[1]
Wetston, J.
: This is an application to review and set aside a decision of the Refugee Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "Board") dated February 7, 1992. The Board determined that the applicant Fahmey Abdalla Ali Abubakar was not a Convention refugee within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (as amended to S.C. 1992, c. 1) (the "
Act
").
[2]
The applicant was born in Hargeisa, in northern Somalia to parents of the Isaaq clan. When he was six years old, he was sent to live with his maternal aunt in Kenya where he resided until he came to Canada on February 2, 1990 at which time he claimed refugee status on the basis of his membership in a particular social group (the Isaaq clan) and his political opinion.
[3]
He returned to Hargeisa in May 1988 to find that his mother had been arrested by the government on suspicion of supporting anti-government rebels, the Somali National Movement (SNM). He returned to Kenya four days later and since that date has had no idea as to the whereabouts of his family (his mother, grandmother, three sisters and a brother) in Somalia.
[4]
In November 1989, the Kenyan government began screening Somalians living in Kenya and deporting those who were there illegally, such as the applicant. Fearing deportation to Somalia, the applicant hid until he was able to obtain a false Kenyan passport and flee to Canada, arriving on February 2, 1990.
[5]
He appeared before the Refugee Division of the Board on January 23, 1992. In its decision, the Board stated three issues to be determined;
1. Does the claimant have a well-founded fear of persecution in Somalia because he is a member of the Isaaq clan?
2. Does the claimant's fear of persecution extend to the whole of Somalia?
3. If the answer to question no. 2 is no, is it reasonable to expect the claimant to return to Somalia under the circumstances which prevail there?
[6]
The Board noted that although all Isaaqs were at risk during the regime of Mohamed Siad Barre, the SNM had overthrown Barre in northern Somalia, declared the independence of the north of the country and formed a government. The Board concluded that these changes were sufficient to remove the applicant's fear of persecution in Hargeisa based on his membership in the Isaaq clan. However, this finding does not directly answer the first question put by the Board; that is does the claimant have a well-founded fear of persecution in Somalia? Since the Board went on to discuss Hargeisa as an "internal flight alternative" (IFA), I conclude that the answer to the first question must have been yes and the answer to the second question must have been no; that is, the applicant does have a well-founded fear of persecution in a part of Somalia.
[7]
The Board then determined if the applicant's fear extended to the whole of Somalia. As mentioned, the Board found that, as a result of the changes in the northern part of Somalia, with the SNM overthrow of Barre, the applicant's fear of persecution in this area was no longer well-founded; thus, answering the second question in the negative.
[8]
In considering the possibility of the existence of an (IFA) for the applicant, the Board quoted the following passage from the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 711:
"In my opinion, in finding the IFA, the Board was required to be satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that there was no serious possibility of the appellant being persecuted in Columbo [sic] and that, in all the circumstances including circumstances particular to him, conditions in Colombo were such that it would not be unreasonable for the appellant to seek refuge there."
Based on this, the Board concluded at page 206 of the Board's record;
"It is clear from this judgment that the internal flight alternative (IFA) does apply where there is no serious possibility of the claimant suffering persecution in a part of his country of nationality to which the panel finds an IFA exists. In the case before us, the panel is satisfied that the claimant could return to Somalia, to the North West, to Hargeisa, where he was born, and live in safety."
[9]
In assessing Hargeisa as an IFA, the Board did not appear to have fully applied the test enunciated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. The applicant asserts that he has no way of proving that he belongs to the Isaaq clan if he is returned to Hargeisa. This fact was brought to the Board's attention during the hearing (page 29 of the Board's record), but is not addressed in the Board's reasons. Similarly, the applicant states that he has never lived in Somalia, that he does not know where his family is, that he does not speak the language and that he has no prospects for residence or employment in Somalia, including Hargeisa. These are all circumstances, particular to the individual that must be considered in assessing the reasonableness of an IFA. However, these matters are not discussed in the Board's reasons.
[10]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  states that if certain evidence is not mentioned in the Board's reasons, it does not mean that the Tribunal failed to consider it. However, in this case, the matters not discussed go to the heart of any reasonableness finding within the meaning of the test in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. Therefore, I can only conclude that the Board's finding that it was not unreasonable for the applicant to return to Hargeisa, since any fear he might have is no different than any other Somali living in Hargeisa, was made without regard to the material before it. Certainly the Board is obliged to consider the totality of the evidence before it, although it may not be necessary to mention it directly.
[11]
Moreover, the Board did not question Mr. Abubakar's credibility, thus establishing the subjective branch of his fear within the meaning of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.), as set out by Mr. Justice La Forest at page 34:
"More generally, what exactly must a claimant do to establish fear of persecution? As has been alluded to above, the test is bipartite: (1) the claimant must subjectively fear persecution; and (2) this fear must be well-founded in an objective sense. This test was articulated and applied by Heald, J.A., in
Rajudeen
, supra, at p. 134:
'The subjective component relates to the existence of the fear of persecution in the mind of the refugee. The objective component requires that the refugee's fear be evaluated objectively to determine if there is a valid basis for that fear.'"
[12]
However, in applying the objective part of the test, the Board only considered the general evidence of Somalians living in Hargeisa. It did not objectively consider the personal circumstances of this applicant in Somalia in general or more specifically in Hargeisa.
[13]
The respondent argued that there was no link between the applicant's fear of persecution and a Convention ground. For the reasons mentioned above, I am of the opinion that such a link exists based on the personal circumstances of the applicant.
[14]
For the above reasons, the application is allowed, the February 5, 1992 decision of the Board is set aside, and the matter is referred back to a differently constituted Board for rehearing and reconsideration in a manner not inconsistent with these reasons.
Application allowed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/blk
[End of document]