Introduction
[1]
McGillis, J.
: The applicants SmithKline Beecham Pharma Inc. and Beecham Group p.l.c. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) have brought an appli­cation under the provisions of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regula­tions
("
Regulations
"), SOR/93-133, as amended SOR/98-166, for an order prohibi­ting the Minister of Health ("Minister") from issuing a notice of compliance to Apotex Inc. ("Apotex") for its paroxetine hydrochloride tablets until the expiry of Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,287,060 ("'060 patent").
Facts
[2]
The application for the '060 patent was filed on October 23, 1986, claiming a prior­ity date in the United Kingdom of October 25, 1985. The '060 patent issued on July 30, 1991. The invention in the '060 patent gen­erally relates to the novel compound "... crystalline paroxetine hydrochloride hemi­hydrate, processes for its preparation, com­positions containing the same and its thera­peutic use".
[3]
At the priority date of the '060 patent, paroxetine and paroxetine hydrochloride were both old substances. The '060 patent cited U.S. Patent No. 4,007,196 which issued on February 8, 1977 ("U.S. Patent"). The U.S. Patent disclosed a class of compounds that were 5-HT inhibitors with a therapeutic use as anti-depressants. In Canada, paroxe­tine and its salts were covered by Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,038,390. That patent issued on September 12, 1978, and expired on September 12, 1995.
[4]
In describing its invention, the '060 patent discloses as follows:
"In general, the hydrochloride salt of a basic compound is preferred for therapeutic use because of its physiological acceptabil­ity.
"However for commercial use it is also important that the solid product should have good handling qualities.
"We have found that amorphous paroxetine hydrochloride is a hygroscopic solid of poor handling qualities.
"It has now been discovered that paroxe­tine hydrochloride can be produced in crystalline form in a manner reproducible on a commercial scale.
"The present invention provides crystalline paroxetine hydrochloride hemihydrate as a novel material, in particular in pharma­ceutically acceptable form.
"Paroxetine hydrochloride hemihydrate is stable and non-hygroscopic."
[5]
The invention in the '060 patent there­fore provides for crystalline paroxetine hydrochloride hemihydrate ("hemihydrate") in a pharmaceutically acceptable form. The invention also provides a process for pro­ducing hemihydrate. In a preferred aspect, the invention provides hemihydrate in sub­stantially pure form. In a further aspect of the invention, hemihydrate can be obtained by compressing crystalline paroxetine hydrochloride anhydrate ("anhydrate"). The invention also provides a pharmaceutical composition comprising hemihydrate and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.
[6]
The '060 patent has 10 claims. Claims 1 to 6 are claims for processes only, and not for the medicine itself or the use of the medicine. Claims 7 and 8 are claims for intermediates that may be used for the pro­duction of the medicine, and are not claims for the medicine itself. Claim 9 claims the use of hemihydrate for the manufacture of a medicament for use in the treatment of depression. Claim 10 claims the product hemihydrate. Accordingly, the embodiments of the invention in which SmithKline claims an exclusive property or privilege are pro­cesses to make pure hemihydrate, the prod­uct hemihydrate and the use of that product for the manufacture of a medicine for use in the treatment of depression.
[7]
SmithKline sells hemihydrate in Canada under the trade-mark PAXIL. Hemihydrate is a serotonin reuptake inhibitor and is used to treat depression.
[8]
On April 7, 1993, SmithKline filed four patent lists, pursuant to the
Regulations
, in connection with 10 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg and 50 mg tablets of the medicine paroxetine. SmithKline listed the '060 patent on all four of the patent lists.
[9]
By letter dated October 15, 1996, Apotex provided a notice of allegation under s. 5(3)(b) of the
Regulations
. The notice of allegation stated as follows:
"We will be submitting to the Federal Minister of Health a New Drug Submis­sion for tablets containing the medicine paroxetine hydrochloride. It is our position that manufacture and sale of our product will not infringe any relevant patent. The
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compli­ance) Regulations
require that we serve on you a Notice of Allegation so as to be able to include a copy of same and proof of ser­vice in our submission.
"Accordingly, this is a Notice of Allega­tion pursuant to s. 5(3)(b) of the said
Regulations
. With respect to patents 1287060, 1290340 and 1310649 we allege that no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine, would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by Apotex Inc. of tablets containing the medicine paroxetine hydrochloride. The legal and factual basis for the aforesaid allegation is as follows.
"None of the aforesaid patents contains any claim for the medicine itself or the use of the medicine, paroxetine hydrochloride. Furthermore, with respect to any claims that might be considered to be claims for a medicine, even if not the medicine, the product sold by us will not be within the scope of any such claims.
"Specifically, with respect to patent 1287060:
i) claims 1 to 6 inclusive are claims for processes only, and not for the medicine itself or the use of the medicine.
ii) claims 7 to 8 are claims for intermedi­ates which may be used for the produc­tion of the medicine, but are not claims for the medicine itself.
iii) claims 9 and 10 relate only to crys­talline paroxetine hydrochloride hemihydrate, which is not the same compound as the medicine, paroxetine hydrochloride.
iv) In any event, the tablets to be made and sold by Apotex Inc. will not be made using crystalline paroxetine hydrochloride hemihydrate, but will be made using the medicine paroxetine hydrochloride.
"Specifically with respect to patents 1290340 and 1310649, these patents have claims only for processes and intermediates that may be useful to make the medicine, and such claims are not claims for the medicine itself or the use of the medicine."
[10]
The allegation made by Apotex rests solely on non-infringement.
[11]
On December 4, 1996, SmithKline instituted its application for an order pro­hibiting the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance to Apotex.
[12]
In support of its application for prohibi­tion, SmithKline filed affidavit evidence, including affidavits from David Philip Elder, Neal Ward, Alan Frank Barnes, David Charles Apperley, Brian Russell and Jan Sedgeworth. In response, Apotex filed affi­davit evidence, including an affidavit from Srebri Petrov. Apotex also, through its soli­citors, sent to SmithKline's solicitors a copy of the Drug Master File of its supplier of paroxetine hydrochloride, as well as a "copy of the relevant portion of the New Drug Submission". SmithKline's affiants had access to the Drug Master File and the New Drug Submission prior to preparing their affidavits.
[13]
As appears from the '060 patent, hemihydrate is a novel form of paroxetine hydrochloride and is reproducible on a com­mercial scale. Hemihydrate is one crystalline form of paroxetine hydrochloride; the other crystalline form is anhydrate. However, hemihydrate and anhydrate have different crystalline structures and a different degree of hydration. Hemihydrate has a half mole of strongly bound water as a structural part of its crystal lattice. In contrast, anhydrate has no strongly bound or structural water in its crystal lattice, but it may contain a variable amount of loosely held water. Indeed, anhy­drate is hygroscopic, in that it has a pro­pensity to attract moisture. In that sense, the prevailing humidity conditions may affect or control the moisture content of anhydrate.
[14]
To date, regulatory approval has only been given in Canada and throughout the world for the sale of paroxetine hydro­chloride in its hemihydrate form.
[15]
In support of its application for prohibi­tion, SmithKline relied on, among other things, two experiments conducted by it or on its behalf to support its assertion that the conversion of anhydrate to hemihydrate would result in the infringement of the '060 patent by Apotex. The question of the con­version of anhydrate to hemihydrate is there­fore central to the case.
[16]
The first experiment was conducted by David Charles Apperley, a chemical scientist with the University of Durham Industrial Research Laboratories in England. In the early 1990's, Dr. Apperley collaborated with Alan Frank Barnes, a chemist employed by SmithKline, to determine whether the anhy­drate and hemihydrate forms of paroxetine hydrochloride could be differentiated by solid state nuclear magnetic resonance ("NMR") spectroscopy. By examining the solid state NMR spectrum of anhydrate and hemihydrate, certain differences were observed. As a result, by early 1995, the NMR technique was routinely used by SmithKline to identify the anhydrate and hemihydrate forms of paroxetine hydrochloride "... in a series of powder blends of the drug substance in tablet excipi­ents".
[17]
Between January 1994, and January 1996, Mr. Neal Ward, a chemist  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , prepared a number of batches of anhydrate "as reference materials or for investigational purposes". He stored samples of those batches of anhydrate in sealed glass containers at 20◦C in the dark, and also retained more than one sample from some of the batches.
[18]
In February 1995, Dr. David Philip Elder of SmithKline supervised the manufac­ture of tablets of paroxetine hydrochloride consisting of anhydrate and/or hemihydrate in various ratios. The anhydrate used in preparing the tablets came from batch NW50910-015D1 prepared by Mr. Ward in January 1995, while the hemihydrate was as described in the '060 patent. All excipients in the tablets came from commercial sup­pliers. The constituents of the tableted for­mulations were as follows:
"Constituent
Batch
Master Formula
Quantity (mg/tablet)
Actual Batch
Quantity (g)
Paroxetine HCI
11.44
17.163
Dibasic Calcium Phosphate
Dihydrate (Encompress)
E00160
158.84
238.30
Sodium Starch Glycollate
(Explotab)
5028878
2.97
4.45
Magnesium Stearate
5014544
1.75
2.63
TOTAL
175.00
262.543"
[19]
Dr. Elder prepared the following tablets and sent them to Mr. Barnes:
"1. Tablets made from paroxetine hydrochloride 100% of which was in the hemihydrate form.
"2. Tablets made from paroxetine hydrochloride 100% of which was in the anhydrate form.
"3. Tablets made from paroxetine hydrochloride anhydrate and paroxetine hydrochloride hemihydrate in the ratio of 95% by weight respectively.
"4. Tablets made from paroxetine hydrochloride anhydrate and paroxetine hydrochloride hemihydrate in the ratio of 90% and 10% by weight respectively.
"5. Tablets made from paroxetine hydrochloride anhydrate and paroxetine hydrochloride hemihydrate in the ratio of 75% and 25% by weight respectively."
[20]
Dr. Elder prepared the anhydrate tablets in the controlled humidity environment of the manufacturing area  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and took no special precautions in relation to the humidity, moisture and temperature of the area. He used the same machines that are used by SmithKline for tableting hemihydrate. The constituents in the tablets were the same as those  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's commercial formulation. He described the level of moisture in the excipients used in formulating the tablets as "very low". How­ever, in cross-examination, he admitted that the main excipient in the anhydrate tablets was dibasic calcium phosphate dihydrate which contains crystalline hydrated water. It was used as a filler or a diluent in the for­mulation, and was the largest single compo­nent of the anhydrate tablets, comprising 158.84 mg of the 175 mg tablet. Dr. Elder did not try to tablet the anhydrate with an excipient that was anhydrous or that con­tained no water. The choice of the formula­tion, including the excipient dibasic calcium phosphate dihydrate, was dictated solely by SmithKline's commercial formulation. Dr. Elder did not know what compression level was applied in making the tablets, but used the same level for all of the tablets. Dr. Elder accepted the hypothetical premise that anhydrate could be tableted without con­verting to hemihydrate if there was no water or humidity present in the tableting process. However, he maintained that it would not be "practically attainable". In making the tab­lets, Dr. Elder took no steps to try to avoid the conversion of anhydrate to hemihydrate; he simply ran the commercial tableting process.
[21]
On February 22, 1995, Mr. Barnes sent Dr. Apperley the tablets formulated by Dr. Elder and the corresponding untableted powder blends, and instructed him to investi­gate the "... anhydrate:hemihydrate ratios in the tableted product using solid state NMR". Mr. Barnes kept the tablets and the powder blends at ambient conditions with no special precautions. He sent the materials to Dr. Apperley by courier.
[22]
Dr. Apperley conducted his experiment and, in March 1995, determined that "... in those tablets tested the ratio of hemihydrate: anhydrate had apparently increased relative to the expected ratio". In short, Dr. Apperley concluded that anhydrate had converted to hemihydrate "... as a result of the tableting process". In order to demon­strate that the sample preparation and the measuring system had not influenced the result, Dr. Apperley measured the hemi­hydrate level in a sample of the powder blend which had initially contained ex­clusively anhydrate. In that sample, no hemihydrate was detected. He also took a tablet containing exclusively anhydrate and ran the NMR experiment at -20◦C in order to eliminate the possibility that conversion had occurred due to sample heating, and deter­mined that the percentage of anhydrate at -20◦C was the same as at 25◦C. Dr. Ap­perley performed his experi­ment at ambient condi­tions in the laboratory, and took no special precautions in relation to storage of the materials, temperature or humidity. Mr. Barnes agreed with and adopted the conclu­sions reached by Dr. Apperley.
[23]
The second experiment was conducted by Mr. Neal Ward, a chemist  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In October 1997, Mr. Ward was asked "... to consider whether paroxetine hydrochloride anhydrate with a melting point of about 120◦C is likely to convert to hemihydrate under normal storage conditions for pharma­ceutical products, i.e., ambient temperature (about 20◦C) in sealed glass containers and in the dark".
[24]
On October 1, 1997, Mr. Ward re-examined all of his stored batches of anhy­drate by infrared analysis using the Nujol mull technique. He found evidence of con­version from anhydrate to hemihydrate in 11 out of the 16 samples. From the 11 samples indicating conversion, two had "completely or almost completely" converted to hemihydrate, four were partially converted and five "showed evidence of conversion". He summarized his data as follows:
TABLE
"
Batch number
Date of preparation
Comments on IR
NW34922-171C
January 31, 1994
Partial convertion to hemihydrate
NW50910-015D1/1
January 26, 1995
Some hemihydrate present
NW50910-015D1/2
January 26, 1995
Some hemihydrate present
NW50910-015D1/3
January 26, 1995
Partial conversion to hemihydrate
NW50910-016B
February 22, 1995
Some hemihydrate present
NW50910-030B/1
February 24, 1995
Partial conversion to hemihydrate
NW50910-030B/2
February 24, 1995
Nearly complete conversion to hemihydrate
NW50910-033B
March 3, 1995
Complete conversion to hemihydrate
NW50910-036C
March 9, 1995
Some hemihydrate present
NW50910-036D1
March 13, 1995
Unchanged
NW50910-037A
March 8, 1995
Some hemihydrate present
NW50910-043D
March 13, 1995
Unchanged
NW50910-052A
March 16, 1995
Unchanged
NW50910-060A
March 28, 1995
Some hemihydrate present
NW50910-159A
November 23, 1995
Unchanged
NW50910-179C
January 19, 1996
Unchanged"
[25]
With respect to the five samples that remained completely unchanged at the date of the experiment, Mr. Ward opined that these samples "... would over time convert in part or in whole to the hemihydrate". However, those five samples had remained unchanged for periods ranging from two years to over two and a half years.
[26]
Mr. Ward also noted that internal records  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  indicated that, on September 24, 1996, seven samples of anhydrate, prepared two to three months earlier, were tested. Two of the five samples showed the presence of hemihydrate. However, data on two of the other five samples were not available.
[27]
Mr. Ward explained the theory of anhydrate conversion, noting that anhydrate is thermodynamically less stable than hemihydrate at normal temperatures. He further stated as follows:
"It therefore follows on theoretical grounds that all samples of the anhydrate will tend to transform into the hemihydrate. While the science of thermodynamics is clear about the theoretical inevitability of transformation of the anhydrate to the hemihydrate, it does not address the question of whether a suitable mechanism is available for the transformation, or whether the transformation will take place on a reasonable time-scale. I have considerable recent experience of working with the anhydrate and have found that such a transformation does indeed occur in real samples of the anhydrate over a time-scale of several months to years, indicating that there is a suitable mechanism available at present for the transformation to take place."
[28]
In summary, Mr. Ward expressed the opinion that "... a proportion of samples of [anhydrate] prepared today will convert to [hemihydrate] over a time scale of several months to years, and that all such samples of the anhydrate will convert to hemihydrate over time". He further stated that his opinion "... applies equally to bulk material and to material that has been formulated into a conventional pharmaceutical composition".
[29]
In an unrelated matter, Mr. Ward also noted that the IR spectrum of a batch of anhydrate prepared in January 1995, conformed to a SmithKline internal reference IR spectrum of anhydrate, as well as to the IR spectrum of the material described as anhydrate in the Drug Master File of Apotex's supplier. In other words, he confirmed that the material described in the Drug Master File was anhydrate.
[30]
Srebri Petrov, a research associate in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Toronto, reviewed for Apotex the affidavit evidence of Mr. Ward, Mr. Barnes and Dr. Apperley. Following his review of their procedures and conclusions, he saw "... no reason to disagree with their conclusions inasmuch as they state that: 1. the anhydrate form will convert to the hemihydrate over time; 2. the anhydrate form is converted to the hemihydrate form as a result of the tableting process." He further indicated that "[t]heir affidavits will confirm to a skilled chemist and reiterate the conclusions reached by Dr. Buxton, one of the inventors (of the '060 patent) in his paper entitled 'Solid-state forms of paroxetine hydrochloride' ...". The paper was appended as an exhibit to Mr. Petrov's affidavit. The paper was authored by P. Christopher Buxton and Ian R. Lynch, who are two of the inventors of the '060 patent, and John M. Roe. In that paper, the authors conclude, among other things, that anhydrate will convert to hemihydrate "... when exposed to humid conditions or if subjected to compression".
[31]
During the course of the hearing, counsel for SmithKline agreed as a fact, for the purposes of the present proceeding, that the drug referred to in the Drug Master File of Apotex's supplier was anhydrate.
Issues
[32]
The principal questions to be determined on this application are as follows:
i) whether Apotex's notice of allegation is ambiguous and contains insufficient facts to justify its allegation of non-infringement; and,
ii) whether SmithKline has discharged its burden of establishing that Apotex's allegation of non-infringement is not justified.
Analysis
i) Notice Of Allegation
[33]
Counsel for SmithKline submitted that the notice of allegation is ambiguous and contains insufficient facts to justify the allegation of non-infringement. I agree that there is some ambiguity in the notice of allegation, given the absence of any specific reference to anhydrate. However, the notice of allegation specifically alleges that "... no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by Apotex Inc. of tablets containing the medicine paroxetine hydrochloride". Furthermore, the legal and factual basis for the allegation indicates, among other things, that "... the tablets to be made and sold by Apotex Inc. will not be made using crystalline paroxetine hydrochloride hemihydrate, but will be made using the medicine paroxetine hydrochloride." I am satisfied that the notice of allegation, when considered in its totality, alleges that Apotex would not infringe the '060 patent by making, constructing, using or selling tablets containing hemihydrate. I am further satisfied that such an allegation is not insufficient, in that it constitutes a specific factual allegation of non-infringement ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), at p. 426).
ii) Is Apotex's Allegation Of
Non-infringement Not Justified
[34]
Counsel for SmithKline submitted that, in making its tablets, Apotex could not avoid infringing the '060 patent in that anhydrate converts to hemihydrate over time and in the tableting process. He therefore submitted that, as a result of the conversion, Apotex will be making hemihydrate either directly or indirectly by making its anhydrate tablets, and it will therefore infringe claim 10 of the '060 patent.
[35]
The question of whether SmithKline has met its burden of proof by establishing, on a balance of probabilities, that Apotex's allegation of non-infringement is not justified, depends on an analysis of the facts concerning the conversion of anhydrate to hemihydrate. Indeed, absent any conversion, Apotex's anhydrate tablets would clearly not fall within the claims of the '060 patent.
[36]
The facts concerning the two main experiments conducted in relation to the conversion of anhydrate to hemihydrate must therefore be considered.
[37]
In the Apperley experiment, the tablets used were prepared by Dr. Elder according to SmithKline's commercial formulation. Each tablet contained approximately 90 per cent of the excipient dibasic calcium phosphate dihydrate, which contains water. No efforts were made to create or use an excipient that was anhydrous or contained no water, despite the fact that water or humidity was a known factor affecting the stability of anhydrate and its conversion to hemihydrate. In my opinion, the Apperley experiment is of limited probative value on the facts of this case, given that 90 per cent of the composition of the tablets was an excipient containing water, a substance directly affecting the conversion of anhydrate to hemihydrate. The conclusions reached by Dr. Apperley are therefore entitled to little, if any, weight in the context of the present case.
[38]
In the Ward experiment, approximately 30 per cent (5 out of 16) of the samples analysed by Mr. Ward did not convert from anhydrate to hemihydrate and, indeed, were completely unchanged between the dates of their preparation and the experiment, namely for periods of time ranging from two to two and a half years. In discussing the theory of anhydrate conversion, Mr. Ward stated that, although science recognized the "theoretical inevitability" of anhydrate conversion to hemihydrate, it did not address "... whether the transformation will take place on a reasonable time-scale". In dealing with the question of the time frame, Mr. Ward expressed the opinion, based on his experiment, that a "proportion" of anhydrate samples would convert to hemihydrate "within several months to years", and that "all such samples will convert to hemihydrate over time". He did not specify or quantify in any manner what he meant by the phrase "over time". However, the phrase "over time" must be considered in the context that 30 per cent of the samples tested by him had not converted at all in the two years prior to the date of the experiment. Furthermore, Mr. Ward provided no information concerning the conditions under which his anhydrate batches were prepared. Finally, he took no special precautions in relation to storage, temperature or humidity.
[39]
Apotex has alleged in its notice of allegation that its tablets will not infringe the '060 patent. That allegation is presumed to be true, "... except to the extent that the contrary has been shown ..." by  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 302 (F.C.A.), at p. 319). In my opinion, the evidence adduced by SmithKline, including the two experiments, raises no more than a possibility of infringement by Apotex, and does not establish, on a balance of probabilities, that Apotex's allegation of non-infringement is not justified. I am also satisfied that the evidence of Apotex's witness Mr. Petrov does not advance the case for SmithKline, as suggested by its counsel. In my opinion, Mr. Petrov simply confirmed that he agreed with the conclusions of Dr. Apperley and Mr. Ward in the context of the experiments conducted by them.
[40]
I have therefore concluded that Apotex should not be prevented from taking its anhydrate tablets to market on the basis of a potential conversion to hemihydrate at some undisclosed and imprecise time in the future. In the event that Apotex's anhydrate tablets do convert to hemihydrate, in whole or in part, it will face "very grave" consequences at that point in time. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 206 (F.C.A.), at p. 213;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 451 (F.C.A.), at p. 452).
[41]
Given my conclusion in this matter, it is unnecessary for me to consider all of the other issues raised by counsel.
Decision
[42]
The application is dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Sharon J. McLaughlin/aga
[End of document]