[1]
MacKay, J.
: This was a show cause hearing at which, pursuant to the order of Madame Justice Reed issued August 5, 1992, the defendant Presidio Clothing Inc./Vêtements Presidio Inc. (formerly Genesis Fashions Inc./Modes Genesis Inc.) (herein after "Presidio"), and Howard Vineberg and David Talbot were directed to appear and show cause why they should not be condemned for contempt of this Court for breach of an injunction order granted, on consent, by Giles, A.S.P. on December 19, 1989.
[2]
The matter was heard on October 19, 1992, in Toronto when counsel appeared for the plaintiff, and counsel also appeared for the defendant Presidio and for Messrs. Vineberg and Talbot. The latter two defendants, who are officers of Presidio, were present as well. Affidavits were filed on behalf of the plaintiff, and on behalf of the defendant Presidio by Howard Vineberg of Montreal, President of Presidio and by David Talbot of Mississauga, Ontario, Vice-President of Presidio. Affidavits were also filed on behalf of the defendant from officers of companies that are customers or suppliers of Presidio, and from the manager of the bank where Presidio maintains its accounts. No witnesses were called at the hearing and counsel for the parties advised that, as there was no dispute on essential facts, the matter should be disposed of on the basis of affidavits filed and argument presented.
[3]
Following the hearing, after deliberation, I rendered oral judgment by which I found the defendant Presidio in breach of the order of December 19, 1989, and that the defendants Howard Vineberg and David Talbot, with knowledge of that order, as officers of Presidio aided and abetted Presidio in breaches of the order. In my view, those breaches interfered with the orderly administration of justice and impaired the authority or dignity of the Court. I imposed fines, upon Presidio in the amount of $2,000, and upon each of Messrs. Vineberg and Talbot in the amount of $1,000, all to be paid within 30 days, with reasonable solicitor and client costs payable to the plaintiff.
[4]
Written Judgment was filed on October 26, 1992. I now confirm and expand upon oral reasons given, in explanation of the Judgment and for compliance with s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 as amended.
[5]
The order of December 19, 1989, granted on consent, upon application by the plaintiff, was directed against the defendant Presidio, then named Genesis Fashions Inc./Modes Genesis Inc. It provided, so far as it is relevant here, as follows:
"1. The defendant shall forthwith change its corporate names to a name or names not including the word Genesis or any word or phrase confusingly similar thereto;
"2. The defendant and its directors, officers, servants, agents, employees and persons under their control having notice of this order are restrained from using the trade names Genesis and/or Genesis Fashions and/or Modes Genesis Inc. and/or Genesis Fashions Inc. or any trade name or trademark confusingly similar thereto from and after February 3, 1990."
[6]
The order of Madame Justice Reed, granted on August 5, 1992, upon application of the plaintiff filed July 30 directed Presidio and Messrs. Vineberg and Talbot to appear and show cause why they should not be condemned for
(1) breach of the Court's order of December 19, 1989, on the grounds that since February 3, 1990,
(i) Presidio continued to carry on business in the trade names Genesis Fashions Inc., Genesis Fashion Inc., and Modes Genesis;
(ii) Presidio is causing signs to be displayed at 462 Wellington Street West, Toronto, Ontario which display the trade names "Genesis Fashion Inc.", "Genesis Fashions Inc." and "Modes Genesis";
(iii) Presidio is using the trade name Genesis Fashion Ltd. in the Metropolitan Toronto Telephone Directories, April 1991-1992 and April 1992-1993;
(iv) David Talbot has used the trade name Genesis to carry on the business of Presidio with knowledge that this breaches the injunction contained in the Judgment and has thereby aided and abetted Presidio in its breach of the said injunction;
(v) Howard Vineberg, as a principal and guiding mind of Presidio and with knowledge of the injunction contained in the Judgment, has been negligent in his attempts to change the listing for Genesis Fashion Ltd. in the Metropolitan Toronto Telephone Directory and has neglected to cause Presidio and Talbot to comply with the terms of the Judgment and in particular to cease and refrain from the activities described in subparagraphs (i) to (iv) inclusive, above, and has thereby aided and abetted Presidio in its breach of the said injunction;
(2) acting in such a way as to interfere with the orderly administration of justice, and to impair the authority or dignity of this Court and rendering nugatory an order of this Court by reason of the acts set forth above.
[7]
With regard to the particular allegations of breach of the Court's order set out in the Order of Madame Justice Reed, I found that there was no evidence that Presidio continued to carry on business in the trade names Genesis Fashions Inc., Genesis Fashion Inc. and Mode Genesis, as alleged. Nor did I find any evidence that David Talbot has used the trade name Genesis to carry on the business of Presidio in any significant way.
[8]
I did find that the corporate defendant Presidio did, after February 3, 1990, continue to display signs at 462 Wellington Street West, Toronto, Ontario, including as trade names "Genesis Fashions Inc"; "Genesis Fashion Inc." and "Mode Genesis", and that the defendant Presidio had continued to use the trade name Genesis Fashion Ltd. in the Metropolitan Toronto Telephone directories, April, 1991-1992 and April, 1992-1993. By so doing the defendant Presidio breached and was in contempt of the order of the Court dated December 19, 1989. I further found that the defendants Howard Vineberg and David Talbot, with knowledge of the order of the Court, as responsible officers of the defendant Presidio, aided and abetted Presidio in its breach of the order and were thus in contempt of the order made December 19, 1989.
[9]
I am satisfied that as a result of settlement between the parties in November 1989, which led to the Order of December 19, 1989, rendered on consent, Howard Vineberg as President of Presidio took substantial steps to ensure that the corporation would not be in violation of the Court's order. These steps included the following.
1. The name of the corporate defendant was formally changed. Originally incorporated under the Quebec
Companies Act
on November 3, 1987, with the corporate name Genesis Fashions Inc./Mode Genesis Inc., that name was changed to Presidio Clothing Inc./Vêtements Presidio Inc. and a certificate of notification of the change, dated November 14, 1989, was issued by the appropriate Quebec Government office.
2. All business forms and documents of the defendant corporation were changed after November 1989 so that the only name used thereafter on any documents of the company was that of Presidio Clothing Inc./Vêtements Presidio Inc.
3. All customers and suppliers, and the corporate defendant's bank, were advised of the change of name at the time the change was made and thereafter all corporate documents of the defendant corporation used in its business transactions bore only the new name of the company. This is confirmed by affidavits of officers of companies that were suppliers or were purchasers of goods from Presidio, and by affidavit of the manager of the defendant corporation's bank. All of them affirm that from and after November or December 1989 all transactions with the corporate defendant were carried on with the new name of the company, Presidio Clothing Inc./Vêtements Presidio Inc. being the only corporate name used.
4. In April 1990, Howard Vineberg wrote to Bell Canada in Toronto to direct a change in the corporate telephone listing for the corporate defendant asking that it thereafter be listed in the new name of the company. He assumed that this change had been made, never having been made aware by any customer, supplier, consumer, or the plaintiff until the service of the plaintiff's notice of motion of July 31, 1992, for a show cause order, that Bell Canada had failed to correct the telephone listing in Toronto. Upon receipt of the notice of motion Mr. Vineberg again communicated with Bell Canada in Toronto, again explicitly instructing them to effect the change of listing in all future Toronto telephone directories. He has been assured this has been undertaken by the telephone company and has confirmed by calling the information number 411 in Toronto, that no listing for Genesis Fashions Inc. is now carried by Bell Canada in Toronto but that a listing for Presidio Clothing Inc. is carried by the telephone company.
5. By his affidavit David Talbot affirms that following settlement of the matter with the plaintiff in the fall of 1989 he was instructed by Howard Vineberg not to use the former name of the corporate defendant, or the name Genesis, and to use his own personal name when answering the telephone at the company's office at 462 Wellington Street in Toronto. He further avers that he followed these instructions and that he could recall that after the change of the company's name he had received only one telephone call at those premises, nearly two years ago, where the caller asked for Genesis Fashions Inc. and he advised the called that this name was no longer in use and that the company now had the new name, Presidio.
6. Howard Vineberg had also advised the landlord of the premises at 462 Wellington Street West in Toronto of the change in corporate name in the late fall of 1989. He had done so orally in anticipation that the owner of the premises would see to changes in the name used for reference to the company at those premises. The name Genesis Fashions Inc. was originally included on the "buzzer" panel at the exterior door used to acquire access to the building, on the directory board in the lobby of the building, on the door of the premises leased by the corporate defendant, and on the parking lot sign adjacent to the building. By July 1992 no changes had been made in the original signs, which were only changed by the landlord of the premises after written instructions from Mr. Vineberg following service of the plaintiff's notice of motion of July 30 for the show cause order. All such signs at the premises were changed to display only the new name Presidio at the premises in Toronto.
[10]
The defendants Vineberg and Talbot acknowledge by affidavit that they were careless in ensuring that the changes requested by Vineberg for the telephone listing and for signs at the Toronto premises were not made following the original requests by Vineberg to Bell Canada and to the landlord.
[11]
I was less concerned with the listing in the Toronto telephone directory for 1991-92 than I was for the succeeding year's directory and for the continuing use of the name at the company's premises in Toronto. There was no evidence before me of the appropriate timing for information to Bell Canada for a change in directory listing in the first directory, apparently issued to be effective April 1991. At least for the second year's directory listing I assume that the defendant company at its Toronto office would have been in receipt on a regular basis of a statement of service charges for telephone service, including listing the name of Genesis Fashions Inc., though again there was no evidence of this. In my view, there can be no excuse for the continuing use of the original name of the company at its premises in Toronto, where Mr. Talbot was based and he was responsible for the company's operations there. He knew of the instructions of Mr. Vineberg to the landlord of the Toronto premises and simply assumed, without checking for more than two years, that the corporate name of the defendant corporation would be changed on signs at the Toronto premises. It is hard to believe that he would not have noticed that the original corporate name continued to be displayed, particularly at the parking space and at the door to the office of the company, without the new name Presidio, even if he did not examine the outside buzzer access panel or the directory board in the lobby of the building.
[12]
I note that the nature of the defendant's business is such that only very occasionally would persons visit its premises at 462 Wellington Street West in Toronto. The defendant company is a manufacturer of apparel, primarily for women, which it sells in the low to mid-price range. As a manufacturer it does not sell on any retail basis but sells to buyers for retail chains or stores. It has never had more than 30 customers purchasing its goods and only ten of those have been in the Toronto area. In that area Mr. Talbot, who is responsible for sales, does most of his work by visiting purchasers at their premises and only very occasionally would anyone visit Presidio's premises in Toronto. That general practice is reflected in their experience by one or two of the affiants who are purchasing officers of customer companies.
[13]
In terms of the general allegation set out in the second main clause of the show cause order of August 4, 1992, I did not find that Presidio, or Howard Vineberg or David Talbot, willingly acted "in such a way as to interfere with the orderly administration of justice, and to impair the authority or dignity of this Court in rendering nugatory an order of this Court". However, on the basis of the facts averred by affidavit and by the acknowledgements of Messrs. Vineberg and Talbot, I did find that all three of the defendants named in the show cause order, that is, the corporate defendant and Messrs. Vineberg and Talbot, were negligent in failing to ensure that the terms of the court's order were adhered to, in particular in regard to the continued listing of Genesis Fashion Ltd., on behalf of the defendant Presidio, in Toronto telephone directories, and more especially by the continued use of the name Genesis Fashions Ltd. on signage related to the company's premises at 462 Wellington Street West in Toronto. That negligence, in my view, does interfere with the orderly administration of justice, impairing the authority of an order of this Court and thus impairing the dignity of the Court.
[14]
The terms of a court order as expressed are to be followed strictly and failure to do so interferes with the orderly administration of justice and impairs the authority or dignity of the Court. Here the defendant corporation, its directors, officers, servants, agents, employees and others under their control having notice of the order were expressly restrained from using certain trade names after February 3, 1990, yet prohibited names continued to be listed in the Toronto telephone directory and at the company's leased premises in Toronto until after July 30, 1992.
[15]
In light of these findings, it was, in my view, appropriate that in this case fines be imposed, in the amount of $2,000 in the case of the corporate defendant, and in the amount of $1,000 for each of the defendants Howard Vineberg and David Talbot.
[16]
Those fines seems to me appropriate in light of the following factors. There were substantial steps taken by Mr. Vineberg, President of Presidio, to comply with the Court's order, including a written request to Bell Canada to change the telephone listing in Toronto and an oral notification to the company's Toronto landlord that the name of the corporate defendant had been changed. The only incidents of breaching the Court's order were the continuing listing until after July 1992 of the original name in the Toronto telephone directory and in the display of the original name of the company at its Toronto premises. There was no evidence that the original name was used in dealing with telephone messages at the Toronto premises; indeed the only evidence is that that name was not used in accepting telephone calls, or in any other way, except for the signs at the Toronto premises, after the formal change in the corporate name of Presidio. The head office and principal place of business of Presidio, is Montreal, where it does not maintain any telephone listing and there is no evidence of any continuing use of its former name in its business operations there.
[17]
In my view, the actions of Messrs. Vineberg and Talbot cannot be characterized as contumacious, or demonstrating any intended disdain of the Court's order. Both acknowledge they were negligent in ensuring instructions of Vineberg to Bell Canada and to the landlord were followed. By their negligence, which resulted in carrying on, for some two and a half years, the use in relation to the company's Toronto operations of a trade name which the Court's order had prohibited, the order was breached. That constitutes contempt, and it impairs the authority and dignity of the Court, and impairs the orderly administration of justice.
[18]
I consider that the following factors warrant consideration in mitigation and in fixing the appropriate sanctions. Howard Vineberg, when he learned by the plaintiff's notice of motion for a show cause order issued July 30, 1992, acted quickly to remedy the failures to ensure the telephone listing in Toronto and the signs at the Toronto premises were changed to include only the new corporate name of Presidio. Messrs. Vineberg and Talbot formally, and I accept sincerely, apologized for their failure to observe strictly the order of December 19, 1989, and Mr. Vineberg, as President of Presidio, averred his determination to ensure that there be no further breach of the Court's order. As I understand counsel, Mr. Vineberg had also apologized to the plaintiff in this matter.
[19]
In addition to imposing fines, I ordered that reasonable costs, on a solicitor and client basis be awarded to the plaintiff. This accords with normal practice in a successful application for an order finding contempt, ensuring that the role of the party acting to support compliance with an order of the Court does not result in undue costs for the applicant. In a number of recent cases in this Court costs awarded on that basis have been set at a fixed amount, but since there was no evidence of the costs actually incurred by the plaintiff and thus of what might be considered reasonable in this case, I declined to fix the amount in the expectation that reasonable cost on a solicitor and client basis would be agreed upon, or failing agreement could be taxed.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sg
[End of document]