[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This is one of seven applications under s. 44 of the Access to Information Act which came on for hearing before me on January 4 and 5, 1988, in Edmonton, Alberta. While the specific facts and arguments in each application vary slightly, the principles involved are the same. These reasons, with minor variations, will also apply, therefore, to the Federal Court files numbered T-1623-86, T-1636-86, T-1658-86, T-1637-86, T-1649-86 and T-1650-86.
[2]
In these applications, seven Indian Bands seek to prevent disclosure under the Access to Information Act of their audited financial statements provided to the respondent under the Indian Act and related Regulations. The respondent received a request dated April 15, 1986, from Wendy Smith, a reporter with the Calgary Herald and the party intervenant herein, for access to all audits and financial statements of the applicant Bands "since 1975". The request was later limited to the financial statements for the fiscal years 1979-80 to 1984-85, inclusive.
[3]
By letter dated May 28, 1986, the applicants were informed by André Faulkner, head of the Access to Information and Privacy Secretariat of the respondent Department, that the request had been received. This letter, which constitutes the third party notice required by s. 28 of the Access to Information Act, sets out a list of the financial statements pertaining to each Band which would be disclosed if the request was granted. The letter continues:
"The Department have reason to believe that these documents might contain financial information as described in paragraph 20(1)(b) of the Act (copy attached); however, we do not have sufficient information in our files to substantiate this. Thus as required by the Access to Information Act, we intend to disclose these documennts on June 27, 1986.
"You have 20 days from the mailing date of this notice to make written representation to the undersigned as to why any portions of the financial information that does not relate to the expenditure of government funds should not be disclosed. If you have not responded by the expiry of the 20 day period, the record will be disclosed on the date set out above. Any representations you make will result in a review of our decision to disclose the record.
"Copies of section 20 (the exemption for third party information) and 28 (the provision dealing with notification of third parties) of the Access to Information Act are enclosed for your convenience.
"Should you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact Ghislain St-Jacques or myself at (819) 997-0307."
[4]
The Montana Band responded on June 9, 1986 by objecting to the release of any of the financial statements. They gave three reasons: that the information is confidential, that disclosure would prejudice their competitive position and result in material financial loss and that the federal government, because of its trust obligations to Indian Bands, is obligated to protect their unique and separate position in Canadian society. Release of the information, it was alleged, would constitute a breach of trust.
[5]
By letter dated June 27, 1986, the applicant was informed that it was the decision of the Department to release the financial information requested, with the exception of any personal information contained in the statements, which would be severed and withheld. These applications were then filed under s. 44 of the Act for a review of the decision to disclose.
[6]
It is important to understand how the financial statements at issue here came into the hands of the respondent. The evidence reveals that they record the Bands' holdings of three different sorts of funds: the Bands' capital moneys, which consist largely of royalties paid for oil and gas obtained on their lands; the Bands' revenue moneys, in which are included the interest on the capital accounts; and grants and contributions to the Bands made by the Department out of federal public funds. All three of these sources of funds are subject to reporting requirements by operation of the Indian Act and other related statutes and regulations. The pleadings set out the following outline of those requirements:
Written Submission of the Respondent:
"17. By definition, 'Indian moneys' means 'all moneys collected, received or held by Her Majesty for the use and benefit of Indians or bands' (Section 2 Indian Act).
"18. Section 61(1) of the Indian Act provides that 'Indian moneys shall be expended only for the benefit of the Indians or bands for whose use and benefit in common the moneys are received or held ... and ... the Governor-in-Council may determine whether any purpose for which Indian moneys are used or are to be used is for the use and benefit of the band'.
"19. Section 62 provides that 'all Indian moneys derived from the sale of surrendered lands or capital assets of a band shall be deemed to be capital moneys of the band, and all Indian moneys other than capital moneys shall be deemed to be revenue moneys of the band'."
Factum of the Applicant:
"5. Pursuant to the Indian Oil & Gas Act, royalties obtained from oil and gas development on Indian lands are paid to the Crown in trust for the Indian Bands concerned.
Indian Oil and Gas Act
S.C. 1974-75, c. 15, sec. 5
(in force April 22, 1977)
"6. The royalties thus obtained are treated by the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs as capital assets (as opposed to revenue generated from the use of land) and as such the funds from these royalties are placed in the individual Band's Capital Fund. The classification of oil and gas royalties as a capital asset is a matter of the Department's discretion.
Cross-Examination of Gerald Throndson,
page 5, line 1 to page 6, line 7,
page 10, lines 12-18
Affidavit of John Vleeming, para. 3-5"
Written Submission of the Respondent:
"20. Section 64 of the [Indian] Act sets out the specific purposes for which the Minister, with the consent of the Council of the Band may authorize and direct the expenditure of capital moneys of the Band.
"21. With respect to the revenue moneys of the Applicant Band, Section 69 of the Indian Act is operative: the Governor-in-Council has, by order, permitted the Band to control, manage, and expend in whole or in part its revenue moneys. This was done by means of the Indian Bands Revenue Moneys Regulations.
"23. The Indian Bands Revenue Moneys Regulations provide, inter alia, that the Band shall engage an auditor to audit its self-administered revenue account, and shall cause such report to 'be posted in conspicuous places on the Band Reserve for examination by members of the Band; and be supplied to the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development'. The Band's financial statements which are in issue in this case were provided pursuant to this requirement of Section 8(2)(b).
"24. The interest earned on the Band's capital moneys is treated, by virtue of Section 62 of the Act as revenue money. The capital money as well as this revenue money is held in the Consolidated Revenue Fund until it is paid out.
"25. The Affidavit of Gerald Throndson, dated December 22, 1986, establishes that capital moneys, as defined by Section 62 of the Indian Act are held in the Consolidated Revenue Fund of Canada to the credit of a specific band (para. 3), that the Minister through his officials required the band to provide him with a Band Council Resolution requesting and consenting to release of the capital moneys, and an undertaking that an audited financial statement of the funds would be provided, (par. 5-9**) and that the band provided such Band Council Resolution for each of the year [sic] 1979-85, inclusive.
"29. With respect to 'contribution moneys', i.e., moneys received pursuant to an appropriation by Parliament, which are also included in the financial statements of the Band, Section 31 of the Financial Administration Act, and Treasury Board Minutes 763729 as amended by Treasury Board Minutes 793872 (Exhibits 'A' and 'B' to the Affidavit of Heather Peden), establish accounting requirements."
Written Argument of the Party Intervenant:
"The terms of the Contribution Agreements with the Applicant Band are that proper financial and accounting records be kept, that department officials have the right to access those records at all reasonable times and that the Band will provide audited financial reports. (Peden Transcripts, page 5, lines 7-23.)
"The information is used to assure the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, and Parliament generally, that the public funds are expended in accordance with the program restrictions. (Peden Transcripts, page 11, lines 21-23, page 16, lines 10-24.)"
[7]
Some important concessions have been made on both sides with respect to these applications. The respondent, as noted above, admits that personal information contained in the statements should not be disclosed. Department officials have indicated on the copies of the reports filed which entries they believe may fall within that classification. For their part, barring some procedural arguments which have been raised about the decision to disclose, the applicants are willing to admit that the information concerning contribution moneys, which are public funds, are not subject to the exemptions from disclosure pleaded here and may be released. While I am grateful to counsel for narrowing the issues by means of these concessions, I will have something to say later about their effect on whether, and to what extent, these records may be disclosed.
[8]
The arguments on behalf of the Montana Band fall into two basic categories: first, that since these documents were obtained in the context of a fiduciary relationship, they are not under the government's control and are not subject to the Access to Information Act at all. Second, if the statements are covered by the Act, they are exempt from disclosure by the operation of ss. 19 and 20. This applicant made the additional submission that the Department's classification of their oil and gas royalties as capital, as opposed to revenue, constituted a breach of trust. I see no relevance in that submission to the issue before me here, which is whether the Band's financial statements, whatever classifications they record, must be disclosed under the Act. These reasons, therefore, will be confined to the applicant's two main arguments.
[9]
The statutory provisions which govern the scope of the Access to Information Act are ss. 2 and 4(1) of the Act:
"2(1) The purpose of this Act is to extend the present laws of Canada to provide a right of access to information in records under the control of a government institution in accordance with the principles that government information should be available to the public, that necessary exemptions to the right of access should be limited and specific and that decisions on the disclosure of government information should be reviewed independently of government.
"2(2) This Act is intended to complement and not replace existing procedures for access to government information and is not intended to limit in any way access to the type of government information that is normally available to the general public.
"4(1) Subject to this Act, but notwithstanding any other Act of Parliament, every person who is
(a) a Canadian citizen, or
(b) a permanent resident within the meaning of the Immigration Act, 1976,
has a right to and shall, on request, be given access to any record under the control of a government institution."
[10]
The applicants submit, and it is not disputed by the respondent, that when dealing with Indian property on behalf of the Band, the Crown is acting as a fiduciary in the context of a trust relationship. Therefore, the financial information provided by the Bands to the Crown in order to obtain "Indian Moneys," derived from their property is received by the Crown in its capacity of fiduciary/ trustee. The Montana Band argues further that the release by the Crown of the financial information would be detrimental to the Band's business interests and contrary to its wishes. It would therefore, it is submitted, constitute a breach of the Crown's duty of loyalty and confidentiality to the Band to release the information. The decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 647-648 (F.C.T.D.) is cited for the proposition that "the federal Crown cannot default on its fiduciary obligation to the Indians through a plea of competing considerations".
[11]
In his oral submissions, counsel for the Band expanded this position to argue that, since the information is governed by the trust relationship, it is not really "under the control" of a government institution. The documents may be in the Department's possession, but they are not under government control unless government direction can be exercised over them. It is argued that such direction is not possible given the limited purpose for which they were provided and the fiduciary nature of the relationship between the parties.
[12]
Some of the other applicants put the case more strongly. It was argued that the financial statements could not be considered "government information" at all as they record the Bands' own revenues and capital. It was alleged that in the phrase "government information", the word "government" has a proprietary connotation. It follows that the government may only grant access to records with which it has the legal authority to deal in its sole discretion. In this case, it is submitted, the information, like the funds it describes, belongs to the Bands, not the government. It therefore cannot be said to be "government information".
[13]
The respondent replies that any record in the possession of a government institution is "under its control" within the meaning of s. 4(1) because it is within the institution's power to produce. A narrow construction of the term, it is alleged, would be contrary to the spirit and intent of the Act, which are to foster disclosure and access to information. That Parliament intended a broad definition of the word "control" can be seen from the care it took to exempt from disclosure those records under government control in which a specific strong interest lies against disclosure. In the words of the respondent's written submissions:
"The exemption of third party information, as set out in s. 20, addresses the concerns pertaining to information provided to the government in a trust relationship, strikes the balance between the interests in disclosure and 'privacy' in the larger sense and sets the exact criteria to be applied in the decision-making process."
It is further submitted that, since the records in question were required by the Department and submitted by the Band to comply with various regulatory and statutory "government" requirements, they should be considered "government information".
[14]
I find I must agree with the respondent on this issue. While the Bands understandably find it repugnant that their private records could be made the subject of an access to information request, the fact remains that, because of the reporting requirements, copies of their financial statements are under government control. To limit the definition of "control" in order to exclude them would be to set a dangerous precedent with respect to the interpretation of this relatively new Act. Fortunately, as the respondent points out, the applicants' concerns have been dealt with by Parliament in the exemption sections of the Act.
[15]
That brings us to the applicant's second major argument, that these records are exempt under ss. 19(1) and 20(1) of the Act. Those subsections read as follows:
"19(1) Subject to subsection (2), the head of a government institution shall refuse to disclose any record requested under this Act that contains personal information as defined in section 3 of the Privacy Act.
"20(1) Subject to this section, the head of a government institution shall refuse to disclose any record requested under this Act that contains
(a) trade secrets of a third party;
(b) financial, commercial, scientific or technical information that is confidential information supplied to a government institution by a third party and is treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party;
(c) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to result in material financial loss or gain to, or could reasonably be expected to prejudice the competitive position of, a third party; or
(d) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to interfere with contractual or other negotiations of a third party."
Specifically, the applicant argues that its financial statements constitute personal information within the meaning of s. 19(1), confidential information within the meaning of s. 20(1)(b) and information the disclosure of which could reasonably result in material financial loss or competitive prejudice within the meaning of s. 20(1)(c).
[16]
Personal information is defined in s. 3 of the Privacy Act as "information about an identifiable individual". The applicant alleges that although no individuals are named or otherwise identified in most of these statements (where such information does appear, the respondent has conceded it may be withheld), since the number of members of each Band is known, a simple per capita division of the asset information in the statements would reveal the entitlement of each individual member. It is alleged that for this reason, all the statements must be considered personal information.
[17]
I reject this argument. First, on the facts of this case, I am not satisfied that information about identifiable individuals can be obtained from the general data in the financial statements. The statements themselves do not provide for the calculation suggested by the applicants. Nothing in these records indicates how an individual member's net worth is connected to the overall Band figures. Second, even if such information could be extracted from the statements, to protect them from disclosure on that basis would be an unwarranted extension of s. 19. While I do not rule out the possibility that information about small groups may, in some cases, constitute personal information, the mere fact that one can divide the group's assets by the number of its members does not support such a finding. To hold otherwise would be to distort the intention of the personal information exemption.
[18]
Nor do I consider the argument under s. 20(1)(c) to be a particularly strong one. Indeed, counsel for the applicants conceded at the hearing that the evidence of financial or competitive harm in this case falls well short of the standard I applied in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. Consequently, the documents cannot be exempted from disclosure on this basis.
[19]
The core of the applicants' case, and their strongest argument, is that this information is "financial ... information that is confidential information supplied to a government institution by a third party and is treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party". It will be seen that this test, as set out in s. 20(1)(b), contains four criteria:
1) The records must be (in this case) financial information. That is conceded by the respondent here, quite properly, in my opinion.
2) The information must be "confidential" by some objective standard. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .) That factor remains very much in dispute.
3) The information must be supplied to a government institution by a third party. The respondent attempted to argue that, because the balances on the applicants' funds held in trust had been provided to the Bands by the Department, that information could not be considered as having been "supplied" by the Bands. There is no question, however, that the financial statements, in their current form, were prepared by the Bands' accountants for the Bands' own use and provided to the government in fulfillment of the statutory reporting requirements. I have no doubt, therefore, that this material was "supplied" by the third parties.
4) The information must have been treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party. This, together with the confidential nature of the information itself, forms the basis of the dispute in this case.
[20]
The applicants argue that, by any objective test, this information is confidential in nature. Their reasons can be summarized as follows:
1) The Bands have not released the information to the public and the public does not have any proprietary interest in the information.
2) The reports were prepared by the Bands, for the Bands, at the expense of the Bands and relate [to the extent of this dispute] solely to the Band's own funds.
3) The information was conveyed to the government within the context of the fiduciary/trust relationship which exists between the Crown and the Indians and as such was "communicated in circumstances in which an obligation of confidence arises".
4) The statements were provided to the Department for the limited purpose of allowing DIA to carry out its fiduciary tasks of monitoring and supervising Band expenditures. In these circumstances there exists a private law duty of confidence, either by virtue of the fiduciary relationship or implied from the nature of the information and the circumstances of its communication to DIA: Finn, Fiduciary Obligations (1977), Chap. 19.
[21]
The respondent does not directly dispute any of these assertions, but makes the following submissions:
1) The financial statements constitute not only an accounting by the Band to the Minister but also an accounting by the Band Council to the Band members for moneys which the Council held and administered by way of a trust for all Band members in common. Because it is an accounting to a large group, the information is thereby public in nature.
2) Each member of the Band is entitled to see the records. The difficult question raised in this case is whether the fact that the statements must be by law and are open to inspection by [here, 471] members of the Band deprives them of their "confidential" nature. It is submitted that it does.
3) By virtue of s. 69 of the Indian Act, and the provisions of s. 8 of the Indian Bands Revenue Moneys Regulations, the Bands were required to engage an auditor to do an annual audit of its revenue moneys, to post such annual audit report "in conspicuous places on the Band Reserve for examination by the members of the Band" and to supply a copy to the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development. It is submitted that this regulation requires the information to be made public. Therefore, although none of the Bands actually posted their annual reports, the information which should have been contained in and published by such posting is not "confidential".
4) Some of the expenditures recorded in the financial statements were for municipal-type operations. Because of the public interest in community expenditures, this information cannot have a confidential nature.
[22]
Most of these arguments boil down to the simple assertion that, because these statements are open to all Band members, they cannot be considered confidential. In support of this proposition the respondent cites two decisions: DMR and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (U.S.C.A.). However, I do not believe that either case can be successfully used for that purpose. In DMR the access request was for the winning proposal resulting from a tender issued by the respondent. The company which had submitted the proposal objected to its release on a number of grounds, among them the confidentiality of the information. I concluded that the information was not exempt from disclosure as it would be made available to the applicant's competitors during the bidding process on the next stage of the project. That is not the situation here. The only people who are ever likely to have access to this information are the people it belongs to - the members of the applicant Bands - and those who owe them a duty of confidence, for example, their accountants. The respondent has not demonstrated even a reasonable likelihood that persons whose interests differ from those of the Band will be allowed to review this material.
[23]
The second case, Sharyland Water Supply is certainly based on a more analogous fact situation, but it has the disadvantage of having been decided under the American Freedom of Information Act whose test for confidentiality differs from that of the Canadian statute. In that case a nonprofit water supply company sought to enjoin the Farmers Home Administration from disclosing audit reports filed with the FHA pursuant to an application for a loan. The applicant alleged that the reports were covered by the fourth exemption to the Freedom of Information Act which protects "trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from a person and privileged or confidential". The court followed the definition of confidentiality set out in National Parks and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 770: information is confidential only if its disclosure "is likely ... to impair the government's ability to obtain necessary information in the future ... or to cause substantial harm to the competitive position of the person from whom the information was obtained". On the basis of that definition, the court went on to find that the information at issue was not confidential. Its reasons included the insignificant competition the company faced and the speculative testimony concerning potential harm resulting from disclosure. In addition, they found at page 399:
"Under Texas law, Sharyland must make the audit reports available to its 5200 members. Texas law does not forbid disclosure by these members. We see no reason to hold erroneous a conclusion that what five thousand people may obtain without even a pledge of nondisclosure is not confidential."
[24]
In the Piller Sausages decision I discussed the problem with relying on American case law for purposes of interpreting the Canadian statute, particularly with respect to the exemptions at issue here. As pointed out  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the National Parks interpretation combines the tests set out in ss. 20(1)(b) and (c) of the Canadian Act by combining a "class" test and an "injury" test in one exemption. I concluded, therefore, that while the American jurisprudence is helpful in seeking an understanding of similar terminology, the standard for refusing to disclose must be established with respect to the Canadian Act ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 21) [page 131 F.T.R.].
[25]
In this case, I would be very hesitant to adopt the holding quoted above from the U.S. Court of Appeal. The Canadian Act's definition of "confidential" does not include an injury test, and actual competitive harm need not be shown under s. 20(1)(b). Therefore, the definition of "confidential" must be a less practical one, having to do with the nature of the information itself. As I indicated at the hearing, I do not believe that the number of people to whom information is available is determinative of its confidentiality. If only those who have a beneficial interest in the information and the funds it represents have access to it, the essential confidentiality of the information will not be affected, regardless of their numbers. Such factors may indicate whether the information has been
treated
consistently in a confidential manner, but the objective test for confidentiality must have more to do with the content of the information, its purpose, and the conditions under which it was prepared and communicated.
[26]
Applying those criteria, I have no hesitation in declaring this material to be objectively confidential in nature. The information at issue relates not to any public funds, but to the financial holdings of a group of private individuals. By a complex series of historical and constitutional developments, it happens that those funds are held in trust for the Bands by the federal government. In the context of that fiduciary relationship, financial information passes between the parties. In any similar situation involving a nongovernmental fiduciary, there would be no question that the information was subject to a duty of confidence. I do not think that a different result applies in this case.
[27]
Certainly, the confidentiality is not destroyed by the Band Council's responsibility to report to its members. As noted above, the funds belong to each Band member and they have a similar interest in the information relating to those funds. For that reason, the fact that members are entitled to review the records, or even to take copies, does not in any way reduce their confidentiality.
[28]
Nor do I think the posting requirement raised by the respondent renders these public records. Even had it been followed, the regulation would only have resulted in a posting on the Band's own reserve. Indian reserves are private property, and anyone who enters one without the consent of the Band is liable for trespass (Indian Act, ss. 30 and 31). It cannot be said, therefore, that to post information on a reserve is to make it available to the public at large.
[29]
Finally, I do not accept the respondent's submission that "municipal-type" expenditures are automatically public information. There must certainly be an accounting to the members of the community on whose behalf the expenditures were made, but in this case that again takes the information no further than the Band itself.
[30]
It remains for me to consider whether these records have been treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party. In my opinion, they have. Much of what I have said above applies here. The evidence reveals that the Montana Band's practice was to permit its members to review the financial statements in the Band's office, but not to take them away. Access would be granted on request to any member who sought it. In addition, the Band's accountants and management consultant were given access to the information. No oaths of secrecy were taken from any of these people and no resolution was passed by the Band declaring the records confidential.
[31]
None of this evidence leads me to the conclusion that these records were not treated confidentially by the Band. There was no requirement for the Band or its members to expressly declare the statements confidential - they were clearly so by their very nature. Nor is it fatal that the members are not sworn to secrecy on reviewing their own financial statements. If such an argument were to succeed, any family or private company who did not take an express oath of confidentiality from its members would endanger the privacy of its records. No oath of secrecy was required, either, from the professionals the Band had engaged in a fiduciary capacity. By the terms of their employment, both the accountants and the consultant had a duty of confidence to the Band, (Finn, Fiduciary Obligations (Sydney, 1977) 137). The suggestion that the provision of information to people in their professional capacity endangers its confidentiality is entirely without merit.
[32]
The most important consideration is that neither the respondent nor the party intervenant could provide any evidence that this information was available to anyone beyond the Band and its fiduciaries. I have, therefore, decided that the financial statements are confidential information which has been treated confidentially by the third party within the meaning of s. 20(1)(b) - at least those parts of the statements which deal with Band funds.
[33]
As noted above, the applicants have conceded that information dealing with public funds, that is, grants and contribution monies, should not be considered confidential. The respondent concludes from this that any such information in the financial statements should be severed and disclosed under s. 25 of the Act. That section reads:
"25. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, where a request is made to a government institution for access to a record that the head of the institution is authorized to refuse to disclose under this Act by reason of information or other material contained in the record, the head of the institution shall disclose any part of the record that does not contain, and can reasonably be severed from any part that contains, any such information or material."
I do not agree. All the monies received by the Band through grants and contribution agreements are recorded in other departmental documents outlining the programs under which the funds were transferred. Many of these documents were filed in evidence as Exhibit "C" to the Peden affidavit. In my opinion, access to that information should be sought by a request for those records, which are undeniably public information under the control of the Department. The records contained in Exhibit "C" would give much more complete and useful information about the amount of contribution monies transferred and the purposes for which they were intended. There is no reason to seek to sever the very minimal information about these monies in the confidential financial statements.
[34]
In addition, I do not find that the information regarding public funds is reasonably severable. To attempt to comply with s. 25 would result in the release of an entirely blacked-out document with, at most, two or three lines showing. Without the context of the rest of the statement, such information would be worthless. The effort such severance would require on the part of the Department is not reasonably proportionate to the quality of access it would provide.
[35]
For these reasons, my order will be that the requested financial statements should not be disclosed by the Department. The s. 44 application is therefore allowed with costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]