[1]
Dawson, J.
: In the context of a hearing into the reasonableness of a security certificate issued in respect of Mohamed Harkat pursuant to s. 77(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2001, c. 27 ("
Act
"), Mr. Harkat moved for an order:
a) appointing John B. Laskin to assist the Court as amicus curiae during those portions of the hearing of this matter when counsel for Mr. Harkat is not permitted to be present;
b) requiring that reasonable expenses of the amicus curiae thereby occasioned be paid by the government of Canada;
c) stating that in the absence of the assistance of the amicus curiae, in the particularly complicated circumstances of this case, as set out in the Statement Summarizing the Information and Evidence pursuant to s. 78(h) of the
Act
dated December 2, 2002 ("Summary") it will be impossible for the Court to provide fundamental justice to the applicant pursuant to s. 7 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, Part I of the
Constitution Act, 1982
, being Schedule B to the
Canada Act 1982
(U.K.), 1982, c. 11 ("
Charter
") on the issue of whether the certificate signed by the two Ministers is reasonable;
d) in the alternative, if the Court determines that s. 7 of the
Charter
is not breached by the procedure to be followed in this case, an order of this Court exercising its common law jurisdiction that amicus curiae be appointed to assist the Court in this case;
e) costs of this motion on the solicitor/client basis in any event of the cause; and
f) such further and other relief as counsel may advise and this Court deems just.
[2]
As to the jurisdiction of this Court to grant such relief, Mr. Harkat argues that the Court has jurisdiction to do so at common law, and also as a remedy available to the Court under s. 24(1) of the
Charter
in order to prevent a breach of Mr. Harkat's rights guaranteed under s. 7 of the
Charter
.
[3]
In support of the Court's common law jurisdiction, Mr. Harkat relies upon dicta of the Ontario Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.R.(3d) 434 (C.A.). There, in the context of an appeal against a criminal conviction, it was argued that the lawyer who had been appointed to act as amicus curiae was in a conflict of interest, had made legal submissions contrary to the best interests of the accused, and disclosed confidential information obtained from the accused. At page 443 of the Court's reasons, Mr. Justice Rosenberg, writing for the Court, observed that:
"It was not argued, nor could it be, that a superior court has no power to appoint amicus curiae at the trial of an unrepresented accused. The appellant's argument therefore must be that the court erred in appointing Mr. Black as amicus curiae because of a potential or actual conflict of interest."
[4]
Mr. Harkat's motion is opposed by counsel for the two Ministers who referred the security certificate to the Court for a determination as to its reasonableness. On the Ministers' behalf, it is argued that:
i) In asserting that the
Charter
gives this Court jurisdiction to appoint an amicus curiae, Mr. Harkat is calling into question the constitutional validity and the applicability of ss. 77 and 78 of the
Act
, which do not provide for such an appointment. As a result, the Ministers say that Mr. Harkat was required to serve a notice of constitutional question upon the Attorney General of Canada, and the Attorney General of each province.
ii) In any event, the Ministers argue that the procedures set out in ss. 77 and 78 of the
Act
, by which a security certificate is referred to the Federal Court and a judge designated by the Chief Justice of the Court then proceeds to inquire into, and determine, whether the security certificate is reasonable, has been found to be consistent with the principles of fundamental justice as set out in s. 7 of the
Charter
.
iii) The
Charter
does not confer jurisdiction upon the Federal Court to appoint an amicus curiae.
iv) There is no express bestowal of jurisdiction upon the Federal Court by statute to appoint an amicus curiae.
v) There is no implied jurisdiction in the Federal Court to appoint an amicus curiae in proceedings conducted pursuant to s. 78 of the
Act
.
vi) In the alternative, if the Court concludes that it does possess jurisdiction to appoint an amicus curiae to assist in proceedings conducted in accordance with s. 78 of the
Act
, the Court should not exercise its discretion to do so in this case.
[5]
For ease of reference, ss. 77, 78 and 80 of the
Act
are set out in Appendix A to these reasons.
[6]
The issue raised by Mr. Harkat is an important one. The written submissions filed in support of, and in opposition to, his motion are not lengthy. Because it may be of relevance to know what arguments were advanced to the Court on this motion, Mr. Harkat's written submissions and supplemental written submissions are appended to these reasons in Appendix B, while the Ministers' written submissions are appended as Appendix C.
[7]
The oral argument did not enlarge these submissions to a significant extent.
[8]
The motion was argued orally on September 24, 2004. In view of the fact that the Court was to sit commencing on October 25, 2004 for the purpose of providing a further opportunity to Mr. Harkat to be heard regarding his alleged inadmissibility, it was important for the Court's decision concerning Mr. Harkat's motion to be communicated promptly to him. Accordingly, after reflection and deliberation upon the submissions made in writing and orally by the parties, the Court issued an order on October 6, 2004 dismissing the motion, for reasons to be later delivered in writing. These are those reasons.
THE MATERIAL FILED IN SUPPORT OF THE MOTION
[9]
The motion is supported by affidavits sworn by John B. Laskin, William George Horton, and Diana Muñoz. Reliance is also placed by Mr. Harkat upon the Summary.
[10]
Mr. Laskin is a well-respected and eminent member of the Law Society of Upper Canada. His affidavit exhibits a copy of his curriculum vitae and states that, from 1985 to 1986, Mr. Laskin acted as counsel to the Security Intelligence Review Committee ("SIRC") with respect to complaints made under s. 42 of the
Canadian Security Intelligence Service Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-23 ("
CSIS Act
"). SIRC's rules of procedure in relation to its function under the
CSIS Act
(as adopted on March 9, 1985) are also exhibited to Mr. Laskin's affidavit. Mr. Laskin also advised that he has acted for the government of Canada on several occasions, including in proceedings arising from objections to the disclosure of information on the ground that the disclosure would be injurious to national security. For his work with SIRC and certain other retainers, Mr. Laskin was granted security clearance to the level "Top Secret". If appointed as amicus, Mr. Laskin swore to his belief that he would again be able to be approved for security clearance. Finally, Mr. Laskin advised he would be prepared to take on the task of amicus curiae if the Court decided it needed such assistance.
[11]
Mr. Horton is another eminent member of the Law Society of Upper Canada. His affidavit also exhibited a brief professional biography and explained that, between 1986 and 1991, he acted as one of SIRC's counsel. During that time, he worked on 4 or 5 matters, two of which required him to review CSIS files. Thus, he was required to obtain, and did obtain, a "Top Secret" security classification. Mr. Horton described his duties as one of SIRC's independent counsel in the following terms:
"4. One of my principal duties as independent counsel was to represent the interests of the complainant with respect to information which could not be disclosed to the complainant and his counsel because of the security classification which had been applied to such information. In the course of performing that function, I did the following:
a) discuss the case with the Chair of the SIRC panel at the outset and review material in the SIRC file regarding the complaint;
b) review the CSIS file;
c) discuss the case with the complainant's counsel and, without revealing any classified information, obtain input as to what issues and concerns the complainant would like to have addressed;
d) conduct in camera cross-examinations of CSIS employees and any informants who testified in whole or in part in camera;
e) make submissions to the SIRC panel with respect to the in camera proceedings;
f) provide editorial assistance with respect to the reasons of the SIRC panel once a decision had been made by the panel.
"5. In the performance of these duties, I attempted to bring out facts and considerations which were favourable to the complainant in a balanced and responsible manner having regard to the fact that I owed duties to both the complainant and to SIRC. However, where I felt in my own independent judgement that it was required, I did not hesitate to conduct an adversarial cross-examination of a witness.
"6. While the role I played as independent counsel to SIRC was a hybrid role in terms of Canadian legal norms, I felt that it was a necessary and effective compromise to ensure that there could be a degree of scrutiny and accountability for state action where classified information is involved."
[12]
Diana Muñoz is a legal secretary employed by Mr. Harkat's solicitor. Her affidavit identified a bound volume entitled "Material Relied Upon in Support of the Amicus Curiae Motion". The contents of that volume are generally described as the correspondence and a memorandum all relating to various disclosure requests made on Mr. Harkat's behalf.
THE JURISDICTIONAL QUESTION
[13]
At the outset, I dismiss the argument advanced on the Ministers' behalf that Mr. Harkat was obliged to serve a notice of constitutional question upon the Attorney General of Canada and the Attorney General of each province. Section 57 of the
Federal Courts Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, requires service of such a notice where the "constitutional validity, applicability, or operability of an Act of Parliament" is put into question. I do not understand Mr. Harkat on this motion to put the validity, applicability, or operability of s. 78 of the
Act
in question. Rather, Mr. Harkat states in his notice of motion that "in the absence of the assistance of the amicus curiae, in the particularly complicated circumstances of this case [...] it will be impossible for the Court to provide fundamental justice" to him pursuant to s. 7 of the
Charter
on the issue of whether the security certificate is reasonable. In other words, Mr. Harkat states that his s. 7
Charter
rights are jeopardized by the current procedure and that the
Act
, fairly interpreted, allows the Court to remedy that situation. In that circumstance, Mr. Harkat was not, in my view, obliged to serve a notice of constitutional question.
[14]
In the circumstances of this case, I do not find it necessary to decide whether the Court has the jurisdiction to appoint an amicus curiae. In the absence of fully developed submissions on the point, as reflected in the appended written submissions, I consider it preferable that I do not decide the point. On my assessment of the merits of the motion before me, it is sufficient for me to assume, without deciding, that there is such a jurisdiction.
[15]
I now turn to consider the facts and matters urged upon the Court as justifying the appointment of an amicus curiae on the assumption that jurisdiction exists in certain circumstances either by implication or as a result of the Court's jurisdiction to provide a remedy for a breach of a
Charter
right.
THE BASIS OF THE ARGUMENT THAT AN AMICUS CURIAE IS REQUIRED
[16]
The facts and matters said to render it impossible for the Court to provide fundamental justice to Mr. Harkat or to warrant the exercise of common law jurisdiction to appoint an amicus curiae are as follows:
i) Matters relating to Mr. Harkat are significantly more complicated than the matters relating to Mr. Ahani which were considered by Madam Justice McGillis in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The simpler allegations in respect of Mr. Ahani were those before the Court when it found the predecessor legislation to ss. 77, 78 and 80 of the
Act
to meet the principles of fundamental justice.
ii) Given the particularly complicated history and circumstances of this case, "the unwillingness of the government to answer even such basic questions as to whether they are relying on information obtained from Maher Arar, or Ahmed Ressam, an amicus curiae is necessary in order to allow the Court to consider fully and fairly the context and substance of the allegations made against" Mr. Harkat.
iii) Such appointment would greatly assist the Court in assessing the reasonableness of the security certificate. "An amicus curiae would allow the Court to benefit from hearing representations of counsel which would not otherwise be put forward, while preserving the government's claim to national security interest". Considering the type of issues the Court will be called upon to decide, "the assistance or input of an amicus curiae could prove invaluable" so that Mr. Harkat's interest will be more completely protected. The appointment of an amicus curiae is said to strike a just balance between the competing interests inherent in the case.
iv) The Summary provided to Mr. Harkat pursuant to s. 78(h) of the
Act
fails to meet the standard imposed upon the Ministers of full, fair and candid disclosure of the facts. Particularly, there was not full disclosure of the political situation in Algeria and the Ministers suggested that false Saudi passports were passports of choice only for Islamic extremists wishing to enter Canada.
ANALYSIS OF THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE GROUNDS ASSERTED TO JUSTIFY APPOINTMENT OF AN AMICUS CURIAE
[17]
I will analyse the facts and matters argued by Mr. Harkat within the following framework:
1. Do those matters establish that the appointment of an amicus curiae is necessary or required in order for the Court to exercise the jurisdiction granted to the Court pursuant to the
Act
so as to establish the asserted implied jurisdiction?
2. Do those matters establish that, unless an amicus curiae is appointed, it will be impossible for the Court to provide fundamental justice to Mr. Harkat?
3. Are there additional considerations relevant to the exercise of discretion to appoint an amicus curiae in this case?
[18]
Before commencing this analysis, it will be helpful to consider the regime established by ss. 77, 78 and 80 of the
Act
and the role in that scheme of the designated judge. These matters were recently reviewed by my colleague, Mr. Justice Simon Noël,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Re
, [2004] 3 F.C. 32; 253 F.T.R. 22 (F.C.) and I adopt his explanation as set out in paragraphs 100 through 102 of his reasons:
"100 In my opinion, designated judges are the cornerstone of the review procedure because they have a twofold obligation: to protect criminal or national security intelligence; and to provide the person concerned with a summary of the evidence that reasonably discloses the circumstances giving rise to the certificate and the warrant that resulted in his detention. This constitutes the balance between the opposing interests.
"101 In order to carry out this difficult task, the designated judge has access to all the information on which the Ministers' decisions are based, without exception. The designated judge can even examine additional information if counsel for the Ministers submit any (paragraph 78(j) of the
IRPA
). The Ministers' representatives are even under a duty to inform the designated judge of any facts that could be prejudicial to the Ministers' case.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Arbour, J., notes that the duty of disclosure is much greater when Parliament has authorized hearings in the absence of a party [at paragraph 47]:
'As mentioned before, when making ex parte submissions to the reviewing court, the government institution is under a duty to act in utmost good faith and must make full, fair and candid disclosure of the facts, including those that may be adverse to its interest.'
"Designated judges preside over hearings and hear the Minister's witnesses. They examine witnesses themselves as the need arises. They examine the documents carefully to determine which information is related to security and which information is not. In order to do so, they examine, among other things, the sources of the information, the way in which it was obtained, the reliability of the sources and the method used, and whether it is possible to corroborate the information by other means. Designated judges take account of the fact that the information was obtained in confidence from a source in Canada or a foreign source, or that the information is already in the public domain. They ask the Ministers' representatives about the quality of the investigation and inquire into whether the events can be interpreted differently. They decide which information can be disclosed to the person concerned and provide a summary of the evidence containing nothing which would, if disclosed, be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person. The summary must enable the person concerned to be reasonably informed of the circumstances giving rise to the signing of the certificate, the issuance of the warrant of arrest and the detention.
"102 After the person concerned receives the summary in question and other relevant documents, the designated judge holds one or more hearings where the person concerned is given the opportunity to be heard. [...] At the hearing, the Ministers and the person concerned have the opportunity to call witnesses, submit documentary evidence and make oral as well as written submissions."
(I) Is the appointment of amicus curiae necessary or required in order for the Court to exercise the jurisdiction granted to the Court pursuant to the Act?
[19]
The Federal Court is not a court of general or inherent jurisdiction. It is a statutory court constituted pursuant to Parliament's authority under s. 101 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
to establish "additional Courts for the better Administration of the Laws of Canada". Section 3 of the
Federal Courts Act
provides that the Court is a "court of law, equity, and admiralty" and "a superior court of record having civil and criminal jurisdiction". The designation of the Federal Court as a superior court has been held to confer no jurisdiction by itself.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pages 232-233 where the majority of the Court held that the concluding words of s. 3 of the then
Federal Court Act
and the reference to the Federal Court continuing as a "superior court of record" did not make the Federal Court a "superior court within the same meaning of that expression as applied by the superior courts of the provinces, that is, courts having jurisdiction in all cases not excluded from their authority". This authority, in my view, distinguishes the dicta of the Ontario Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. The Federal Court can only exercise those powers that are given to it by Parliament.
[20]
Having said that, a power may be conferred by implication to the extent that the existence and exercise of such a power is necessary for the Court to properly and fully exercise the jurisdiction expressly conferred upon it by some statutory provision.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), where the Federal Court of Appeal found that it had implied jurisdiction to grant a stay where the failure to stay the operation of the decision under review would render the appeal nugatory. However, conferral of a power will be implied only where that power is necessary or required in order to permit the exercise of the Court's express jurisdiction.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pages 639 to 644 where the majority of the Court wrote that, in the context of the power to issue an injunction, "power has only been implied where that power is actually
necessary
for the administration of the terms of the legislation; coherence, logicality, or desirability are not sufficient".
[21]
This is why it is necessary to consider whether the evidence establishes that the appointment of an amicus curiae is necessary in order for the Court to exercise its responsibility under ss. 78 and 80 of the
Act
.
[22]
Counsel have not cited, nor am I aware of, any prior request for the appointment of an amicus curiae in cases where the Court is inquiring into the reasonableness of a security certificate under the
Act
or under its predecessor legislation. In those previous cases, the Court reached its conclusions concerning the reasonableness of a certificate without the assistance of an amicus curiae. What then makes this case different so that the Court cannot exercise its statutory jurisdiction without the appointment of an amicus curiae?
[23]
First, Mr. Harkat argues that the matters relating to him are significantly more complicated than the matters relating to Mr. Ahani. No evidentiary basis was tendered for this submission, but it was argued orally that the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case was simpler because the allegation was simply that Mr. Ahani was a foreign assassin.
[24]
Allegations against Mr. Harkat, as contained in the Summary and supplementary disclosures, are that:
(i) Prior to arriving in Canada, Mr. Harkat engaged in terrorism by supporting terrorist activities, and he is a member of the Bin Laden Network which includes Al Qaida.
(ii) He is an Islamic extremist and a supporter of Afghani, Pakistani and Chechen extremists.
(iii) Mr. Harkat's method and route of travel to Canada, untrue statements made to Canadian officials, support for individuals and groups involved in political violence or terrorist activity, alliances with Islamic extremists, and use of security techniques lead CSIS to believe that Mr. Harkat is associated with organizations that support the use of political violence and terrorism.
(iv) With respect to the provision of untrue statements, it is said that Mr. Harkat lied when he:
(a) denied helping Islamic extremists in Pakistan while working for a relief agency;
(b) denied he was involved in supporting Islamic extremists;
(c) failed to reveal that he had been in Afghanistan;
(d) masked his relationships with individuals in Canada; and
(e) denied using aliases in order, in part, to distance himself from associating with individuals or groups who may have participated in the Bin Laden Network.
(v) Mr. Harkat has assisted some Islamic extremists who have come to Canada.
(vi) Mr. Harkat has associated with Abu Zubaida, one of Osama Bin Laden's top lieutenants who identified Mr. Harkat from his physical description and his activities, including that he operated a guest house in Peshawar, Pakistan in the mid-1990s for Mujahedeen travelling to Chechnya.
(vii) Mr. Harkat denied being known as Abu Muslim or Abu Muslima.
[25]
Mr. Harkat is, in my view, able to avail himself of his opportunity to be heard under s. 78(i) of the
Act
in response to this disclosure without the involvement of amicus curiae. The allegations against him are based purely on asserted facts and in my view are not so complicated as to require a procedure not contemplated in the
Act
.
[26]
Mr. Harkat points to the fact that he has been unable to obtain answers to all of 231 questions which he put to the Ministers and he says therefore that an amicus curiae is necessary. With respect, I appreciate that, without knowledge of the contents of the classified Security Intelligence Report that led to the issuance of the security certificate, it is impossible for Mr. Harkat to know the precise evidence that supports the certificate where I have found that the disclosure of such evidence would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any other person. That does not mean, however, that without an amicus curiae the Court cannot fully and fairly consider the context and substance of the allegations made against Mr. Harkat and the nature and the reliability of the evidence supporting it. That is the very responsibility of the Court, and the exercise the Court has, and will, conduct. To illustrate, by direction, the Court has previously advised the parties that:
"I have carefully considered the entirety of the evidence presented by the Ministers. On the basis of that review and consideration, I can advise that I will make no finding adverse to Mr. Harkat on the basis of any information concerning Mr. Harkat which may have been provided by Ahmed Ressam or Maher Arar."
[27]
To the extent that information was sought by Mr. Harkat in his counsel's 231 questions (and more), any information that was not already before the Court in the classified Security Intelligence Report has now been provided to the Court in Mr. Harkat's absence where the disclosure of the answer would be injurious to national security or the safety of any person. Put more simply, the Court has ensured that all information that Mr. Harkat wished to have before the Court has been placed before the Court.
[28]
Counsel for Mr. Harkat argued that intelligence services have been involved with abuses in the past and that intelligence services are not infallible. This, however, is why the Court is obliged to isolate the facts relied upon to support the security certificate and then, in the words of Mr. Justice Blais in
Zündel, Re
(2004), 245 F.T.R. 61 (F.C.), at paragraph 12, review such evidence "with intense scrutiny" and weigh the evidence "with an eye to the quality and number of sources of information". This will necessarily require the Court to consider the potential for error caused by a number of factors including mis-identification, mistake, mis-direction, incompetence and malevolence.
[29]
Mr. Harkat also argues that the appointment of an amicus curiae would greatly assist the Court and that his interest would be better protected with the presence of an amicus. However, as the majority of the Supreme Court noted in
Canadian Liberty Net
, supra, the standard for finding an implied power is a stringent one; a power is not to be implied where it is simply logical or desirable.
[30]
Mr. Harkat has alleged that an amicus curiae is required because the Ministers have failed to make full and fair and candid disclosure of the facts in two material respects. First, Mr. Harkat says there was not full disclosure of the political situation in Algeria. Specifically he says that:
"The government failed to advise the Court that the FIS won the first round of the elections in 1992, that the military intervened to take over the government and cancelled the elections. The government failed to advise this Court that the military engaged in indiscriminate killings and disappearances of its political opponents. The government failed to advise the Court that 200,000 people were killed in Algeria as a result of the actions of the army and the response to the actions of the army in canceling [sic] the elections and seizing the government."
[31]
I believe this to relate to paragraphs 10 and 11 of the Summary which are as follows:
"10. In his refugee claim, HARKAT acknowledged his support for, and membership in, the Front islamique du salut (FIS) in Algeria. When HARKAT was a supporter of the FIS, it was a legitimate political organization. In 1992, the FIS was outlawed by the Government of Algeria, and in 1993, it created a military wing, the Armée islamique du salut (AIS), which supported a doctrine of political violence. HARKAT claims to have joined the FIS in 1989 after losing faith in the Algerian government's ability to solve the social and economic problems facing Algeria. Shortly after joining the FIS, he provided the group with access to a family home in the village of Zmalet Elamir Abdulkadir, Algeria. This residence became the district office for the FIS and was used rent-free for the registration of its members. During this period, he claims to have resided at Oran University, where he was attending classes. In March 1990, Algerian government security officers closed down the residence in Zmalet Elamir Abdulkadir and arrested all the FIS workers. HARKAT was advised that the authorities were looking for him and went into hiding until his departure for Saudi Arabia on a visitor visa in April 1990. He travelled to Pakistan and remained until September 1995.
"11. HARKAT's claims to membership in the FIS are consistent with Service investigation. However, Service investigation revealed that when the FIS severed its links with the Groupe islamique armé (GIA), HARKAT indicated his loyalties were with the GIA. The GIA seeks to establish an Islamic state in Algeria through the use of terrorist violence and to eliminate Western influences from the country. Although the FIS was at one time politically and ideologically associated with the GIA, in 1997, the FIS distanced itself from the civilian massacres committed by the GIA and publicly denied that the two organizations would join forces. Since the September 11, 2001 attacks on the United States, GIA attacks and massacres in Algeria have continued (see Annex IV)." (footnotes omitted)
[32]
I cannot accept Mr. Harkat's submissions that the Ministers breached their duty to make candid disclosure so as to establish the need for the appointment of an amicus curiae. In my opinion, the Summary fully and clearly outlines the allegations concerning Mr. Harkat's involvement in the FIS and GIA. If of the view that more information is required in order to historically situate the FIS, Mr. Harkat is free to adduce whatever relevant evidence he wishes.
[33]
The second lack of disclosure is said to be the suggestion "that false Saudi passports were passports of choice only for Islamic extremists wishing to enter Canada". This is, I believe, a reference to paragraph 14 of the Summary which is as follows:
"14. In an interview with the Service in May 1997, HARKAT explained that he used a false Saudi passport so that he would not require a visa to travel to Canada. The Service believes Saudi passports were the document of choice for Islamic extremists wishing to enter Canada, as prior to 2002, Saudi passport holders did not require a visa to enter Canada."
[34]
I do not believe, on a fair reading, that the Summary says that only Islamic extremists used Saudi passports. Nor does the Summary say that Islamic extremists only used Saudi passports. There has not been a breach of the duty to make full and fair and candid disclosure.
[35]
To summarize, I have found that Mr. Harkat has failed to establish that the Court cannot properly exercise its jurisdiction without the appointment of an amicus curiae.
(ii) Without the appointment of an amicus curiae, will it be impossible for the Court to provide fundamental justice to Mr. Harkat?
[36]
Section 24(1) of the
Charter
provides that:
"24(1) Anyone whose rights or freedoms, as guaranteed by this Charter, have been infringed or denied may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain such remedy as the court considers appropriate and just in the circumstances."
"24(1) Toute personne, victime de violation ou de négation des droits ou libertés qui lui sont garantis par la présente charte, peut s'adresser à un tribunal compétent pour obtenir la réparation que le tribunal estime convenable et juste eu égard aux circonstances."
[37]
Thus, the section allows a "court of competent jurisdiction" to ensure that violations of
Charter
rights are remedied in an appropriate fashion.
[38]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at paragraph 107, Mr. Justice Simon Noël concluded that the procedure established by ss. 76 to 85 of the
Act
complies with the principles of fundamental justice guaranteed by s. 7 of the
Charter
. More recently, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Federal Court of Appeal found that the procedure whereby a member of the Immigration Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board may, in making an admissibility decision, take into account security intelligence information without disclosing it to the affected individual, conforms to the principles of fundamental justice so that s. 7 of the
Charter
is not violated.
[39]
In both <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, significant reliance was placed upon the decision of Madam Justice McGillis in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the constitutional validity of the predecessor legislation was upheld.
[40]
It follows from this jurisprudence, at least for the purpose of this motion, that any alleged violation of Mr. Harkat's s. 7
Charter
rights arises not from the legislative scheme, but from the particular circumstances of this case.
[41]
For the reasons set out above, I have not been persuaded that there is anything in the circumstances of this case that renders the Court incapable of properly balancing and protecting Mr. Harkat's rights so as to provide a hearing that conforms with the principles of fundamental justice. It follows, in my view, that there is no need for recourse to the remedial provisions of s. 24(1) of the
Charter
in order to appoint an amicus curiae.
(iii) Additional Considerations
[42]
In my view, the following factors also weigh against the exercise of discretion to appoint an amicus in this case at this time:
i) It would not be in accordance with the intent of Parliament, as expressed in the legislation.
ii) The request is made late in the proceeding and would result in further delay.
iii) The procedure set out in s. 78 of the
Act
provides the designated judge with the necessary power and flexibility to inquire into the reasonableness of a security certificate while balancing and protecting the rights of the person named in the security certificate.
Parliamentary Intent
[43]
Sections 77, 78 and 80 of the
Act
do not expressly contemplate the appointment of an amicus curiae, and s. 78 evinces Parliament's intent that the responsibility for determining the reasonableness of the security certificate is placed upon the designated judge alone. It is the designated judge who is to: i) hear the matter; ii) ensure the confidentiality of all information; iii) deal with all matters as informally and expeditiously as the circumstances and considerations of natural justice permit; iv) provide the person named in the certificate with a summary of the information or evidence that enables him or her to be reasonably informed of the circumstances giving rise to the certificate; and v) provide the person concerned with an opportunity to be heard.
[44]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at paragraph 18, the Federal Court of Appeal considered the statutory obligation placed upon the designated judge to keep information confidential together with the provision of the
Act
that no appeal lies from the decision of a designated judge as to the reasonableness of the certificate. The Court of Appeal concluded from these provisions that Parliament intended that the evidence which is necessary to determine the reasonableness of the certificate is to be taken and handled by the designated judge and to go no further. In the view of the Court of Appeal, to recognize a right of appeal on the issue of detention would allow such evidence to go beyond that framework so as to be put before the Court of Appeal. This was said to pose a number of practical problems and raise questions that Parliament had not answered, which indicated to the Court of Appeal that Parliament did not contemplate any appeal from a decision on detention.
[45]
It would follow from this reasoning that providing access to the confidential information to an amicus curiae would also be contrary to Parliament's intent.
[46]
In my view, some singular circumstance would have to arise in order to justify derogation from the scheme set out in s. 78 of the
Act
.
[47]
Mr. Harkat placed some reliance upon a speech delivered at a conference organized by the Canadian Institute for the Administration of Justice entitled "Terrorism, Law and Democracy" by my colleague Mr. Justice Hugessen. There, Mr. Justice Hugessen observed that designated judges "do not like the process of having to sit alone hearing only one party, and looking at the material produced by only one party". However, judges are not parliamentarians. Parliament, when dealing with security certificates, has chosen not to follow the SIRC model (where independent counsel performed the functions described by Mr. Horton). Justice Hugessen's comments I believe reflect the difficulty of the task entrusted to designated judges and the keen awareness with which they face the task of balancing the rights of a person named in a security certificate against Canada's need to preserve the confidentiality of information protected for reasons of national security.
[48]
Before moving to the next consideration, it is appropriate to deal with Mr. Harkat's submission that Parliament has eliminated the protections provided for permanent residents in the national security context by having their cases heard before a single judge of the Federal Court and not by SIRC. This asserted diminution of protection flows, as I understand his submissions, from the absence of independent counsel in proceedings before the Federal Court. There are two responses to this. First, and less important, Mr. Harkat is not a permanent resident so that his case would never have been referred to SIRC. Second, it should be remembered that members of SIRC were appointed on a part-time basis and that members of SIRC were appointed from among members of the Privy Council. However, there was no requirement that members of SIRC be legally trained. Members of SIRC are not judges. The fact that SIRC engaged independent counsel must be seen in that context.
[49]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, Mr. Justice Noël considered the origin of the designation of Federal Court judges to act in matters of national security. He wrote at paragraph 35 and 36:
"35 Interestingly, the concept was formulated in the report of the Commission of Inquiry Concerning Certain Activities of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police: Second Report: Freedom and Security under the Law ('the Commission'). The Commission refers to the notion of 'designated judge' in Part V of its 2nd report at paragraph 101 (volume I, page 556) where it considers the question of applications for warrants in connection with the
Official Secrets Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. O-5, stating as follows:
'In a system of responsible Cabinet government operating within the rule of law Ministers are responsible for the effective and proper execution of the powers lawfully available to government, but they do not have the final responsibility for determining what the law is. In our system of government this is normally the function of judges.'
"36 At paragraphs 104 and 106 of Part V (volume I, pages 557-58), the Commission recommends as follows:
'To ensure the availability of reasonably experienced judges to hear applications for warrants, we propose that five judges from the Trial Division of the Federal Court of Canada be designated by the Chief Justice of the Federal Court to hear applications.
. . . . .
'Hearings before a judge in our proposed system would be ex parte proceedings ... . Submissions have been made to us that the proceedings should be made more adversarial by providing for the appointment of an officer to serve as "a friend of the court". This officer would appear before the judge and point out possible weaknesses or inadequacies in applications. While we think such a proposal has considerable merit and have considered it carefully, we have concluded that, on balance, it would not be advisable to adopt such a mechanism. The adversarial element afforded by such a procedure might be rather artificial and would make the process of approving applications unduly complex. Further, we think that an experienced judge is capable of giving adequate consideration to all relevant aspects of an application without the assistance of an adversarial procedure.'
At paragraph 6 of Chapter 2 (volume 2, page 882), the Commission addresses the question of external reviews and states as follows:
'These two sets of recommendations clearly envisage a significant role for the Federal Court of Canada in decisions relating to national security. As we recommended earlier in Part V, this role would best be carried out by a nucleus of judges from the Appeal and Trial Divisions who would be specially designated for the purpose by the Chief Justice of the Court.'"
See also <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at paragraph 45 where the Court of Appeal observed that designated Federal Court judges have expertise in assessing the advisability of disclosing security intelligence information. The Court of Appeal referred not only to the jurisdiction conferred under the
Act
but also to the provisions of ss. 38 to 38.15 of the
Canada Evidence Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-5, ss. 83.05 and 83.06 of the
Criminal Code of Canada
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46, s. 52 of the
Access to Information Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1, and s. 51 of the
Privacy Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-21.
[50]
As noted by Justice Simon Noël in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the genesis of the concept of a designated judge confirms the view that Parliament intended security certificates to be reviewed by a designated judge alone in order to limit access to protected information and to thereby protect both national security and the means by which information regarding national security is obtained.
The lateness of the Request and Resultant Delay
[51]
The appointment of an amicus curiae can only result in further delay because Mr. Laskin would be required to obtain the necessary security clearance, the terms and conditions of his retainer would have to be settled, and he would then be obliged to familiarize himself with a substantial volume of material.
[52]
Proceedings to determine the reasonableness of a security certificate are to be conducted as expeditiously as conditions of fairness and natural justice permit. The following is a chronology of the steps taken to date in this proceeding:
December 10, 2002: Certificate referred to the Court with request to examine the evidence supporting the certificate in camera and ex parte.
December 13, 2002: Order issued summarizing the information and evidence to be served on Mr. Harkat.
January 10, 2003: Teleconference with counsel to discuss scheduling of hearing to afford Mr. Harkat the opportunity to be heard ("s. 78(i) hearing"). A hearing was set for March 4, 2003 for a motion to be brought on Mr. Harkat's behalf seeking further disclosure.
March 4, 2003: Motion for disclosure was heard.
March 7, 2003: Order issued dismissing the motion for further disclosure.
April 14, 2003: Order issued scheduling s. 78(i) hearing for 5 days to commence on April 28, 2003.
April 22, 2003: Additional disclosure made to Mr. Harkat.
April 24, 2003: Order issued granting Mr. Harkat's request that the s. 78(i) hearing be adjourned because his expert witness was not available.
May 2, 2003: Section 78(i) hearing scheduled for 5 days to commence on July 21, 2003.
May 23, 2003: Motion brought by Mr. Harkat to suspend this proceeding; the motion to be heard on June 12, 2003.
June 19, 2003: Order issued dismissing Mr. Harkat's motion to suspend this proceeding.
July 17, 2003: Appeal filed by Mr. Harkat with respect to the June 19, 2003 order.
July 21, 2003: Additional disclosure made to Mr. Harkat and the s. 78(i) hearing begins. During this week, Mr. Harkat made two motions, the first seeking production of a knowledgeable CSIS employee, the second seeking an order quashing the security certificate. The Court also heard the evidence of Mrs. Harkat. This was the only evidence adduced by Mr. Harkat during the week. At the conclusion of the week, on July 25, the Court allowed the first motion in part so as to allow Mr. Harkat to obtain further particulars and dismissed the motion for an order quashing the certificate.
July 29, 2003: Order issued setting the schedule to be followed whereby Mr. Harkat was to serve and file questions requesting clarification of facts and matters set forth in the statement provided to him. His questions were to be served and filed on or before August 8, 2003.
August 8, 2003: Mr. Harkat filed a notice of appeal of the orders of July 25, 2003.
October 28, 2003: Not having heard from counsel, the Court issued a direction with respect to a teleconference to schedule the s. 78(i) hearing.
November 3, 2003: Counsel not having responded to the Court's direction of October 28, 2003, a direction was issued with respect to a case management teleconference.
November 14, 2003: Case management conference held and Mr. Galati, then counsel for Mr. Harkat, advised that no steps had been taken as required by July 29 scheduling order because of the pending appeal from the orders of July 25, 2003. Mr. Galati advised he would expedite the two pending appeals.
November 16, 2003: The following direction issued: "In consequence of the advice received from counsel for Mr. Harkat today that no steps have been taken in response to the Court's order of July 29, 2003, and advice that Mr. Harkat does not wish to proceed in this matter pending the appeal of the Court's orders, it is directed that:
(1) Counsel for Mr. Harkat should forthwith confirm this request in writing, including confirmation that Mr. Harkat understands the effect this request has on his continued detention.
(2) Counsel for Mr. Harkat shall move forthwith to expedite appeals brought on Mr. Harkat's behalf.
(3) Counsel for Mr. Harkat shall advise the Court forthwith as to the result of such motions to expedite."
November 24, 2003: Mr. Engel, co-counsel for Mr. Harkat, writes advising that: "Further to the Honourable Judge Dawson's Order of November 18, 2003, please be advised that I have sought and obtained clear instruction on behalf of my client, who is prepared to wait in custody pending the outcome of any interlocutory appeals before resuming his hearing on the reasonableness of the Security Certificate. I trust that the above is satisfactory."
January 20, 2004: Having heard nothing further, the Court issued a direction to set up a further case management conference.
February 10, 2004: At that case management conference, Mr. Engel advised that Mr. Galati was no longer acting for Mr. Harkat; that no motion had been brought to expedite the two pending appeals; and that the Court of Appeal had issued an order on status review requiring Mr. Harkat to show cause why the appeals should not be dismissed for delay.
February 11, 2004: Order issued setting June 21 to 25 and 29, 30 and July 2, 2004 for the continuation of s. 78(i) hearing. Shortly thereafter, on consent, the dates were changed to August 3 through 6 and August 9 through 13, 2004.
June 7, 2004: Mr. Engel withdraws as counsel.
June 22, 2004: The two pending appeals were heard and dismissed by the Federal Court of Appeal.
June 30, 2004: New counsel for Mr. Harkat, Mr. Copeland, advises Court that "he is not in a position to proceed with the matter on August 3, 2004" and requests that the hearing be adjourned to allow him to familiarize himself with the file.
The Court granted that request, and after allowing Mr. Copeland some opportunity to familiarize himself with the case and to provide the questions contemplated by the Court's orders of July 25 and July 29, the Court set further hearing dates to commence on October 25, 2004.
[53]
This chronology shows that every consideration has been afforded to Mr. Harkat in order to allow his counsel to properly represent him. However, until Mr. Copeland was appointed, Mr. Harkat did not even avail himself of the rights afforded by the Court's orders of July 25 and 29, 2003.
[54]
The delays which have been permitted out of considerations of fairness now militate in favour of requiring Mr. Harkat to avail himself of his s. 78(i) right without further delay where the Court has concluded that the absence of an amicus curiae will not impact on the fairness of the hearing.
The flexibility and power provided to the designated judge
[55]
As discussed above, the procedure set out in s. 78 of the
Act
permits the designated judge to examine all of the information which supported the issuance of the security certificate. Each fact said to support the reasonableness of the certificate is examined and the designated judge inquires into and weighs the total reliability of the evidence said to support each fact. The presence or absence of corroborating information is considered. The potential for error and misinterpretation is assessed. The designated judge may receive as evidence anything that, in the opinion of the judge, is appropriate.
[56]
In my view, the legislation provides the designated judge with sufficient power and flexibility to properly discharge the duties placed upon the judge. With that power and flexibility, the rights of the person named in a security certificate are capable of being protected without the need for the appointment of an amicus curiae.
[57]
For all of these reasons, the motion was dismissed.
Motion dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/gs
APPENDIX A
Sections 77, 78 and 80 of the
Act
:
"77(1) The Minister and the Solicitor General of Canada shall sign a certificate stating that a permanent resident or a foreign national is inadmissible on grounds of security, violating human or international rights, serious criminality or organized criminality and refer it to the Federal Court, which shall make a determination under section 80.
"77(2) When the certificate is referred, a proceeding under this Act respecting the person named in the certificate, other than an application under subsection 112(1), may not be commenced and, if commenced, must be adjourned, until the judge makes the determination.
"78. The following provisions govern the determination:
(a) the judge shall hear the matter;
(b) the judge shall ensure the confidentiality of the information on which the certificate is based and of any other evidence that may be provided to the judge if, in the opinion of the judge, its disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person;
(c) the judge shall deal with all matters as informally and expeditiously as the circumstances and considerations of fairness and natural justice permit;
(d) the judge shall examine the information and any other evidence in private within seven days after the referral of the certificate for determination;
(e) on each request of the Minister or the Solicitor General of Canada made at any time during the proceedings, the judge shall hear all or part of the information or evidence in the absence of the permanent resident or the foreign national named in the certificate and their counsel if, in the opinion of the judge, its disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person;
(f) the information or evidence described in paragraph (e) shall be returned to the Minister and the Solicitor General of Canada and shall not be considered by the judge in deciding whether the certificate is reasonable if either the matter is withdrawn or if the judge determines that the information or evidence is not relevant or, if it is relevant, that it should be part of the summary;
(g) the information or evidence described in paragraph (e) shall not be included in the summary but may be considered by the judge in deciding whether the certificate is reasonable if the judge determines that the information or evidence is relevant but that its disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person;
(h) the judge shall provide the permanent resident or the foreign national with a summary of the information or evidence that enables them to be reasonably informed of the circumstances giving rise to the certificate, but that does not include anything that in the opinion of the judge would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person if disclosed;
(i) the judge shall provide the permanent resident or the foreign national with an opportunity to be heard regarding their inadmissibility; and
(j) the judge may receive into evidence anything that, in the opinion of the judge, is appropriate, even if it is inadmissible in a court of law, and may base the decision on that evidence.
. . . . .
"80(1) The judge shall, on the basis of the information and evidence available, determine whether the certificate is reasonable and whether the decision on the application for protection, if any, is lawfully made.
"80(2) The judge shall quash a certificate if the judge is of the opinion that it is not reasonable. If the judge does not quash the certificate but determines that the decision on the application for protection is not lawfully made, the judge shall quash the decision and suspend the proceeding to allow the Minister to make a decision on the application for protection.
"80(3) The determination of the judge is final and may not be appealed or judicially reviewed."
"77(1) Le ministre et le solliciteur général du Canada déposent à la Cour fédérale le certificat attestant qu'un résident permanent ou qu'un étranger est interdit de territoire pour raison de sécurité ou pour atteinte aux droits humains ou internationaux, grande criminalité ou criminalité organisée pour qu'il en soit disposé au titre de l'article 80.
"77(2) Il ne peut être procédé à aucune instance visant le résident permanent ou l'étranger au titre de la présente loi tant qu'il n'a pas été statué sur le certificat; n'est pas visée la demande de protection prévue au paragraphe 112(1).
"78. Les règles suivantes s'appliquent à l'affaire:
a) le juge entend l'affaire;
b) le juge est tenu de garantir la confidentialité des renseignements justifiant le certificat et des autres éléments de preuve qui pourraient lui être communiqués et dont la divulgation porterait atteinte, selon lui, à la sécurité nationale ou à la sécurité d'autrui;
c) il procède, dans la mesure où les circonstances et les considérations d'équité et de justice naturelle le permettent, sans formalisme et selon la procédure expéditive;
d) il examine, dans les sept jours suivant le dépôt du certificat et à huis clos, les renseignements et autres éléments de preuve;
e) à chaque demande d'un ministre, il examine, en l'absence du résident permanent ou de l'étranger et de son conseil, tout ou partie des renseignements ou autres éléments de preuve dont la divulgation porterait atteinte, selon lui, à la sécurité nationale ou à la sécurité d'autrui;
f) ces renseignements ou éléments de preuve doivent être remis aux ministres et ne peuvent servir de fondement à l'affaire soit si le juge décide qu'ils ne sont pas pertinents ou, l'étant, devraient faire partie du résumé, soit en cas de retrait de la demande;
g) si le juge décide qu'ils sont pertinents, mais que leur divulgation porterait atteinte à la sécurité nationale ou à celle d'autrui, ils ne peuvent faire partie du résumé, mais peuvent servir de fondement à l'affaire;
h) le juge fournit au résident permanent ou à l'étranger, afin de lui permettre d'être suffisamment informé des circonstances ayant donné lieu au certificat, un résumé de la preuve ne comportant aucun élément dont la divulgation porterait atteinte, selon lui, à la sécurité nationale ou à la sécurité d'autrui;
i) il donne au résident permanent ou à l'étranger la possibilité d'être entendu sur l'interdiction de territoire le visant;
j) il peut recevoir et admettre en preuve tout élément qu'il estime utile - même inadmissible en justice - et peut fonder sa décision sur celui-ci.
. . . . .
"80(1) Le juge décide du caractère raisonnable du certificat et, le cas échéant, de la légalité de la décision du ministre, compte tenu des renseignements et autres éléments de preuve dont il dispose.
"80(2) Il annule le certificat dont il ne peut conclure qu'il est raisonnable; si l'annulation ne vise que la décision du ministre il suspend l'affaire pour permettre au ministre de statuer sur celle-ci.
"80(3) Caractère définitif de la décision
"(3) La décision du juge est définitive et n'est pas susceptible d'appel ou de contrôle judiciaire."
APPENDIX B
Court File No. DES-04-02
FEDERAL COURT - TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF a certificate signed
pursuant to subsection 77(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act,
S.C. 2001, c. 27
AND IN THE MATTER OF the referral of
that certificate to the Federal Court of
Canada pursuant to subsection 77(1),
sections 78 and 80 of the Act.
IN RELATION TO
Mohammed HARKAT
_____________________________________
OUTLINE OF ARGUMENT ON MOTION TO APPOINT AMICUS CURIAE
1. The aspect of the need for confidentiality in national security cases was set out in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case. That case was cited with approval by the Supreme Court of Canada in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
2. The government of Canada, when creating s. 38.1 and s. 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
, chose not to follow the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> model but to provide a form of review of the Ministerial decision, either before the Security Intelligence Review Committee or before a single Judge of the Federal Court.
3. Mr. Harkat as a person who has been granted refugee status in Canada, has a limited right to remain in Canada.
4. As to the nature of Lord Denning's decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> reference is made to Tab 2, pages 67-74 of the Material Relied Upon in Support of the Amicus Curiae Motion.
5. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the Supreme Court ruled at paragraph 42 that the absence of an appeal on wider grounds than those on which the initial decision was based does not violate Section 7. Justice Sopinka went on to say that "Parliament could have simply provided that a certificate could issue without any hearing".
6. Justice Sopinka went on to review the procedure available at the Security Intelligence Review Committee and concluded "that the procedure followed by the Review Committee in this case did not violate principles of fundamental justice".
7. Both the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case and the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case were dealt with by the Security Intelligence Review Committee, since Moumdjian and Chiarelli were permanent residents of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
8. Section 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
(since replaced by the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
) provided a different procedure for persons who were not permanent residents of Canada. Those cases were dealt with by a Judge of the Federal Court.
9. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Justice McGillis held at paragraph 38 that the procedure under s. 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
met the principles of fundamental justice. At paragraph 44 she found that the Summary of Evidence and Information together with any other material disclosed either by the state or the designated judge provides the individual with the substance of the allegations and thereby permits him to respond to the case against him.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . With the passage of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
Parliament decided to eliminate whatever little protections were provided for permanent residence in the national security context in having their cases heard before the Security Intelligence Review Committee. Under the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, all national security matters are now dealt with by a single Judge of the Federal Court.
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, ss. 77 - 80
12. It is respectfully submitted that the matters relating to Mr. Harkat are significantly more complicated than the matters relating to Mr. Ahani as set out in the decision of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  fundamental justice and procedural fairness to which the applicant is entitled under s. 7 of the
Charter
the Court must appoint an amicus curiae to assist it in considering whether the certificate signed by the two ministers is reasonable. Given the particularly complicated history and circumstances of this case, the unwillingness of the government to answer even such basic questions as to whether they are relying on information obtained from Maher Arar, or Ahmed Ressam, an amicus curiae is necessary in order to allow the Court to consider fully and fairly the context and substance of the allegations made against the applicant.
14. It is respectfully submitted, that quite apart from the jurisdiction to appoint amicus curiae pursuant to the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, this Honourable Court also has the jurisdiction to do so at common law. Section 4 of the
Federal Courts Act
defines in part, the Federal Court as a "... superior court of record having civil and criminal jurisdiction."  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  could it be, that a superior court has no power to appoint amicus curiae at the trial of an unrepresented accused."
It is respectfully submitted such appointment would greatly assist the Court in assessing the reasonableness of the certificate signed by the two ministers. An amicus curiae would allow the Court to benefit from hearing representations of counsel which would not otherwise be put forward, while preserving the government's claim to national security interest in non-disclosure of information to the applicant and his counsel.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 8; 41 O.R.(3d) 434
15.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  allowed to participate in ex parte in camera proceedings (Paragraph 46). In so holding, the Supreme Court found at paragraph 47 that "when making ex parte submissions to the reviewing court, the government institution is under a duty to act in utmost good faith and must make full, fair and candid disclosure of facts, including those that may be adverse to its interest."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
16. It is respectfully submitted that the background facts concerning the FIS in Algeria as set out in paragraph 10 of the Statement Summarizing the Information and Evidence fail to meet the standard of full, fair and candid disclosure of facts. The government failed to advise the Court that the FIS won the first round of the elections in 1992, that the military intervened to take over the government and cancelled the elections. The government failed to advise this Court that the military engaged in indiscriminate killings and disappearances of its political opponents. The government failed to advise the Court that 200,000 people were killed in Algeria as a result of the actions of the army and the response to the actions of the army in canceling the elections and seizing the government.
17. It is respectfully submitted that the government failed to meet the standard of full, fair and candid disclosure of facts in paragraph 14 of the Statement Summarizing the Information and Evidence by suggesting that false Saudi passports were passports of choice only for Islamic extremists wishing to enter Canada.
18. In addition to the above-noted specific concerns, it is respectfully submitted that this Court will in all likelihood, be required to draw innumerable distinct conclusions throughout the course of this litigation. When one considers the types of issues that this Court is called upon to decide, pursuant to s. 78 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, it is submitted the assistance or input of an amicus curiae could prove invaluable.
19. Mr. Justice Hugessen speaking at the Canadian Institute for the Administration of Justice Conference "Terrorism, Law and Democracy" held in Montreal on March 25 and 26, 2002, said:
"This is not a happy posture for a judge, and you are in fact looking at an unhappy camper when I tell you about this function. Often, when I speak in public I make the customary disavowal that I am not speaking for the Court and I am not speaking for my colleagues but I am speaking only for myself. I make no such disavowal this afternoon. I can tell you because we talked about it, we hate it ... We do not like this process of having to sit alone hearing only one party, and looking at the materials produced by only one party ... If there is one thing that I learned in my practice at the Bar, and I have managed to retain it through all these years, it is that good cross-examination requires really careful preparation and a good knowledge of your case. And by definition, judges do not do that ... we do not have any knowledge except what is given to us and when it is only given to us by one party we are not well suited to test the materials that are put before us.
"We greatly miss, in short, our security blanket which is the adversary system that we were all brought up with and that, as I said at the outset, is for most of us, the real warranty that the outcome of what we do is going to be fair and just ... it might be helpful if we created some sort of system somewhat like the public defender system where some lawyers were mandated to have full access to the CSIS files, the underlying files, and to present whatever case they could against the granting of the relief sought ... I am not sure what the judges of the Federal Court are doing in this picture and if I may be forgiven for using the expression, I sometimes feel a little bit like a fig leaf."
Material Relied Upon in Support of the Amicus Curiae Motion Tab 1, page 4
20. For the sake of this argument, it is accepted that issues have and potentially will arise that are of a sufficiently sensitive nature that s. 78(e) and (h), for example, will be invoked. This does not detract from the fact that the presence of an amicus curiae, with the same security clearances as Crown counsel, can only further the end of fairness by ensuring that both or all sides of an issue are explored. The appointment of an amicus will go some distance to remedying the malady identified by Justice Hugessen, that is that at present the Court only hears one party. As well, the applicant's interests will be more completely protected. Finally, both of these significant interests will be furthered while at the same time the security concerns of the state will be preserved. The appointment of an amicus curiae, pursuant to the terms of reference being proposed in this application, will strike a just balance between the competing interests inherent in this case.
21. In the Arar Inquiry, Ron Atkey has been appointed amicus curiae in respect of government requests for in camera hearings.
The Amicus Curiae will act as counsel, independent from government, and his mandate will be to test government requests on the ground of National Security Confidentiality.
www.ararcommission.ca/eng/13.htm
22. In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case a counsel was appointed to conduct a cross examination of two witnesses when the answers given by those witnesses were relevant to issues pursuant to s. 38 of the
Canada Evidence Act
.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at par. 6
23. In the
Reference re Secession of Quebec
case the Supreme Court of Canada appointed amicus curiae "in view of the complexity of the issues raised and the fact that some aspects of these issues were not otherwise be argued by the parties who have intervened in the Reference. In order to clarify what is frequently misunderstood, such counsel, traditionally called "A Friend of the Court" does not represent a party but is tasked with assisting the Court in arguing issues or matters in which the Court wishes to hear representations that the parties to the Reference would not otherwise put forward.
Reference re Secession of Quebec
, [1996] S.C.C.A. 421, paragraph 23
24. If the Court decides it is appropriate to order an amicus curiae be appointed, whether under s. 7 of the
Charter
, or otherwise, it is respectfully submitted that this Court has inherent jurisdiction to order the payment of costs for the services of the counsel appointed as amicus curiae.
25. As to the issue of the costs of this motion, it is respectfully submitted that this Application deals with a matter of fundamental public importance concerning the administration of justice in this country.
ALL OF WHICH IS RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED.
DATED this day of September 2004
_____________________
Paul D. Copeland, Solicitor for the Applicant
COPELAND, DUNCAN
Barristers & Solicitors
31 Prince Arthur Avenue
Toronto, Ontario M5R 1B2
Tel. (416) 964-8126
Fax. (416) 960-5456
Court File No. DES-04-02
FEDERAL COURT - TRIAL DIVISION
IN THE MATTER OF a certificate signed
pursuant to subsection 77(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee
Protection Act
,
S.C. 2001, c. 27
AND IN THE MATTER OF the referral of
that certificate to the Federal Court of
Canada pursuant to subsection 77(1),
sections 78 and 80 of the
Act
.
IN RELATION TO
Mohammed HARKAT
_____________________________________
SUPPLEMENTAL OUTLINE OF ARGUMENT ON MOTION TO APPOINT AMICUS CURIAE
1. I apologize to the Court and to counsel for CSIS for the lateness of this submission. On September 7th, 2004 I received an e-mail from Rayner Thwaites, which had attached to it his Master's thesis for the University of Toronto Law School.
Deportation on National Security Grounds within a Culture of Legal Justification by Rayner Thwaites.
Master's thesis submitted to the University of Toronto, Faculty of Law. 2004 (a copy of this will be provided in the Book of Authorities on this issue)
2. I first had an opportunity of reviewing that thesis on September 13th, 2004. I forwarded a copy of the thesis to Mr. Mathieson late on September 14th, 2004. What follows are my additional submissions as a result of the information I located in that thesis:
3. As described below, in the United Kingdom there has been created a Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC) to deal with national security concerns. It is respectfully submitted that the United Kingdom has benefitted from its use of a "special advocate" when considering information that may not be disclosed for reasons of national security.
4.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  violated the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms by failing to provide a competent national authority to deal with the substance of the relevant complaint under the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms signed at Rome on 4 November 1950.
6. That Court partially based its decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at paragraphs 131 and 144, on the existence of the so-called "Canadian Model", in which a security-cleared counsel is provided access to confidential evidence, and is allowed to cross-examine witnesses and generally assist the court in testing the strength of the government case. While the Court's understanding of the Canadian process for deportation in matters of national security was clearly erroneous, it stated that the above process was an example of "techniques which can be employed which both accommodate legitimate security concerns about the nature and sources of intelligence information and yet accord the individual a substantial measure of procedural justice."
7. In response to the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  it jurisdiction in s. 2 of the
Special Immigration Appeals Commission Act
to hear appeals from decisions of the Home Secretary regarding deportation.
The Special Immigration Appeals Commission Act
(U.K.) 1997, c. 68 (
SIAC Act
).
8. Under s. 6 of the
SIAC Act
, a "special advocate" must be appointed to represent the interests of the appellant in any closed hearing from which the appellant and his or her legal representative is excluded. This special advocate is selected from a list of security cleared immigration and human rights barristers.
9. The benefit to the court of such a "special advocate" was noted by the Court of Appeal while hearing an appeal of an SIAC decision in
Secretary of State for the Home Department v. "M"
. SIAC allowed the appeal against certification and cancelled the certificate. The Secretary of State for the Home Department had appealed. The Court quoted from the SIAC judgment, at paragraphs 27 and 28, where it was held that "as a result of ... [the special advocate's] rigorous cross-examinations in the closed session", it was found that "the assertions made in statements provided by the respondent [the Home Secretary] are not supported by the evidence ... "Too often assessments have been based on material which does not on analysis support them." The Court further stated, at paragraph 27, that "assertions [made by the Home Secretary were] found to be misleading when the source documents were looked at. In other cases ... there had been insufficient effort made to ensure that they were accurate."
Secretary of State for the Home Department v. "M"
[2004] E.W.C.A. Civ. 324.
10. It is respectfully submitted that the process now followed in the United Kingdom should guide this Court in dealing with our request that amicus curiae be appointed.
ALL OF WHICH IS RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED.
DATED this 16th day of September 2004
_____________________
Paul D. Copeland
COPELAND, DUNCAN
Barristers & Solicitors
31 Prince Arthur Avenue
Toronto, Ontario M5R 1B2
Tel. (416) 964-8126
Fax. (416) 960-5456
Solicitor for the Applicant
APPENDIX C
Court File No. DES-04-02
FEDERAL COURT
IN THE MATTER OF a certificate signed
pursuant to subsection 77(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee
Protection Act
,
S.C. 2001. C. 27
AND IN THE MATTER OF the referral of
that certificate to the Federal Court of
Canada pursuant to subsection 77(1),
and section 78 and 80 of the
Act
AND IN THE MATTER OF
Mohammed Harkat
_____________________________________
MINISTERS' RECORD
(RESPONSE TO MOTION TO APPOINT AMICUS CURIAE)
________________________________________
Solicitors for Mohammed Harkat:
Paul Copeland
Barrister and Solicitor
31 Prince Arthur Avenue
Toronto, Ontario
M5R 1B2
Tel: (416) 964-8126
Fax: (416) 960-5456
Matthew Webber
Barrister and Solicitor
2nd Floor, 220 Elgin Street
Ottawa, Ontario
K2P 1L7
Tel: (613) 860-1449
Fax: (613) 860-1549
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Morris Rosenberg
Department of Justice
Canadian Security Intelligence Service
1941 Ogilvie Road
Ottawa, Ontario
K1J 1B7
Per: James Mathieson
Michael W. Dale
Tel: (613) 231-0985/(613) 842-1604
Fax: (613) 842-1345
Court File No. DES-04-02
FEDERAL COURT
IN THE MATTER OF a certificate signed
pursuant to subsection 77(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee
Protection Act
,
S.C. 2001. C. 27
AND IN THE MATTER OF the referral of
that certificate to the Federal Court of
Canada pursuant to subsection 77(1),
and section 78 and 80 of the
Act
AND IN THE MATTER OF Mohammed Harkat
INDEX
Document
Tab
Outline of Argument in Response to Motion to Appoint Amicus Curiae
1
Attorney General of Canada et. al. v. Aluminum Co. of Canada et al., B.C. Wildlife Federation, Intervenor
(1987), 35 D.L.R.(4th) 495 (B.C.C.A.)
2
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at page 29, para. 185
6
Federal Courts Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended, s. 57 thereof
7
Federal Court Rules, 1998
, R. 69
8
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)
10
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court Rules, 1998
, rules 26 and 29
12
Terms of Reference for the Commission of Inquiry into the Action of Canadian Officials in relation to Maher Arar
13
Re: Ribic
(2003), F.C.A. 246
14
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), at paragraphs 56 to 62
15
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
("
IRPA
") ss. 19, 20, 21 and 115
16 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (1996), F.C.J. 937, at 939; affd. (1996), 201 N.R. 233 (Fed. C.A.), at 235
17
Re: Harkat
(2003), 243 F.T.R. 161, at 164
18
Court File No. DES-04-02
FEDERAL COURT
IN THE MATTER OF a certificate signed
pursuant to subsection 77(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee
Protection Act
,
S.C. 2001. C. 27
AND IN THE MATTER OF the referral of
that certificate to the Federal Court of
Canada pursuant to subsection 77(1),
and section 78 and 80 of the
Act
AND IN THE MATTER OF
Mohammed Harkat
OUTLINE OF ARGUMENT IN RESPONSE TO MOTION TO APPOINT AMICUS CURIAE
What is an amicus curiae?
1. Generally an amicus curiae or "friend of the court" is a disinterested or neutral person appointed to assist the court, at its request. Three situations arise in which an amicus curiae is appointed: a) where there is a matter of public interest in which the court invites the Attorney-General or some other capable individual to intervene; b) to address the court to prevent an injustice, for example, to make submissions on points of law that may have been overlooked; and c) to represent the unrepresented. It is submitted that an amicus curiae will not be appointed merely because the case is factually difficult or it raises complicated legal issues.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. H.C.)
What is the Jurisdiction of the Federal Court to appoint an amicus curiae?
2. With the introduction of the s. 78
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
("
IRPA
") procedure, of a review of a security certificate by a single judge of the Federal Court, designated by the Chief Justice, there has been no reduction in the rights of a refugee to a fair hearing. The procedure has not changed substantially from what was in place in 1996 under the former s. 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
when <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was decided by Madam Justice McGillis. Recognizing the parallels between what was in place then and now, this Honourable Court denied the Applicant Mohammed Harkat's application for further disclosure under
IRPA
.
In addition, the procedure as set out in ss. 77 and 78 of
IRPA
has been found to be consistent with the principles of fundamental justice as set out in s. 7 of the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
.
Section 40.1
Immigration Act
; ss. 78 to 80
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2001, c. 27, as amended
Re: Harkat
(2003), 231 F.T.R. 19, at p. 24
Re: Charkaoui
unreported 2003 FC 1419, at page 29, para. 185
3. In asserting that the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
gives this Court the jurisdiction to appoint an amicus curiae, Counsel for the Applicant is calling into question the constitutional validity and applicability of the provisions of ss. 77 and 78 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2001, c. 27, as amended, which do not provide for such an appointment. As a result, he should be required to serve a Notice of Constitutional Question upon the Attorney General of Canada, and the Attorney General of each Province. Counsel for the Applicant has not served the required Notice of Constitutional Question on either the Attorney General of Canada, or any of the Attorneys General of any of the Provinces of Canada. In not following the process set forth in the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985 c. F-7, as amended for such a Notice of Constitutional Question, Counsel for the Applicant has prevented any of the Attorneys General of any of the Provinces of Canada, from making submissions in respect of this issue.
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended, s. 57 thereof
Federal Court Rules
, 1998, R. 69
4. The
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
does not confer jurisdiction upon the Federal Court to appoint an amicus curiae. Nor does the Federal Court have "inherent jurisdiction" to do so, as would a provincial superior court. However, as a creature of statute, the Federal Court has control over its own process and discretion as to how to best implement, by necessary implication, what jurisdiction has been expressly bestowed upon it by statute.
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Is jurisdiction to appoint an amicus curiae bestowed expressly upon the Federal Court by statute?
4. The Federal Court has the power to set rules which regulate and control access to its files (Rule 26), and in the absence of specific legislation, such as s. 78(b), (d) or (e) of
IRPA
, it has the discretion, under Federal Court Rule 29, to exclude the public from its hearings. However, the jurisdiction of this Honourable Court to carry out its responsibilities under
IRPA
must be examined within the context of that specific legislation. Section 78(b) and (h) of
IRPA
mandate that the designated judge safeguard, by non-disclosure, national security and the safety of informants while s. 78(j) confers upon the designated judge a broad discretion in relation to the evidence that may be received and considered. However, there is no express power to appoint an amicus curiae to assist this Honourable Court in determining whether the security certificate is reasonable in either the
Federal Court Act
and its procedural rules or in ss. 77 to 80 of the
IRPA
or in any regulations passed under
IRPA
. It is submitted that Parliament deemed it fit that a Federal Court Judge sitting alone could and should bear the responsibility of testing the Ministers' case.
Federal Court Rules, 1998
, rules 26 and 29; ss. 78 to 80
IRPA
The
Federal Courts Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended.
Is there an implied jurisdiction to appoint an amicus curiae in s. 78
IRPA
proceedings?
5. It is further submitted that there is no procedural necessity to appoint an amicus curiae in s. 78
IRPA
hearings. A designated judge is amply qualified to review and test the material presented in camera no matter how complicated and onerous the task may appear to be. While a positive duty is imposed upon the judge by s. 78(c) to deal with all matters as informally and expeditiously as considerations of natural justice and fairness permit, it is submitted that to introduce an amicus curiae into s. 78 proceedings would be neither expeditious nor fair. Moreover, an element of uncertainty would be introduced, were an amicus curiae to be appointed who subsequently disagreed with the judge about the nature and scope of testing the in camera information or, ultimately, about the determination of the reasonableness of the certificate, which decision cannot be appealed. It is further submitted that the prolongation of the s. 78 proceedings and pre-removal detention, (without review, in the case of a refugee) occasioned by the introduction of an amicus curiae would, as well, be neither expeditious nor fair. Finally, the time lines set by s. 78(d) of
IRPA
to examine in private all the information and evidence presented by the Ministers upon referral of the certificate are inconsistent with the appointment of an amicus curiae.
6. The examples cited by Counsel for the Applicant, of assistance by appointed counsel, to the Arar Commission of Inquiry, to the Security Review Intelligence Committee, to the Supreme Court of Canada in the
Quebec Succession Reference
case, to the Ontario Court (General Division) for an unrepresented accused in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and to the Federal Court, by the
Canada Evidence Act
procedure adopted on the consent of the parties in the unique and urgent circumstances presented by <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , are distinguishable from the situation presented by a security certificate confirmation hearing under s. 78 of the
IRPA
.
Terms of Reference for the Commission of Inquiry into the Action of Canadian Officials in relation to Maher Arar
Re: Ribic
(2003), F.C.A. 246
7. In contrast to Mr. Justice Hugessen, who expressed his discomfort with his role in ex parte hearings, Mr. Justice Blanchard, ruling on a detention review in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , accepted without reservation his obligation to challenge and question the evidence presented in camera "in the context of the legislative scheme" he recognised it was his task to work within.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), at paragraphs 56 to 62
An amicus curiae should not be appointed in the Applicant's section 78
IRPA
proceedings.
8. In the alternative, if this Honourable Court concludes that it does possess jurisdiction to appoint an amicus curiae for s. 78
IRPA
proceedings, it should not exercise its discretion in favour of appointing an amicus curiae in the Applicant's s. 78 proceedings. The Applicant is currently a refugee with no right to remain in Canada and only a limited right to non-refoulement. He is neither a permanent resident nor a Canadian Citizen. Nor is he an accused person facing jail upon conviction for a serious criminal offence.
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
("
IRPA
") ss. 19, 20, 21 and 115 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (1996), F.C.J. 937, at 939; affd. (1996), 201 N.R. 233 (Fed. C.A.), at 235
9. It is submitted that neither of these three situations described in paragraph 1 (supra) arise in the Applicant's case, which, despite the Applicant's change of counsel and lengthy demands for disclosure, it is submitted, is no more complicated than that of Mr. Ahani or of any other refugee subject to s. 78
IRPA
proceedings. The Applicant has always been represented by at least one counsel, and while he may have a private interest in the outcome of these proceedings, his case presents no public interest that needs to be represented and protected by an amicus curiae.
10. This Honourable Court is eminently capable of examining and exploring whatever issues are raised by Counsel for the Applicant. The Applicant is under no disability for lack of representation during in camera and ex parte hearings because this Honourable Court has vigorously challenged the accuracy of the information which supports the Ministers' case against him and the basis for its non-disclosure. Any concerns over the accuracy of background material about the FIS and use of Saudi passports which was disclosed to the Applicant's Counsel are capable of being addressed by an agreed statement of facts. The testing of any unclassified material can be made without recourse to an amicus curiae.
Re: (2003) Harkat
243 F.T.R. 161, at 164
11. If this Honourable Court should determine that it appoint an amicus curiae for the Applicant, then the Respondents wish to reserve the right to make further submissions on the issues of the suitability of Mr. Laskin to be appointed as an amicus curiae, the terms and conditions of the retainer of any amicus curiae, and the source of funding for the amicus curiae.
ORDER SOUGHT
12. For the reasons set out above, it is respectfully submitted that the Applicant Mohammed Harkat's motion ought to be denied with costs.
ALL OF WHICH IS RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED
DATED at Ottawa this 22nd day of September 2004
____________________________________
James H. Mathieson
Of Counsel for the Ministers
____________________________________
Michael W. Dale
Of Counsel for the Ministers
TO: The Registrar
Federal Court
AND TO: Paul Copeland
Barrister and Solicitor
31 Prince Arthur Avenue
Toronto, Ontario
M5R 1B2
Tel: (416) 964-8126
Fax: (416) 960-5456
Counsel for Mr. Harkat
AND TO: Matthew Webber
Barrister and Solicitor
2nd Floor, 220 Elgin Street
Ottawa, Ontario
K2P 1L7
Tel: (613) 860-1449
Fax: (613) 860-1549
[End of document]