[1]
Dubé, J.,
: This application is for judicial review under s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended ("the
Act
"), of a decision of the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration ("the Minister"), dated September 8, 1995, wherein he issued an opinion pursuant to s. 77(3.01)(b) of the
Act
to the effect that the applicant, Peter To Kan Tsang ("Peter Tsang") is a person who constitutes a danger to the public in Canada.
[2]
This application also attacks the Minister's further decision to file his opinion with the Immigration and Refugee Board, Appeal Division ("the Appeal Division"), which was at the time considering the immigration sponsorship appeal of the applicant, Lannie Wai Har Tsang ("Lannie Tsang"), for the sponsorship to Canada of her husband.
1 - Facts
[3]
Lannie Tsang is a Canadian citizen of Vancouver, B.C. On February 16, 1978, she married Peter Tsang, a nonimmigrant who resided in Canada from August 24, 1977, until November 6, 1991. During his time in Canada, Peter Tsang acquired a criminal record and, as a result, was placed under a deportation order on May 21, 1987. While serving his prison sentence in British Columbia, he was granted parole for deportation and was physically removed from Vancouver to Hong Kong on November 6, 1991, where he is still residing.
[4]
On November 12, 1992, Lannie Tsang filed a sponsorship application for her husband. Her application as well as her husband's immigrant application were refused by a Canadian visa officer in Hong Kong on July 13, 1993.
[5]
On October 1, 1993, Lannie Tsang filed an appeal to the Appeal Division from those two refusals. The hearings concluded on August 10, 1995, and the Appeal Division reserved its decision. On September 8, 1995, before the Appeal Division had rendered its decision, the Minister issued a s. 77 opinion which purported to remove all the applicant's rights of appeal to the Appeal Division.
[6]
The Minister's opinion reads as follows:
"OPINION OF THE MINISTER
PURSUANT TO
PARAGRAPH 77(3.01)(b) OF THE
IMMIGRATION ACT
On the basis of information considered
by me, I am of the opinion, pursuant
to paragraph 77(3.01)(b) of the
Immigration Act, that
To Kan Peter TSANG
constitutes a danger to the
public in Canada."
2 - Issues
[7]
In their application record the applicants raise three points of argument: (1) did the Minister err in law in issuing an opinion against Peter Tsang at the time and in the circumstances of Lannie Tsang's appeal?; (2) did the Minister fail to observe a principle of natural justice and procedural fairness in not according the applicants a full and proper hearing before he issued the said opinion?; and (3) did the Minister fail to observe a principle of natural justice and procedural fairness and act arbitrarily and capriciously in not providing Lannie Tsang with written reasons as to what factors and evidence he took into consideration in reaching a decision to issue the opinion?
[8]
At the hearing, counsel for the applicants dropped the second ground regarding a full and proper hearing. As to the third ground, it is trite law that unless there be an express duty to give reasons for a decision, reasons need not be given. In the case at bar, there is no such statutory requirement. However, the first ground regarding the issuing of the opinion by the Minister is a more serious argument which deserves full consideration.
3 - Does The Minister's Opinion Extinguish The Sponsor's Right Of Appeal?
[9]
Section 77(3.01)(b) of the
Act
reads as follows:
"77.(3.01) No appeal lies to the Appeal Division under subsection (3) in respect of a person
. . . . .
(b) who is a member of an inadmissible class described in paragraph 19(1)(c), (c.1), (c.2) or (d) where the Minister is of the opinion that the person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada."
[10]
The applicants claim that the Minister erred in law in issuing the s. 77 Minister's opinion against Peter Tsang which purported to remove all the sponsor's appeal rights having regard to the circumstances and the time when it was issued, that is after the Appeal Division had already completed its hearing and had reserved its decision.
[11]
The respondent submits that the question of whether a person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada is a discretionary matter for the Minister himself and this court ought not to intervene lightly in the exercise of that statutory discretion.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 165 (F.C.A.), the applicant sought judicial review of the determination of ineligibility of his refugee claim on the ground that the Minister had certified that the person constituted a danger to the public in Canada. Mr. Justice Marceau of the Federal Court of Appeal stated as follows, at pp. 173-174:
"I do not believe that the Minister needs to be compelled to follow formal guidelines as to the factors he should take into account in forming his opinion, and I consider the Minister's opinion in respect of public danger as reliable as that of a court."
[12]
The respondent also submits that Lannie Tsang's right of appeal to the Appeal Division concerning the refusal of her family sponsorship application is governed by s. 77 of the
Act
. Section 77(3) provides as follows:
"77(3) Subject to subsection
s (3.01), (3.02) and
(3.1), a Canadian citizen or permanent resident who has sponsored an application for landing that is refused pursuant to subsection (1) may appeal to the Appeal Division on either or both of the following grounds:
(a) on any ground of appeal that involves a question of law or fact, or mixed law and fact; and
(b) on the ground that there exist compassionate or humanitarian considerations that warrant the granting of special relief."
[13]
Emphasis delineates amendments to the
Act
brought into force by Bill C-44 on July 10, 1995.
[14]
Thus, a sponsor's right of appeal is expressly made subject to, inter alia, s. 77(3.01) of the
Act
which was added to the
Act
pursuant to s. 15(2) of Bill C-44. Section 15(3) of Bill C-44 is the transitional provision which governs the application of s. 77(3.01). It stipulates as follows:
"15(3) Subsection 77(3.01) of the Act, as enacted by subsection (2), applied to an appeal that has been made on or before the coming into force of that subsection and in respect of which the hearing has not been commenced, but a person who has made such an appeal may, within fifteen days after the person has been notified that, in the opinion of the Minister, the person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada, make an application for judicial review under section 82.1 of the Act with respect to the matter that was the subject of the decision made under subsection 77(1)."
[15]
The effect of s. 77(3.01)(b) is to extinguish a right of appeal to the Appeal Division in respect of a person who is a member of an inadmissible class described in ss. 19(1)(c), (c.1), (c.2) or (d) where the Minister is of the opinion that the person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada. Clearly, Peter Tsang is a member of an inadmissible class since he was convicted of unlawful confinement, robbery and sexual assault with a weapon of two individuals and sentenced to six years and two years consecutively. It is also common ground that the Minister rendered his opinion on September 6, 1995, that Peter Tsang constitutes a danger to the public in Canada.
[16]
It is thus submitted by the respondent that by operation of s. 77(3.01) the combined effect of these two triggering events was to extinguish Lannie Tsang's right of appeal to the Appeal Division. The
Act
, as amended by Bill C-44, contains no time limitation concerning the issuance or filing of the Minister's opinion. The Minister's opinion may be sought and obtained at any point in the appeal process prior to the Appeal Division rendering its decision.
[17]
Moreover, counsel for the applicants was aware before the commencement of Lannie Tsang's hearing before the Appeal Division that the Minister was considering the issuance of an opinion that Peter Tsang is a danger to the public in Canada and that he requested a three month postponement of the hearing to allow him sufficient time to do so. The request was denied by the Appeal Division.
[18]
The applicants rely on a 1985 Supreme Court of Canada decision,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 422; 14 C.R.R. 13; 12 Admin. L.R. 137, as authority for the proposition that the Minister erred by filing his opinion at the time he did. However, the
Singh
case does not deal with the issuance of a ministerial opinion of public danger but with a determination pursuant to s. 45 of the
Act
that none of the appellants was a Convention refugee. These appellants made an application for redetermination by the Immigration Appeal Board pursuant to s. 70 of the
Act
. In accordance with s. 71(1) of the
Act
, the Board refused to allow the application to proceed. The Supreme Court held that the application for redetermination of their refugee claims be remanded to the Board for a hearing on the merits. Counsel for the applicants in the present case relies more particularly on the following paragraph from Madame Justice Wilson's judgment, at p. 215  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"It seems to me that the basic flaw in Mr. Bowie's characterization of the procedure under ss. 70 and 71 is his description of the procedure as nonadversarial. It is in fact highly adversarial but the adversary, the Minister, is waiting in the wings. What the Board has before it is a determination by the Minister based in part on information and policies to which the applicant has no means of access that the applicant for redetermination is not a Convention refugee. The applicant is entitled to submit whatever relevant material he wishes to the Board but he still faces the hurdle of having to establish to the Board that on the balance of probabilities the Minister was wrong. Moreover, he must do this without any knowledge of the Minister's case beyond the rudimentary reasons which the Minister has decided to give him in rejecting his claim. It is this aspect of the procedures set out in the
Act
which I find impossible to reconcile with the requirements of 'fundamental justice' as set out in s. 7 of the
Charter
."
[19]
The
Singh
case is factually distinct from the instant case. The refugee claimants in the
Singh
case alleged that the procedural mechanisms set out in the
Act
deprived them of their rights under the
Charter
and the court found that s. 71(1) of the
Act
, which imposes limitations on the scope of the hearing afforded to refugee claimants, denied their rights under s. 7 of the
Charter
.
4 - Analysis
[20]
In my view, the Minister did not err in law in issuing his opinion at the time he did and, moreover, it cannot be said that the applicant was denied a right of appeal because there has never been a universally available right of appeal from a deportation order.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 741-742, Sopinka, J., of the Supreme Court of Canada said as follows:
"It can thus be seen that there has never been a universally available right of appeal from a deportation order 'on all the circumstances of the case'. Such an appeal has historically been a purely discretionary matter. Although it has been added as a statutory ground of appeal, the executive has always retained the power to prevent an appeal from being allowed on that ground in cases involving serious security interests.
"If any right of appeal from the deportation order in s. 32(2) is necessary in order to comply with principles of fundamental justice, a 'true' appeal which enables the decision of the first instance to be questioned on factual and legal grounds clearly satisfies such a requirement. The absence of an appeal on wider grounds than those on which the initial decision was based does not violate s. 7.
"
Procedural Ground
"The respondent submitted that his s. 7 rights were violated as a result of the procedure followed by the Review Committee. This argument was the basis for the judgment of the majority in the Court of Appeal. I have already concluded that the respondent can assert no substantive right to an appeal on compassionate grounds. It is entirely within the discretion of Parliament whether an appeal on this basis is provided."
[21]
Neither can it be said that the transitional provision infringe upon the applicants' rights.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the Associate Chief Justice of this court dealt with an application for an order that the transitional provisions of s. 118 of the amending Act (transferring certain matters from the Appeal Division to the Trial Division of this court) violated s. 7 of the
Charter
because they eliminated the right to appeal. The learned judge said as follows, at pp. 111-112:
"Applying those principles to the facts before me, I am unable to conclude the transitional provisions, by deeming appeals to be judicial review applications, deny the applicant the fundamental justice to which he is entitled under s. 7 of the
Charter
. There is no support for the proposition that the principles of fundamental justice include a right of appeal."
[22]
Of course, retrospective force will not be ascribed to new laws affecting rights unless by express words or necessary implication. [See footnote 1]. In the case at bar, the transitional provision, s. 15(3), is clear. The subsection applies "... to an appeal that has been made on or before the coming into force of that subsection and in respect of which the hearing has not been commenced ...".
[23]
In the instant case, the appeal was filed on October 1, 1993, before the coming into force of the said subsection (July 10, 1995). The hearing commenced on July 25, 1995, fifteen days after the coming into force of the subsection. Thus, the hearing was not commenced when the subsection came into force. Therefore, the Minister was entitled to file his opinion at the time he did. The language of the French text supports that interpretation:
"15(3) Le paragraphe 77(3.01) de la même loi, édicté par le paragraphe (2),
s'applique aux appels interjetés dans le cadre de l'article 77 dont l'audition n'est pas commencée à la date de son entrée en vigueur
; cependant, toute personne visée peut, dans les quinze jours suivant la date à laquelle elle est avisée que, selon le ministre, elle constitue un danger pour le public au Canada, présenter une demande de contrôle judiciaire, dans le cadre de l'article 82.1, à l'égard de la décision de l'agent d'immigration ou de l'agent des visas prise au titre du paragraphe 77(1)." (my emphasis)
[24]
Consequently, I find that the Minister did not err in law in issuing his opinion against Peter Tsang after the hearing and before the decision of the Appeal Division. The application for judicial review is denied.
[25]
Both parties have agreed that this judicial review application raises a serious question of general importance which warrants certification pursuant to s. 83 of the
Act
. They also agree that the question for certification should read as follows:
"When an appeal is made by a sponsor to the Immigration Appeal Division ('IAD') prior to July 10, 1995, with respect to a sponsoree who is inadmissible pursuant to s. 19(1)(c), (c.1), (c.2) or (d) of the
Immigration Act
, and the hearing before the IAD has commenced after July 10, 1995, does the effect of the Minister issuing a 'danger to the public' opinion extinguish the sponsor's right of appeal pursuant to s. 77(3.01) of the
Act
and s. 15(3) of
Bill C-44
and thereby terminate the jurisdiction of the IAD with respect to the appeal?"
Application dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/clh
Footnotes
1.	 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.R.(3d) 371 (C.A.).
[End of document]