[1]
Noël, J.
: This is an application for judicial review, pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, of the decision of Adjudicator P. Chodos denying the applicants' grievances referred to adjudication in accordance with the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-35. The applicants base their application on the following grounds:
"(a) the adjudicator erred in law and refused to exercise his jurisdiction when he interpreted the provisions of the Workforce Adjustment Directive;
"(b) the adjudicator based his decision on an erroneous finding of fact made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the evidence before him; and
"(c) such other grounds as counsel may advise and this Honourable Court may permit." (Applicants' record, at 1.)
Specifically, the applicants attack the adjudicator's determination that the transfer by the Federal Department of National Health and Welfare of the Whitehorse General Hospital and the administration of its programs to the Yukon Hospital Corporation (the "Corporation") was not a privatization but a devolution within the meaning of the Work Force Adjustment Directive (the "Directive"). The importance of this distinction is that while the Directive guarantees those employees affected by a work force adjustment situation a reasonable job offer within their headquarters area only where practicable, those employees declared surplus as a result of a privatization are entitled to an offer of appointment on an indeterminate basis to another position in the Public Service within their headquarters area.
1. Background
[2]
The facts relevant to this application are aptly summarized in the decision of Adjudicator Chodos. I am content for present purposes to reproduce his summary:
"The grievors were all employed with Health and Welfare Canada at the Whitehorse General Hospital prior to the transfer of that institution to the Whitehorse General Hospital Corporation. A complete list of the grievors is found as an appendix to this decision. The grievors contend the following:
'We the undersigned grieve that we have not been treated within the intent of the Workforce Adjustment Directive. We believe that the Department has privatized the Whitehorse General Hospital and that we should be guaranteed a position with the Department with salary protection if necessary in Whitehorse.'
"The material evidence in this matter is not in dispute, and is based almost entirely on documentation which was filed with the consent of both parties. There is also agreement that the issue in this case turns on whether, pursuant to the definition provisions of the Workforce Adjustment Directive, the actions taken in respect of the Whitehorse General Hospital constituted a 'privatization' as contended by the grievors, or a 'devolution', which is the employer's submission. There is no dispute that the Workforce Adjustment directive of December 15, 1991 applies to the grievors, and that this matter is presently before this adjudicator as a reference to adjudication pursuant to the National Joint Council bylaws.
"The Yukon Hospital Corporation and their bargaining agent were the subject of a decision of the Canada Labour Relations Board (CLRB/CCRT Decision no. 1107 dated February 21, 1995). The parties agreed that the following extract from pages 3 and 4 of that decision is an accurate and relevant summary of facts that are also pertinent to this case:
'The Whitehorse General Hospital was for many years operated by the Medical Services Branch of the Department of National Health and Welfare. The hospital serves not only the City of Whitehorse but also outlying communities in the Yukon. It is the only facility of its size and kind in the Yukon.
'Employees of the Whitehorse General Hospital were federal public servants. Most employees were represented by PSAC, and were included in one or other of the occupational family type bargaining units for which PSAC had been certified by the Public Service Staff Relations Board.
. . . . .
'On April 1, 1993, the Government of Canada, the Government of Yukon and the Yukon Hospital Corporation entered into a comprehensive agreement respecting the transfer of National Health and Welfare programs, services and facilities to the Government of Yukon, including the Whitehorse General Hospital. This agreement is known as the Whitehorse General Hospital Transfer Agreement. In the result, the Yukon Hospital Corporation assumed responsibility for the operation of the Whitehorse General Hospital. Also on April 1, 1993, the Government of Canada, the Government of Yukon and the Yukon Hospital Corporation entered into another agreement known as the Whitehorse General Hospital Bridging Agreement. The Bridging Agreement provided for the orderly transfer of the hospital's staff from the Public Service of Canada to the Yukon Hospital Corporation. The staff were to remain federal public servants until the termination date of the Bridging Agreement which was October 1, 1993, whereupon they became employees of the Yukon Hospital Corporation.'
"The documentary evidence submitted by the parties reveals the following additional information. In 1954 the federal government assumed responsibility for the delivery of health care to people residing in the Yukon through a division of the then Department of National Health and Welfare known as Northern Health Services; the government also undertook to construct what is now the Whitehorse General Hospital. A number of years later there were negotiations resulting in a 'Canada/Yukon/Council for Yukon Indians Health Transfer Framework Agreement' (Exhibit 8) which was signed in October, 1990. The objectives of this Agreement were described as follows:
'1.1	The objective is to achieve a complete transfer of the Medical Services Branch programs, services and facilities to create a unified health system for all Yukoners.
'1.2	Medical Services Branch Programs, services and facilities may be transferred to the Government of Yukon or to Yukon First Nations, as negotiated by the three parties.'
"This agreement was concluded on behalf of the Department of National Health and Welfare, the Government of the Yukon, and the Council for Yukon Indians, all of whom were signatories. Among other things the Agreement provided for 'the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital, including capital for a new facility, and the related administration and nurses accommodation owned by the Department of National Health and Welfare to the Government of Yukon' (paragraph 3.2). In 1989 the Legislature of the Yukon passed the
Hospital Act
(Statutes of the Yukon, 1989-90; c. 13). This
Act
established the Yukon Hospital Corporation, to be administered by a Board of Trustees appointed by the Commissioner and Executive Council pursuant to certain directions under s. 4(1) of the
Act
which establishes the representative nature, in respect of the local community, of the Board of Trustees. The
Hospital Act
provided that the Board of Trustees must submit any bylaws respecting the corporation for the approval of the Minister. Section 6 of the
Act
states that:
'The Minister may supply property and make grants and contributions to the Corporation to use in the pursuit of its objects and to other persons who operate a hospital with the Minister's approval.'
"Section 8(1) states that:
'The Corporation is not an institution of the Government of the Yukon and, except to the extent an agency relationship is created by contract with the Government, the Corporation is not an agent of the Government.'
"Section 17(1) states:
'Subject to any Act of parliament and limitations that the Government of Canada can impose, the Commissioner in Executive Council may make regulations respecting the transfer of programs, activities, personnel, and property from the Government of the Yukon or the Government of Canada to the Corporation and from any other person or group to the Corporation.'
"A complementary piece of legislation, the
Health Act
, was passed by the Yukon Legislature in December, 1990. It provides for the establishment of the Department of Health and Social Services, whose Minister is responsible, among other things, for the implementation and administration of several statutes, including the
Hospital Act
.
"Effective April 1993, two agreements were concluded between the Government of Canada, the Government of the Yukon and the Yukon Hospital Corporation. The first, which is referred to as the 'Transfer Agreement' provides for the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital. Section 3(l) of that Agreement states:
'On the Effective Date Canada agrees to transfer the responsibility for the delivery of the Whitehorse General Hospital Programs (appendix "C") to Yukon, and the Yukon agrees to accept this transfer.'
"Section (2)(c) states:
'Canada agrees to transfer to the administration and control of the Commissioner of the Yukon on or before the Effective Date, all lands described in Appendices "A" and "B" together with the buildings, facilities and any other structures thereon, subject to the approval of the Treasury Board of Canada and the Governor-in-Council.'
"This Agreement also provides that employees affected by the transfer will receive letters of offer of employment from the Corporation simultaneously upon the issue of letters of surplus by the Government of Canada. There is also a provision for the payment 'to the Yukon' of annual funding in the amount of six million, six hundred and ninety thousand, five hundred dollars ($6,690,500), as well as an undertaking that the Government of Canada will finance the construction of a new facility to replace the Whitehorse General Hospital at a cost not exceeding forty-nine million, three hundred and thirty-eight thousand dollars ($49,338,000). The companion agreement, referred to as the 'bridging agreement', establishes detailed provisions, in particular, concerning the transfer of staff to the Corporation. The preamble to this Agreement notes that the Corporation is responsible for the day-to-day operation of the hospital. On April 1, 1993 the Corporation issued letters of offer of employment to the grievors effective October 1, 1993. The letters of offer set out the Terms and Conditions of Employment as proposed by the Corporation. In various correspondence submitted to the employees, the Corporation noted that it is a separate entity from the Government of the Yukon with, among other things, its own pension plan. In one such document entitled 'Employee Info Letter # 1, Feb/Mar 93' it is noted that:
'... the corporation, truly "runs the show". ... Upon acceptance of your letter of offer and as of your appointment date, you will no longer be government employees. You will be employees of the Yukon Hospital Corporation! As stated in your letter of offer, your terms and conditions of employment are governed by the Memorandum of Understanding dated March 1991 for Whitehorse General Hospital, and by such policies and procedures currently in place or that may be put in place by the corporation.'
"In the same document under the subheading 'The Role of the Government of Yukon' it is stated:
'While the Yukon Hospital Corporation defines policy, ... it is the Government that defines the criteria by which health care in the Yukon is delivered. Government of Yukon prescribes methods of operations and standards of facilities and care. ... By submission to the Health Programs Branch or to the Minister, the Board can recommend expansion, deletion or modification of goals and resources.
'The Gov't of Yukon also provides a monitoring role and, through the Minister, presents to the Legislature the annual reports of the Corporation.'
"On October 28, 1993, the Yukon Hospital Corporation made an application pursuant to ss. 16, 19 and 47 of the
Canada Labour Code
for 'a declaration that one union is the exclusive bargaining agent for a unit of employees at Whitehorse General Hospital ...' (Exhibit 10). That is, the Corporation as employer sought to have a consolidation of the professional and nonprofessional bargaining units into one all encompassing bargaining unit. In its decision, supra, the Canada Labour Relations Board concluded, among other things, that s. 47 of the
Code
has no application to the Yukon Hospital Corporation. Section 47(1) of the
Code
provides as follows:
'47(1) Where the Governor in Council deletes the name of any portion of the public service of Canada specified from time to time in Part I or II of Schedule I to the Public Service Staff Relations Act and that portion of the public service of Canada is established as or becomes a part of a corporation to which this Part applies, or where a portion of the public service of Canada included in a portion of the public service of Canada so specified in Part I or II of Schedule I to that Act is severed from the portion in which it was included and established as or becomes a part of a corporation to which this Part applies, ... (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Relations Board) [hereinafter Adjudicator's reasons], at 1-6.)'"
It is noteworthy that s. 47 of the
Canada Labour Code
, R.S.C. 1985, c. L-2, provides for the continuation of collective agreements or arbitral awards in the circumstances described in subsection (1).
2. The Adjudicator's Decision
[3]
Based on the facts set out above, Adjudicator Chodos concluded as follows:
"It is common ground between the parties that this case turns on the interpretation and application of the definition of 'privatization' and 'devolution' as found in the Workforce Adjustment Directive. Those terms are defined as follows:
'Privatization occurs where a department discontinues both responsibility for and delivery of an operation such that, simultaneously and by prior agreement with the department a private sector organization assumes delivery of that operation. Where an operation is transferred under these circumstances, the operation is deemed, for the purposes of this directive, to be discontinued, resulting in a work force adjustment situation;
'A devolution occurs where a departmental operation is either:
transferred from the Public Service to any other part of the federal government (such as another part of the Public Service of Canada, a Crown corporation or agency), to another level of government (such as provincial, territorial, regional or municipal), to a local airport authority, or to an aboriginal group (such as a band or tribal council), without any further responsibility on the part of the Public Service
or
is performed on behalf of the Public Service by one of the above entities.
'Where an operation is transferred or performed under these circumstances, the operation is deemed, for the purposes of this directive, to be discontinued, resulting in a work force adjustment situation;'
"It is clear from the evidence that the Yukon Hospital Corporation is a legal entity whose sole purpose is to pursue and promote a public objective on behalf of the Government of Yukon. I would note for example that there are three parties (Exhibit 2) to the transfer agreement including the Government of Yukon; the preamble states that 'WHEREAS the Yukon is ready and able to assume the administration of the Whitehorse General Hospital from Canada, and to provide hospital services to people of the Yukon'. Likewise, the bridging agreement provides that '... Canada, the Yukon and the Corporation have agreed to the Transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital ... to the Yukon, pursuant to the Whitehorse General Hospital Transfer Agreement'. The enabling statute for the Yukon Hospital Corporation, that is the
Hospital Act
, also underlines that the Corporation is in almost all respects a creature of the Yukon Government which is intended to carry out a major responsibility of that Government, namely the provision of hospital care for the citizens of the Yukon. In my view s. 8(1) does not detract from this conclusion. While such a provision may have implications for s. 47 of the
Canada Labour Code
(see the CLRB decision, supra) that of itself doesn't necessarily imply that the Corporation is a 'private sector organization'. The
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
defines 'private sector' as 'the part of an economy, industry, etc., which is free from direct State control'. I would suggest that, where the State creates the corporation, provides most or all of its funding and appoints its managing body, that corporation is very much subject to direct State control.
"The fact that this entity has a separate legal personality does not override the overwhelming evidence that the Corporation is a public institution pursuing a public goal on behalf of government. Although it is true that the Corporation is governed, for collective bargaining purposes, by the
Canada Labour Code
, as opposed to the Yukon
Public Service Staff Relations Act
this of itself does not lead to the conclusion that the Corporation is a private sector organization. This country is replete with examples of corporate entities established by the federal government outside the Public Service proper and subject to the
Canada Labour Code
, which are notwithstanding considered to be public sector organizations, for instance the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. In this respect, I would note that the definition of 'devolution', supra refers to 'a Crown corporation or agency' as examples of a transfer which constitutes a devolution as opposed to a privatization. Furthermore, the recipient organization in respect of a devolution is very broadly defined as including, among other things, municipalities, a local airport authority or an aboriginal group. Counsel for the bargaining agent acknowledged that the transfer in this instance can be only a privatization or devolution; given the several examples of recipient organizations under the definition of 'devolution', the definition of 'devolution' readily subsumes the Yukon Hospital Corporation and, in my view, is a much better 'fit' than the definition of 'privatization' which is the only other alternative.
"Accordingly, for the reasons noted above, I have no hesitation in concluding that the grievances should be denied." (Adjudicator's reasons, supra, at 9-10.)
3. Arguments
[4]
The applicants argue that the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital and the administration of its programs was not a devolution, but a privatization within the meaning of the Directive, and that the adjudicator ought to have upheld their grievances.
[5]
The applicants submit that a devolution occurs within the meaning of the Directive when a departmental operation is transferred from the Public Service to (1) any other part of the federal government (such as another part of the Public Service of Canada, a Crown corporation or agency), (2) another level of government (provincial, territorial, regional or municipal), (3) a local airport authority, or (4) to an aboriginal group (such as a band or tribal council), without any further responsibility on the part of the Public Service. In this instance, the applicants argue that the only way in which a devolution could have occurred would be if the operation of the Whitehorse General Hospital had been transferred to another level of government, i.e., to the Yukon Territorial Government. However, the applicants submit that the legislative framework surrounding the transfer shows that the operation of the Whitehorse General Hospital has been transferred to the Corporation, not to the Yukon Government. In support of this argument, the applicants note the following:
-	Section 8(1) of the
Hospital Act
, S.Y. 1989-90, c. 13 (hereinafter the
Act
), provides that the Corporation is not an institution or an agent (except to the extent an agency relationship is created by a contract with the Government) of the Government of the Yukon;
-	The
Financial Administration Act
, R.S.Y. 1986, c. 65, which normally applies as a matter of course to the Government of the Yukon, is the subject of a specific provision of the
Hospital Act
, which explicitly provides that this
Act
does not apply to the Corporation. Similarly, a provision of the
Hospital Act
also specifies that the
Human Rights Act
, R.S.Y. 1986, Supp., c. 11, applies to the Corporation. The inference drawn by the applicants is that explicit provisions are needed because the Corporation is not considered a part of the Yukon Government;
-	The agreements dealing with the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital recognize the Corporation as a distinct party with different obligations than the Yukon or Federal Governments; and
-	The employees of the Whitehorse General Hospital do not benefit from the protection of the Yukon
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, R.S.Y. 1986, c. 142, but are governed by the
Canada Labour Code
.
The applicants submit that, as these factors show that the operation of the Whitehorse General Hospital has been transferred to the Corporation and not to the Yukon Government, the transfer cannot be a devolution in the meaning of the Directive.
[6]
The applicants submit that the transfer is a "privatization" according to the Directive, because:
"(a) under several different territorial enactments, the Corporation is defined or recognized as being distinct from the Government of Yukon and is deemed to not be an agent of the Government of Yukon;
"(b) all of the agreements respecting the transfer of responsibility for the delivery of health programs recognized the Yukon Hospital Corporation as a distinct party in its own right acting at arm's length from the Yukon Government;
"(c) in its own representations to its employees and to the CLRB, the Corporation emphasized that it was distinct from the Government of Yukon;
"(d) although the Corporation was established by statute, it is clear that, to a significant extent, the operation of the Corporation is such that it is, in effect, acting as a private organization which is delivering programs formerly delivered by the Federal Government;
"(e) the Canada Labour Relations Board recognized that, notwithstanding the creation of the Corporation under legislation, the Yukon Hospital Corporation exercised substantial discretion to conduct its own affairs such that it is not a public or semi-public organization." (Applicants' record, at 180.)
[7]
The applicants submit that in determining that the transfer was not a privatization, Adjudicator Chodos placed too much emphasis on the fact that the Corporation was created by the Yukon Government instead of properly focusing on the substantive operational nature of the Corporation and the relationship of the Corporation to its employees. The applicants argue that the Corporation operates on a daily basis as a private sector organization with virtually no involvement from the Yukon Government, and that in the words of the Directive, the Federal Department of Health and Welfare has discontinued both responsibility for and delivery of the operations of the Whitehorse General Hospital such that, simultaneously and by prior agreement with the department, the Corporation assumes delivery of that operation.
[8]
The respondent submits that the adjudicator did not err in determining that the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital and the administration of its programs to the Corporation was not a privatization within the meaning of the Directive by giving the words "private sector organization" in the definition of "privatization" their normal and ordinary meaning. The respondent argues that the statutory scheme under which the Corporation exists and the agreements under which the Whitehorse General Hospital was transferred to the Yukon clearly support the adjudicator's conclusion that the Corporation is a legal entity whose sole purpose is to pursue and promote a public objective on behalf of the Government of Yukon. Finally, the respondent submits that in the alternative, the adjudicator's decision is reasonable, and that it should not be subject to judicial interference.
4. Analysis
a) Standard Of Review
[9]
The applicants' grievances were brought before an adjudicator assigned by the Public Service Staff Relations Board pursuant to ss. 92 and 93 of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-35 as amended by 1992, c. 54, s. 68(1) (hereinafter
PSSRA
):
"92(1) Where an employee has presented a grievance, up to and including the final level in the grievance process, with respect to
(a) the interpretation or application in respect of the employee of a provision of a collective agreement or an arbitral award,
(b) in the case of an employee in a department or other portion of the public service of Canada specified in Part I of Schedule I or designated pursuant to subsection (4),
(i) disciplinary action resulting in suspension or a financial penalty, or
(ii) termination of employment or demotion pursuant to paragraph 11(2)(f) or (g) of the Financial Administration Act, or
(c) in the case of an employee not described in paragraph (b), disciplinary action resulting in termination of employment, suspension or a financial penalty,
and the grievance has not been dealt with to the satisfaction of the employee, the employee may, subject to subsection (2), refer the grievance to adjudication.
(...)
"93 The Board shall assign such members as may be required to hear and adjudicate on grievances referred to adjudication under this Act."
[10]
At issue in this case is the adjudicator's interpretation of provisions of the Work Force Adjustment Directive, namely the meaning of the terms "devolution" and "privatization". According to the terms of the Directive:
"With the exception of those provisions for which the Public Service Commission (PSC) is responsible, this directive is deemed to be part of the collective agreements between the parties and the National Joint Council (NJC) and employees are to be afforded ready access to it." (Applicants' record, at 28.)
Thus, an adjudicator interpreting provisions of the Directive is in effect interpreting the collective agreement. The appropriate standard of review to be applied by a court reviewing the decision of an adjudicator interpreting the provisions of a collective agreement was discussed by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 1, at 250-251  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (hereinafter <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).) LaForest, J., held as follows:
"This court has stated in previous cases that courts should, as a matter of policy, defer to the expertise of the arbitrator in questions relating to the interpretation of collective agreements: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . This development is traced in the dissenting reasons of Wilson, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 1340-1342. It is clear that an arbitrator has jurisdiction 'stricto sensu' to interpret the provisions of a collective agreement in the course of determining the arbitrability of matters under that agreement. In that case the arbitrator is acting within his or her 'home territory', and any judicial review of that interpretation must only be to a standard of patent unreasonableness."
There is no privative clause in the
PSSRA
insulating the decisions of adjudicators from review. This was also the case in the
Volvo Canada
[see [1980] 1 S.C.R. 178; 27 N.R. 502; 33 N.S.R.(2d) 22; 57 A.P.R. 22] and
Douglas Aircraft
[see [1980] 1 S.C.R. 245; 29 N.R. 109] cases cited by LaForest, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . However, the presence of a privative clause is only one of a number of important factors to be considered by the court in determining the appropriate standard of review. These factors were discussed by the Supreme Court in the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 75 W.A.C. 1 decision, where Iacobucci, J., held at pp. 354 to 355 N.R.:
"From the outset, it is important to set forth certain principles of judicial review. There exist various standards of review with respect to the myriad of administrative agencies that exist in our country. The central question in ascertaining the standard of review is to determine the legislative intent in conferring jurisdiction on the administrative tribunal. In answering this question, the courts have looked at various factors. Included in the analysis is an examination of the tribunal's role or function. Also crucial is whether or not the agency's decisions are protected by a privative clause. Finally, of fundamental importance is whether or not the question goes to the jurisdiction of the tribunal involved.
"Having regard to the large number of factors relevant in determining the applicable standard of review, the courts have developed a spectrum that ranges from the standard of reasonableness to that of correctness. Courts have also enunciated a principle of deference that applies not just to the facts as found by the tribunal, but also to the legal questions before the tribunal in the light of its role and expertise. At the reasonableness end of the spectrum, where deference is at its highest, are those cases where a tribunal protected by a true privative clause, is deciding a matter within its jurisdiction and where there is no statutory right of appeal. See
Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 963 v. New Brunswick Liquor Corp.
, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 227;
U.E.S., Local 298 v. Bibeault
, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 1048, at p. 1089 (
Bibeault
), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
"At the correctness end of the spectrum, where deference in terms of legal questions is at its lowest, are those cases where the issues concern the interpretation of a provision limiting the tribunal's jurisdiction (jurisdictional error) or where there is a statutory right of appeal which allows the reviewing court to substitute its opinion for that of the tribunal and where the tribunal has no greater expertise than the court on the issue in question, as for example in the area of human rights. See for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
. . . . .
"Consequently, even where there is no privative clause and where there is a statutory right of appeal, the concept of the specialization of duties requires that deference be shown to decisions of specialized tribunals on matters which fall squarely within the tribunal's expertise. This point was reaffirmed in
United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local 579 v. Bradco Construction Ltd.
, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 316 (
Bradco
), where Sopinka, J., writing for the majority, stated the following at p. 335;
'... the expertise of the tribunal is of the utmost importance in determining the intention of the legislator with respect to the degree of deference to be shown to a tribunal's decision in the absence of a full privative clause. Even where the tribunal's enabling statute provides explicitly for appellate review, as was the case in
Bell Canada
, supra, it has been stressed that deference should be shown by the appellate tribunal to the opinions of the specialized lower tribunal on matters squarely within its jurisdiction.
'On the other side of the coin, a lack of relative expertise on the part of the tribunal vis-à-vis the particular issue before it as compared with the reviewing court is a ground for a refusal of deference.'"
[11]
The principles set out in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decisions were applied to the case of an adjudicator assigned by the Public Service Staff Relations Board under the
PSSRA
in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) (hereinafter
Wiseman
).) In
Wiseman
, the adjudicator had decided that the applicant's failure to consult with the respondent employee prior to making a scheduling change constituted a violation of a provision of the collective agreement. After citing the above passage from the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision, Cullen, J., stated at pp. 205 to 206:
"... In the case at bar, it was not contested by the applicant that a labour arbitrator is a highly specialized decision-maker, meeting the first of the indicia for judicial deference. Second, there was no statutory right of appeal from the arbitrator's decision, supporting judicial deference. Third, the question to be addressed -- the interpretation of the collective agreement -- fell squarely into the area of expertise of the adjudicator. Only the fourth consideration -- the nonexistence of a privative clause -- mitigated against judicial deference. However, as discussed in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the nonexistence of a privative clause is not alone determinative.
. . . . .
"In my opinion, having considered the criteria referred to above and the cases from the Supreme Court dealing with the standard of review, I find that the decision of the arbitrator in the case at bar should be accorded considerable or significant curial deference, particularly since it concerns a matter squarely within the scope of the arbitrator's jurisdiction and special expertise. Although I was unable to come up with a pat phrase -- such as 'patently reasonable' -- to describe the kind of decision that demands judicial intercession, it is sufficient to say that only decisions not supportable by the evidence are subject to intervention."
[12]
In
Canada (Procureur général) v. Séguin
(1995), 101 F.T.R. 64 (T.D.), this court reviewed the decision of an adjudicator assigned under the
PSSRA
. (See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).) The adjudicator had determined that a grieving employee had been "called back to work" according to the provisions of the collective agreement when she provided information by telephone to co-workers after working hours and on a day of rest, and that she was entitled to reporting pay. After an extensive review of the jurisprudence of the Supreme Court in relation to the determination of the appropriate standard of review, Pinard, J., concluded that at p. 80:
"... without endorsing the particular interpretation adopted by the adjudicator, and while realizing that in future others may interpret clause M-29.01 in question differently, I intend to exercise great judicial restraint and refrain from intervening in an adjudicative decision which, within the limits of the jurisdiction conferred by law, interpreted a collective agreement in a sufficiently rational manner in reliance on the facts in evidence, and did so without infringing the rules of natural justice or procedural fairness."
[13]
Thus, this court will accord, on judicial review, a high degree of deference to the decision of an adjudicator interpreting a provision of a collective agreement. However, if in arriving at an interpretation of a provision of a collective agreement, the adjudicator must interpret other legislation of general public interest other than its constituting statute, the court need accord no deference to this interpretation. This principle was set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in the decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 2 N.R. 443, in which Laskin, C.J., stated at pp. 518-519 S.C.R.:
"... I wish to add for myself why I cannot accept the approach taken by the Ontario Court of Appeal, namely that there was an issue of construction and the construction adopted by the arbitrator was one which the language which he had to construe would reasonably bear. Although the issue before the arbitrator arose by virtue of a grievance under a collective agreement, it became necessary for him to go outside the collective agreement and to construe and apply a statute which was not a projection of the collective bargaining relations of the parties but a general public enactment of the superior provincial Legislature. On such a matter, there can be no policy of curial deference to the adjudication of an arbitrator, chosen by the parties or in accordance with their prescriptions, who interprets a document which is in language to which they have subscribed as a domestic charter to govern their relationship.
. . . . .
"... No doubt, a statute like a collective agreement or any other document may present difficulties of construction, may be ambiguous and may lend itself to two different constructions neither of which may be thought to be unreasonable. If that be the case, it nonetheless lies with the court, and ultimately with this court, to determine what meaning the statute should bear. That is not to say that an arbitrator, in the course of his duty, should refrain from construing a statute which is involved in the issues that have been brought before him. In my opinion, he must construe, but at the risk of having his construction set aside by a court as being wrong."
[14]
In its recent decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Supreme Court revisited the principle enunciated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . On this question, Iacobucci, J., speaking for three other members of the court, stated that:
"As a general rule, I accept the proposition that curial deference need not be shown to an administrative tribunal in its interpretation of a general public statute other than its constituting legislation, although I would leave open the possibility that, in cases where the external statute is linked to the tribunal's mandate and is frequently encountered by it, a measure of deference may be appropriate. However, this does not mean that every time an administrative tribunal encounters an external statute in the course of its determination, the decision as a whole becomes open to review on a standard of correctness. If that were the case, it would substantially expand the scope of reviewability of administrative decisions, and unjustifiably so. (...)
. . . . .
"While the Board may have to be correct in an isolated interpretation of external legislation, the standard of review of the decision as a whole, if that decision is otherwise within its jurisdiction, will be one of patent unreasonableness. Of course, the correctness of the interpretation of the external statute may affect the overall reasonableness of the decision. Whether this is the case will depend on the impact of the statutory provision on the outcome of the decision as a whole."
(
CBC
, supra, at 187-188  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . L'Heureux-Dubé, J., Gonthier, J., concurring, held that an administrative tribunal protected by a full privative clause (such as the CLRB) is entitled to curial deference in its interpretation of an external statute, because the interpretation of an external statute cannot be characterized as a jurisdictional question for which correctness is required. McLachlin, J., dissenting, held that on a question outside the special competence of the Board (in this case, interpreting the
Broadcasting Act
and its regulatory regime), the standard of review applicable to the Board's decision was correctness. LaForest, J., and Sopinka, J., agreed with the result reached by Iacobucci, J., but did not specifically address this point.)
Iacobucci, J., concluded at pp. 191-192  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that:
"... the proper standard to be applied to judicial review of the Board's decision that the appellant had committed an unfair labour practice is one of patent unreasonableness. The Board has the exclusive jurisdiction to determine whether there has been an unfair labour practice by the interference with the administration of a trade union or the representation of employees by that union, in contravention of s. 94(1)(a). This jurisdiction encompasses the authority to develop a test for when such interference is established, and to define the scope of the concepts of 'administration' of a union and 'representation' of employees. The fact that the employer in this case is a creation of, and is governed by, an external statute, does not raise the overall standard of review to one of correctness, even though no deference will be shown to the Board in its interpretation of the provisions of that statute. In this case the Board did not err in concluding that the existence of statutory obligations on the appellant was relevant to the issue of whether a compelling business justification existed for the appellant's actions. For the appellant to succeed, then, requires a finding that the ultimate decision that no such justification had been made out was an unreasonable one on the evidence before the Board."
[15]
In the case at bar, in interpreting the Directive, the adjudicator was obliged to consider and interpret the legislative framework which governs the Corporation and through which the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital and the administration of its programs was effected and in particular, the
Hospital Act
. In light of the decision of the Supreme Court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and considering the reasons of Iacobucci, J., in the
CBC
decision, I am of the view that the overall standard of review appropriate in this case to the decision of Adjudicator Chodos is that set out by this court in the
Wiseman
and
Séguin
decisions: the decision must be supportable on the evidence before the adjudicator. However, this court owes no deference to an adjudicator's interpretation of the provisions of a statute other than its constitutive statute (the
PSSRA
) such as the
Hospital Act
. Inasmuch as the interpretation of the provisions of the
Hospital Act
are central to the adjudicator's decision, the correctness of this interpretation may affect the overall reasonableness of the adjudicator's decision.
b) Reasonableness Of The
Adjudicator's Decision
[16]
The issue before the adjudicator, as identified in the applicants' grievance, was whether the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital and the administration of its programs was a privatization. The starting point to answer this question is to examine the Directive, and specifically, the definition of the term "privatization". The objectives of the Work Force Adjustment Directive are stated in the Directive as follows:
"It is the policy of the Treasury Board to minimize the impact of work force adjustment situations on indeterminate employees, primarily through ensuring that, wherever possible, alternative employment opportunities are provided to affected employees. It is, however, recognized that it is impracticable to guarantee the continuation of a specific position or job. The emphasis of this directive is, therefore, upon the concept of employment security rather than job security. To this end, every indeterminate employee whose services will no longer be required because of a work force adjustment will be guaranteed a reasonable job offer within the Public Service, subject to the provisions of the directive." (Aplicants' record, at 29.)
"Work force adjustment" is defined as:
"A situation that occurs when a deputy head decides that the services of one or more indeterminate employees will no longer be required beyond a specified date because of: a lack of work; the discontinuance of a function; a relocation in which the employee does not wish to relocate; a devolution, a privatization, or a contracting out situation. (Applicants' record, at 35.)"
"Privatization" is defined as occurring:
"... where a department discontinues both responsibility for and delivery of an operation such that, simultaneously and by prior agreement with the department, a private sector organization assumes delivery of that operation. Where an operation is transferred under these circumstances, the operation is deemed, for the purposes of this directive, to be discontinued, resulting in a work force adjustment situation. (Applicants' record, at 33. The french language text of the Directive defines 'privatisation' as follows:
Situation où un ministère cesse d'être responsable d'un service et d'en assurer l'exécution et où un organisme du secteur privé commence au même moment à assurer ce service en vertu d'une entente préalable avec le ministère. Lorsqu'un service est transféré dans ces conditions, il est réputé avoir été supprimé, au sens de la présente directive, ce qui entraîne un réaménagement des effectifs.)"
Paragraph 1.1.14 of the Directive provides that:
"Departments shall guarantee every affected or surplus employee who is both mobile and retrainable a reasonable job offer during the surplus period, and shall extend any such surplus period until at least one such offer has been made. Where practicable, a reasonable job offer shall be within the employee's headquarters area as defined in the Travel Policy. (Applicants' record, at 42.)"
Paragraph 6.1.1 of the Directive deals specifically with employees declared surplus as a result of a privatization. It states:
"Employees declared surplus as a result of a privatization are guaranteed an offer of appointment on an indeterminate basis to another position in the Public Service within their headquarters area, either at their current level or with salary protection, where necessary. (Applicants' record, at 65.)"
[17]
As there appears to be little doubt that the Department of National Health and Welfare has discontinued both responsibility for and delivery of the operation in this case, i.e., the Whitehorse General Hospital and the various programs it administers, the central question is whether the Corporation is a "private sector organization" which has assumed the delivery of the operation. As the term "private sector" is not defined in the Directive, the adjudicator ascertained the plain meaning of the term by referring to the following dictionary definition:
"private sector - the part of an economy, industry, etc., which is free from direct State control. (The
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993). The
Oxford English Dictionary
, 2nd Ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989) provides the same definition, but adds as an annotation the following:
'1965 J.L. HANSON Dict. Econ. 372/2 Private sector, that part of the economy which is left to private enterprise.'
In turn, private enterprise is defined in the
Oxford English Dictionary
as 'A business or other commercial activity that is privately owned and free of direct state control.')"
In my view, it was perfectly reasonable for the adjudicator to identify the ordinary meaning of the term "private sector" by referring to a dictionary definition when the term was not explicitly defined in the Directive.
[18]
The fundamental characteristic of a private sector organization which can be gleaned from the definitions of "private sector" and "private enterprise" is freedom from direct State control. The next step is to ascertain to what degree direct State control of the Corporation's operations exists by looking at the constitutive statute of the Corporation: the
Hospital Act
.
[19]
The preamble of the
Hospital Act
is important as it sets out to some extent the purpose behind the establishment of the Corporation. It states in part:
"Whereas the Whitehorse General Hospital and its successor should be operated by a board independent of the Government,
"And whereas it might be advisable for other hospitals to be similarly operated,
"And whereas the Legislature and Government have a responsibility to ensure
(a) community participation in the operation of hospitals,
(b) the availability of necessary hospital facilities and programs,
(c) responsible use of the public property and funds which must be supplied to enable hospitals to operate,
(d) compliance with appropriate methods of operation and standards of facilities and care, and
(e) integration of hospital and medical services with other health programs and services."
The
Act
establishes the Corporation, consisting of a Board of trustees, (
Hospital Act
, s. 1.) which has the following objects:
"... to provide hospital and medical services to meet the needs of people in the Yukon." (s. 2.)
Reading the preamble and s. 2 of the
Act
together, it is apparent that the Corporation's sole object is the provision of hospital and medical services to Yukoners, allowing the Government of Yukon to fulfil its responsibility to ensure the availability of such services. The adjudicator's conclusion that the
Hospital Act
"... underlines that the Corporation is in almost all respects a creature of the Yukon Government
which is intended to carry out a major responsibility of that Government, namely the provision of hospital care for the citizens of the Yukon
." (My emphasis).
is in my view correct. (Adjudicator's reasons, supra, at para. 5.)
Powers Of The Corporation
[20]
Section 3 of the
Act
enumerates the powers of the Corporation. It states in part that
"3(1) For attaining its objects the Corporation shall
(a) establish and implement policies concerning the organization, administration, and operations of the Corporation;
. . . . .
(f) control the powers and duties of officers, employees, and other agents of the Corporation; and
(g) establish remuneration and travelling expenses to be paid to employees of the Corporation and establish their other conditions and benefits of employment."
Section 3(1) appears to give the Corporation the power to define the employment conditions which will govern its employees and to make policies to otherwise administer the Corporation. However, s. 3(3) specifies that the Corporation
must
make bylaws in relation to the matters described in s. 3(1) and that no bylaw comes into force without the approval of the Minister. Thus, the Government retains ultimate control over the establishment by the Corporation of employment conditions. (Section 3(3) states:
"The board of trustees must make bylaws in relation to the matters described in subsection (1) and may make bylaws in relation to the matters described in subsection (2), but no bylaw comes into force without the approval of the Minister.")
The programs, activities, and staff of the Corporation are supervised by a chief executive officer, who is appointed by the board of trustees. (s. 5) Although the Corporation has the capacities of a natural person for the attainment of its objects, (s. 3(4)) and may employ officers and other employees and contract to have services performed for the conduct of its programs and activities, (s. 5(3)) it may only borrow money with the consent of the Minister. (s. 3(5)) The Corporation is a charitable organization, and must use any profit it makes for the attainment of its objects. (ss. 3(6) - 3(7)).
Powers Of The Minister
[21]
The Corporation must direct its programs and activities in accordance with the
Act
, failing which the Commissioner in Executive Council may appoint an administrator to replace the board and manage the Corporation's programs and activities until a new board is constituted.
Hospital Act
, s. 13. Pursuant to ss. 20(c) and (d) of the
Act
, the Commissioner in Executive Council retains the power to make regulations
"(c) prescribing methods of operation and standards of facilities and care to be complied with by the Corporation or any other person operating a hospital;
"(d) generally for the implementation of the provisions of this
Act
according to their intent."
In 1994, (
An Act to Amend the Hospital Act and the Evidence Act
, S.Y. 1994, c. 2., s. 2.) the Yukon Legislature added a new section reserving to the Minister certain powers of intervention in the operation of the Corporation. Section 3.1 provides that:
"The Minister may declare an increase or a decrease in level of services, the introduction or the cessation of a service, or the alteration, acquisition or disposal of equipment or a building or other property to be a matter of general public interest that must not be done or continued except with the Minister's approval."
[22]
The Commissioner in Executive Council appoints the members of the board of trustees, which governs the activities and programs of the Corporation. The board consists of the chief executive officer and of persons nominated by eight different groups, including Yukon's First Nations, the public at large, and the public sector of the Yukon (s. 4(1)). If any of the groups fail to nominate a candidate, the Commissioner in Executive Council may appoint nominees of the Minister (s. 4(3)). Board members are appointed for a three year term, but may be reappointed (s. 4(4)). The Minister may designate one of the members to be the chair of the board (s. 4(6)). The remunerations and travelling expenses of board members may be prescribed by the Commissioner in Executive Council (s. 4(7)). The government may supply property and make grants and contributions to the Corporation to use in the pursuit of its objects (s. 6).
Independent Status Of
The Corporation
[23]
Section 8(1) of the
Act
provides that:
"8(1) The Corporation is not an institution of the Government of the Yukon and, except to the extent an agency relationship is created by a contract with the Government, the Corporation is not an agent of the Government."
According to the applicants, additional evidence of the independent status of the Corporation is found in s. 9 of the
Act
which provides that:
"9(1) Section 14 of the Human Rights Act applies to the Corporation.
"(2) The Financial Administration Act does not apply to the Corporation."
Section 14 of the
Human Rights Act
provides in part that:
"14(1) This section applies only to the Government of the Yukon and municipalities and their corporations, boards, and commissions."
Section 1 of the
Financial Administration Act
defines "government" as "the Government of the Yukon" including "every department of the government". "Department" is defined as "any department or agency of the government" including "any corporation, board, commission or committee established under any
Act
".
[24]
I am not convinced that s. 9 of the
Act
assists in establishing anything more than that the Corporation has a special status. It does not in my view show that the Corporation is a private sector entity. Section 9(1) is not worded like a "deeming" clause; it may have been inserted for greater clarity. The fact that the
Financial Administration Act
does not apply to the Corporation, while it applies to most government departments simply highlights the Corporation's distinct status.
[25]
Considering the Corporation's constitutive statute, I cannot conclude that the adjudicator erred in deciding that the Corporation was "very much subject to state control". The Government appoints the members of the board of trustees, provides funding to the Corporation and has the power to approve or disapprove the Corporation's bylaws which by virtue of s. 3(3) must be made in relation to all matters enumerated in s. 3(1), namely:
(a) the establishment and implementation of policies concerning the organization, administration, and operations of the Corporation,
(b) the establishment and maintenance of one or more hospitals or other facilities for supplying medical services and programs,
(c) the provision of insured services as defined in the
Hospital Insurance Services Act
and insured health services as defined in the
Health Care Insurance Plan Act
and other medical services or programs,
(d) the establishment of requirements and procedures for the admission and discharge of patients by medical practitioners, dentists, and others who provide medical services,
(e) the establishment of committees of the board, the delegation of powers of the board to such committees and the establishment of procedures for meetings and work of the board and its committees,
(f) the control of the powers and duties of officers, employees, and other agents of the Corporation, and
(g) the establishment of remuneration and travelling expenses to be paid to employees of the Corporation and the establishment of their other conditions and benefits of employment.
In addition, the Government may intervene in the operation of the Corporation and has an obligation to ensure that the Corporation directs its programs and activities in accordance with the
Act
. There are sufficient indicia of direct state control to warrant a conclusion that the Corporation is not a "private sector organization" in the meaning of the Directive, and that the transfer of Whitehorse General Hospital is not a privatization.
[26]
Aside from the organizational framework within which the Corporation is to operate, and the public policy objective behind its creation, both of which support the decision of the adjudicator, there is no basis for the allegation by the applicants that the Corporation in fact operates on a daily basis as a private sector organization. What the evidence does establish is that the Corporation has assumed direct responsibility for providing hospital services in the Yukon within the above described framework and that employees of the Corporation are no longer employees of the Government of Yukon. There is also evidence of the changes that were foreseen at the time of the transition, none of which lend themselves to either a private or public sector label. There is otherwise no evidence as to how the Corporation is effectively run, and no evidence that it is in fact run as the applicants suggest.
[27]
Based on the foregoing, it was open to the adjudicator to conclude that the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital is not a privatization. Having come to that conclusion, it is not necessary for me to determine whether the transfer amounts to a devolution although I do agree with the adjudicator that, as between the two possibilities envisioned by the Directive, the definition of "devolution" appears to be a better "fit".
[28]
For these reasons, the application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/ham
[End of document]