[1]
Reed, J.
: The applicant raises several grounds in his appeal. I find it necessary to deal with only one of them. It is argued that the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board ("the tribunal"), dated November 16, 1992, should be quashed because the applicant was not granted a recess, when he requested one, in order to review documents which were introduced in evidence and which he had not seen previously. The documents were introduced to contradict evidence which he had given. They were written in English. The applicant was testifying through an interpreter.
[2]
The applicant sought convention refugee status on the ground that he feared persecution from both the police and from Sikh extremists in India. He was a Hindu who had lived in the Punjab. Part of his evidence was that in 1984 he had joined the Hindu Shiv Sena. He was asked a number of questions about the nature of that organization.
. . . . .
"Q.	Okay before we go into your problem, Mr. Pal, I'm going to ask you some other questions. Now let us talk about the Hindu Shiv Sena. What was the aims or the political beliefs of the Hindu Shiv Sena?
A.	They want peace and help the affected ones.
Q.	This Hindu Shiv Sena, is that a political party?
A.	No it's not.
Q.	What kind of party is it? Can you tell us?
A.	This is a religious party.
Q.	An what ... does it have affiliation with any specific religion?
A.	It's only connected with the Hindu religion.
Q.	Can people of other religion become a member of Hindu Shiv Sena?
A.	No not often.
Q.	What do you mean by not often?
A.	Because nobody quits as religion.
Q.	Is it a prerequisite to be a Hindu, to become a member of the Shiv Sena?
A.	Only Hindus belong to this party, not people from other religions belong to this party.
Q.	Now you are telling us that your father was a member of the Shiv Sena. Can you tell us how long has your father been a member? To the best of your knowledge.
A.	I'm not sure, I cannot provide you with the exact date but I can say nearly four or five years. Following his footsteps I become member of Hindu Shiv Sena.
. . . . .
Q.	Now who are killing the Hindus?
A.	Sikh terrorists.
Q.	Okay now what did the Hindu Shiv Sena do to protect Hindus?
A.	Hindu Shiv Sena is getting Hindu, Punjabi Hindus together and fighting with Punjab government demanding their protection.
Q.	When you said fighting, what kind of fighting do you mean?
A.	Demanding their rights. When Sikh people attack on Hindus while isolating them on top of that they request Hindus get together not to be isolated and get killed.
Q.	Now my original question was to get some clarification from you. What did you mean by fighting with the government? And you told us that you are asking for your demands. Now in what manner would you put forward these demands?
A.	Everywhere in every job you find discrimination in Punjab because Sikhs are in majority in Punjab. Hindus are minority that's how ... that's why they are facing discrimination in all walks of life in Punjab.
Q.	Mr. Dharam Pal please try to listen to the question. I'm not asking you what problems the Hindus are having, my question is how or in which manner will the Hindu Shiv Sena present their demands?
A.	They don't want to fight with anyone, Hindus just want to put forward their demands in manners of peace.
. . . . .
Q.	So you are telling us that Mr. Ashwani Kuma Sharma was the president of Shiv Sena?
A.	Ashwani Kuma Sharma was president of Shiv Sena unit district Hoshiarpur. And Jagdish Dangri was the president of Punjab. Balchrisin Thakre was president of all India unit.
. . . . .
Q.	... Mr. Dharam Pal, you have mentioned what generally you have done but now I'm getting into very specific. So please be ... please listen to the question carefully. You are talking about attacks by Sikhs and you are telling us that you are encouraging Hindus to get together and protect themselves.
A.	Yes.
Q.	If you can explain a little further, how did you intend to protect yourself? Hypothetically, hypothetically let's say there is going to be an attack. What would you do immediately to protect yourself?
A.	Well advise people to get together and take care of themselves because, because we cannot put ourselves encounter because Hindus are not in majority, cannot, cannot do any counterattack to protect themselves.
Q.	So Hindus, if they're attacked, would they for example to save themselves, would they pick up arms and fight?
A.	Not with the arms but by hiding here and there. Because we are peace-loving.
Q.	Do you know the meaning of the name Hindu Shiv Sena?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Can you tell us?
A.	Yes. Helping the affected people to finish the terrorism.
Q.	Okay, now my question was the literary meaning of the word. For example in Hindu we know it is Hindu, Shiv Sena, what are the meanings of these two words?
A.	It's the name of the party. Religious party.
Q.	Well you have told us that this is the name of the party. What is Shiv?
A.	It's a name.
Q.	Is that the name of any political person or any political thing?
A.	It's a whole Hindu community.
Q.	Is that another name for the Hindu community?
A.	Hindu is just a name.
Q.	Okay I asked you and you said that you knew the literary meaning of the words. Okay what does, what do you understand by the word Sena?
A.	It's a group.
Q.	And now you said you would not fight back to protect yourself but you're always telling us that you would suggest for Hindus to get together. What does the significance of getting together?
A.	Because we just want to make sure they don't isolate Hindus and kill them easily because we don't have arms to fight back so if we are all together we can find some way to protect ourselves by hiding in houses or at one place. We cannot fight back, we can protect ourselves to some extent.
. . . . .
Q.	Was the Hindu Shiv Sena allowed to operate in India and hold meeting without any government interference?
A.	Every party has permission (incomprehensible) every ... each and every party is allowed to do so.
Q.	And to your knowledge, was the Hindu Shiv Sena and extremist group?
A.	No, this was not an extremist group.
Q.	And was the Hindu Shiv Sena ever involved in any killings, tortures, kidnappings or any terrorist activity?
A.	Hindu Shiv Sena was never been in the favour of torturing or harming anyone.
. . . . .
Case Presenting Officer: Okay, I have some documents I'd like to submit at this ...
. . . . .
Adjudicator: Alright, we have three exhibits. Okay C-1 will be from the IRB Documentation Centre.
Adjudicator: C-2 will be the U.S. Senate Report.
Adjudicator: And C-3 is an excerpt from Keesing's Revolutionary and Dissident
Movements.
. . . . .
Case Presenting Officer:
. . . . .
Q.	Okay, and my next question is ... I've handed in some documents that describe the Hindu Shiv Sena as a right-wing extremist group that emerged in 1986. Okay, and that's a sentence I read from the Revolutionary Dissident Movement, an international guide, Keesing's reference publication. Page 152. Now you've, you've testified that you do not consider the Hindu Shiv Sena to be an extremist group. And you also stated that you joined in 1984. Now this document contradicts both those statements that you made in that it says it's an extremist group and that it emerged in 1986.
Adjudicator: Hold it.
IRB Member: No that's not ...
Adjudicator: This one says '84.
IRB Member: (inaudible).
Case Presenting Officer: Oh this one doesn't, but the other one does. I'll just go ahead 	with the first part then. It's been described as a right-wing extremist group, and you say it's not. I'd just like to known what your reaction or comment.
Person Concerned: Hindu Shiv Sena is not an extremist group. They have looking for 	... forward for peace between Hindus and Sikhs. They are seeking unity between Hindus and Sikhs. Sikhs are demanding separate state for them and that's what we are against of.
Case Presenting Officer: That will be the end of my questions, thank you.
Adjudicator: Counsel, any questions or redirect?
Counsel: Yes madam Adjudicator. I was only wondering, because I know that Mr.
Dharam Pal is familiar with the Keesing's document, that is C-3, because it was available to us from before. But I'm not sure if he's conversant with the contents of C-1 and I would ask, request that in all fairness this should be, should be given a chance to review this document, so that if I have any questions in that area, he can at least be well informed.
Adjudicator: Well, firstly the, I take it you're not submitting any documents 		whatsoever.
Counsel: I will definitely submit some documents.
Adjudicator: Well, in that case then, Mr. McGuire hasn't had a chance to review them 	before he asked his questions.
Counsel: That's right.
Adjudicator: And secondly ... and secondly, I don't [think] that Exhibit C-1 is vastly 	different from what is said in C-3. The gist of both of these is that the Shiv Sena is a violent group, which Mr. Pal says is not the case. So I don't see that there's any need to review. He's already been asked about this on several occasions. I mean on the subject.
Counsel: Thank you madam Adjudicator. In that case I will just proceed with my
questions then."
[3]
Counsel for the applicant argues that not granting a recess to enable the applicant and his counsel to review Exhibit C-1 constitutes a breach of natural justice. It is argued that the applicant was not given an adequate opportunity to answer the evidence against him.
[4]
Counsel for the applicant referred to the decision of Mr. Justice Gibson in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). In that case it was held that the refusal to produce for the applicant's review prior to the CRDD hearing the interview notes, taken by an official of the Canadian Immigration Commission at the time of the applicant's arrival in Canada, was a breach of natural justice. The interview notes were used during the course of the CRDD hearing and were eventually entered as an Exhibit at that hearing (as evidence of an alleged contradictory statement which had been made by the applicant).
[5]
Counsel for the respondent argues that the refusal of a recess was matter a within the discretion of the tribunal and that the reasons given by the adjudicator for that decision justify the decision which was made. In addition, it is argued that even if there was a technical breach of natural justice the decision should not be quashed because the finding that the applicant lacked knowledge of the violent nature of the Hindu Shiv Sena was only one of several findings on which the tribunal relied in reaching its conclusion that there was no credible evidence offered in support of the applicant's claim. Reference was made to the decision of Mr. Justice MacKay in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
[6]
The relevant portion of exhibit C-3 which the applicant had seen prior to the hearing reads:
"Hindu Shiv Sena ('Army of Shiva')
"This right-wing extremist group emerged in 1986 to organize resistance amongst the minority Hindus against Sikh attacks in Punjab. On March 16, 1986, the town of Batala in Punjab, which has a Hindu majority, was placed under indefinite curfew after members of Hindu Shiv Sena clashed with Sikhs following the death of the group's local branch president."
[7]
Exhibit C-1 which the applicant was not given an opportunity to review reads:
"Shiv Sena (Army of Shiva) is a right-wing extremist group. It has been in existence since 1984. Around 30,000 armed youths were part of the movement in 1986. Shiv Sena uses violence against Muslims, Sikhs, and other non-Hindu groups, often in retaliation for attacks against Hindus. Shiv Sena has supported Hindu extremism during the recent Ayodhya incident in which Hindus and Muslims competed for the erection of a religious monument. Shiv Sena is reported to be particularly powerful in the state of Maharashtra.
"In 1985, the Shiv Sena leader in Bombay declared its admiration for Hitler, thus affirming the party's right-wing idealogy. In May 1988, Shiv Sena organized a rally outside a courthouse in Aurangabad (Maharashtra) to protest against a court dismissal of its complaint against the election of a Muslim-supported Hindu mayor. The protest turned violent and 12 people were killed in communal violence throughout Maharashtra. During the spring of 1988, Shiv Sena won elections in parts of Maharashtra with the slogan 'Be Proud You Are A Hindu", thus exacerbating communal tensions in the state.
"In 1989, more than 500 people died in sectarian violence in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra, a sharp increase from the prior years. In Maharashtra alone, 'hundreds' of people have reportedly died in intercommunal violence over the last few years. In October 1989, the Ayodhya Temple controversy (the government gave its approval for the building of a Hindu temple on the site of Lord Rama's birthplace, later occupied by a mosque and considered a sacred place by the Muslims) had repercussions in Maharashta where violent clashes between Hindu and Muslims broke out.
"During the November 1989 federal elections, a Shiv Sena representative in Maharashtra declared that the 'Muslims here have realised that the [sic] is someone to check them'. During the early 1990 State elections, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), another militant Hindu party, and Shiv Sena both had bright prospects in Maharashtra. In February 1990, forecasts gave an alliance between BJP and Shiv Sena as winner of the State elections. Muslims have been alarmed, in recent months, by the rapid rise of Shiv Sena and the increasing popularity of its 'virulent anti-Muslim sentiment'. Muslim leaders feared that the BJP, through its control of State governments, would discriminate against Muslim populations." (footnotes omitted)
[8]
With respect to the first reason given by the adjudicator for not allowing a recess, the fact that the applicant's counsel would be submitting documentary evidence which counsel for the respondent might not have seen, was irrelevant. Such documentation had not been introduced and counsel for the respondent had not asked for a recess in order to review any such documentation. It might very well be that counsel for the respondent would be sufficiently aware of the contents of the documents to decide that proceeding without an opportunity to review them would not prejudice the respondent's case. In any event, a refusal be the tribunal to allow a recess to respondent's counsel to review documents being introduced into evidence, which he had not previously seen, before cross-examining the applicant would equally be an inappropriate way of proceeding. The second reasons given by the tribunal for not granting a recess, that exhibit C-1 and exhibit C-3, are essentially the same, is not borne out by a review of those documents. Exhibit C-1 contains much more detailed information and describes specific acts of violence and examples of ideological pronouncements. It is much more persuasive evidence than exhibit C-3. In refusing to allow the applicant and his counsel an opportunity to review this evidence, the applicant was denied the opportunity to answer the case against him and a breach of natural justice occurred.
[9]
The question to be answered, then, is whether the breach of natural justice was one which could have little or no effect on the outcome of the decision as a whole. A decision of this court to grant relief under s. 18.1(4) of the
Federal Court Act
is discretionary. This is reflected in the text of that subsection which provides that the court "may grant relief if it is satisfied that" the Board has "failed to observe a principle of natural justice [or] procedural fairness". This wording reflects the discretionary nature of the old prerogative writs which s. 18.1(4) replaces. Thus, if no prejudice is caused by an erroneous procedure or decision an order quashing the decision will not normally be given. If no real purpose will be served by requiring another hearing, one will not be ordered.
[10]
Counsel for the applicant cited the decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, where Mr. Justice Gibson said:
"It was argued before me by counsel for the respondent that the hearing notes and the contradiction in the applicant's testimony that they were used to establish were not critical to the CRDD's decision; that without their use and the establishment of the particular contradiction, the decision would have been the same. That is not for me to speculate on. It is sufficient that I find a breach of fairness, as I do, to justify referring this matter back for rehearing. It will be for another panel of the CRDD to determine the impact of a remedying of that breach."
[11]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , on the other hand, Mr. Justice MacKay refused to quash the tribunal's decision where the applicant had not been provided ahead of time with interview notes which were subsequently produced on his cross-examination. Mr. Justice MacKay wrote:
"... In this case, the notes were not accepted as true but as indicating inconsistency in the applicant's story given on different occasions and not explained to the satisfaction of the Panel. That inconsistency was brought to the attention of the applicant in cross-examination, perhaps not directly but through questioning. He had the opportunity during this questioning before the Panel to respond to what appeared to be an inconsistency, and it seems to me that this matter, relied on by the Board in relation to its finding of a lack of credibility, is but one of several findings to which the Board pointed in its conclusion that there was, ultimately, no credible evidence offered by the applicant."
And with respect to the failure to provide a translation:
"... The error in failing to provide a translation is one of substance. In this case, the applicant was assisted by an interpreter at the hearing before the Panel and the Hearing Panel did, in my view, err in law in failing to provide for a translation of the notes, but that error concerned but one of five bases cited by the Panel for its finding that the evidence of the applicant was not credible and it does not substantially, in my view, affect the decision of the Panel or the way in which I must look at it."
[12]
It is, necessary then, to set out the pertinent part of the tribunal's reasons for decision in this case:
"Mr. Dharam Pal, I do not believe any of your evidence. You have remarkably little knowledge of the Shiv Sena for someone who was as involved as you claim you were. And I note that you were an adult when you joined, not a child. In addition to this lack of knowledge, you apparently had no knowledge at all of any violent or extremist activities which are described in Exhibits C-1 and C-3. An [sic] I can only conclude that either you were never a member of this group or you are deliberately attempting to mislead this panel about the activities of this group. An [sic] where your evidence conflicts with that of these Exhibits, I accept the evidence in the Exhibits.
"And there were some other problems with your testimony. One of these was your demeanour. I noticed that you became agitated when the question became difficult and you never looked in the direction of the panel for more than a milli-second. I found many of your answer to be evasive. It seemed that certain words would trigger a memorized response. And often this did not relate to the question asked in any way. You told us that your father went missing in 1990, yet you believed he was living in Delhi in August of 1991.
"You stated that your sister never lived in Delhi, but on your Personal Information Form you have her living in Delhi in 1991 and then when questioned on redirect, you said your sister lived in Delhi at that time. You stated in your evidence-in-chief that the police were not doing anything about the Sikh terrorists and this is obviously not correct, according to the documentary evidence. You also mixed up several dates."
[13]
I will summarize the tribunal's decision. It found the applicant's claim was not credible because: (1) he seemed to have little knowledge about the Hindu Shiv Sena and particularly had no knowledge of the extremists and violent nature of the organization; (2) his demeanour was agitated (when answering difficult questions); it was evasive and his answers contained memorized responses; (3) there were contradictions in his evidence, particularly concerning the whereabouts of his father and the place of residence of his sister. The panel also considered his conclusion that the police were not doing anything to solve the situation to contradict the weight of the evidence; and, the panel noted that he mixed up several dates.
[14]
With respect to the finding that the applicant said his father went missing in 1990, but the applicant believed he was living in Delhi in August of 1991, this alleged contradiction is not supported by the evidence. Also, the finding of contradictory statements concerning whether his sister had even lived in Delhi, is not supported by the evidence.
[15]
When I subtract from the tribunal's decision those portions for which there is no support together with the finding that the applicant did not have knowledge of the extremist nature of the Hindu Shiv Sena, I am left with the following findings in support of the tribunal's decision: a lack of knowledge generally of the Hindu Shiv Sena; the applicant's demeanour; a finding that the statement that the police were not doing anything contradicted the documentary evidence; the applicant mixed up some unspecified dates. The last two points are not strong ones. In asserting that the police were not doing anything, the applicant was giving his opinion and speaking from his particular perspective. The view he expressed from that perspective is not surprising. In giving evidence so long after the events, mixing up dates is not so unusual. Thus, the finding of lack of credibility based on Exhibits C-1 and C-3 is a significant part of the tribunal's decision.
[16]
The present case is not an easy one. It is clearly very much a borderline case. The tribunal's finding that the applicant did not have knowledge of the extremist and violent nature of the Hindu Shiv Sena was a central finding in its decision. Exhibit C-1 was an important factor in that determination. I find I cannot conclude that the breach of natural justice which occurred was minor in extent and could not appreciably effect the final decision. The breach was not cured by subsequent actions, as appears to have occurred in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case. I find I share Mr. Justice Gibson's views, expressed in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , that is to determine whether the decision would have been the same in the present case had the breach of natural justice not occurred requires me to speculate. It would require me to sift and weigh the evidence on the basis of the transcript and documentary evidence in short, to take on the role of the tribunal.
[17]
The tribunal's decision will therefore be quashed and applicant's claim referred back to a differently constituted panel of the CRDD for rehearing.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/dlr
[End of document]