Introduction:
[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board, Convention Refugee Determination Division (hereinafter the "Board"). In a decision dated March 7, 1996, the Board found that the applicant, a native of China, was not a Convention refugee. The Board determined that the applicant's fear of persecution in China on the basis of political opinion and membership in a particular social group (pro-democracy activists in China) was not well-founded on both objective and subjective grounds. "Significant aspects of the applicant's testimony were found to be lacking in trustworthiness" (page 4 Board Reasons, page 10 applicant's record).
Facts:
[2]
In the spring of 1989, the applicant was a college lecturer in electronics involved in China's pro-democracy movement. In the wake of the government crackdown on protests in June 1989, most notoriously at Tiananmen Square, the applicant was demoted and worked in a college-run factory. The Board accepted as credible the applicant's evidence concerning his involvement in dissident activity before the Tiananmen Square massacre. The Board held, however, that the authorities' treatment of the applicant, "while unfortunate", did not amount to past persecution. The Board cited documentary evidence that indicated a "lower incidence of (political persecution) in Guangdong Province, where the claimant was involved in pro-democracy activities" (page 9 Board Reasons, page 15 applicant's record).
[3]
However, the Board did not accept as credible the applicant's further evidence that he also feared persecution because of his activities in a teaching network subsequent to the Tiananmen Square protests. The applicant claimed that he had co-founded in the Spring of 1990 with three other individuals a "Part-time Teachers Association" (hereinafter the "Association"). The Association was an informal study group or teaching network that held lectures in public venues like libraries and university halls and subtly tried to disseminate pro-democracy views. The applicant came to Canada to study in September 1991. He was later advised in letters from friends that the Association had been banned and two of its co-founders detained. The Board did not believe the evidence offered to buttress the applicant’s claim that members of the Association had been persecuted, a fate that he feared sharing upon his return. The Board highlighted implausibilities in the letters received from other members of the Association and held the very existence of the Association unlikely in China's repressive political climate.
[4]
In addition, the Board characterized as minimal, insignificant and belated the applicant's involvement in Canadian protests aimed at the Chinese government. There was therefore no persecutory interest based on the applicant's activities in Canada or evidence that the applicant is a refugee sur place.
[5]
The Board's decision of March 7, 1996 marked the applicant's second appearance before the Convention Refugee Determination Division. The applicant’s claim was initially heard and rejected after a hearing on November 10, 1993. The first Board largely based its decision dated January 20, 1994 on documentary evidence prepared by John Kamm in May 1991 called "Human Rights in the Guangdong Province: A Preliminary Report" (hereinafter the “Kamm Report”). The Kamm Report describes government efforts in China to crack down on dissent in the wake of the June 4, 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre. However, the Board relied on the Kamm Report in its reasons after specifically telling the applicant during the hearing that it would not do so. Because of this procedural breach, the respondent consented to the application for leave to appeal the Board's first decision. On November 30, 1994, Justice Reed in Court File No. IMM-615-94 granted a consent judicial review judgment, set aside the Board's decision and referred the matter back for a new hearing (page 40, Tribunal Record).
Grounds Of Review:
1. Did the Board violate
procedural fairness in failing
to call a witness?
[6]
The applicant argues that the Board violated procedural fairness because it reneged on an undertaking made during the hearing to accept as sufficient the applicant's own evidence concerning his involvement in Canadian protests against China. The Board appeared to have some misgivings about a letter written on the applicant's behalf (page 29, Board Record). The letter is from the Chairman of the Alliance for a Democratic China (hereinafter the “ADC”) and reads,
"To whom it may concern:
Mr. Henry Cai, a teacher in Guangdong Grain College. During that time, he participated in the subterranean activity of dissenting view (sic) to Chinese government. After he arrived in Canada, his two friends were arrested in Guangzhou because they supported (sic) of democratic activity. And he has already been a active member of our organization. Any enquiries regarding him will by answered by, Yours faithfully, Shao Fu Liu, Alliance For a Democratic China, The Branch of Toronto. Chairman."
[7]
The Presiding member apparently had some questions because the letter written on the applicant's behalf was undated and did not appear on ADC letterhead. Mr. Sotto, the Presiding member, therefore wondered aloud during the hearing about the possibility of calling the Chairman of the ADC as a witness. He stated just before a break in the proceedings, "it just strikes me that it is odd and I'm not making a negative inference counsel or Mr. Henderson. But I ... it's my observation that it is ... how can we ... what is there to do ... Do you mind if we contact this gentleman indicated in the letter?" (page 44 transcript, page 464 Board's Record).
[8]
However, after the break, there is nothing further in the transcript of the hearing on the topic of calling the Chairman as an additional witness. The issue is entirely dropped by the Board and the parties themselves. The applicant is therefore, I say with respect, stretching the facts when he states in his written submissions to the court that the Board
agreed
to "accept the applicant's testimony on this subject" (paragraph 30, page 383, applicant's record) and made an "undertaking" (paragraph 46, page 387 applicant's record). The record is silent on express agreements. According to the applicant’s counsel, at the time, he discussed with the Refugee Hearing Officer during the break how to coordinate the Chairman's prospective appearance. In his affidavit, the applicant states that when his counsel put to the Board some proposals for calling the Chairman of the ADC, counsel asked the Board whether calling the Chairman was really necessary (paragraphs 33-34, pages 28-29 applicant's record). Board Member Sotto replied that the matter was in counsel's hands because "it is always up to counsel to decide whatever evidence he wishes to lead". Now the applicant rather weakly argues in his written submissions that after the break in the hearing, the Board "seemed to change its mind" and deem an additional witness unnecessary because it would accept the applicant's own evidence on this issue as sufficient. Contrary to the applicant’s submission, I am satisfied that the Board’s actions do not represent a violation of procedural fairness. The Board gave an "undertaking" during the hearing to totally accept the applicant's testimony on his involvement in the Canadian protest movement. This the Board did. There was no deal or trade-off to accept the applicant's evidence in return for dispensing with the need to call the Chairman. Indeed, in his closing arguments, the Refugee Hearing Officer invited the Board to reconsider the weight of the undated and vague letter from the Chairman (page 55 transcript, page 475 Board Record).
[9]
The case at bar can be distinguished from
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). In
Velauther
, the Federal Court of Appeal held that there had been a violation of natural justice because the claimant was not allowed to make full answer and defence to the case against him. The Board specifically invited the appellant's counsel and the refugee hearing officer to make written submissions on the sole issue of whether the persecution feared by the appellant fell within the Convention definition. Justice Mahoney wrote at page 240 in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , "the proposal was accepted and a timetable agreed to". In its reasons, however, the Board in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> denied the claim because it doubted the appellant's credibility. In the current proceedings, the idea of calling the Chairman of the ADC was stillborn. No formal proposals were made or timetables agreed to. There was in fact no express refusal to hear a witness whose testimony might help corroborate a key element of an applicant's testimony:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a Board flirted with the idea of hearing another witness that the claimant himself
proposed to call
to verify his testimony regarding his subjective fear of persecution as an Alevi Kurd. However, the Board decided that an additional witness was in fact not necessary despite the objections
on the record
of the claimant’s counsel. Justice MacKay held that even if there had been a breach of procedural fairness, judicial intervention was not warranted because the objective evidence considered by the Board was at least as significant in its decision as its conclusions about implausibilities in the claimant's testimony regarding his subjective fear. In the case at bar, the Board has been far more noncommittal than the Board in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . I have nothing before me from the Board or the applicant's counsel, only the vague suppositions from the applicant's counsel after the fact that the Board "seemed to change its mind". I am satisfied that there was no violation of procedural fairness on this issue.
[10]
Aside from the issue of procedural fairness in calling the witness, the evidence of present persecutory interest because of the applicant's activities in Canada is important for the substance of the applicant's claim for refugee status. The Board did not deny that the applicant had been involved in Canadian protests but characterized his participation as "sporadic, inconsistent and relatively insignificant" (page 10 Board Reasons, page 16 applicant's record) on the basis of the applicant’s own testimony. The applicant did not attend the Canadian commemoration service for the victims of Tiananmen Square in 1992. The next year, the applicant was in attendance at the service held at Toronto City Hall. However, he did not attend protests the same day outside the Chinese Consulate because he "had more important matters to attend to" (page 11 Board Reasons, page 17 applicant's record). The Board was free to air its scepticism about the timing of the applicant's attendance at these memorial services. The applicant's pro-democracy activities in Canada seemed to step up in 1994 and 1995 after the applicant's first refugee hearing in November 1993. By the same token, however, the Board had already accepted as credible the applicant's evidence that he had been involved in the pro-democracy movement in China in 1989. The applicant was therefore not an opportunistic latecomer to protests against the actions of the Chinese government.
[11]
The Board appears to have skipped lightly over the issue of how the applicant's activities in Canada might have a negative impact on his return to China. If the applicant was filmed or photographed as a protestor in front of the Consulate, the applicant argues that he would be in grave jeopardy upon his return to China, even more danger than the other members of the Association. The Board held, however, that because of the nature of the applicant's involvement, there "is not more than a mere possibility that he would be persecuted if he were to return to China" (page 10 Board Reasons, page 16 applicant's record). The Board did not cite any documentary evidence to support its characterization of the mere possibility. The applicant has aptly pointed out that there is some documentary evidence in the Board Record that is not so sanguine about the "mere possibilities" awaiting returned refugees to China. After all, what a Board deems a "mere possibility" might be a very real threat from the perspective of a repressive Government. The Board is supposed to keep in mind the oppressive government's viewpoint, however repugnant, in its analysis of whether the applicant's objective fear of persecution is well-founded:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A). In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice Heald quoted at page 239 the Federal Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.):
"I have no difficulty in concluding that the Board clearly erred in law in its determination of the appellant's claim to fear of persecution on the basis of political opinion. The above reasons make it apparent that this Board fell into the same kind of error as that which occurred in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case. In dealing with the proper test for evaluating 'political activities', Mr. Justice Kelly said, '
... the crucial test in this regard should not be whether the Board considers that the appellant engaged in political activities, but whether the ruling government of the country from which he claims to be a refugee considers his conduct to have been styled as political activity
'." (my emphasis)
[12]
The Board in the case at bar merely referred to documentary evidence concerning the fate of prominent dissenters but there is no inkling that the Board turned its mind to the crucial question of the fate of returned refugee claimants. There was not a wealth of documentary evidence on the fate of returned refugees to China, mainly because such evidence is suppressed by Chinese authorities. However, the evidence that does exist refutes the Board's finding (pages 92, 94, 95, 112, applicant's record). I agree with the applicant that the Board failed to consider how the
combination
of the applicant's known activism during the full flowering of protests in the Tiananmen Square era and his activism in Canada to mark the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre might put him at the risk or persecution:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). The Board erred when it treated each element of the applicant's claim in isolation to consider the issue of whether the applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution. This of course, puts aside for the moment, the issue of the applicant's separate involvement in the Association, a claim the Board wholly repudiated as fictional.
2. Did the Board commit
reviewable errors of law in
drawing negative inferences?
[13]
The applicant submits that the Board committed numerous errors of law. The Board was unreasonable in making negative inferences of credibility based on the applicant's failure to keep certain letters and ostensible inconsistencies in the letters themselves. The Board was also in error when it cited the applicant's delay in making a claim for refugee status and made reference to the Kamm Report.
Involvement in the Association
[14]
The respondent has cited numerous excerpts from the transcript of the Board hearing which reveal the applicant's shifting testimony on the nature of the Association and its relation with the government. The Association was registered with the government and had to obtain the permission of the various officials in charge of the meeting venues. The applicant was one of four registered co-founders and organizers. The other 20 teachers participating in the classes were not registered (page 37 transcript, page 457 Board Record). The applicant was questioned on how the Association could proceed given the potential for government spies, a real possibility in the wake of the government crackdown on dissent and the Association's open attendance invitation. The Board found it implausible that the Association would be so finely attuned to sudden shifts in government tolerance for certain topics if its purpose was to subtly introduce democratic concepts into the curriculum and anyone could attend. The Board also held that it did not believe the applicant when he stated that he spoke out on numerous occasions but was never detained for his efforts on behalf of the Association or even checked by the authorities (page 8 Board Reasons, page 14 applicant's record). The Board therefore concluded that the Association was a fictional creation. More importantly, the Board stated that this "finding goes to the heart of this claim" (page 8 Board Reasons, page 14 applicant's record). I believe that the Board erred in characterizing the applicant's involvement in the Association as it did.
[15]
I am satisfied that the Board's finding on the applicant's involvement in the Association is suspect. To reach its conclusion that the Association was fiction, part of an elaborate ruse devised by the applicant to bolster his claim for refugee status, the Board had to first discount letters in an unreasonable and perverse manner and selectively rely on an impugned piece of documentary evidence.
(i) Letters from fellow members of the Association
[16]
The Board found it implausible and most "unusual" that the applicant would keep correspondence documenting his pro-democracy activities despite the dangers to himself and yet would lose a key piece of evidence like the letter dated June 1992 from his fellow founding member of the Association. The author of this letter, a fellow co-founder of the Association had fled to Thailand and was the first to inform the applicant that the Association had been banned and the two other co-founders detained. The co-founders had also participated in the pro-democracy movement in 1989. The Board held that if the applicant had truly wanted to show people the dismal state of human rights in China, he would have kept the letter. The Board therefore concluded that the letter had never existed while the other letters were part of an elaborate scheme, "contrived ... and solicited purposely to bolster the claimant's claim to Convention refugee status" (page 7 Board Reasons, page 13, applicant's record). The letters are important because the applicant believes that he would be detained upon his return to China based on the fate befalling his fellow Association members. Besides the loss of the first letter, the Board found inconsistencies in the salutations and contents of the remaining letters. One letter addressed the applicant as "Mr. Cai". The applicant testified that this first greeting could also be translated as "Brother Cai". The next letter from the same author greeted the applicant less formally as "My Buddy or Brother Ye". The letters also reveal that some members of the Association were not aware that a co-founder of the Association, Mr. Peng, had fled to Thailand. The author of one letter speculated about Mr. Peng's fate because he was "missing".
[17]
I believe the Board to be unreasonable in holding against the applicant the fact that he did not keep every letter that was sent to him! The fact that the applicant kept radio broadcasts and leaflets from the Tiananmen Square period as a record for posterity and did not safeguard a personal letter is not a sound basis for rejecting the applicant's credibility. The applicant's credibility should also not depend on certain minor inconsistencies in the greetings used by the authors of the letters. Given that there is some dispute over the proper translation of the greetings, it does not seem wise to dwell on ostensible differences or what the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), called at page 312 "reaching for inconsistencies in claimants' evidence to support findings of lack of credibility". This is especially true when evidence is given through interpreters. Part of the letters were originally written in a Cantonese dialect but the translator at the hearing was working to translate the applicant's oral testimony from Mandarin into English. The second letter also included more personal details and confidences so it is not inconceivable that the author would address the applicant in less formal terms in the second letter. The applicant also submitted a very critical letter from his sister who pleaded with him to refrain from future protests. This letter was not specifically addressed by the Board although it held that minor differences in salutations carried great weight. It is also often true that within a set of friends, some are not aware of the exact details of every individual's particular fate. For instance, an individual might ask about Mr. Peng, the co-founder who fled to Thailand, without knowing Mr. Peng's whereabouts because he is a closer friend of the applicant and not Mr. Peng himself.
(ii) The Kamm Report
[18]
Did the Board also err in basing its finding almost exclusively on the Kamm Report (pages 352-373, applicant's record) a Report the applicant claims is partisan and discredited? The applicant argues that the motives behind the Kamm Report, written in May 1991, are suspect. Mr. Kamm was a business lobbyist attempting to persuade the American government to give China "most favoured nation" status for trade. Mr. Kamm outlined government attitudes towards dissidents in the applicant's home province of Guangdong (Canton), the free economic zone, as less severe and more lenient. The applicant's counsel had objected to the entry of the Kamm Report in a letter to the Board prior to the hearing (page 41, applicant's record) for numerous reasons, including Mr. Kamm's lack of credentials as an ostensible expert and his reliance on government sources and statistics. After the hearing, the applicant's counsel presented written submissions to the Board on country conditions, particularly in Guangdong, that contradicted the findings of the Kamm Report. At the beginning of the hearing, the Presiding Member also acknowledged receipt of "a huge volume of articles on China. Particularly human rights violations in Guangdong" (page 3 transcript, page 423 Board Record). However, only the Kamm Report's conclusions on Guangdong made it into the Board's reasons. The Board spoke of "documentary accounts" (note the plural - page 10 Board Reasons, page 16 applicant's record) to support its finding, but there is in effect only a single documentary record, the Kamm Report, referred to by the Board. The Board does not even allude to the contrary documentary evidence on the situation in Guangdong. This other evidence reveals that the human rights picture in Guangdong is no less bleak than in the rest of China (pages 154, 157, 168, 175 applicant's record). The Kamm Report provided the basis for the Board's conclusion that the applicant's fear of persecution because of his pro-democracy activities in 1989 was not well-founded. Even if the Kamm Report is an entirely reliable source and there is less repression in Guangdong than in the rest of China, the applicant only has to demonstrate a reasonable chance or more than a mere possibility of persecution:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A).
[19]
Ironically, the Board also invoked the Kamm Report for a different purpose in relation to the applicant's fear of persecution based on his involvement in the Association. The Board cited the Kamm Report to refute the applicant's claim that the Association even existed in the Spring of 1990 because according to the Kamm Report, "the authorities' crackdown of pro-democracy activities had not dissipated" (page 8 Board Reasons, page 14 applicant's record). So what does the Kamm Report stand for in the Board's rationale? The applicant's fear of persecution based on his actions in 1989 is not well-founded because according to the Kamm Report, activists in Guangdong enjoyed better treatment. And yet, at the same time, the Board also holds that the applicant's fear of persecution based on his involvement in the Association in 1990-1991 is not well-founded because according to the Kamm Report, the Association could not have existed in Guangdong at that time! However, the respondent argues that the dual purposes of the Kamm Report is a strength and not a failing. The applicant's own testimony in one sense corroborates the Kamm Report because in spite of his activities in 1989, he was never questioned or arrested by the Public Security Bureau in Guangdong but suffered only a demotion.
[20]
The court is generally reluctant to interfere in the Board's consideration of the documentary evidence, but judicial review is warranted if it is clear that the Board failed to address, weigh and consider contrary evidence:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Board acknowledged having received the applicant's documentary evidence that his fear of persecution was well-founded. However, the Board did not indicate in its reasons the impact, if any, that such evidence had upon the applicant's claim. In the case at bar, the Board has not even made the "bare acknowledgement" cited by the Federal Court of Appeal at page 3 in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In line with my decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the Board should have recognized that not all documentary evidence is equally reliable. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , I wrote at page 72, "The Board itself admits that there is a history of both discrimination and persecution in the Ukraine directed at Jews but believes that because the official policy of the country is alleged to be non-racist, the applicants (Jews) have nothing to fear for the future.
How naive
" (my emphasis). It is, perhaps, equally naive for the Board in the case at bar not to consider and weigh the preface of Mr. Kamm's report in which he describes his lobbying efforts and "testifying in favour of retaining most favoured nation status ...". I believe the Board committed a reviewable error in failing to pay due heed to the documentary evidence contradicting the Kamm Report.
Delay in Making a Refugee Claim
[21]
The Board also had doubts about the applicant's credibility because the applicant only made his claim for refugee status in November 1992 once his student visa had expired in September 1992. The respondent has drawn the court's attention to relevant portions of the hearing transcript on this subject (paragraph 9, pages 2-3, respondent's further memorandum). The applicant testified that he did not immediately seek refugee status because he wanted to maintain his student status, was not familiar with the refugee process and was worried about his future career prospects (page 7 Board Reasons, page 13 applicant's record). From reading this transcript, it is clear that the Board in this instance acted reasonably when it made a negative inference of credibility because the applicant had delayed his claim. In the Board's mind, the delay and the applicant's shaky explanation "casts a dubious shadow on the well-foundedness of his fear of persecution". (page 7 Board Reasons, page 13 applicant's record). It is true that the Board could have reached a less negative inference from the delay. The applicant left behind in his residence in China some personal possessions, including poems that expressed his yearning for democracy in subtle allegories. The applicant's residence was raided by the authorities and the poems, labelled anti-revolutionary, were seized. This could indicate that the applicant was serious about his original intention of returning to China after the conclusion of his studies. As well, when the applicant left, the Association had not yet been banned. I am satisfied the Board did not act
unreasonably
in making its negative inference regarding the delay despite the possibility that it might have arrived at a different interpretation.
Conclusion:
[22]
In sum, I am satisfied that the Board did not breach procedural fairness. However, judicial review is warranted because of the Board's numerous and significant errors in law. As for the Board's findings regarding the applicant's doubtful credibility on the basis of the delay in making a refugee claim, its conclusions are reasonable, but this is only one factor of many.
[23]
The judicial review is allowed and this matter is returned for a new hearing before a newly constituted Board in accordance with these reasons.
[24]
Counsel have informed me that they have no question to be certified.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/gs
[End of document]