[1]
Pinard, J.
: This is an appeal pursuant to s. 56 [see footnote 1] of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13 (the "
Act
"), from the decision dated October 30, 1992 by the Chairman of the Trademarks Opposition Board (the "Registrar") maintaining the opposition by the respondent to the appellant's application for the registration of the trademark VICTOR HUGO & Design, a representation of which appears below:
[See printed version]
Background
[2]
On June 29, 1987, the appellant filed an application to register its trademark VICTOR HUGO & Design in respect of men's suits, jackets, vests, coats and pants constructed and unconstructed. This application was based on intended use of the mark in Canada and was accorded serial no. 586,911. The application was given preliminary approval by the Registrar and was published in the February 24, 1988 issue of the
Trade Marks Journal
.
[3]
The respondent opposed the application on March 21, 1988 on the grounds that:
(a) the trademark was not registrable in that it was confusing with trademark registration no. 253,272 for HUGO BOSS & Design owned by the respondent;
(b) the appellant was not the person entitled to registration because as of the filing date of its application the trademark was confusing with the trademark HUGO BOSS previously used in Canada by the respondent in association with "men's clothing, including pants, jackets, suits, vests and coats"; and
(c) the trademark VICTOR HUGO & Design was not distinctive of the wares of the appellant because it did not actually distinguish, nor was it adapted to distinguish, the appellant's wares from those of the respondent.
[4]
Before the Registrar, the respondent's evidence consisted of the affidavit of Mr. Konrad Jud, a member of the Board of Directors of the respondent, as well as the affidavits of Messrs. John Ribeiro and Ian Luis Mendes. Cross-examinations were conducted in respect of the affidavits of Messrs. Ribeiro and Mendes and the transcripts produced were filed before the Registrar. The appellant's evidence consisted of two affidavits of Mr. Marvin Tkatch, the President of the appellant, as well as the affidavit of Mr. Jack Korman.
[5]
In addition, and in support of the present appeal, the appellant filed the affidavits of Eli Elfassy, Gilles Calestagne, Karl Tondl, Lou Longo, Emile Reboh, Laurent Gervais, Jack Korman and George Papantonis.
[6]
On the basis of the evidence before him, the Registrar considered the respondent's ground of opposition that the appellant was not the person entitled to registration pursuant to s. 16(3) [see footnote 2] of the
Act
, which was decided on the issue of confusion between the trademarks VICTOR HUGO & Design and HUGO BOSS. Because this ground of prior entitlement was successful, the Registrar did not consider the remaining grounds of opposition.
The Issues
[7]
It is the appellant's first contention that the Registrar erred in law in the test to be applied and the circumstances to be considered when deciding whether there existed any likelihood of confusion between the appellant's proposed trademark VICTOR HUGO & Design and the mark raised by the respondent, namely HUGO BOSS. The appellant's second contention is that based on the additional evidence filed in support of this appeal, when considered in light of the evidence which was before the Registrar, there is no likelihood that confusion would occur in the marketplace as a result of the concurrent use of the trademarks VICTOR HUGO & Design and HUGO BOSS in respect of men's wearing apparel.
Analysis
A)
First Issue
[8]
It is undisputed that the ground of prior entitlement based on s. 16(3) of the
Act
needed to be decided on the issue of confusion between the trademarks VICTOR HUGO & Design and HUGO BOSS. The Registrar began his analysis of the ground in question by stating the following well-established [see footnote 3] and relevant principles:
"... In accordance with the clear wording of section 16(3) of the
Act
, the material time for considering the circumstances respecting this issue is as of the applicant's filing date. Furthermore, the onus or legal burden is on the applicant to establish that there would be no reasonable likelihood of confusion between the trademarks at issue. Finally, in applying the test for confusion set forth in section 6(2) of the
Trade-marks Act
, consideration is to be given to all of the surrounding circumstances including those specifically set forth in section 6(5) [see footnote 4] of the
Act
."
[9]
In fact, the Registrar assessed the likelihood of confusion based on all the surrounding circumstances including those specifically set forth in s. 6(5) of the
Act
.
[10]
With respect to the surrounding circumstances specified in s. 6(5)(a) of the
Act
, the Registrar stated that both the appellant's mark VICTOR HUGO & Design and the respondent's mark HUGO BOSS are inherently weak since both marks would be perceived by the average Canadian consumer as being the name of a person. He also held that there had been fairly extensive use of the trademark HUGO BOSS in Canada in association with men's clothing and that the trademark HUGO BOSS had become known to some extent in Canada as of the material date (the appellant's application date). In contrast, the appellant's trademark had not become known at all in Canada as of the filing date given that it did not commence using its trademark until after filing its proposed use application.
[11]
With respect to the circumstances in ss. 6(5)(b), (c) and (d), the Registrar concluded that the length of time the trademarks had been in use in Canada clearly favours the respondent, who had used its mark in Canada since at least as early as 1975. The Registrar held that the wares of the parties are the same and the channels of trade associated with their wares would overlap. He noted that their wares have been sold through the same men's retail clothing stores in Canada.
[12]
With respect to the degree of resemblance between the marks at issue in appearance, sound and ideas suggested by them, as set out in s. 6(5)(e) of the
Act
, the Registrar noted that both marks suggest the idea of the name of a person including the word HUGO which is a given name in the respondent's trademark HUGO BOSS and a Christian name in the appellant's trademark VICTOR HUGO & Design. The Registrar concluded that the appellant's trademark is dominated visually by the word HUGO. Also, the element BOSS in the respondent's trademark would be perceived visually by the average consumer as being the dominant element of the respondent's trademark given that the trademark HUGO BOSS is often used in conjunction with and subsidiary to the mark BOSS. As a result, the Registrar found there is at least some similarity in appearance between the trademarks at issue when considered as a matter of immediate impression and imperfect recollection. He further found that both marks have little resemblance when sounded.
[13]
Finally, with respect to the issue of actual confusion as set out in the Mendes and Ribeiro affidavits, to which the second affidavit of Marvin Tkatch and the affidavits of Jack Korman were submitted to the Registrar in rebuttal, the Registrar found it impossible to determine whose evidence was more credible and indicated that he was far from certain whether the events as related by the respondent's affiants constituted evidence of actual confusion between the trademarks at issue. In fact, I am of the view that the issue of actual confusion could not be relevant to the Registrar's determination of the opposition ground of prior entitlement based on s. 16(3) of the
Act
because at the material date, which is the filing date of the appellant's application, there could not have been any instances of actual confusion involving the appellant's trademark at issue given it had not then yet been used. However, the following inferences drawn by the Registrar with respect to "the potential nature of the trade relating to the purchase of suits" could well constitute relevant surrounding circumstances within the meaning of s. 6(5) of the
Act
:
"The events relating to the instances of actual confusion do indicate the potential nature of the trade relating to the purchase of suits in that Mr. Korman would remove suits from the rack for his customers to try on, such that the customer may not necessarily notice or otherwise carefully check the labels on the suit prior to its purchase. That being the case, the applicant's wares might well be identified by a salesman as being HUGO suits, as opposed to VICTOR HUGO suits, which could result in a consumer being confused and particularly so when he is in a retail establishment which is also selling HUGO BOSS suits."
[14]
In the final analysis, the Registrar concluded that he was left in doubt as to "whether there might be a likelihood of confusion between the trademarks at issue". As a result, he concluded that the appellant had failed to meet the burden upon it of establishing that there would be no reasonable likelihood of confusion, and thus refused the appellant's application pursuant to s. 38(8) [see footnote 5] of the
Act
.
[15]
On an appeal from such a decision of the Registrar, the appellant has the burden of establishing that the Registrar made an error in law or exercised his discretion based on a misinterpretation of the evidence before him. The decision ought not to be easily interfered with by this court as it was recently restated by the Federal Court of Appeal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 67, at 68 (F.C.A.)), quoting the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 8-9:
"In my view the Registrar's decision on the question on whether or not a trademark is confusing should be given great weight and the conclusion of an official whose daily task involves the reaching of conclusions on this and kindred matters under the
Act
should not be set aside lightly ..."
[16]
Every court of review was also reminded by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 885, that decisions by administrative boards should not be analyzed or parsed microscopically as if one were dealing with a matter of statute interpretation. As stated by Joyal, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 486, at 493 (T.D.)  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"... such decisions must be read as a whole to give them an over-all meaning undeterred by a certain lack of precision in the language used, or by the occasional ambiguity of expression ..."
[17]
In the case at bar, I find that the Registrar applied the correct test to determine whether there was any likelihood of confusion between the trademarks at issue based on the evidence which was before him. The Registrar correctly applied the likelihood of confusion test set out in s. 6(5) of the
Act
, considered all the surrounding circumstances including those specified in each paragraph of the latter provision, and properly did so from the point of view of the average consumer as a matter of an immediate impression and imperfect recollection. [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  relevant surrounding circumstances which would have been disregarded by the Registrar in determining whether the trademarks at issue were confusing. The appellant also failed to convince me that the Registrar based his decision on an erroneous finding of fact that he made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before him. On the contrary, I am of the opinion that the findings reached by the Registrar in connection with the surrounding circumstances he needed to consider are totally supported by the evidence which was before him.
[18]
In that context, I am satisfied that the Registrar, on the basis of the evidence before him, could reasonably conclude that he was left in doubt as to whether there was a likelihood of confusion between the trademarks at issue. Consequently, the Registrar correctly concluded that, at the date of filing its application, the appellant had failed to meet the legal burden upon it of establishing that there existed no reasonable likelihood of confusion between the trademarks at issue. Having thus upheld the respondent's ground of opposition that the appellant was not the person entitled to registration pursuant to s. 16(3) of the
Act
, it was unnecessary for the Registrar to consider the remaining grounds of opposition.
B)
Second Issue
[19]
For the purposes of this appeal, the appellant has submitted further evidence which was not before the Registrar. However, in order to justify the intervention of this court and a departure from the Registrar's conclusions, the new evidence must be sufficiently material. [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of opposition that the appellant was not the person entitled to registration pursuant to s. 16(3 of the
Act
must be decided by this court on the issue of confusion between the trademarks VICTOR HUGO & Design and HUGO BOSS. The material time therefore for considering the circumstances respecting this issue is as of the appellant's application filing date and the onus is on the appellant to establish that there is no reasonable likelihood of confusion between the trademarks at issue.
[21]
In the context of this particular ground of opposition, the only new admissible evidence relevant to assessing the likelihood of confusion between the trademarks at issue, given my conclusions above on the first issue, is evidence of surrounding circumstances which existed at the material date, namely the filing date of the appellant's application for registration of the mark VICTOR HUGO & Design. Accordingly, no evidence concerning the use of the trademark VICTOR HUGO & Design can be considered given the appellant did not commence using such mark until after filing its application for proposed use.
[22]
Thus, the relevant new evidence is included in the affidavits of eight owners or officers of companies operating men's retail clothing stores located in Montreal, Toronto, North York, Edmonton, Terrebonne, Mississauga and Brampton, as well as across the Province of Quebec. All such owners or officers indicate in their affidavits that customers who want to purchase designer label garments refer to such garments either by the designer's full name or by his last name as follows: CHRISTIAN DIOR or DIOR, YVES ST. LAURENT or ST. LAURENT, GUY LAROCHE or LAROCHE, HUGO BOSS or BOSS, GIORGIO ARMANI or ARMANI, ALEXANDRE JULIEN or JULIEN, RALPH LAUREN or LAUREN. They further state that customers never refer to a designer label by utilizing the first name of the above designers. They also state that both their sales personnel and themselves always refer to designer label products by the full name of the designer, or the last name alone. Finally, several of them state that in advertising designer merchandise, the distributors emphasize either the full name of the designer or his last name and in support thereof, they files copies of several advertisements which appeared in trade magazines which circulated in Canada.
[23]
I do not find this submitted new evidence justifies any change in any of the Registrar's conclusions with respect to the individual surrounding circumstances relevant to assessing the likelihood of confusion between the trademarks at issue. This new evidence, in my view, does not much more than confirm what was found and considered by the Registrar himself, namely that the respondent "often employs its trademark HUGO BOSS in conjunction with and subsidiary to its trademark BOSS". Moreover, this new evidence does certainly not discredit the inference drawn by the Registrar that the appellant's wares "might well be identified by a salesman as being HUGO suits ...".
[24]
Upon considering the additional evidence filed before this court together with the evidence filed before the Registrar, and upon looking at all the relevant surrounding circumstances in the same way as did the Registrar, I am also left in doubt as to whether, at the date of filing of the appellant's application, its proposed trademark VICTOR HUGO & Design was confusing with the respondent's trademark HUGO BOSS. As a result, like the Registrar, I have concluded that the appellant has filed to meet the onus or burden upon it of establishing that there existed at the material date no likelihood of such confusion and that he then was the person entitled to registration pursuant to s. 16(3) of the
Act
, which is sufficient to dismiss the present appeal.
Conclusion
[25]
Consequently, the appeal will be dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/gms
Footnotes
1.	"56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months."
2.	"(3) Any applicant who has filed an application in accordance with section 30 for registration of a proposed trademark that is registrable is entitled, subject to sections 38 and 40, to secure its registration in respect of the wares or services specified in the application, unless at the date of filing of the application it was confusing with
(a) a trademark that had been previously used in Canada or make known in Canada by any other person;
(b) a trademark in respect of which an application for registration had been previously filed in Canada by any other person; or
(c) a trade-name that had been previously used in Canada by any other person."
3.	See subsection 6(5) of the
Act
with respect to the application of the relevant test for confusion; see subsection 16(3) of the
Act
with respect to the relevant date which governs the ground of prior entitlement at issue; and see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), with respect to the onus of establishing no likelihood of confusion.
4.	"(5) In determining whether trademarks or trade-names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade-names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade-names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade-names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
5.	"(8) After hearing the parties, if so required and considering the evidence, the Registrar shall refuse the application or reject the opposition and notify the parties of his decision and his reasons therefor."
[End of document]