 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Gyula Kanto, Gyulane Kanto and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 1049)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
de Montigny, J.
September 5, 2012.
Counsel:
Michael Korman, for the applicants;
Neal Samson, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Otis & Korman, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
de Montigny, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Refugee Protection Division (the "Board") dated August 29, 2011, whereby the Board rejected the Applicants' claim for protection, finding that the three Applicants were not Convention refugees or persons in need of protection pursuant to sections 96 and 97 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [IRPA].
[2]
For the reasons that follow, I have found that this application must be dismissed.
1. Facts
[3]
Gyula Kanto Sr., his wife, Gyulane Kanto, and their son, Gyula Kanto Jr. are Roma citizens of Hungary. They arrived in Canada on September 15, 2009, and, on the same day, sought refugee protection on the basis of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race and membership in a particular social group.
[4]
The Applicants argue that Romanies regularly face discrimination in Hungary. Since the 1980s, the Roma people claim to have faced persecution in many forms. Roma children are segregated in schools, have the letter "C" affixed to their name to indicate their ethnic origin, and are said to suffer humiliation at the hands of their classmates and teachers. The Applicants further argue that, by reason of their ethnicity, Roma people are unable to secure meaningful employment and are reduced to menial labour that non-Roma would not entertain. They submit that, in 2006, the Hungarian Guard, a Neo-Nazi organization with a violent anti-Roma agenda, along with other skinhead/fascist groups, increasingly targeted Romanies and that violence against the Roma people is largely ignored by police officers. It is against this backdrop that the Applicants allege to have experienced persecution.
[5]
The Applicants allege that they were the victims of a number of incidents because of their ethnic origin. The first of these incidents is said to have occurred on November 21, 2006, when Gyula Kanto Jr. was attacked on his way home from work by a group of five or six skinheads. He managed to escape and run home, while sustaining only minor injuries. He did not report that incident to the police.
[6]
On December 6, 2006, after leaving work, Gyula Kanto Jr. was surrounded and assaulted by the same group of individuals as the previous month. Fellow colleagues came to his rescue. Two blocks from the incident, he met a police officer who refused to come to his aid, claiming that the Applicant had probably triggered the altercation.
[7]
In 2006, Gyula Kanto Sr. participated in the Roma elections for a position in the minority government. This participation further publicized his ethnicity and role as a Roma activist. In the Applicants' apartment complex, their upstairs neighbour was a known racist and Guardist. The neighbour would shout racial slurs at them and send threatening letters. He even broke their windows. The Applicants complained to the police but they refused to intervene.
[8]
On July 8, 2009, Gyula Kanto Jr. was confronted by three Guardists. He warned them that he would complain to the authorities. However, one of the men pulled out a police badge and retorted that the Applicant could press charges but that his complaint would not be investigated. The Applicant was then hit in the face with an empty beer bottle. He required stitches after this incident.
[9]
On July 25, 2009, while travelling in the metro, Gyula Kanto Sr. was grabbed from behind, turned and punched in the face by a young man. No passengers came to his aid. He complained to a police officer who smiled and declared that no one is attacked without prior provocation. This is the most significant incident that influenced the Applicants' decision to flee Hungary. At some point in August 2009, Gyula Kanto Sr. encountered a demonstration while on his way home and a group of skinheads began to verbally assault him, telling him to disappear. The Applicant did not suffer any physical injuries as a result of the incident and did not report the incident to the police.
[10]
On August 26, 2009, Gyula Kanto Jr. was surrounded and verbally abused by a group of police officers at a bank machine. They spoke with approval about a recent violent attack on Romanies by a group of skinheads. The Applicant overheard one of the police officers say: "At least there is one less Roma in the country".
[11]
The hearing of this refugee protection application took place over the course of three sittings: March 25, May 27 and July 29, 2011. At the initial sitting, the Board member asked Gyula Kanto Sr. to confirm that the Personal Information Form (PIF) had been translated to him in its entirety. The Applicant explained that counsel had him sign the PIF before filling out the narrative portion of that form. In addition, his narrative was never read back to him in Hungarian. The Board member then left the room to allow the Applicant and his counsel the opportunity to sort out this issue among themselves. However, the Board's audio record system was inadvertently left running and the privileged conversation that ensued was recorded.
[12]
Upon resumption of the hearing, the Board was advised by counsel for the Applicants that he was withdrawing due to a breakdown in the solicitor-client relationship. At that time, the Board informed the Applicants that they had the burden of proving the allegations of incompetence made against their lawyer. The hearing was then adjourned.
[13]
On May 27, 2011, the Applicants' new counsel, Mr. Michael Korman, presented an urgent motion before the Board requesting: (a) the recusal of the Board member; (b) that the existing audio record be destroyed or redacted to remove the privileged conversation; and (c) a
de novo
hearing. Counsel made three essential arguments: (1) the Applicants' rights had been violated so as to compromise the integrity of the administration; (2) the Board member inappropriately shifted the burden to prove allegations against their former counsel onto the Applicants; and (3) there was a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the Board member, warranting his recusal. Counsel's motion was denied that same day.
[14]
The hearing resumed on July 29, 2011 and the Board rendered its decision rejecting the Applicants' claim for protection one month later.
2. The impugned decision
[15]
After considering the Applicants' testimony, the Board determined that they were not credible. In addition, the Board found that Hungary provides adequate state protection.
[16]
Regarding the issue of credibility, the Board viewed the Applicants' testimony as both contradictory and inconsistent.
[17]
Firstly, the Applicants could not provide medical reports to corroborate their allegations of physical injuries. Gyula Kanto Sr. did not seek medical attention for his injuries. Gyula Kanto Jr. initially stated that he had no medical report with respect to the incident of July 2009. When probed further, he admitted to possessing a copy of the report, which he had not submitted to the Board despite the fact that question 31 of the PIF specifically urges refugee claimants to attach copies of any medical documentation. As the Applicants had the benefit of being represented by two experienced counsel, the Board drew a negative inference from Gyula Kanto Jr.'s failure to submit the medical report and concluded that he had not been physically assaulted in July 2009.
[18]
Secondly, after Gyula Kanto Jr. testified regarding the November 2006 incidents, he was asked if there were any other incidents that he wished to describe, and he immediately began relating the events of August 2009. When further questioned regarding the November 2006 assault, he explained that the interaction with the police officer described as having occurred in July 2009 in the application materials had actually transpired in December 2006, following another incident. The Board member rejected the Applicant's assertion that the confusion in dates was an innocent mistake, finding that it was reasonable to expect that Gyula Kanto Jr. would describe the November and December 2006 ordeals consecutively since they were allegedly perpetrated by the same individuals. Consequently, the Board concluded that Gyula Kanto Jr. was not assaulted in either November or December of 2006.
[19]
As for state protection, the Board acknowledged that Hungary has a history of discrimination against Roma people. Hungary, however, is a democracy; therefore, there is a strong presumption in favour of adequate state protection. Furthermore, the Board found that the documentary evidence shows that Hungary has taken active measures to correct discriminatory practices against the Roma people. The Board then listed a series of legislative measures taken by the Hungarian government to protect the rights of ethnic minorities. By way of example: the government has mandated training in human rights, basic freedoms and tolerance for in-service and aspiring police officers; in 1993, the government enacted the
Rights of National and Ethnic Minorities
, a comprehensive and progressive tool for protecting minority rights; and, in June 2007, Parliament adopted a resolution,
The Decade of Roma Inclusion Programme Strategic Plan (2007-2015)
, presenting tasks to be accomplished in an effort to eradicate discrimination.
[20]
While the Board determined that the police had provided no assistance whatsoever in one instance of discrimination alleged by Gyula Kanto Sr., they found that the remaining incidents described by Gyula Kanto Sr. and Gyula Kanto Jr. either were not credible or had not been reported to the authorities, allegedly because the Applicants did not trust the police. Ultimately, the Board took the view that local authorities' failure to provide protection does not establish a broader pattern of the state's inability or refusal to provide protection. As a result, the Board found that the Applicants did not provide clear and convincing evidence that Hungary could not provide adequate state protection.
3. Issues
[21]
This application for judicial review raises the following issues:
a) Was there a breach of the principles of natural justice?
b) Did the Board err in failing to consider the issue of cumulative discrimination?
c) Did the Board err in concluding that there was adequate state protection?
4. Analysis
[22]
The parties are in agreement as to the applicable standard of review. As stated by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], a court can seek guidance from the existing case law for determining the appropriate degree of deference for a particular type of question. The first question is one of procedural fairness, which courts have held to be reviewable on a standard of correctness (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 43;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> FTR 120). Therefore, the Court will not show deference and may substitute its view for that of the Board.
[23]
The second and third questions raise issues pertaining to the assessment of risk of persecution and the availability of adequate state protection. These are issues of mixed fact and law that fall squarely within the expertise of the Board (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2012] FCJ no 169 at para 47;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 312 at para 11). As such, they are reviewable against a standard of reasonableness. This requires the Court to inquire into the existence of justification, transparency, and intelligibility in the decision-making process. The Court will only intervene if the decision falls outside of the range of possible, acceptable outcomes that are defensible in respect of the facts and law ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above at para 47).
a) Was there a breach of the principles of natural justice?
[24]
The Applicants allege the existence of a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the Board member which, in turn, breaches the principles of natural justice. This allegation is based on two arguments:
1) The Board member refused to strike or redact the original hearing record containing privileged communication with their former counsel. In spite of this refusal, the Board member declined to recuse himself and to order a
de novo
hearing; and
2) The Board member inappropriately shifted on the Applicants, the burden of proving the allegations of incompetence against their former counsel onto the Applicants.
[25]
The legal test for determining the existence of a reasonable apprehension of bias is well-established. In
Committee for Justice and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 394, 9 N.R. 115, Justice de Grandpré stated:
[T]he apprehension of bias must be a reasonable one, held by reasonable and right minded persons, applying themselves to the question and obtaining thereon the required information. In the words of the Court of Appeal, that test is "
what would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically - and having thought the matter through -conclude
.Would he think that it is more likely than not that [the decision-maker], whether consciously or unconsciously, would not decide fairly." [Emphasis added.]
[26]
It is against this standard that the Applicants' allegation of a reasonable apprehension of bias must be examined.
[27]
The first allegation that the Board member refused to strike or redact the original record is without merit. During the second sitting of the hearing, the Board member unequivocally stated that he did not object to destroying all record of the privileged conversation (Tribunal Record, page 958, line 40). In fact, the only indication in the transcripts of this conversation is the following annotation: "RECORD LEFT RUNNING AND ENTIRE CONVERSATION BETWEEN CLAIMANT AND COUNSEL WAS RECORDED" (Tribunal Record, page 951, line 10). No further detail of the conversation is transcribed.
[28]
Furthermore, I accept the Respondent's submission that the fact that the conversation was recorded does not in and of itself create unfairness. At the second sitting, the Board member stated that he had not listened to the recording and explained that transcripts are not prepared for the benefit of the members of the Board. Transcripts are produced only upon request of a party. Even when such transcripts are prepared, a copy is not provided to any member of the Board, including the presiding member (Tribunal Record, Transcripts at page 958, lines 15 to 25). It also appears from the parties' submissions that the conversation that ensued between the Applicants and their former counsel took place in Hungarian. There is no evidence that the Board member understands Hungarian or that there is reason to believe that he may have had access to an English translation of the privileged communication.
[29]
With these considerations in mind, the Applicants have not provided evidence of a breach of the solicitor-client privilege. An informed person would not conclude that the Board member had access to any privileged communication that would influence his ability to decide the case in a fair and impartial manner. Therefore, the Applicants have provided no basis for a finding of a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the Board member.
[30]
Additionally, it should be noted that the Applicants have not reiterated their allegation of incompetence against their former counsel before this Court. They have, however, submitted a second basis for their allegation of bias against the Board member, claiming that the burden of proving their former counsel's incompetence was mistakenly placed on their shoulder.
[31]
The Applicants' submission in this respect is unfounded.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] FCJ no 1864 at para 20, Justice Teitelbaum states the following with respect to the evidentiary burden of an allegation of incompetence:
The Applicants recognize that the test for incompetent counsel is very high. They submit that the party making the allegation of incompetence must show substantial prejudice to the individual, that prejudice must flow from the actions or inaction of the incompetent counsel, and that the prejudice must bring about a miscarriage of justice.
(Cited with approval in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] FCJ no 814 at para 52.)
[32]
Accordingly, during the first sitting, the Board member's statements to the Applicants were not inconsistent with the jurisprudence of this Court:
The claimant, the principal claimant had made an accusation of misconduct on the part of his previous lawyer and I believe sir that there is case law in the federal court that says, you know, when there is such an accusation, it is up to the claimant to demonstrate that he has made all the necessary steps in order to show that there has been that type of misconduct sir.
Tribunal Record, Vol 5, page 959, Lines 25 to 29
[33]
Clearly, the Applicants cannot expect the Board to prove this allegation of misconduct on their behalf nor to accept their submissions at face value. This would be contrary to the role of the Board. As Justice Herman of the Ontario Superior Court of Justice stated in
R v Ellis
, 2010 ONSC 2390 at para 63, 89 Imm LR (3d) 201:
As a member of the Refugee Protection Division, it was his job to "make well-reasoned decisions on behalf of Canadians on immigration and refugee matters efficiently, fairly and in accordance with the law." In particular, it was his job to conduct hearings and decide whether the individuals appearing before him were refugees or in need of protection.
[34]
To this end, it would be contrary to a member's role and responsibilities to blindly accept an applicant's allegations or to aid an applicant in proving an allegation. In fact, I am of the view that it is this precise situation that would create a reasonable apprehension of bias against Canadian interests and in favour of refugee claimants, thereby compromising the duty of impartiality that is expected and required of Board members.
[35]
In light of the above, the Board member made no error of law. An informed person would not perceive any apprehension of bias in the member's statements. In fairness to the Applicants, it must be added that counsel did not vigorously pursue this argument at the hearing.
b) Did the Board err in failing to consider the issue of cumulative discrimination?
[36]
The Board member has made a number of findings against the credibility of the Applicants. Counsel for the Applicants, however, has not contested these findings, and went so far as to acknowledge at the hearing that the Board made adverse credibility findings. Nevertheless, counsel alleged that the Board erred in law in its failure to consider whether the cumulative nature of their treatment in Hungary amounts to persecution.
[37]
Admittedly, at paragraph 46 of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Supreme Court addressed the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status under the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees
(Reedited, Geneva, January 1992) (the"UNCR Handbook"), stating as follows: "[T]he UNCR Handbook must be treated as a highly relevant authority in considering refugee admission practices. This, of course, applies not only to the Board but also to a reviewing court." Thus, the following paragraphs of the Handbook are particularly relevant:
(b) Persecution
...
52. Whether other prejudicial actions or threats would amount to persecution will depend on the circumstances of each case, including the subjective element to which reference has been made in the preceding paragraphs. The subjective character of fear of persecution requires an evaluation of the opinions and feelings of the person concerned. It is also in the light of such opinions and feelings that any actual or anticipated measures against him must necessarily be viewed. Due to variations in the psychological make-up of individuals and in the circumstances of each case, interpretations of what amounts to persecution are bound to vary.
53. In addition, an applicant may have been subjected to various measures not in themselves amounting to persecution (e.g. discrimination in different forms), in some cases combined with other adverse factors (e.g. general atmosphere of insecurity in the country of origin).
In such situations, the various elements involved may, if taken together, produce an effect on the mind of the applicant that can reasonably justify a claim to well-founded fear of persecution on "cumulative grounds".
Needless to say, it is not possible to lay down a general rule as to what cumulative reasons can give rise to a valid claim to refugee status. This will necessarily depend on all the circumstances, including the particular geographical, historical and ethnological context. [Emphasis added.]
(c) Discrimination
54. Differences in the treatment of various groups do indeed exist to a greater or lesser extent in many societies. Persons who receive less favourable treatment as a result of such differences are not necessarily victims of persecution. It is only in certain circumstances that discrimination will amount to persecution. This would be so if measures of discrimination lead to consequences of a substantially prejudicial nature for the person concerned, e.g. serious restrictions on his right to earn his livelihood, his right to practise his religion, or his access to normally available educational facilities.
55. Where measures of discrimination are, in themselves, not of a serious character, they may nevertheless give rise to a reasonable fear of persecution if they produce, in the mind of the person concerned, a feeling of apprehension and insecurity as regards his future existence. Whether or not such measures of discrimination in themselves amount to persecution must be determined in the light of all the circumstances.
A claim to fear of persecution will of course be stronger where a person has been the victim of a number of discriminatory measures of this type and where there is thus a cumulative element involved
. [Emphasis added.]
[38]
According to these provisions, members of the Immigration and Refugee Board must consider the cumulative instances of discrimination faced by refugee claimants to determine whether it amounts to the requisite level of persecution. However, the doctrine of cumulative persecution is premised on the notion that the Applicants have experienced hardship, albeit of a non-persecutory nature when considered in isolation. In the case at bar, the Board member concluded that the Applicants' testimony was contradictory and inconsistent, which undermined their credibility. This conclusion remains unchallenged. As a result, there is no basis for the Applicants' objective fear of persecution. The Applicants only presented evidence of a general nature in support of their allegations of a general climate of intolerance and discrimination against Romani individuals. This is not enough to conclude that the Applicants are Convention refugees or persons in need of protection.
c) Did the Board err in concluding that there was adequate state protection?
[39]
The Applicants submit that the Board erred in concluding that the government initiatives aimed at protecting Roma citizens were indicative of the effectiveness and adequacy of state protection. Counsel submitted that in so finding, the Board misconstrued the documentary evidence by relying on the "efforts" and "attempts" of the Hungarian government to enact laws and policies to protect its Roma citizens without considering the reality on the ground, or whether the laws and policies have been effectively implemented. To support that proposition, the Applicants rely on the decision of the Federal Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 132 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], where it was held that legislation and procedure may reflect the will of the state to protect its citizens but do not suffice to establish the reality of state protection unless they are given effect in practice. In essence, the Applicants claim that the Board should have considered both the willingness and capacity of the state to protect Romani people.
[40]
I have to agree with the Applicants on this point. In his reasons, the Board member extensively reviewed documentary evidence pertaining to the legislative measures and policies put in place by the Hungarian state to tackle discrimination and to improve the situation of the Roma people. While these initiatives are undoubtedly commendable, they fall short of the test required to prove the adequacy of state protection.
[41]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] FCJ no 1082 at para 15, this Court explained the standard for a finding of effective state protection:
The Applicant submits that the PRRA Officer has erred in viewing the legal test as one of "serious measures". The Federal Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) (QL), at paragraph 15, established, that for adequate state protection to exist,
a government must have both the will and the capacity to effectively implement its legislation and programs
:
Ability of a state must be seen to comprehend not only the existence of an effective legislative and procedural framework but the capacity and the will to effectively implement that framework. [Emphasis added]
[42]
Similarly in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 35, this Court pointed out:
[27] In order to determine whether a refugee protection claimant has discharged his burden of proof, the Board must undertake a proper analysis of the situation in the country and the particular reasons why the protection claimant submits that he is "unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail [himself] of the protection" of his country of nationality or habitual residence (paragraphs 96
(a)
and
(b
) and subparagraph 97(1)
(b)
(i) of the Act).
The Board must consider not only whether the state is actually capable of providing protection but also whether it is willing to act. In this regard, the legislation and procedures which the applicant may use to obtain state protection may reflect the will of the state. However, they do not suffice in themselves to establish the reality of protection unless they are given effect in practice
: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). [Emphasis added]
[43]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above at paragraph 63 Justice Shore addressed the same issue: "Proof of the state's willingness to improve and its progress should not be, for the decision-maker, a decisive indication that the potential measures amount to effective protection in the country under consideration."
[44]
In the present case, the documentary evidence shows that the Hungarian state is willing to protect Romani individuals. The Board member took great heed of that fact, but failed to consider the effectiveness of the state's measures or policies. The Board member should have assessed the ability of the state to protect Romani individuals and, in particular, whether the Hungarian authorities are willing and able to protect the victims of hateful crimes and prosecute their perpetrators.
[45]
That being said, this finding is not sufficient to warrant the intervention of this Court. Although the Applicants have demonstrated an error in the assessment of state protection, it is of no consequence because they have failed to establish that they are in need of that protection. The Board member has not found their story credible and, as a result, their fear of persecution is not subjectively grounded. As a result, this application for judicial review ought to be dismissed.
JUDGMENT
[46]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
this application for judicial review is dismissed.
.........................
Gyula Kanto,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  La Cour est saisie d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire visant la décision, en date du 29 août 2011, par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés (la Commission) a conclu que les trois demandeurs n'avaient pas qualité de réfugiés au sens de la Convention ni celle de personnes à protéger aux termes des articles 96 et 97 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 7 [LIPR].
[2]
Pour les motifs qui suivent, j'ai conclu que la présente demande doit être rejetée.
1. Faits
[3]
Gyula Kanto père, son épouse, Gyulane Kanto, et leur fils, Gyula Kanto fils, sont des citoyens roms de Hongrie. Ils sont arrivés au Canada le 15 septembre 2009 et, le même jour, ils ont présenté une demande d'asile dans laquelle ils alléguaient qu'ils craignaient avec raison d'être persécutés du fait de leur race et de leur appartenance à un groupe social.
[4]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que les Roms font régulièrement l'objet de discrimination en Hongrie. Depuis les années 1980, les Roms seraient exposés à la persécution sous plusieurs formes. Les enfants roms subissent la ségrégation dans les écoles, et la lettre « C » est apposée à leur nom pour indiquer leur origine ethnique et, selon ce que relatent les demandeurs, ils seraient humiliés par les autres élèves et les enseignants. Les demandeurs font de plus valoir qu'en raison de leur origine ethnique, les Roms sont incapables d'obtenir un emploi convenable et en sont réduits à occuper des emplois subalternes que les personnes non roms n'envisageraient même pas. Ils prétendent qu'en 2006, la Garde hongroise, organisation néo-nazie dotée d'un programme agressif anti-Roms, ainsi que d'autres groupes composés de skinheads ou de fascistes ont intensifié leurs attaques à l'endroit des Roms et que les policiers ignorent grandement la violence faite aux Roms. Voilà le contexte dans lequel les demandeurs allèguent avoir subi de la persécution.
[5]
Les demandeurs font valoir qu'ils ont été victimes de plusieurs incidents en raison de leur origine ethnique. Le premier de ces incidents se serait produit le 21 novembre 2006, lorsque Gyula Kanto fils a été attaqué par un groupe de cinq ou six skinheads en rentrant du travail. Il a réussi à s'échapper et à courir jusqu'à la maison, n'ayant subi que des blessures mineures. Il n'a pas signalé cet incident à la police.
[6]
Le 6 décembre 2006, après avoir quitté le travail, Gyula Kanto fils a été cerné et agressé par le même groupe de personnes que le mois précédent. Des collègues sont venus à sa rescousse. À deux pâtés de maisons de l'incident, il a rencontré un policier qui a refusé de lui venir en aide au motif que le demandeur avait vraisemblablement provoqué l'altercation.
[7]
En 2006, Gyula Kanto père a participé aux élections roms en vue d'obtenir un poste au sein du gouvernement minoritaire. Cette participation a fait connaître encore plus son origine ethnique et son rôle d'activiste rom. Dans l'immeuble d'habitation des demandeurs, leur voisin du dessus était un raciste notoire membre de la Garde hongroise. Ce voisin leur criait des insultes racistes et leur envoyait des lettres de menaces. Il a même cassé leurs fenêtres. Les demandeurs se sont plaints à la police, mais celle-ci a refusé d'intervenir.
[8]
Le 8 juillet 2009, Gyula Kanto fils s'est retrouvé devant trois membres de la Garde hongroise. Il les a prévenus qu'il se plaindrait aux autorités. Un des hommes a toutefois tiré un insigne de police et a rétorqué que le demandeur pouvait déposer des accusations, mais que sa plainte ne ferait pas l'objet d'une enquête. Le demandeur a alors été frappé au visage avec une bouteille de bière vide. Il a eu besoin de points de suture après cet incident.
[9]
Le 25 juillet 2009, alors qu'il voyageait dans le métro, un jeune homme a attrapé Gyula Kanto père par derrière, lui a fait faire demi-tour et lui a donné un coup de poing au visage. Aucun passager ne lui est venu en aide. Il s'est plaint à un policier qui a souri et déclaré que personne n'est attaqué sans provocation préalable. Il s'agit de l'incident déterminant qui a influencé la décision des demandeurs de fuir la Hongrie. À un certain moment en août 2009, Gyula Kanto père, alors qu'il rentrait chez lui, a croisé une manifestation et un groupe de skinheads a commencé à l'agresser verbalement, lui disant de disparaître. Le demandeur n'a subi aucune blessure physique par suite de cet incident, qu'il n'a pas signalé à la police.
[10]
Le 26 août 2009, un groupe de policiers a cerné et agressé verbalement Gyula Kanto fils à un guichet automatique bancaire. Les policiers ont parlé d'une récente attaque violente sur des Roms par un groupe de skinheads, faisant comprendre qu'ils approuvaient l'agression. Le demandeur a entendu un des policiers dire ce qui suit: [traduction] « Au moins, il y a un Rom de moins dans le pays. »
[11]
L'instruction de la demande d'asile a eu lieu en trois séances, soit le 25 mars, le 27 mai et le 29 juillet 2011. À la première séance, le commissaire a demandé à Gyula Kanto père de confirmer qu'on avait traduit pour lui l'intégralité du Formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP). Le demandeur a expliqué que le conseil lui avait fait signer le FRP avant de remplir la partie de l'exposé circonstancié de ce formulaire. En outre, son exposé circonstancié ne lui avait jamais été relu en hongrois. Le commissaire a alors quitté la pièce pour donner au demandeur et à son conseil l'occasion de démêler cette question. Cependant, le système d'enregistrement audio de la Commission a continué de fonctionner par inadvertance et la conversation confidentielle qui a suivi a été enregistrée.
[12]
À la reprise de l'audience, le conseil des demandeurs a avisé la Commission qu'il se retirait du dossier en raison d'une détérioration de la relation avocat-client. À ce moment-là, la Commission a informé les demandeurs qu'ils avaient le fardeau de prouver les allégations d'incompétence formulées à l'encontre de leur avocat. L'audience a alors été ajournée.
[13]
Le 27 mai 2011, le nouveau conseil des demandeurs, M. Michael Korman, a présenté une requête urgente devant la Commission dans laquelle il sollicitait ce qui suit: a) la récusation du commissaire; b) la destruction de l'enregistrement audio ou son caviardage relativement à la conversation assujettie au secret professionnel; c) une nouvelle audience. Le conseil a présenté trois arguments principaux: 1) les droits des demandeurs avaient été violés au point de compromettre l'intégrité de l'administration; 2) le commissaire avait déplacé de façon inappropriée le fardeau de la preuve en demandant aux demandeurs de prouver les allégations formulées à l'encontre de leur ancien conseil; 3) il existait une crainte raisonnable de partialité de la part du commissaire, ce qui justifiait sa récusation. La requête du conseil a été rejetée le même jour.
[14]
L'audience a repris le 29 juillet 2011 et, un mois plus tard, la Commission a rendu sa décision: elle a rejeté la demande d'asile des demandeurs.
2. La décision contestée
[15]
Après avoir examiné le témoignage des demandeurs, la Commission a conclu qu'ils n'étaient pas crédibles. De plus, la Commission a conclu que la protection de l'État en Hongrie était adéquate.
[16]
En ce qui concerne la question de la crédibilité, la Commission a estimé que le témoignage des demandeurs était à la fois contradictoire et incohérent.
[17]
Premièrement, les demandeurs ne pouvaient fournir de rapports médicaux pour corroborer leurs allégations quant aux blessures physiques. Gyula Kanto père n'a pas sollicité de soins pour ses blessures. Gyula Kanto fils a tout d'abord déclaré qu'il n'avait pas de rapport médical à l'égard de l'incident de juillet 2009. En réponse à d'autres questions qui lui ont été posées, il a ensuite avoué posséder une copie du rapport, qu'il n'avait pas présentée à la Commission malgré le fait que la question no 31 du FRP demande instamment aux demandeurs d'asile de joindre les copies de tout rapport médical. Comme les demandeurs avaient eu l'avantage d'être représentés par deux conseils chevronnés, la Commission a tiré une conclusion défavorable de l'omission de Gyula Kanto fils de présenter le rapport médical et a conclu qu'il n'avait pas été agressé physiquement en juillet 2009.
[18]
Deuxièmement, après le témoignage de Gyula Kanto fils concernant les incidents de novembre 2006, on lui a demandé s'il souhaitait décrire d'autres incidents, et il a immédiatement commencé à décrire les événements d'août 2009. En réponse à d'autres questions concernant l'agression de novembre 2006, Gyula Kanto fils a expliqué que l'interaction avec le policier, décrite comme s'étant produite en juillet 2009 dans les documents de la demande, avait réellement eu lieu en décembre 2006, à la suite d'un autre incident. Le commissaire a rejeté l'affirmation du demandeur selon laquelle la confusion de dates était une erreur de bonne foi, concluant qu'il était raisonnable de s'attendre à ce que Gyula Kanto fils décrive les épreuves de novembre et de décembre 2006 de façon consécutive puisqu'elles auraient mis en cause les mêmes personnes. Par conséquent, la Commission a conclu que Gyula Kanto fils n'avait été agressé ni en novembre ni en décembre 2006.
[19]
En ce qui concerne la protection de l'État, la Commission a reconnu que la Hongrie possédait des antécédents en matière de discrimination à l'égard des Roms. La Hongrie est cependant une démocratie et, par conséquent, il existe une forte présomption en faveur d'une protection adéquate de l'État. De plus, la Commission a conclu que, selon la preuve documentaire, la Hongrie a pris des mesures actives pour corriger les pratiques discriminatoires à l'encontre des Roms. La Commission a alors énuméré une série de mesures législatives prises par le gouvernement hongrois pour protéger les droits des minorités ethniques. Voici quelques exemples: le gouvernement a obligé les policiers en service et les candidats policiers à suivre des formations sur les droits de la personne, les libertés fondamentales et la tolérance; en 1993, le gouvernement a adopté un outil complet et progressif visant à protéger les droits des minorités appelé Droits des minorités nationales et ethniques; en juin 2007, le Parlement a adopté une résolution présentant les tâches à accomplir en vue d'éradiquer la discrimination, le Plan stratégique de la décennie du programme d'inclusion des Roms (2007-2015).
[20]
La Commission a conclu que la police n'avait fourni aucune aide lors d'un incident de discrimination relaté par Gyula Kanto père, mais elle a estimé que les autres incidents décrits par Gyula Kanto père et Gyula Kanto fils n'étaient pas crédibles ou n'avaient pas été signalés aux autorités, soi-disant parce que les demandeurs ne faisaient pas confiance à la police. Au bout du compte, la Commission a estimé que l'omission des autorités locales d'assurer une protection n'établit pas une tendance plus générale de l'incapacité ou du refus de l'État d'offrir une protection. En conséquence, la Commission a conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas fourni une preuve claire et convaincante que l'État de la Hongrie ne pouvait pas leur fournir une protection suffisante.
3. Les questions en litige
[21]
La présente demande de contrôle judiciaire soulève les questions suivantes:
a) Y a-t-il eu manquement aux principes de justice naturelle?
b) La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en ne tenant pas compte de la question de la discrimination cumulative?
c) La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que la protection offerte par l'État était adéquate?
4. Analyse
[22]
Les parties s'entendent sur la norme de contrôle applicable. Comme l'a déclaré la Cour suprême du Canada dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], les cours de justice peuvent se référer à la jurisprudence actuelle pour déterminer le degré de déférence approprié à l'égard d'un type particulier de question. La première question est une question d'équité procédurale qui, selon les tribunaux, doit être contrôlée selon la norme de la décision correcte (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , aux paragraphes 100 et 102;
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 43;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 120, au paragraphe 24). En conséquence, la Cour ne fera pas preuve de déférence à l'égard de cette question et peut substituer son opinion à celle de la Commission.
[23]
Les deuxième et troisième questions soulèvent des questions concernant l'évaluation du risque de persécution et l'existence d'une protection adéquate de l'État. Il s'agit de questions mixtes de fait et de droit qui relèvent clairement du champ d'expertise de la Commission (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2012] ACF no 169, au paragraphe 47;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 312, au paragraphe 11). À ce titre, elles sont susceptibles de contrôle selon la norme de la raisonnabilité. Ainsi, la Cour cherchera à savoir si la décision est justifiée et si le processus décisionnel est transparent et intelligible. La Cour n'interviendra que si la décision de la Commission n'appartient pas aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit (arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 47).
a) Y a-t-il eu manquement aux principes de justice naturelle?
[24]
Les demandeurs allèguent l'existence d'une crainte raisonnable de partialité de la part du commissaire qui, à son tour, porte atteinte aux principes de justice naturelle. Cette allégation est fondée sur deux arguments:
1) Le commissaire a refusé de supprimer ou de caviarder l'enregistrement audio original contenant l'entretien assujetti au secret professionnel des demandeurs avec leur ancien conseil. Malgré ce refus, le commissaire a refusé de se récuser et d'ordonner la tenue d'une nouvelle audience.
2) Le commissaire a déplacé de façon inappropriée sur les demandeurs le fardeau de prouver les allégations d'incompétence à l'encontre de leur ancien conseil.
[25]
Le critère juridique pour établir l'existence d'une crainte raisonnable de partialité est bien établi. Dans l'arrêt
Committee for Justice and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 9 NR 115, à la page 394, le juge de Grandpré a déclaré ce qui suit:
[L]a crainte de partialité doit être raisonnable et le fait d'une personne sensée et raisonnable qui se poserait elle-même la question et prendrait les renseignements nécessaires à ce sujet. Selon les termes de la Cour d'appel, ce critère consiste à se demander «
à quelle conclusion en arriverait une personne bien renseignée qui étudierait la question en profondeur, de façon réaliste et pratique
. Croirait-elle que, selon toute vraisemblance, [le décideur], consciemment ou non, ne rendra pas une décision juste? » [Non souligné dans l'original.]
[26]
C'est en fonction de cette norme que l'allégation de crainte raisonnable de partialité formulée par les demandeurs doit être examinée.
[27]
La première allégation selon laquelle le commissaire a refusé de supprimer ou de caviarder l'enregistrement original est sans fondement. Au cours de la deuxième séance de l'audience, le commissaire a déclaré sans équivoque qu'il ne s'opposait pas à la destruction de l'enregistrement complet de la conversation assujettie au secret professionnel (dossier du tribunal, page 958, ligne 40). En effet, la seule indication dans la transcription de cette conversation est la note suivante: [traduction] « enregistrement laissé en marche et la totalité de la conversation entre le demandeur d'asile et son conseil a été enregistrée »(dossier du tribunal, page 951, ligne 10). Aucun autre détail de la conversation n'est transcrit.
[28]
De plus, j'accepte l'observation du défendeur voulant que l'enregistrement de la conversation ne crée pas en soi de l'iniquité. À la deuxième séance, le commissaire a déclaré qu'il n'avait pas écouté l'enregistrement et a expliqué que les transcriptions n'étaient pas préparées au profit des commissaires. Les transcriptions sont produites à la demande d'une partie. Même lorsque de telles transcriptions sont préparées, aucune copie n'est remise aux commissaires, y compris le président de l'audience (dossier du tribunal, transcription à la page 958, lignes 15 à 25). Il ressort également des observations des parties que la conversation qui a eu lieu entre les demandeurs et leur ancien conseil s'est déroulée en hongrois. Rien dans la preuve n'indique que le commissaire comprend le hongrois ou qu'il existe des motifs de croire qu'il a pu avoir accès à une traduction anglaise de la conversation faisant l'objet du secret professionnel.
[29]
Compte tenu de ces considérations, les demandeurs n'ont pas fourni une preuve de la violation du privilège des communications entre avocat et clients. Une personne bien renseignée ne conclurait pas que le commissaire a eu accès à une communication visée par le secret professionnel qui influencerait sa capacité de trancher l'affaire d'une façon équitable et impartiale. Par conséquent, les demandeurs n'ont fourni aucun fondement susceptible d'étayer une conclusion de crainte raisonnable de partialité de la part du commissaire.
[30]
De plus, il convient de souligner que les demandeurs n'ont pas réitéré devant la Cour leur allégation d'incompétence à l'encontre de leur ancien conseil. Ils ont toutefois invoqué un deuxième fondement à l'appui de leur allégation de partialité à l'encontre du commissaire, à savoir que le fardeau de prouver l'incompétence de leur ancien conseil avait été erronément placé sur eux.
[31]
La prétention des demandeurs à cet égard est non fondée.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] ACF no 1864, au paragraphe 20, le juge Teitelbaum déclare ce qui suit à l'égard du fardeau de preuve relativement à une allégation d'incompétence:
Les demandeurs reconnaissent que le critère applicable à l'incompétence d'un conseil est très élevé. Ils soutiennent que la partie qui allègue l'incompétence de son conseil doit démontrer qu'elle a subi un préjudice important et que ce préjudice a été causé par les actes ou l'inaction du conseil incompétent et a abouti à une erreur judiciaire [...].
(Passage cité avec approbation dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] ACF no 814, au paragraphe 52)
[32]
En conséquence, les déclarations du commissaire faites aux demandeurs n'étaient pas incompatibles avec la jurisprudence de la Cour:
[traduction] Le demandeur d'asile, le demandeur d'asile principal avait accusé d'inconduite son ancien avocat et je crois, Monsieur, qu'il existe de la jurisprudence de la Cour fédérale qui dit, vous savez, qu'en présence d'une telle accusation, il incombe à celui qui allègue l'incompétence de démontrer qu'il avait pris toutes les mesures nécessaires pour démontrer l'existence de ce type d'inconduite.
Dossier du tribunal, vol 5, page 959, lignes 25 à 29
[33]
Les demandeurs ne peuvent certes pas s'attendre à ce que la Commission prouve cette allégation d'inconduite à leur place ni à ce que leurs prétentions soient acceptées sans réserve. Cela irait tout à fait à l'encontre du rôle de la Commission. Comme l'a déclaré le juge Herman de la Cour supérieure de justice de l'Ontario dans
R c Ellis
, 2010 ONSC 2390 au paragraphe 63, 89 Imm LR (3d) 201:
[traduction] En tant que commissaire de la Section de la protection des réfugiés, son travail consistait à« rendre, de manière efficace, équitable et conforme à la loi, des décisions éclairées sur des questions touchant l'immigration et le statut de réfugié pour le compte des Canadiens. » Plus particulièrement, son travail consistait à tenir des audiences et à décider si les personnes qui comparaissaient devant lui étaient des réfugiés ou des personnes à protéger.
[34]
À cette fin, il serait contraire au rôle et aux responsabilités d'un commissaire d'accepter aveuglément les allégations d'un demandeur ou d'aider un demandeur à prouver une allégation. En fait, je suis d'avis qu'il s'agit de la situation précise qui créerait une crainte raisonnable de partialité à l'encontre des intérêts du Canada et en faveur des demandeurs d'asile, compromettant ainsi le devoir de partialité attendu et exigé des commissaires.
[35]
Compte tenu de ce qui précède, le commissaire n'a commis aucune erreur de droit. Une personne bien renseignée ne percevrait dans les déclarations du commissaire aucune crainte de partialité. En toute équité pour les demandeurs, il faut ajouter que leur avocat n'a pas défendu cet argument avec vigueur à l'audience.
b) La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en ne tenant pas compte de la question de la discrimination cumulative?
[36]
Le commissaire a tiré plusieurs conclusions défavorables quant à la crédibilité des demandeurs. L'avocat des demandeurs n'a cependant pas contesté ces conclusions et est allé jusqu'à reconnaître que la Commission avait tiré des conclusions défavorables en matière de crédibilité. L'avocat a néanmoins soutenu que la Commission avait commis une erreur de droit en omettant d'examiner la question de savoir si la nature cumulative du traitement subi par les demandeurs en Hongrie équivalait à de la persécution.
[37]
Certes, au paragraphe 46 de l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la Cour suprême a mentionné le
Guide des procédures et critères à appliquer pour déterminer le statut de réfugié au regard de la Convention de 1951 et du protocole de 1967 relatifs au statut des réfugiés
du Haut Commissariat des Nations Unies pour les réfugiés (réédité, Genève, janvier 1992) (le Guide du HCNUR) et a déclaré ce qui suit: « [L] e Guide du HCNUR doit être considéré comme un ouvrage très pertinent dans l'examen des pratiques relatives à l'admission des réfugiés. Il va de soi que les observations qui précèdent valent non seulement pour la Commission mais également pour les cours chargées d'examiner le bien-fondé des décisions de celle-ci. »Ainsi, les paragraphes suivants du Guide sont particulièrement pertinents:
b) Persécutions
[...]
52. La question de savoir si d'autres actions préjudiciables ou menaces de telles actions constituent des persécutions dépendra des circonstances de chaque cas, compte tenu de l'élément subjectif dont il a été fait mention dans les paragraphes précédents. Le caractère subjectif de la crainte d'être persécuté implique une appréciation des opinions et des sentiments de l'intéressé. C'est également à la lumière de ces opinions et de ces sentiments qu'il faut considérer toute mesure dont celui-ci a été effectivement l'objet ou dont il redoute d'être l'objet. En raison de la diversité des structures psychologiques individuelles et des circonstances de chaque cas, l'interprétation de la notion de persécution ne saurait être uniforme.
53. En outre, un demandeur du statut de réfugié peut avoir fait l'objet de mesures diverses qui en elles-mêmes ne sont pas des persécutions (par exemple, différentes mesures de discrimination), auxquelles viennent s'ajouter dans certains cas d'autres circonstances adverses (par exemple une atmosphère générale d'insécurité dans le pays d'origine).
En pareil cas, les divers éléments de la situation, pris conjointement, peuvent provoquer chez le demandeur un état d'esprit qui permet raisonnablement de dire qu'il craint d'être persécuté pour des « motifs cumulés »
. Il va sans dire qu'il n'est pas possible d'énoncer une règle générale quant aux « motifs cumulés »pouvant fonder une demande de reconnaissance du statut de réfugié. Toutes les circonstances du cas considéré doivent nécessairement entrer en ligne de compte, y compris son contexte géographique, historique et ethnologique.
c) Discrimination
54. Dans de nombreuses sociétés humaines, les divers groupes qui les composent font l'objet de différences de traitement plus ou moins guide marquées. Les personnes qui, de ce fait, jouissent d'un traitement moins favorable ne sont pas nécessairement victimes de persécutions. Ce n'est que dans des circonstances particulières que la discrimination équivaudra à des persécutions. Il en sera ainsi lorsque les mesures discriminatoires auront des conséquences gravement préjudiciables pour la personne affectée, par exemple de sérieuses restrictions du droit d'exercer un métier, de pratiquer sa religion ou d'avoir accès aux établissements d'enseignement normalement ouverts à tous.
55. Lorsque les mesures discriminatoires ne sont pas graves en elles-mêmes, elles peuvent néanmoins amener l'intéressé à craindre avec raison d'être persécuté si elles provoquent chez lui un sentiment d'appréhension et d'insécurité quant à son propre sort. La question de savoir si ces mesures discriminatoires par elles-mêmes équivalent à des persécutions ne peut être tranchée qu'à la lumière de toutes les circonstances de la situation.
Cependant, il est certain que la requête de celui qui invoque la crainte des persécutions sera plus justifiée s'il a déjà été victime d'un certain nombre de mesures discriminatoires telles que celles qui ont été mentionnées ci-dessus et que, par conséquent, un effet cumulatif intervient
. [Non souligné dans l'original.]
[38]
Selon ces dispositions, les commissaires de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié doivent examiner l'accumulation des incidents de discrimination auxquels sont exposés les demandeurs d'asile pour trancher la question de savoir si cette discrimination correspond au niveau requis de persécution. Cependant, la doctrine relative à la persécution cumulative repose sur la prémisse que les demandeurs ont subi des difficultés, quoiqu'elles n'équivalent pas à de la persécution lorsqu'elles sont examinées isolément. En l'espèce, le commissaire a conclu que le témoignage des demandeurs était contradictoire et incohérent, ce qui a miné leur crédibilité. Cette conclusion demeure incontestée. En conséquence, la crainte objective de persécution des demandeurs ne repose sur aucun fondement. Les demandeurs ont uniquement présenté des éléments de preuve de nature générale à l'appui de leurs allégations concernant l'existence d'un climat général d'intolérance et de discrimination à l'égard des Roms. Cela n'est pas suffisant pour conclure que les demandeurs sont des réfugiés au sens de la Convention ou des personnes à protéger.
c) La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que la protection offerte par l'État était adéquate?
[39]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission a commis une erreur en concluant que les initiatives du gouvernement visant à protéger les citoyens roms illustraient l'efficacité et le caractère adéquat de la protection de l'État. L'avocat a soutenu qu'en tirant cette conclusion, la Commission a mal interprété la preuve documentaire en se fondant sur les « efforts » et les « tentatives » du gouvernement hongrois pour adopter des lois et des politiques visant la protection de ses citoyens roms sans prendre en compte la réalité sur le terrain, ni vérifier si les lois et les politiques étaient mises en œuvre de façon efficace. À l'appui de cette proposition, les demandeurs s'appuient sur la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 132 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], dans laquelle la Cour fédérale a statué que les lois et les mécanismes peuvent constituer des éléments qui reflètent la volonté de l'État de protéger ses citoyens mais qui ne sont pas suffisants pour établir l'existence de la protection de l'État à moins qu'ils ne soient mis en œuvre dans la pratique. Essentiellement, les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission aurait dû prendre en compte tant la volonté que la capacité de l'État de protéger les Roms.
[40]
Je dois convenir que je suis d'accord avec les demandeurs sur ce point. Dans ses motifs, le commissaire a examiné en profondeur la preuve documentaire concernant les mesures législatives et les politiques mises en œuvre par l'État hongrois pour s'attaquer à la discrimination et améliorer la situation des Roms. Bien que ces initiatives soient sans aucun doute louables, elles ne satisfont pas au critère requis pour prouver le caractère adéquat de la protection de l'État.
[41]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] ACF no 1082, au paragraphe 15, la Cour a expliqué le critère à appliquer pour conclure à l'efficacité de la protection de l'État:
La demanderesse soutient que l'agent d'ERAR a commis une erreur en prenant comme critère juridique les « mesures sérieuses ». Dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (1re inst.) (QL), au paragraphe 15, la Cour a établi que, pour qu'il existe une protection de l'État adéquate,
un gouvernement doit avoir la volonté et la capacité de mettre en œuvre sa législation et ses programmes
:
Non seulement le pouvoir protecteur de l'État doit-il comporter un encadrement légal et procédural efficace mais également la capacité et la volonté d'en mettre les dispositions en œuvre. [Non souligné dans l'original.]
[42]
De même, dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 35, la Cour a déclaré ce qui suit:
[27] Pour déterminer si le revendicateur d'asile a rempli son fardeau de preuve, la Commission doit procéder à une véritable analyse de la situation du pays et des raisons particulières pour lesquelles le revendicateur d'asile soutient qu'il « ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection »de son pays de citoyenneté ou de résidence habituelle (alinéas 96
a
)et
b
) et sous-alinéa 97(1)
b
)(
i
) de la Loi).
La Commission doit considérer non seulement la capacité effective de protection de l'État mais également sa volonté d'agir. À cet égard, les lois et les mécanismes auxquels le demandeur peut avoir recours pour obtenir la protection de l'État peuvent constituer des éléments qui reflètent la volonté de l'État. Cependant, ceux-ci ne sont pas en eux-mêmes suffisants pour établir l'existence d'une protection à moins qu'ils ne soient mis en œuvre dans la pratique
: voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.F. 1re inst.);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.F. 1re inst.). [Non souligné dans l'original.]
[43]
Dans la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, le juge Shore a abordé la même question au paragraphe 63: « La preuve d'une volonté d'amélioration et des progrès tentés par l'État ne devrait pas constituer, pour le décideur, un indice décisif à l'effet que les mesures potentielles équivalent à une protection efficace dans le pays sous étude. »
[44]
En l'espèce, la preuve documentaire indique que l'État hongrois est disposé à protéger les Roms. Le commissaire a porté une attention toute particulière à ce fait, mais a omis d'examiner l'efficacité des mesures ou des politiques de l'État. Il aurait dû évaluer la capacité de l'État de protéger les Roms et, plus particulièrement, il aurait dû chercher à savoir si les autorités hongroises sont disposées et en mesure de protéger les victimes des crimes haineux et de poursuivre leurs auteurs.
[45]
Cela dit, cette conclusion n'est pas suffisante pour justifier l'intervention de la Cour. Bien que les demandeurs aient démontré une erreur en ce qui a trait à l'évaluation de la protection de l'État, elle est sans conséquence parce qu'ils n'ont pas réussi à établir qu'ils ont besoin de cette protection. Le commissaire a conclu que leur récit n'était pas crédible et, par conséquent, que leur crainte de persécution n'était pas subjectivement fondée. Par conséquent, la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire doit être rejetée.
JUGEMENT
[46]
LA COUR STATUE que
la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
[End of document]