[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The applicant's originating notice of motion, dated December 16, 1991, was filed the next day,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the hearing took place on February 12, 1992. Here is the statement of remedies sought in the applicant's said notice:
"1. An order in the nature of certiorari quashing the decision of the Canadian Human Rights Commission dated July 9, 1991 to stand down the applicant's complaint under the
Canadian Human Rights Act
alleging discrimination in employment on the grounds of sex, sexual orientation, marital status and family status.
"2(a) An order in the nature of mandamus compelling the respondent to request the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel to appoint a Human Rights Tribunal pursuant to ss. 44(3)(a), and 49(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
.
"2(b) In the alternative, an order in the nature of mandamus compelling the respondent to determine whether there is a reasonable basis in the evidence to request the appointment of a Human Rights Tribunal, pursuant to ss. 44(3) and 49(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
."
Although no grounds for the motion are stated in the notice, they emerge clearly enough from a reading of the documents filed and from the opening statement of the applicant's counsel.
[2]
The principal ground is the decision of the Canadian Human Rights Commission (hereinafter also: CHRC or the Commission) to make the applicant wait, as she asserts unlawfully and unjustly, in the processing of her complaint before a Human Rights Tribunal (hereinafter also: a, or the, Tribunal) pending the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 114 N.R. 241; 12 C.H.R.R. D/355 (F.C.A.), leave granted January 25, 1991, (S.C.C. Bulletin p. 157 - No. 22145).
[3]
The applicant, a woman, has a "domestic relationship" with another woman, whose child lives with, and is dependent on, her mother (that other woman), and the applicant. The applicant considers that other woman to be her spouse, an assertion which is largely the same as, or similar to, the matter in issue in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case. The CHRC wants to wait and see the final outcome of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case in the Supreme Court of Canada before acting on the applicant's complaint of discrimination.
[4]
Here is an excerpt from the applicant's counsel's opening statement, as transcribed:
"As a preliminary matter, I wish to make clear that the applicant does not ask this court to decide her case on the merits. We understand perfectly well that the jurisdiction to do that lies with a Tribunal. And we also take it as a given that the decisions of the Canadian Human Rights Commission about whether to appoint Tribunals or not, are decisions of an administrative nature rather than a judicial nature.
"We will be asking this court not to hear the applicant's case on the merits but rather to stop the Commission from doing that which it is not authorized by its enabling statute to do, that is holding a complaint in abeyance or standing it down pending the outcome of unrelated litigation involving substantially different issues. It is our position that standing down or holding in abeyance while awaiting the outcome of unrelated litigation involving substantially different issues is not an option that the Commission can take. It is not authorized by its statute to take that action. We will ask this court to grant an order compelling the Commission to do that which it is legally bound to do by its statute."
[5]
The applicant has produced a statement of facts (and law) which is annexed to her affidavit sworn on December 16, 1991 as Exhibit "A", and is also found at Tab X, commencing at page 000199 of the applicant's motion record. The respondents' respective counsel (i.e., the CHRC and the Attorney General for the "government respondents") seem generally quite content with the applicant's statement of facts. Here, therefore, are passages selected to further the narrative:
"1. At all material times the applicant was employed by the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission. At various times the applicant held the position of Native Program Officer, Supervisor of Employment Services and Coordinator of Job Entry. By reason of her employment, the applicant was a member of a bargaining unit represented by the Public Service Alliance of Canada.
"2. At all material times, the terms and conditions of the applicant's employment were those in the master agreement negotiated between the Treasury Board of Canada and the Public Service Alliance of Canada, in force for the term July 1, 1988 to June 20, 1991.
"3. Pursuant to the master agreement, the applicant was required to join the Public Service Dental Care Plan. The applicant was entitled to enrol herself in the Dental Care Plan as well as a spouse including a commonlaw spouse, and dependent children.
"4. [The domestic relationship with the other woman, '(her partner)', has endured since 1983.]
"5. On July 13, 1988 the applicant submitted an enrolment form and requested the inclusion of her partner in the Dental Care Plan. The Pay and Benefits Section of Employment and Immigration Canada had already agreed to provide coverage for the dependent child.
"6. On or about July 18, 1988 the applicant was informed by the Pay and Benefits Section of Employment and Immigration Canada that Treasury Board would not provide Dental Care Plan coverage to her partner. The applicant was advised that final disposition of her case would await the outcome of another employee's claim, namely that of James Watson who had applied for coverage under the same Dental Care Plan and been denied coverage for his partner who is a man. By letter dated May 10, 1989, the applicant sought confirmation of the status of her application. She received a reply from her employer dated May 17, 1989.
"7. In October of 1989 the applicant submitted a claim for dental services rendered to her partner. On October 19, 1989 the applicant was advised by Great-West Life Assurance, the insurance company carrying the Dental Plan, that based on the definition of spouse contained in the master agreement, the claim for dental services rendered to the applicant's partner would not be accepted and that no future claims would be considered for her child.
"8. Article M-2, paragraph (M) of the master agreement defines commonlaw spouse relationship as follows:
'A "commonlaw spouse" relationship exists when for a continuous period of at least one year, an employee has lived with a person of the opposite sex, publicly represented that person to be his/her spouse, and continues to live with the person as if it were his/her spouse.'
"9. On September 29, 1989 the applicant filed a written complaint to the Canadian Human Rights Commission alleging discrimination based on the grounds of sex, marital status and family status.
"10. On November 27, 1989 the applicant filed her complaint again, on the standard forms required by the Commission, naming as respondents: Employment and Immigration Canada (CHRC File #W06978); Treasury Board of Canada (CHRC File #W06974); Public Service Alliance of Canada (CHRC File #W06977).
"11. On October 3, 1990 the applicant's complaint was amended to add sexual orientation as a ground of discrimination.
"12. By letter dated February 26, 1990, Bob Fagan a Human Rights Officer of the Commission informed the applicant's counsel that the applicant's complaint would be held in abeyance pending the release of the Federal Court of Appeal decision in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Fed. Trib.); (1990) 12 C.H.R.R. D/355 (F.C.A.); leave to appeal to Supreme Court of Canada granted January 25, 1991.
"13. By letter dated March 7, 1990, counsel for the applicant objected to the applicant's complaint being held in abeyance.
"14. By letter dated March 13, 1990, Paul Leroux the Director of the Western Region of the Commission indicated that the Commission staff had two choices, either holding on to the applicant's complaint pending release of the Federal Court of Appeal decision in the case of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> or sending the applicant's complaint to the Commissioners for consideration.
"15. By letter dated March 19, 1990, counsel for the applicant objected to the applicant's complaint being held in abeyance, explained that the outcome of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> would not necessarily be determinative of the applicant's claims because Brian Mossop's claims and the applicant's claims are completely different in important respects, and requested that the applicant's complaint be presented to the Commissioners.
"16. By letter dated June 4, 1990, counsel for the applicant provided an outline of legal arguments in support of the grounds of discrimination relied upon by the applicant in her complaint, and requested that the complaint proceed to a hearing as soon as possible.
"17. [The Federal Court of Appeal decision, unfavourable to Mossop, was]
"18. [released on June 29/90, but on Oct. 9/90 Leroux wrote that the] [applicant's complaint would be in abeyance pending the decision of the] [Supreme Court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .]
"19. By letter dated October 22, 1990, counsel for the applicant objected to the applicant's complaint being held in abeyance, on the basis that the Federal Court of Appeal decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> dealt only with family status discrimination whereas the applicant's complaint is based on three additional grounds of discrimination not raised in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , namely sex, sexual orientation and marital status.
"20. In an investigation report dated November 28, 1990, Bob Fagan and Paul Leroux recommended that the applicant's complaint be stood down. The investigation report found that there was no disagreement between the parties about the facts which gave rise to the complaint. By letter dated April 16, 1991 Paul Leroux confirmed that his recommendation to the Commissioners would be to stand down the applicant's complaint.
"21. On May 29, 1991, counsel for the applicant made written submissions to the Commissioners requesting the appointment of a Tribunal, and objecting to the applicant's complaint being held in abeyance. An outline of legal arguments in support of the grounds of discrimination relied upon in the applicant's complaint was provided to the Commissioners.
"22. By letter dated July 9, 1991 the applicant was informed that the Commissioners had decided to stand down the applicant's complaint pending the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . There is no indication that the Commissioners considered the facts of the applicant's complaint and the ground of discrimination relied upon, in the context of the applicable law."
[6]
The Deputy Attorney General of Canada (hereinafter also: Dep. A.G.) denies the allegations asserted in paragraph 22 above. His counsel recites in the Crown respondents' motion record, at p. 3, that:
"The Commission has reviewed the investigation report of your complaint ..., as amended, alleging discrimination in employment on the grounds of family status, marital status, sex and sexual orientation. The Commission also reviewed the submission dated May 29, 1991, signed by Shona A. Moore [applicant's counsel in the matter of the complaint to the CHRC].
"The Commission has decided to stand down the complaint pending the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Brian Mossop against Secretary of State and Treasury Board. Following the release of the decision, the case will be brought forward once more for the Commission's consideration.
"The investigator will contact you soon to discuss the matter further."
For those passages counsel cites a letter dated July 9, 1991, from Lucie Veillette, the secretary of the CHRC, to the applicant, Exhibit "T" annexed to Connie Gauvin's affidavit sworn  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on December 12, 1991, and Tab W, p. 000198 of the applicant's motion record.
[7]
Furthermore, in regard to the applicant's paragraph 21, the author somewhat elides the import of some of the letter's representations. For example (emphasis not in original text) the letter of May 29, 1991, states at its p. 3 (motion's record p. 000190):
"The complainant therefore submits that the Commission
ought to resolve to stand down
the complaint in respect of family status pending the final outcome of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ... [in the Supreme Court, given this letter's date], but should immediately proceed to hear the complaint on the grounds of marital status, sex and sexual orientation."
[8]
Counsel for the Dep. A.G., in her statement of law and argument, Part III of her motion record, (Crown Respondents) takes issue with the applicant's view, writing at p. 12 thereof:
"24. Although it is not presently one of the enumerated grounds in s. 3 of the
Act
, the applicant seeks to have the merits of her complaint considered by the Commission in relation to the ground of 'sexual orientation'. The applicant also seeks to have the merits of her complaint considered by the Commission in relation to the grounds of 'family status'. It is clear from her complaint that she relies on ss. 9 and 10 of the
Act
and that the discriminatory practice complained of relates the situation of two persons living in a homosexual relationship.
. . . . .
"25. It is submitted that the issues raised by the applicant are clearly issues that were dealt with by the Federal Court of Appeal in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case and that the relevance of the ultimate determination in that matter to the present case is obvious. Moreover, the relevance of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision to the applicant's particular circumstances was acknowledged by counsel for the applicant in her correspondence of May 29, 1991. As noted above, this acknowledgment of relevance was before the Commission when it determined to stand down the applicant's complaint pending the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ."
[9]
Section 3 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6, as amended, (hereinafter also: the
Act
) runs thus:
"3(1) For all purposes of this Act, race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, age, sex, marital status, family status, disability and conviction for which a pardon has been granted are prohibited grounds of discrimination.
"3(2) Where the ground of discrimination is pregnancy or childbirth, the discrimination shall be deemed to be on the ground of sex."
[10]
It is quite apparent that sexual orientation as the applicant would relate it to her assertion of family status is not a prohibited ground of discrimination described as such in s. 3, or elsewhere in the
Act
. Although it is not for this court to make a substantive adjudication of the applicant's complaint, this court is required in these circumstances to scrutinize and review the CHRC's conduct of this matter, included in which is to observe why the CHRC acts as it does.
[11]
It is quite apparent, or observable, without formally deciding, that the applicant's claim for dental services rendered to her partner was not declined because of sex. After all the dental care plan is, it seems, available to both women and men equally, so the fact of the applicant's being a woman is not the basis for the alleged discrimination. Nor, it would seem, but without deciding, is the applicant's marital status the cause for the alleged discrimination. According to the material filed on the applicant's behalf, it appears that none of the respondents, including the Great-West Life Assurance Company, has any regard whatever for whether she be single, married, widowed, separated or divorced. The applicant is thwarted in her claim for dental coverage for her partner because she asserts that their sexual orientation, while living together, vests them with the status of a family although they are, it seems, otherwise unrelated. The applicant and her partner are not "common-law spouses", for that concept bespeaks disparity of gender in the relationship.
[12]
Despite the absence of sexual orientation, or homosexuality in this instance, from the list of characteristics which are prohibited grounds of discrimination in the
Act
, the applicant's counsel urges the court nevertheless to quash the CHRC's decision to stay its proceedings in the applicant's case, and to compel the Commission to get on with processing the applicant's case. The applicant, through counsel, misconstrues the CHRC's lawful scope of action. The CHRC is conducting itself more favourably for her than the applicant seems to understand.
[13]
That Commission's choice, at this time, is not between holding the applicant's case in abeyance, or else getting on with it: the choice is rather between holding it in abeyance, or else dismissing it out of hand. Sexual orientation is not the basis of any prohibited ground of discrimination. That being so, the Commission could hardly have been satisfied that inquiry into this complaint is warranted pursuant to ss. 44(3)(a)(i) and (ii) since no prohibited ground of discrimination is alleged. Indeed the matter might well have been stopped at the earlier stage prescribed by s. 41(c) of the
Act
, as being "beyond the jurisdiction of the Commission".
[14]
This situation is described by the majority judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l'Acadie [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 385, delivered by Mr. Justice Sopinka, cited by the applicant.
"Section 36(3) [now s. 44(3) of the
Act
] provides for two alternative courses of action upon receipt of the report. The Commission may either adopt the report 'if it is satisfied' that the complaint has been substantiated, or it may dismiss the complaint if 'it is satisfied that the complaint has not been substantiated'. If the report is adopted,
I presume
that it is intended that a tribunal
will
be appointed under s. 39 unless the complaint is resolved by settlement. I come to this conclusion because otherwise there is no provision for any relief to the complainant consequent on adoption of the report. This aspect of the Commission's procedure has been clarified by amendments to the
Act
(S.C. 1985, c. 26, s. 69). The current version of s. 36(3) is contained in s. 44(3) of the R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6 (as amended by c. 31 (1st Supp.), s. 64) and now provides that, upon receipt of the report of the investigator, the Commission may request the appointment of a tribunal if it is satisfied that, having regard to all the circumstances, an inquiry into the complaint is warranted.
"The
other
course of action is to
dismiss
the complaint." (Emphasis not in original text) (pp. 898-899 S.C.R.)
Yes,
presumably
, a tribunal
will be appointed
if the outcome of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case be sufficiently favourable to the reading into the
Act
of "sexual orientation" as the basis of a prohibited ground of discrimination for the CHRC to act on it; and,
presumably
, a tribunal
will not be appointed
if the outcome of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case be otherwise. There is nothing rationally akin to the circumstances of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 81; 59 C.C.C.(3d) 449; 79 C.R.(3d) 273, in the case here at bar.
[15]
Is the CHRC behaving unfairly toward the applicant in keeping her complaint alive when it might have dismissed it? Hardly, for the Commission is not obliged by statute to move with promptitude in pursuing the first course of action mentioned by Sopinka, J. Indeed it is strikingly noticeable that in prescribing those courses of action, Parliament in s. 44(3)(b) provides that the Commission "
shall dismiss the complaint
" in the described circumstances, but in paragraph 44(3)(a) it provides that the Commission "
may request
the President of the ... Panel to appoint a ... Tribunal". This court interprets those disparate provisions to mean that when, for example, pursuant to s. 41(c), the CHRC finds itself to be without jurisdiction, it shall dismiss the complaint
sur-le-champ
, and it cannot by law do otherwise. However, when the CHRC finds that the complaint is warranted or justified it may request the appointment of a tribunal, "in accordance with s. 49", which authorizes that CHRC "
at any stage after
the filing of a complaint [to make that] request ...". In the words of Sopinka, J., in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, one can "presume" ... "that a tribunal will be appointed", but not necessarily
instanter
, for the expression "may, at any stage" in s. 49(1) appears to clothe the CHRC with a discretion to decide when (but always within good reason) the appointment of a tribunal will in fact be requested. The alternative, as the learned judge held for the majority in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , "is to dismiss the complaint". One cannot discern any unfairness to the applicant on the CHRC's part at all.
[16]
One would think that rather than "bite" the hand which keeps her complaint alive, the applicant would (to mix a canine metaphor) let sleeping dogs lie.
[17]
The foregoing is not the approach of the applicant, through her counsel's submissions. In fairness to the applicant, it is not unreasonable to recite pertinent passages from her motion record's statement of fact and law. The court does not necessarily rebuke, but merely notes the polemical quality of the submissions, which certainly makes the author's point of view unmistakable. Beginning at p. 000203:
"30. It is submitted that gender is the meaning of being a woman or a man in a given society and that sexuality is one of the significant social dimensions of gender.
"31. Heterosexuality is the traditional sexual orientation or identity in the social context of gender inequality. Traditional gender role requirements for women accordingly include being socially submissive to and sexually available to men only. Homosexuality, lesbian existence in particular, challenges heterosexuality as a particular institution as well as the gendered and unequal social roles of which it is a part.
"32. Discrimination on the basis of lesbian sexual orientation or identity is discrimination on the basis of sex. In the simplest sense, any time a lesbian or gay man is discriminated against because of homosexuality, she or he is discriminated against because of gender: but for their sex, or the sex of their sexual preference or partner, they would not be so treated. In the deeper sense, a lesbian sexual orientation or identity in particular challenges an institution of gender -- heterosexuality -- that in some of its norms and practices serves as a major vehicle for the inequality of women to men. To deprive lesbians or gay men or both of rights and opportunities by law because they violate the norms of sex inequality is to enforce sex inequality by law, in violation of s. 15 of the
Charter
.
"33. Not only is discrimination on the basis of lesbian sexual orientation or identity sex discrimination, there is some authority that it is an analogous and prohibited ground of discrimination pursuant to s. 15 of the
Charter
.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
"34. In this respect, the absence of sexual orientation from the list of proscribed grounds in s. 3 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, which legally legitimates discrimination against lesbians, is inconsistent with s. 15 of the
Charter
.
Haig and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the applicant's partner, based as it was on a restrictive definition of spouse, constitutes discrimination on the basis of marital status.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
"36. With respect to the ground of family status, the applicant submits that it is discrimination based on the ground of family status to make entitlement to benefits such as dental care conditional on conformity with a narrow and increasingly anachronistic conception of family. The unfairly favours employees in heterosexual relationships and penalizes employees in lesbian relationships. It also penalizes the children of lesbian parents.
"37. An administrative tribunal which has been given the power to interpret law holds a concomitant power to determine whether that law is constitutionally valid.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.).
"38. Under-inclusive legislation may be extended, pursuant to s. 24 of the
Charter
, where it is appropriate and just to do so and where the positive right to equality ought to be guaranteed by a positive remedy.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)."
[18]
The <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision, referred to in the above recited passages was considered and analyzed, and ultimately rejected by Mr. Justice Martin, of this court in
Egan and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  reasons, that the exclusion from spousal benefits of the chosen lifestyle of homosexual couples, "does not infringe the plaintiffs' subs. 15(1) [
Charter
] rights on the basis of either their sex or their sexual orientation".
[19]
It may be wondered why this court is considering what was decided in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and in
Egan and Nesbit
, when those considerations in these circumstances are more germane to the CHRC's or to a tribunal's deliberations. The court is, in fact, asked to extend the scope of what the applicant considers to be under-inclusive legislation, by finding that, despite the absence of sexual orientation from s. 3 of the
Act
, the Commission must be compelled to request the appointment of a tribunal right now, even if it be beyond its jurisdiction to do so in these circumstances. The applicant's counsel, at the hearing indicated:
"... the extent to which tribunals and indeed courts ... can, if you like, repair under-inclusive legislation so as to bring it into line with the
Charter
, to exercise what is in the United States jurisprudence to grant what is known as a remedy of extension, remains a somewhat open one.
"The decision of the Supreme Court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ... is a case concerning the under-inclusiveness of unemployment insurance benefits will be important on this question. It has that very issue, the question of the power to extend.
(Transcript: pp. 39 and 40)
. . . . .
"In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> it was recognized that under-inclusive legislation may be extended by a court, pursuant to s. 24, where it's appropriate and just to do so.
"If this case were to go to a tribunal, ..., counsel for the applicant would have available, and would want to pursue, a number of different arguments concerning the interaction between the
Charter
and Human Rights legislation, and one might be to the effect that if the tribunal has the power to recognize and declare that its legislation is under-inclusive by not expressly including the ground sexual orientation but does not have the power to write in the ground it might nonetheless be arguable that the tribunal has the power to and, indeed, as a matter of statutory interpretation, the duty to extend or give the equal benefit of the grounds that do appear in the
Act
to persons who are gay and lesbian.
(Transcript: pp. 41 and 42)
. . . . .
"These are questions about how best to ensure that if the human rights of women and
minorities
are guarded within the context of a democratic framework in which a high value is placed upon decisions made by a majority.
"I would submit that the question that was concerned, a Commission, however, is there some ambiguity about how this question will be resolved ultimately by the Supreme Court of Canada because it's clear that Charter jurisprudence and Human Rights jurisprudence are in a very active state of evolution and have been for the past ten years and will continue to be for quite some time." (Emphasis not in text)
(Transcript: p. 43)
[20]
This truly fascinating dialogue (for that is what it was) with counsel would not be very relevant to the matters in issue, if it were not for two considerations. The first is that despite her concise and competent advocacy, counsel did not persuade this court that the CHRC's duty is to send the applicant's doubtful complaint to a tribunal without delay. The second is, as mentioned, that counsel really urges the court to compel the CHRC to request a tribunal to enquire into a complaint involving sexual orientation where that matter is not mentioned in the
Act
. That course of judicial conduct would really amount to the court's legislating, instead of Parliament. It may be that the
Act
is under-inclusive, but it does not appear that Parliament so considered it to be.
[21]
The reality of a democratic society bespeaks rule by the people, and that, where the population is large and the territory extensive, means rule by the majority of the people's elected representatives. For an unelected judge to add what Parliament declined to include in legislation is redolent of anti-majoritarian, anti-democratic legislating. It is at least notionally otherwise in declaring already adopted legislation to be contrary to the constitutional values and imperatives which were put in place initially by the Parliamentary legislators. It is well to remember the words of Lamer, J. (now C.J.C.), writing for the majority (within a unanimous panel, in the result) of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Reference Re B.C. Motor Vehicle Act
, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 486; 63 N.R. 266; [1986] 1 W.W.R. 481; 23 C.C.C.(3d) 289; 48 C.R.(3d) 289; 69 B.C.L.R. 145; 36 M.V.R. 240; 18 C.R.R. 30; 24 D.L.R.(4th) 536, at p. 497 S.C.R.:
"... It ought not to be forgotten that the historic decision to entrench the
Charter
in our
Constitution
was taken not by the courts but by the elected representatives of the people of Canada. It was those representatives who extended the scope of constitutional adjudication and entrusted the courts with this new and onerous responsibility. Adjudication under the
Charter
must be approached free of any lingering doubts as to its legitimacy."
[22]
To decide that policy-based legislation "invented" and enacted by Parliament conflicts with constitutional values and imperatives is a legitimate posture for the court; but for the court itself to invent the legislation which has not been adopted by Parliament in order to fulfil policy ends urged by litigants, in an attempt presumably to satisfy constitutional values and imperatives, is not a legitimate posture for the court. It circumvents the legislative branch, not only by usurping the policy choice of what to include in legislation, but also by effectively denying the legislative choice to reconfigure or repeal any new constitutionally inclusive laws so made by an unelected judicature, as if by command of the Constitution. That would be simply the abolition of majority rule and the legislature.
[23]
Society should be governed by laws, not merely judges. It is a well known fact, of which the court takes notice, that Canadian society is deeply riven over the question of homosexual behaviour, the course and direction of the applicant's sexual orientation. Firmly held attitudes of some consider such sexual orientation to be a sinful abomination and an irredeemable perversity, while to others' attitudes it is morally neutral and normal. To some, it should not be accorded recognition or status by law because that seems to legitimate a foul example for the impressionable young: it is still regarded as one of the obscene seeds of social decadence, even although decriminalized only about two decades ago. To others, such sexual orientation liberates expression of sexual preference, if not immutable proclivity; and homosexuals' unions have the same social status for legal protection as do heterosexuals' unions, in effect, normal basic family units of society. To most, Parliament was right to decriminalize homosexual behaviour, but to some it would be wrong to give it equal place with heterosexual behaviour; while to others, it already has equal status in nature and among humans and ought so to be recognized in law.
[24]
Simply to recite these notorious facts is to demonstrate that this is an issue for which it would be highly inappropriate for the courts to purport to legislate. The court cannot properly act as a peripatetic pollster. Any posture of law clearly must be maintained or adopted by the legislature, (not the judicature) according to the democratic imperatives of the
Constitution
. In regard to the imperatives of majoritarian democracy, the applicant's plight is constitutionally quite akin to that of the plaintiff in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as illustrated in paragraphs [26], [27], [40], [42], [43], [46] and [47]; 91 D.T.C. 5491. No doubt a modicum of judicial activism has a place in this country's society under the rule of law. However, when it comes to fueling that activism by minting new, highly controversial rights, even by analogy to existing rights, the court obviously ought not to be seduced into burning the fuel of legislative usurpation. The appropriate legislative authority to resolve the controversy is the democratically elected component of the legislature in this country of universal adult suffrage. Indeed within the adversial system of jurisprudence, lines of opinion on the litigants' parts tend always to harden. The seemingly "last resort" which is litigation runs entirely counter to civil discourse with its sources of noncourtroom rhetoric enabling a free and democratic society to enjoy the prospect of evolutionary change. So often in this century, impatience to circumvent the pace of democratically elected legislatures has led only to tyranny and violence, not the rule of law.
[25]
At this time the fat of courtroom rhetoric is in the Supreme Court's fire. Being constitutionally supreme, it may, in its wisdom, choose to legislate on sexual orientation or not. Until the Supreme Court's judgment be known, this judge prefers to leave the legislating to the legislature. Parliament.
[26]
Accordingly, the court in these claims for discretionary relief will neither quash the CHRC's decision, nor command it to get on with the applicant's case, as if "sexual orientation", or "family status" founded on the particular homosexual orientation of the applicant and her partner, had been emplaced by Parliament in the
Act
. Still applicable are the principles of mandamus enunciated by this Court's Appeal Division in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). The application on all of its expressed bases will be dismissed with party-and-party costs in favour of the Crown respondents only, if any or both of them seek costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]