[1]
Gibson, J.
: An extensive statement of agreed facts in this matter was filed at the opening of the trial at Saskatoon on November 8, 1995. In the result, no witnesses were called.
[2]
On February 14, 1983, the plaintiff was convicted at Brandon, Manitoba of a number of serious offenses and was sentenced to an aggregate term of five years and seven months. In the same year, he was convicted at Edmonton, Alberta of another series of serious offenses and, following a sentence appeal, the sentence imposed on him for those offenses was life imprisonment.
[3]
The plaintiff was admitted to Saskatchewan Penitentiary to serve his sentence and, at all times material to this action, he was an inmate of Saskatchewan Penitentiary.
[4]
Immediately prior to May 21, 1985, the plaintiff was a member of the general population of Saskatchewan Penitentiary. On May 21, 1985 he was involuntary placed in the dissociation area of Saskatchewan Penitentiary following his being discovered with a female staff member, in an area of the penitentiary where he was not authorized to be, during working hours. The next day, a Segregation Review Board hearing was convened. It recommended to the director of the institution that the plaintiff remain in dissociation until the investigation of his alleged offence was completed. A similar recommendation was made by a Segregation Review Board on May 29, 1985. The recommendations were complied with.
[5]
On May 30, 1985, the plaintiff appeared in Disciplinary Court at the penitentiary and entered a guilty plea to the charge of failing to remain at his place of work. He was sentenced to twenty-two days punitive dissociation.
[6]
The plaintiff remained in dissociation until June 7, 1985, at which time the remaining fourteen days of his sentence were suspended. He was transferred to the segregation area of the institution. He remained in segregation until July 17, 1985, at which time he was returned to general population. [see footnote 1]
[7]
From the time of his removal from general population until the plaintiff pled guilty to a serious disciplinary offence on May 30, the plaintiff's incarceration in the dissociation area of the penitentiary was based on s. 40(1)(a) of the
Penitentiary Service Regulations
. [see footnote 2] From May 30 to June 7, 1985, the plaintiff continued to be held in dissociation by reason of the twenty-two day punitive dissociation sentence imposed on him following his guilty plea. The time spent in segregation from June 7 to July 17 was allegedly for the purpose of maintaining the good order and discipline of the institution.
[8]
On January 7, 1986, the plaintiff was once again involuntarily placed in dissociation. While the printed portion of a form completed at the time indicates "you are being placed in administrative segregation according to s. 40(1)(A) of the
Penitentiary Service Regulations
", the handwritten reason indicated is as follows:
"Due to your behaviour, and statements made by yourself in regards to a supposed death during the last two days, you are segregated
for your own good
." (underlining added by me for emphasis) [see footnote 3]
The circumstances leading to this second placement in dissociation apparently involved a conversation between the plaintiff and a female staff member of the institution in which the plaintiff indicated that his younger sister had died. Investigation proved this not to be true. The next day, the decision to place the plaintiff in dissociation was reviewed by the director of the penitentiary who upheld the decision. On January 15, a further review was conducted, resulting in a recommendation that the plaintiff should remain in dissociation, and this recommendation was approved by the director. On January 17, the plaintiff was transferred from dissociation to segregation. He remained in segregation until February 3 at which time he was returned to general population. At no time was the plaintiff charged with any disciplinary offence as a result of the incident.
[9]
The plaintiff sought habeas corpus from the Court of Queen's Bench for Saskatchewan in relation to the 1986 period of dissociation and segregation. On January 29, the director of the institution was advised that habeas corpus would issue in favour of another inmate in circumstances very similar to those of the plaintiff. The next day, habeas corpus issued in favour of that inmate. The writ was served on the solicitors for the Correctional Service of Canada on January 31. In the result, the plaintiff was released into general population on February 3, the solicitors for Her Majesty the Queen, the defendant in the plaintiff's habeas corpus application, consented to the issue of habeas corpus in favour of the plaintiff, and habeas corpus in fact issued on February 11.
[10]
Before me, counsel for the plaintiff took no issue with the treatment of the plaintiff in the period from May 21 to June 7, 1985, but argued that the actions of the Correctional Service of Canada in holding the plaintiff in segregation from June 7 to July 17, 1985, and in dissociation and later segregation from January 7 to February 3, 1986, were unjustified and amounted to false imprisonment. In the result, the plaintiff seeks:
(1) general damages for the restriction on his liberty caused by his placements in punitive dissociation and segregation areas of the penitentiary;
(2) general damages for mental and physical distress and suffering;
(3) exemplary damages;
(4) costs; and
(5) such other relief as the court allows.
[11]
The Supreme Court of Canada, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  adopted the following passage from
Halsbury's Laws of England
(2nd Ed. 1940), vol. 33, p. 38:
"The gist of the action of false imprisonment is the mere imprisonment; the plaintiff need not prove that the imprisonment was unlawful or malicious, but establishes a prima facie case if he proves that he was imprisoned by the defendant; the onus then lies on the defendant of proving a justification."
[12]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), also a matter where the plaintiff, a penitentiary inmate, alleged false imprisonment by reason of confinement in "administrative segregation", Mr. Justice Denault impliedly found that the transfer of an inmate out of general population to a more restrictive environment amounts to "imprisonment". It was acknowledged here that both segregation and dissociation are more restrictive environments than general population imprisonment. [see footnote 4] I reach the same conclusion here as did Mr. Justice Denault, and I am satisfied that that conclusion is in accordance with other authorities. [see footnote 5] The onus therefore falls on the defendants to prove justification for the holding of the plaintiff in segregation from June 7 to July 17, 1985, and in dissociation and segregation from January 6 to February 3, 1986.
[13]
It was agreed before me that the director of a penitentiary is entitled to order that an inmate be confined in "administrative segregation" (and I take that term to include both segregation and dissociation) if the director is satisfied that the inmate has acted in a manner that jeopardizes the security of the institution or the safety of an inmate and that the inmate should therefore be kept from associating with other inmates. That appears to be the substance of s. 40(1) of the
Regulations
quoted earlier in footnote 2.
[14]
In the June and July 1985 situation, the plaintiff pled guilty to a charge of failing to remain at his place of work and it is acknowledged that he engaged in improper conduct with a female staff member. He was sentenced, he served a portion of his sentence and the balance of his sentence was suspended. Following the suspension of the balance of his sentence, he was nonetheless held in segregation for some forty days. No justification for this period of segregation was established on the evidence before me. I was asked to infer that, by reason of his conduct, the immediate return of the plaintiff to general population on June 7 would have jeopardized the security of the institution or the safety of an inmate, notwithstanding the fact that the individual with whom he had engaged in improper conduct was no longer employed at the institution. I am not prepared to draw such an inference. I conclude that, for this forty-day period, the plaintiff was falsely imprisoned.
[15]
For the period from January 7 to February 3, 1986, the plaintiff was held, first in dissociation and later in segregation, by reason of what was considered to be his efforts to play on the sympathies of a staff member on the basis of false information. It was acknowledged before me that he had committed no offence. In the terms of s. 40(1) of the
Regulations
, no evidence was adduced before me that satisfies me that the director of the institution could have been satisfied that, for the maintenance of good order and discipline in the institution or, in the best interest of an inmate, it was necessary or desirable that the plaintiff should be kept from associating
with other inmates
. While, on the basis of the plaintiff's efforts to play on the sympathies of a staff member and on the basis of his prior history of misconduct with another staff member, the director could, I conclude, be reasonably satisfied that there was justification in terms of the maintenance of good order and discipline of the institution in keeping the plaintiff from associating with one or more institutional staff members, that is not a ground for dissociation.
[16]
The ground for dissociation provided in s. 40(1)(a) of the
Regulations
was apparently relied on for the January/February, 1986 period of segregation as well as for the period that the plaintiff spent in dissociation. But having adopted that ground, for the whole of the period from January 7 to February 3, 1986, the defendants simply failed, against the test in s. 40(1) of the
Regulations
, to meet the burden on them of satisfying me that the dissociation and segregation during this period were justified. Accordingly, I find that throughout the period from January 7 to February 3, 1986, the plaintiff was falsely imprisoned. This period amounted to some 28 days.
[17]
I turn then to the question of damages. In the
Saint-Jacques
case cited above, Mr. Justice Denault acknowledged that in assessing damages in circumstances such as those with which he was dealing and which were, for this purpose at least, similar to the circumstances before me, a presiding judge is not faced with "an easy task". As here, the inmate in
Saint-Jacques
was serving a long term of imprisonment. Mr. Justice Denault stated:
"It must be borne in mind that if he had not been kept in administrative segregation the plaintiff would not have been at liberty like any law-abiding individual, but would still have been an
inmate
in a penitentiary."
Bearing that reality in mind, he concluded that an amount of $800.00 for eighty days of false imprisonment adequately compensated the plaintiff for nonphysical damage suffered by him. I see no basis on the facts before me to vary from the standard adopted by Mr. Justice Denault. I find the periods of false imprisonment here in question to total 68 days. In the result, I conclude that an amount of $680.00 is appropriate in respect of nonphysical damage suffered by the plaintiff.
[18]
The plaintiff incurred $1,000.00 in legal fees and expenses in respect of his application for habeas corpus which was eventually consented to on behalf of Her Majesty. Counsel for the defendants here did not dispute this amount and acknowledged that it would be appropriate for the plaintiff to recover these fees and expenses if I found him to have been falsely imprisoned during the January 7 to February 3, 1986 period. I will order that the plaintiff be reimbursed for these fees and expenses.
[19]
With regard to exemplary or punitive damages, counsel for the plaintiff referred me to the following passage in
Saint-Jacques
:
"In a recent judgment,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , my brother Muldoon, J., ordered Her Majesty to pay $10,000 exemplary damages to an
inmate
who at the end of a long sentence was kept in prison forty-three days longer than the time he ought to have served. This decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal ([1989] 1 F.C. 603), and the court thus dismissed the Crown's appeal which argued that the amount awarded as exemplary damages was excessive. The cross-appeal filed by the respondent, who regarded this amount as inadequate, was also dismissed. In this unanimous judgment MacGuigan, J.A., citing Lord Devlin in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), noted 'that "outrageous" or "oppressive" conduct on the part of the Government is quite different from similar conduct by powerful corporations or individuals, and that it is much more serious, "for the servants of the Government are also the servants of the people and the use of their power must always be subordinate to their duty of service"' (at 615). As Muldoon, J., had done at trial, the Court of Appeal judges recognized that the defendant's conduct fell into the category of 'oppressive, arbitrary or unconstitutional action by the servants of the Government'. I consider that the same is true in the case at bar. The court further recognized that 'malice is not necessary for the existence of "oppressive, arbitrary or unconstitutional action by the servants of the Government"'."
Like Mr. Justice Muldoon and Mr. Justice Denault, I consider that, on the facts before me, the defendants' actions in relation to the plaintiff were oppressive and arbitrary and justify an order to pay exemplary damages. I conclude that the conduct justifying exemplary damages in
Le Bar
was more flagrant than the similar conduct in this matter. On the other hand, the conduct here was equally as flagrant as that reviewed in the
Saint-Jacques
case and, for the brief period after the director of the correctional institution and counsel for Her Majesty were aware that habeas corpus would issue in favour of the plaintiff in respect of his period of dissociation and later segregation in January and February 1986 and before his release back to general population, the conduct here, I conclude, was more flagrant. In the result, I find the plaintiff to be entitled to judgment in an amount of $3,000.00 as exemplary or punitive damages.
[20]
Before me, counsel for the plaintiff agreed to dismissal of the action against the personal defendants. This action will be dismissed as against James O'Sullivan and Frederick Payton. Judgment will go in favour of the plaintiff as against the defendant Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada as represented by the Correctional Service of Canada with damages in total fixed at $4,680.00.
[21]
In written submissions, counsel agreed that the plaintiff should receive prejudgment interest on the portion of the judgment in his favour that is for other than exemplary or punitive damages. It was further agreed that the appropriate amount calculated in accordance with the
Prejudgment Interest Act
of Saskatchewan amounts to $386.32. Finally, in light of the result, counsel agreed that the plaintiff is entitled to costs and that costs, inclusive of fees and disbursements, might reasonably be taxed at $3,300.22. Judgment herein will provide for prejudgment interest and costs in favour of the plaintiff in accordance with the submissions of counsel.
Judgment for plaintiff.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/kmb
Footnotes
1.	In the statement of agreed facts filed, the distinctions among "general population", "segregation", "dissociation" and the "special handling unit" at Saskatchewan Penitentiary are explained. For the purposes of this matter, it is sufficient to note that inmates in general population have "... the greatest freedom of movement and the broadest opportunity to interact with other inmates and prison staff." Segregation is significantly more restrictive and dissociation is more restrictive again. The special handling unit is the most restrictive and high security area in the Penitentiary. In the periods at issue in this matter, the plaintiff was not confined in the special handling unit.
2.	C.R.C. 1978, c. 1251. At the relevant time, s. 40 of the
Penitentiary Service Regulations
, and the heading preceding it, read as follows:
"Dissociation
"40(1) Where the institutional head is satisfied that
(a) for the maintenance of good order and discipline in the institution, or
(b) in the best interest of an inmate
it is necessary or desirable that the inmate should be kept from associating with other inmates, he may order the inmate to be dissociated accordingly, but the case of every inmate so dissociated shall be considered, not less than once every month, by the Classification Board for the purpose of recommending to the institutional head whether or not the inmate should return to association with other inmates.
"(2) An inmate who has been dissociated is not considered under punishment unless he has been sentenced as such as he shall not be deprived of any of his privileges and amenities by reason thereof, except those privileges and amenities that
(a) can only be enjoyed in association with other inmates, or
(b) cannot reasonably be granted having regard to the limitations of the dissociation area and the necessity for the effective operation thereof."
3.	See footnote 2, in particular paragraph 40(1)(b) quoted in that footnote.
4.	See footnote 1, supra.
5.	See for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
[End of document]