[1]
Joyal, J.
: This is an action by owners of a ship against its Charterers arising from a short-term hire of the ship for the period of October 31, 1970, to January 28, 1971. The ship was the "Marina", a general cargo vessel of some 8,600 D.W.T. It was a Dumbarton-built ship launched in 1957 and was formerly owned by Jardine-Matheson of Hong Kong. It had sailed under the name "Eastern Argosy" when its new owners acquired it in April 1970. The new owners took delivery of the ship in August 1970 at Kobe, Japan and rechristened it the "Marina".
[2]
The ship had a standard lay-out consisting of a superstructure mid-ships for bridge and crew quarters with two cargo holds forward and three cargo holds aft.
[3]
On delivery to the new owners at Kobe, the "Marina" was thoroughly surveyed by the American Bureau of Shipping, a classification society similar to Lloyd's. She was dry-docked for some four or five days and the whole inspection took some twelve days. The A.B.S. subsequently issued on A-1 certificate on her behalf. Concurrently, she transferred her registry to Panama and was provided with a Greek crew.
THE VOYAGES
[4]
Later in August of 1970, the "Marina" set sail with cargo for New York and Boston. A day out of Kobe, however, she encountered some engine problems. She returned to Kobe for necessary repairs and resumed her voyage. The rest of the trip appears to have been uneventful and eventually, the "Marina" docked at Boston, Mass. in October 1970.
[5]
During her long transit from Kobe to Boston, agents in London for both the ship's owners and the defendant company, then known as Lunham & Moore Ltd. (the charterers), were negotiating a charter-party for the ship. It was decided to adopt the New York Produce Exchange form of charter-party. Several discussions took place between the agents and many telexes were exchanged with their principals. In due course, the parties agreed on the terms of the contract and the ship went on charter at 2320 hours, local time, off Key West, Florida, on October 31, 1970.
[6]
Immediately before the fix, the charterers instructed the owners to take bunkers at Freeport, Bahama. From there she sailed to Belize, took on a cargo of raw sugar and made her way to Montreal. This leg of what eventually became the saga of the "Marina" was uneventful.
[7]
She unloaded part of her cargo at Montreal and, having to comply with St. Lawrence Seaway regulations, was fitted with Seaway fittings. Added to the installation of these fittings were certain modifications to the ship itself including the cutting down of the top of her mast, its height being some twenty-odd feet over maximum height for Seaway Transit. There were also structural changes to the wings of its bridges. At Montreal, the ship also took on a radio operator, a Mr. George Sheats. There were some language problems with the Greek telegraphist and Mr. Sheats was to facilitate radio and other telecommunications during the voyage from Montreal to Toronto and then on to Duluth, Michigan.
[8]
At Toronto, the "Marina" unloaded the rest of her raw sugar cargo. She was delayed for a short while in Toronto on a small polution matter and then proceeded to Duluth, Michigan. A couple of incidents happened on the Toronto-Duluth run. On entering the Welland Canal, the ship collided with the sides of the canal causing some damage to the starboard hull approximately seven feet above the waterline and about half-way between the No. 1 and No. 2 holds of the ship. She was nevertheless able to proceed. In Lake St. Clair, approximately ten miles from Detroit, she appears to have suffered from both boiler problems and very heavy seas and winds. She rode at anchor for some eleven hours and then continued on her way through Lake Huron and St. Mary's Channel at Sault St. Marie and into Lake Superior. She appears to have suffered more boiler problems when traversing Lake Superior. She also had to cope with exceptionally cold weather and strong winds.
[9]
At Duluth, Michigan, where the "Marina" arrived on December 6, 1970, she proceeded to repair the damage done in the Welland Canal and at the same time, took on a load of some 7,300 tons of linseed extraction meal and sugarbeet pulp pellets for delivery to consignees in Rotterdam.
[10]
Time was becoming of the essence. The closing date to transit the Seaway was fast approaching. The weather was cold and the "Marina" was sheathed with ice on her hull and on her upper deck. She left Duluth fully loaded with cargo and, lucky for her, made it through the Seaway and to Montreal in the nick of time. In fact, she was the last ship to transit the Seaway before it closed for the Winter.
[11]
The "Marina" arrived in Montreal on December 15, 1970. The master met with the representative of the charterers. The extra radio operator was paid off and the ship proceeded on her way to Rotterdam.
[12]
Severe weather was encountered when the "Marina" hit the broader reaches of the lower St. Lawrence River and the Cabot Strait west and south of Newfoundland. Strong easterly winds buffeted the ship and there was considerable structural damage done to the upper deck of the ship. Her breakwater was torn off causing sea-water to seep into the No. 1 hold, her forward masthead was torn off, a water-tight door buckled in and sea-water flooded the accommodations alleyways.
[13]
The heavy weather persisted and on December 20, 1970, the "Marina" took refuge in the Port of St. John's, Newfoundland. She stayed there five days. One of the owners of the ship flew there to supervise the necessary repairs. An A.B.S. team surveyed the ship and upon the repairs being made, considered her shipshape.
[14]
On December 26, 1970, the "Marina" set sail again for Rotterdam. She followed the rhumb-line course towards Europe, steering at 083 degrees. The weather continued bad with exceptionally high seas and, an anomaly in terms of the weather in the North Atlantic in mid-Winter, strong easterly winds. On December 30, 1970, she veered from her rhumb-line and proceeded south-easterly on a course 130 degrees. In the space of a few hours that day, she veered south-westerly to course 240 degrees and then westerly to course 270 degrees. She developed boiler problems again. She was on this westerly course for a while until the master directed the ship south-easterly again towards the Azores and took refuge in Ponta Delgada.
[15]
She arrived in Ponta Delgada on January 3, 1971. She suffered damage to her hull and stern when coming along-side. Necessary repairs were again made and she left the Azores on January 6, 1971, experienced more boiler problems a day or two out of the Azores but otherwise made her uneventful way to Rotterdam.
[16]
Arriving in Rotterdam on January 11, 1971, she proceeded to discharge her cargo. There were difficulties in unloading from No. 1 and No. 3 holds. Sea water and fresh water from broken pipes had entered the holds damaging the cargo. Surveyors came on board to inspect the damaged cargo. The process of discharging both good and damaged cargo was more involved and took longer. Finally, on January 28, 1971, after a hire which had lasted just about three months, the charter-party came to an end and the charterers redelivered the "Marina" to her owners.
A SAD AFFAIR
[17]
On the face of it, the voyages of the "Marina" on behalf of her charterers sound mundane enough. She picked up her cargo in Belize, delivered it to Montreal and Toronto, picked up another cargo in Duluth and eventually delivered it to Rotterdam. A casual reader might well ponder as to why a three-month charter involving two voyages in 1970-1971 should result in a trial of an action between the charter-parties which endured in Montreal some sixteen years later for some eighteen sitting days. What could have happened during the charter of the good ship "Marina" to bring for the Court's resolution after such long, protracted and extremely expensive proceedings, issues between the parties which, when broken down into their multitudinous parts are veritably a series of small conflicting claims which are normally the role, if not the duty, of the parties themselves to resolve.
[18]
In substance, the charterers perceived that they had made a bad deal in chartering the "Marina". To protect themselves, they claimed off-hire, meaning that in calculating the hire payment of $2,050 per day due to the owners, they began discounting them for various periods of days, hours and minutes. The owners did not like this at all. The relationship quickly deteriorated. Every effort was made by the charterers to find more grounds to discount the hire payments. Every effort was also made by the owners to find more grounds to charge the charterers.
[19]
I am not to pass any kind of moral judgment more favourable to one party or to the other. I would only comment on what may happen when the basic credibility and trust between two parties break down in a most inexorable manner. As a consequence, no representations by one party will be believed by the other. The mind of each party becomes fixed on the purported dishonest or unseemly practices of the other.
[20]
All which may be said now is that an action by the owners of the ship was taken in this Court claiming various heads of charges to which reference will be made later. The defendant charterers filed a defence to all these charges and counterclaimed for losses suffered through or by reason of the damaged condition of the ship's cargo when it arrived in Rotterdam at the completion of its voyage.
[21]
Basically, the position of the owners was that they had been short-changed by the charterers; that the charterers' calculations of off-hire days and hours were exaggerated and unfounded; that delays in transit time were by force majeure and perils of the sea; that allowances had already been made for delays in St. John's and in the Azores and that after all the necessary accounting had been done, there was left due and owing by the charterers the sum of $98,000.
[22]
The charterers denied the claim, having concluded early on that they had chartered a rust-bucket. They alleged that the "Marina" was not seaworthy; that it could not make good its represented speed, that the damage caused to the cargo was not by reason of heavy seas but by reason of corrosion on the ship's upper deck; that its boilers were continually failing; that the ship could not carry its stated tonnage; and that the ship's log was misleading or incomplete. Further, the charterers counterclaimed for losses suffered as a result of their claim for demurrage against the cargo owners in Rotterdam and for loss of the use of the ship during its unloading at that terminal.
THE CHARTER-PARTY
[23]
To situate the many sources of conflicts which generated such involved proceedings, one must begin with the contract or, as it is called in the trade, the charter-party. In this respect, one will recall that the terms of this charter-party followed a standard printed form, the so-called New York Produce Exchange form. In negotiations between the various agents for the parties, some amendments were made to that form and additional provisions inserted. Basically, however, it called on the owners of the "Marina" to make the ship available to the charterers. The ship was represented as capable, in favourable weather and fully laden, of maintaining a speed of about 17 knots, that it had about 8,720 long tons deadweight capacity (including cargo, bunkers, stores and fresh water), that it was seaworthy and was generally fit and able to carry the cargo which the charterers arranged for her.
[24]
In return, the basic obligation on the charterers was to pay the hire for the ship. This was fixed at $2,050 (U.S.) per day.
[25]
There were other provisions of the charter-party which I should briefly outline here because, as will be seen, they became a focal point on which the parties set their respective positions:
1. that the ship would consume about 45 tons per day of bunker C fuel and burn 1.5 tons daily of diesel fuel while in port.
2. that on delivery to the charterers, she would be ready to receive cargo with clean-swept holds and in every way fitted for the service.
3. that the owners would pay all ship crew's provisions, salaries and wages, as well as insurance and ship's stores.
4. that the charterers would pay for fuel, port charges and all other usual expenses.
5. that the master, although appointed by the owners, would be under the directions of the charterers.
6. that the loading, stowing and trimming of cargo would be at charterers' account.
7. that the captain was to keep a full and correct log of the voyages and furnish the charterers, when required, with true copies thereof showing course of vessel, distance run and fuel consumption.
8. that in the event of loss of time from deficiencies of men or stores, or from breakdown or damages to hull, machinery or equipment or for any other cause preventing the full working of the ship, or if speed were reduced because of defect or breakdown, the payment of hire would cease and both time lost and extra fuel costs would be deducted from hire.
9. that Seaway fittings for the Montreal-Duluth voyage as well as extra insurance premiums payable for this transit would be to charterers' account.
[26]
It was basically in connection with the charterers' own determination of various off-hire periods that the dispute between the parties developed. It escalated into other areas of dispute, each of which will have to be traversed individually to determine not only the rights and obligations of the parties in respect thereto but the quantum of costs involved.
THE EVIDENCE
[27]
I should not propose to recite at length the verbal and documentary evidence adduced in the course of the long trial. I should, however, provide at this time a general summary of this evidence before going on with the individual items.
1.
Mr. Simos Palios
[28]
One of the ship's owners, a Mr. Simos Palios, testified at length on the inherent qualities and seaworthiness of the ship. He was in Kobe when the "Marina" was delivered to the new owners and witnessed the carrying out of the classification surveys by the American Bureau of Shipping. He provided detailed information on the steam turbine propulsion system of the "Marina" and of its seaworthiness. He acknowledged that the ship developed boiler problems when it first left Kobe but he testified that the necessary repairs were made and that the "Marina" subsequently made her way to Boston without incident.
[29]
Mr. Palios was also in attendance when the "Marina" underwent repairs on December 21st to 26th, 1970, in St. John's Newfoundland. Again, A.B.S. surveyors were called in and upon the repairs being made, the "Marina" was declared seaworthy. Mr. Palios testified that on observing the breakwater which had been torn off its plates during the extremely bad weather encountered by the "Marina" in the Gulf of St. Lawrence and in the area south and south-east of Newfoundland, he could only conclude that damage was exclusively by reason of heavy seas. It was not by reason of corrosion.
[30]
Mr. Palios was also in attendance when the "Marina" took refuge in the Azores and when further repairs to the "Marina's" boilers were made.
[31]
He was also in Rotterdam when the "Marina" began to discharge her cargo and when it was drydocked and more permanent repairs to hull and equipment were made.
[32]
Mr. Palios expressed strong disapproval at the manner in which the charterers were calculating the hire payments due ot the ship's owners. He stated that the hire fee was sacred and should not continuously have been discounted by the unilateral decision of the charterers. Ship owners, he said, count on this money for their cash flow and any necessary adjustments for off-hire or other charges can be made at the termination of the charter.
[33]
He acknowledged that the owners cannot expect to be paid hire when a ship is disabled. He further acknowledged that there had been periods of disability by reason of the ship's boilers and that the owners had already accounted for these periods. Throughout, however, he felt that the charterers had not played fair with the owners. The off-hire claims, he said, had been greatly exaggerated by the charterers and every charge by the charterers as well as the charterers' refusal to adjust the owners' own claims had been unwarranted and mean-spirited.
2.
Mr. Robert A. Raguso
[34]
Mr. Raguso was called as an expert witness by the owners. He has eminent qualifications as a meteorologist. Through available meteorological reports, he was able to reconstruct the weather conditions in Lake St. Clair and Lake Superior when the "Marina" was steaming towards Duluth on December 4 to 6, 1970. He testified that the weather was unusually heavy at that time and the weather observations found in the ship's log relating to the conditions when traversing Lake St. Clair or Lake Superior were consistent with the more objective observations which were recorded at that time by various meteorological agencies. He further stated for the whole period of December 2 to 6, 1970, the weather in that part of the Great Lakes was the roughest for the entire year and created the highest values of winds and seas.
[35]
Mr. Raguso gave substantially the same evidence with respect to the Montreal - St. John's leg of the "Marina's" voyage to Rotterdam. He said that from December 18, 1970, to December 28, 1970, the area which the "Marina" was traversing constituted a long, heavy and turbulent weather period. Applying the meteorological data to the ship's position from time to time, he testified that on December 18, 1970, while west of St. John's, the south-easterly winds and seas freshened increasingly from force 4 and 5 on the Beaufort scale to force 6, 7 and 8. Later that day, the winds were east-south-east with forces 8 to 10. On December 19, the winds and seas veered and shifted from south-east to east, then to south-west then to west with continuing force 8 to 9.
[36]
On December 20, 1970, the winds started to back up to south, southwest, force 7-8. On the night of December 20 - 21, a storm came up from Maine but later again, the winds veered northerly and north-westerly with the seas in the force 8 to 9 range. He described the conditions, with perhaps a touch of eager fervour, as "horrendous".
[37]
Mr. Raguso went on to confirm that even after the "Marina" had left St. John's and had resumed her rhumb-line course to Rotterdam, she again encountered heavy weather, with winds south and south-easterly, force 6 to 8, then 8 to 10, then 8 to 9. The witness indicated that these were adnormal conditions. It was unusual for a ship sailing east across the North Atlantic at that time to face strong head winds for so long. He appeared to approve the master's decision on December 30th, 1970, to change to a more south-easterly direction. He did admit, however, that had the ship maintained its original course, she would finally have found more favourable conditions.
[38]
In sum, the witness was able to conclude that the information disclosed in the ship's log conformed in all essential respects with the climatological and meteorological data which he had been able to reconstruct.
3.
Captain Gordon George Glover
[39]
Captain Glover's expert evidence was on behalf of the owners and was directed to his long experience sailing the Great Lakes. He confirmed that weather conditions on Lake Superior can be extremely severe and ice formation from sea spray in winter is not an uncommon occurrence. He further stated that he knows well the location facilities at Duluth, that these were antiquated and the weighing devices were not always accurate. This might explain, he said, why there appeared to be a shortfall in the tonnage of cargo taken on board at Duluth. Captain Glover also calculated that the elapsed time for the "Marina's" run from Lake St. Clair to Duluth indicated a speed made good of some 12.2 knots, a speed which was in keeping with the heavy weather encountered at that time.
[40]
The witness, when referred to an item on Seaway fittings of $1,200 for steel fenders, felt that this equipment must have been for rubbing strakes, the ordinary wooden fenders being far less expensive.
4.
Captain K.E. Mirza
[41]
Captain Mirza also testified as an expert witness on behalf of the owners. He had had over a dozen years' experience with charter-parties using the New York Produce Exchange form. He confirmed that cleaning of holds is on account of the owners prior to delivery of the vessel to the charterers. At redelivery, the converse applies. Interim cleaning of holds between voyages under the same charter is usually, he said, a matter for negotiations between the charter-parties. In his experience, he had never met that problem and he felt that if an issue of that nature be overlooked by the parties prior to reaching agreement, an attempt should nevertheless be made to negotiate it.
5.
Mr. Harold N. Moore
[42]
Mr. Moore was the main witness for the defendant charterers. He was associated with the charterers from 1953 to his retirement in 1974. In 1970-71, he was Operations Manager for the defendant and had been involved in some 200-300 time charters during his career.
[43]
He first say the "Marina" when she docked in Montreal to discharge part of her raw sugar cargo and to take on bunkers. He was not impressed with her. She was not in pusser condition. She did not appear to be a modern well-maintained vessel.
[44]
Perhaps, Mr. Moore's first impression of the "Marina" coloured his perceptions of subsequent events. He was given information by Mr. Sheats, the radio operator, which had not been disclosed to him by the master of the "Marina". He testified that although copies of the ship's log were to be provided to him, he either received them late or they contained little information which would enable him to calculate the off-hire hours or days charged against the owners. On the ship's passage through Montreal on its way to Rotterdam, he was not told of the collision of the "Marina" with the Seaway wall in the Welland Canal nor of the hours spent at anchor in Lake St. Clair. Whether with respect to time lost on that occasion, or to boiler problems in both Lake St. Clair or Lake Superior, or to repairs to the damaged hull in Duluth, Mr. Moore felt that he had no alternative to calculating the worst scenario and counting off-hire amounts to the maximum.
[45]
Mr. Moore further testified that he had reason to believe that the ship's log was not accurate; that the ship was burning an excessive amount of diesel fuel; that her speed made good was less then represented, that the vessel required 'tween decks cleaning in Duluth; that loading time there had taken longer because of repairs to the hull of the "Marina"; that the maximum cargo loaded in Duluth was short some 500 tons of the expected tonnage; finally, that the general unseaworthiness of the "Marina" justified throughout the Duluth - Rotterdam run the many debits charged against the daily hire fee.
[46]
Mr. Moore also explained the background to the defendant's counter-claim. As charterers, they had negotiated a voyage charter with the I.S. Joseph Shipping Company in Duluth. One of the conditions of this charter was that the charterers could charge the shipper $3,000 per day for demurrage if the cargo could not be discharged in Rotterdam within four working days.
[47]
On January 38, 1971, the charterers had claimed $37,750 against the voyage charterers representing some twelve days and eight hours of demurrage. The I.S. Joseph Shipping Company had refused to pay and the charterers on December 3, 1971, sued in the Federal Court of Canada. The I.S. Joseph Shipping Company took the position that it had had to pay an extra $8,792 in discharing expenses because of the damaged cargo and that they should not have had to account for all the demurrage charges. The parties decided to negotiate and eventually, they settled the claim for $25,000. The charterers took the position that the shortfall on the claim against I.S. Joseph was a proper charge against the ship's owners.
[48]
Mr. Moore further stated that the charterers objected to paying extra wages to the crew of the "Marina" for cleaning the holds, after discharging the cargo of raw sugar in Montreal and Toronto; for the costs of cleaning the holds when the "Marina" was returned to her owners; for any hire fee in excess of six days for a normal Atlantic crossing to Rotterdam, for an item of extra insurance payable on account of the Seaway transit to Duluth. Further, he felt justified in claiming back a portion of the amount paid to equip the "Marina" with Seaway fittings.
6.
Mr. Robert George Sheats
[49]
Mr. Sheats was the radio operator who boarded the "Marina" at Montreal for the return trip to Duluth. His evidence, for what it was worth, was not favourable to the owners. Mr. Sheats described the ship as cold and less than clean. He attributed the delay in Lake St. Clair to boiler problems and not to the weather. He stated that the "Marina" experienced further problems in Lake Superior and was left wallowing for some time in very heavy seas. He had written what might be termed ingratiating notes to the defendant charterers from which the charterers could infer that there were shortcomings in the "Marina's" performance of a nature to alert the charterers that care had to be taken in dealing with her owners.
7.
Mr. Edward Edwardson
[50]
Mr. Edwardson is an expert witness and testified for the defendant. His analysis of the log books of the "Marina" led him to conclude that even on the Key West - Belize voyage, the ship was experiencing boiler problems. The consumption of 20 tons of water on this run indicated leaks in the boilers.
[51]
He noted problems with the steering gear of the "Marina" on its passage from Montreal to St. John's. There was reference to this in the ship's log for December 19, 1970. He noted further steering problems on December 28, 1970, on the passage between St. John's and the Azores. The log disclosed problems with the No. 3 diesel generator on December 18, 1970 and repairs to the No. 2 generator were noted for January 12 to January 19, 1971.
[52]
Mr. Edwardson also concluded that the damage to the breakwater on the "Marina's" forecastle was caused not by heavy seas but by corrosion. He noted a reference to this while the ship was undergoing repairs in St. John's and he had also noted te General Averaging Report in Rotterdam which indicated that the strength of the breakwater had been considerably reduced by corrosion. He conceded, however, that the bottom plates for the breakwater appeared to have been ripped off from the upper deck from which it might be inferred that the breakwater was not a wholly corroded mess.
[53]
Mr. Edwardson provided helpful evidence on the interplay of hull, winds, seas, machinery and equipment in making determination of a ship's performance. He noted in this connection that the "Marina" met force 8 winds in its Belize - Montreal run but that did not stop her from maintaining a 15 to 16 knots speed over the course.
[54]
In his opinion, the ship was in bad need of repair to her boilers. This defect, together with what he considered to be other deficiencies in the ship, were the causes of the delays in the ship's voyage from Toronto to Duluth and from Montreal to Rotterdam.
8.
Mr. Frank B. Peterson
[55]
Mr. Peterson, an expert witness for the charterers, stated that the initiative taken by the charterers in discounting hire for loss of time attributable to the owners' ship as well as the method of calculations used were standard practices in charter-parties and well within the usages of the trade. He further stated that full communication between the ship's master fand the charterers are of the utmost importance as the charterers are not in a position to see for themselves what is going on during the hire period.
[56]
In his report, Mr. Peterson had calculated running time of six days for the St. John's to Rotterdam leg of the voyage. He conceded, however, that this would be under ideal conditions and could only be used as a datum line or a bargaining point. He admitted that to insist on six days on a North Atlantic run in the middle of winter would be unreasonable.
[57]
Mr. Peterson also stated that a two or three month charter is often difficult to administer. There is very little experience on which to develop a pattern. The charterers must rely on the master of the ship to assure themselves that they are getting full value for their hire fee. Mr. Peterson admitted that bad weather, including heaving to at the discretion of the master, is not cause for off-hire. With respect to the representations by the owners as to a ship's speed, it was his opinion that "about" so many knots allowed a variation of perhaps half a gnot or so and that "under good weather" indicated a sea at Beaufort scale force 4 or 5 or less, depending on the ship's tonnage.
9.
Francis O'Brien
[58]
This witness is a member of the Bar of New York State and of other states as well. His practice over 35 years has been devoted to maritime law. He testified that in September 1975, he was retained by I.S. Joseph Shipping Co. in connection with an action for $37,750 for demurrage by Lunham & Moore Ltd., the charterers' former corporate name. I.S. Joseph Shipping Co. felt it had a good defence to the claim on grounds that the "Marina" was unseaworthy, that sea water from the holes on the upper deck and from burst water pipes had entered the ship's holds causing considerable damage to the cargo. Moreover, this had created delays in discharging the vessel and the shipper felt it should not be charged with demurrage.
[59]
Nevertheless, Mr. O'Brien had recommended that the proper course to follow was a settlement and on November 14, 1975, the parties had executed a mutual release and the I.S. Joseph Shipping Co. had paid Lunham & Moore Ltd. $25,000 in full and final settlement, the spread between the amount claimed and the amount paid constituting the extra unloading charges of some $8,972 allegedly borne by the shipper in Rotterdam and a discount on demurrage fees.
10.
Other Witnesses
[60]
Further evidence, by consent or by order of this Court was made part of the record. This included the transcript of the evidence of a New York maritime lawyer, Donald Francis Mooney, given on January 19, 1982, the commission evidence of Stilianous Houlis appointed Chief Officer of the "Marina" on December 6, 1970, taken on January 20, 21, 22, 1982, and the evidence on discovery of Mr. Melvin Graham Angus, Founding President of Lunham & Moore Ltd., given on September 12, 1979. Mr. Angus had unfortunately passed away in December 1985.
[61]
Captain Houlis' evidence was directed at the considerable damage to the "Marina" in the course of its voyage from Duluth to Rotterdam and to the speed made good in her Seaway transit. He had been appointed Chief Officer of the ship on December 6, 1970, shortly before the ship left Duluth. He stated that the repairs to the hull at Duluth had not delayed the loading of cargo. He said that pilots are the ones to determine and reduce speed in the restricted passageways of the Seaway. His observation as to the heavy weather off Newfoundland on December 17, 18 and 19 was that that voyage "was my worst voyage of my life". He testified as to 20 meter waves. He described the house flag post being torn off and the breakwater on the foc'sle being torn off its deck plates and permitting sea water to enter No. 1 hold, the chain locker, and the storerooms. He described other damages caused by the waves to the forward mast house when a water-tight door effectively caved in from the force of the waves. The port accommodation ladder had been torn off and had disappeared into the sea. Cabins, galleyway and dining room were flooded. Frozen pipes had burst in No. 3 hold causing water damage to the cargo in that hold.
[62]
Captain Houlis described the continuing voyage of the "Marina" after she had undergone repairs in St. John's Newfoundland. The weather continued to be very bad and to avoid hazarding the ship, the master reduced speed, hove to for a while and changed course from 080 degrees - 083 degrees to 130 degrees - 140 degrees then to 240 degrees and 270 degrees and then back again to 130 degrees - 140 degrees in the direction of the Azores.
[63]
Mr. Melvin Graham Angus' evidence provides a clear indication of how the relationships between owners and charterers got off the rails. From the very beginning, Mr. Angus had reached the preliminary conclusion that the speed and fuel consumption of the "Marina" were not as warranted. He had expressed surprise that the vessel was not only burning bunker C fuel but diesel fuel as well. Of course, the negotiations between the parties to fix the charter-party had been through their agents in London and he had not been made aware of diesel oil requirements.
[64]
More than this, Mr. Angus was considerably disturbed that the "Marina" appeared to be burning diesel oil not only in port but at sea as well. He concluded that fuel costs being to the charterers' account, he would have to monitor this item very carefully.
[65]
He was further concerned with the shortfall in cargo capacity at Duluth. He was concerned with the "Marina's" master visiting Minneapolis while the ship was being loaded. He felt that the owners and the ship's master had not communicated sufficiently with the charterers to deal effectively with the owners of the cargo and with cargo claims in Rotterdam. He stated at one time: "This whole business from start to finish was a very sorry affair right from the beginning". Remarks like these tend to confirm the general observations I made earlier in these reasons that when credibility is lost between the parties in a contract of the nature of a charter-party, neither reason, nor good sense, nor objectivity can survive.
ANALYSIS OF THE CLAIMS
[66]
This is the point where a rundown of the various claims made by the parties against each other may be made. According to the charter-party, the principal claim of the owners was for the hire fee, fixed at $2,050 (U.S.) per day for a period of some 88.736 days. The principal claim of the charterers was for off-hire credits, broken down into days, hours and minutes for those occasions where the "Marina" suffered boiler problems, or deviated from its course, or failed to make good its represented speed or otherwise was not available to charterers for their purposes.
[67]
Added to these principal claims was a bushel of subsidiary claims and counterclaims running from a claim by the owners of $9,686 for cleaning holds on redelivery in Rotterdam to $104.96 for cable costs paid by owners for the account of charterers. Some of these claims are more easily resolved than others, some of them indeed were resolved in the course of the trial. Others involve issues of law or of mixed fact and law. Others, finally, are merely a matter of estimating (I use this word advisedly) the quantum of costs to which either party might be entitled or for which either party might be chargeable.
[68]
In the owners' statement of claim, as finally amended, it was alleged that the charterers were indebted to the owners for the following amounts (U.S. $):
1. Basic Hire of 88.736 days @ $2,050 (U.S.)
$181,909.03
2. A charge of 12 1/2 hours of bunker time at Freeport at charterers' expense
1,067.71
3. Detention at Rotterdam for 6.8 days
14,120.29
4. Overtime compensation @ $500 per month for 2.- 90937 months
1,454.69
5. Cost of fuel on board on delivery at $17,502.20 for bunker C and $715.68 for diesel oil
18,217.88
6. Cost of cables for charterers' accounts
104.96
7. Cost of extra insurance premium for Seaway transit
14,695.82
8. Costs of cleaning holds of the ship after delivery of bulk raw sugar cargo from Belize
3,000.00
9. Costs of cleaning holds of the ship after redelivery under protest at Rotterdam
9,696.97
10. Costs of repairs to window damaged during unloading at Rotterdam
115.15
Total amount otherwise payable
$244,382.50
[69]
Against this gross amount, the owners were crediting the charterers with the following:
1. Advances paid by charterers for owners' account
$10,605.20
2. Value of fuel on re-delivery
2,346.57
3. Hire payments received from charterers
113,486.96
4. Off-hire credits of 9.70833 days for the St. John's and Azores diversions
19,902.08
Total Credits
$146,340.81
[70]
A quick calculation of all the foregoing credits and debits fixes the net amount allegedly owing to the owners at roughly $98,000 (U.S.).
[71]
The charterers' position as disclosed in their statement of defence and counterclaim was that the off-hire periods calculated by the owners were clearly insufficient. Instead of 9.708-33 days of off-hire periods, the charterers calculated the total over the period of the charter-party at 25 days, 4 hours and 53 minutes for an amount of $51,667. In serial form, the charterers calculated the following credits to their account as well as the following charges:
1. Hire payments made
$113,486.96
2. Off-hire of 25 days, 4 hours and 53 minutes
51,667.00
3. Brokerage commissions paid
7,019.84
4. Disbursements made for owners' account
18,645.39
5. Fuel consumed during off-hire
2,433.54
6. Fuel on board at redelivery
2,300.00
7. Extra labor costs in Duluth to clean 'tween decks
1,945.20
8. Owners' proportion of Seaway fitting costs
4,196.15
9. Oil spill in Toronto
9.89
10. Deadweight discrepancy
6,364.80
11. Expenses of cleaning cargo at Rotterdam (by counterclaim)
8,792.17
12. Loss of demurrage i.e. on I.S. Joseph Shipping Co. settlement (by counterclaim)
12,749.96
13. Legal expenses arising from charter-party breaches (by counterclaim)
7,500.00
Total credits and charges
$237,110.90
[72]
What in effect the charterers requested of this Court was that the plaintiff's action be dismissed and that the defendant's counterclaim for $29,042.11 (U.S.) be allowed with interest and costs.
[73]
As I have indicated before, it is necessary that each item of credit and debit be traversed, that certain findings based on the available evidence be made and that the quantum amount allowed or charged be determined.
FINDINGS
1.
The Freeport Deviation
[74]
The owners claim an extra 12 1/5 hours for this deviation at the charterers' request to take on bunkers immediately prior to its delivery to the charterers off Key West. The evidence discloses that the "Marina" took some four hours and forty minutes to load and had to steam an extra 37 nautical miles. I would calculate this extra mileage, keeping in mind the elapsed time entering or leaving harbour, at 2 1/5 hours and allow a total for this item of seven hours at $85.42 (U.S.) per hour for a total of $597.94.
2.
Seaway Fittings
[75]
The charter-party contained a provision making it for the charterers' account to have the Marina fitted for Seaway transit. These fittings, according to the evidence, could have been rented at a cost of some $2,200. On a purchase basis, the cost would have been $3,800. The charterers suggested to the owners that perhaps the cost of permanent fittings might be split between them at $1,900 each. The owners approved. Much to their consternation, however, the owners were charged $4,196.15 as their share of the costs. More than this, they were not made aware of it until April 15, 1971, some three and half months after the work was done.
[76]
There seems to be no doubt on the basis of an invoice from Montreal Ship Repairs Limited and dated January 19, 1971, that an expenditure of $9,720.50 was incurred by the charterers. There is little doubt also that fitting the "Marina" for Seaway transit required much more work than contemplated. Not only were the normal fittings required to be installed and this at the estimated price of $3,850, but other modifications had to be made as well. These modifications, I find, were not made at the instance of the charterers, but on the recommendation of the Seaway inspector and of the fire marshal. Heavy duty steel fenders were installed at a cost of $1,200. Port and starboard navigation bridge wings and aft docking bridge wings were modified and cut back at a cost of $1,760. The foremast had to be cut down to comply with maximum Seaway height at a cost of $890. Various modifications had to be made in crew accommodations at a cost of $360.
[77]
The owners took the position that there was no authority to the charterers to expend more than $3,800 and that the owners should not be held accountable for their share. I agree this might be a sound principle in a normal case. I find, however, that there was an implied mandate to the charterers to arrange compliance with Seaway and fire safety rules. Effectively, the charterers were the owners' agents for this purpose. The master was on board and presumably he consented, albeit perhaps passively, to the modifications being performed.
[78]
It would of course have greatly assisted the whole operation if the charterers had notified the owners beforehand that Seaway requirements were far in excess of those originally contemplated and that the original $3,800 formula could no longer apply. On the other hand, the charter-party makes of these Seaway fittings a matter for charterers' account and to that extent, the prime burden of paying for it rests on them. I would therefore find that the carrying out of the original agreement was frustrated and that I should, in the measure possible, make the necessary apportionment of all costs to reflect those which were strictly for Seaway transit and those which could not have been reasonably foreseen or which in fact became permanent fittings or fixtures for the "Marina".
[79]
The charterers, adopting the principle of sharing the costs of the permanent works, deducted from the total account of $9,720.50, a total of $1,270.50 of sundry rentals and charged the owners with one half of the balance, i.e. $4,196.15. I would propose that the following specific items be charged to the owners:
Steel fenders
$1,200.00
Foremast modifications
890.00
Structural changes to bridge wings
1,870.00
Total
$3,870.00
3.
Toronto Spillage
[80]
It was reported to the charterers by their agents in Toronto that the "Marina" had spilled some oil in Toronto harbour on December 1, 1970. The extent of the pollution was negligible, nevertheless, it caused some delays to the ship. The charterers put the ship off hire for two hours in an amount of $170.83. I should not disturb this item of cost.
4.
Anchorage in Lake St. Clair
[81]
On December 3, 1970, at approximately 1800 hours, the "Marina" anchored in Lake St. Clair. The ship's log indicates that she rode at anchor for some eleven hours. On the evidence, I find that the ship experienced boiler problems. I also find that the ship experienced strong winds while disabled. The heavy weather conditions of that date were confirmed by the witness Raguso. The witness Sheats testified that the weather was clear and that he could see the lights of downtown Detroit some 8 or 10 miles away. He did not state in a clear or forthright manner what the wind force was or what happened to the weather conditions while the ship lay at anchor. The ship's log abstract for that day contains only the cryptic comment "1820 - Anchored Port Anchor St. Clair Strong Wind". Later in the evening, the starboard anchor was let go and in the course of the night, more shackles were let out.
[82]
I can only conclude that the weather was as bad as indicated in the log. Absent any direct evidence of the extent of engine or boiler problems, or of the inability of the ship if the weather had been more favourable to run on one boiler for transit into St. Clair River and Lake Huron, I must discount the off-hire hours claimed by the charterers and reduce them from eleven hours to 7 1/2 hours. The off-hire amount claimed at $939.58 is therefore reduced to $640.65.
5.
Lake St. Clair - Duluth Transit
[83]
No doubt the "Marina" experienced further boiler problems, or perhaps feeder pump problems in Lake Superior. Mr. Sheats testified that the ship wallowed for an hour while repairs were made. I find, however, that on the evidence of extremely severe weather encountered through this transit, from Lake St. Clair to St. Clair River to Lake Huron to Sault St. Marie and St. Mary's Channel and on to Lake Superior and Duluth, the "Marina's" reduced rate of speed cannot be attributable to her propulsion system. I find that the master would not have hazarded his ship in maintaining warranted speed even if such speed were maintainable. The evidence clearly indicates extremely severe weather conditions on this transit with winds reaching 70 knots force. Perhaps the weather saved the owners from having to account for reduced speed. That is no reason, however, in my view, to allow the full claim for five hours of off-hire. I would reduce this to one hour and discount the amount claimed of $427.08 to $85.42.
6.
Hull Repairs in Duluth
[84]
The charterers claimed six hours of off-hire while repairs were being made for the damage to the hull near No. 1 hold of the "Marina" where it had collided with the walls of the Welland Canal. There is evidence, however, which I find credible, that such repairs did not delay the loading of the ship. The evidence is uncontradicted that the loading facilities at Duluth were limited and that no more than one hold could be loaded at one time and no delay was caused to the loading operations. The off-hire of six hours for a sum of $512.50 must therefore be disallowed.
7.
Deadweight Discrepancy
[85]
The charterers have claimed $6,364.80 in this respect. Their preliminary calculations to arrive at this amount do not, in my view, stand up to later calculations or findings. One must allow for spillage when dealing with the kind of cargo being taken on board. One must allow for weight of the ice sheathing the hull of the ship and its upper deck. Furthermore, there is no evidence that there remained in Duluth any cargo which could not be taken on board, nor is there any evidence that the shipper, I.S. Joseph Shipping Company, protested this shortfall. There is also evidence that the charterers became themselves confused and made several calculations of this alleged shortfall indicating a total of some 550 tons, 200 tons and 300 tons. Although much technical evidence was adduced with respect to winter and summer drafts of the "Marina", the tonnage of stores, fuel and fresh water on board, the estimated weight of the ice sheathing at Duluth, the permissible Seaway draft and the like, there is not sufficient evidence that the charterers suffered any loss on this account which I can quantify. I must therefore disallow it.
8.
Cleaning of Holds Between Voyages
[86]
The owners have claimed $3,000 as extra remuneration paid to the "Marina's" crew for cleaning the holds while the ship was on its Toronto-Duluth transit. The evidence on this is a statement by the ship's master dated Duluth, December 9, 1970, acknowledging receipt of this sum from Union Commercial Steamship Co. and covering payments made to all deck hands for cleaning the holds between December 1, 1970 and December 7, 1970.
[87]
The charter-party contains no express provision on this item except to state that the cleaning of holds is on owners' account upon delivery of the ship and on charterers' account upon redelivery. Expert evidence as to the usages of the trade when holds require cleaning between voyages, were conflicting. In no one's experience had the matter been an issue, one expert witness limiting himself to suggesting that it should be a matter of prior negotiations or, if overlooked, a matter of settlement. There is of course a letter dated November 25, 1970, from the charterers to the "Marina's" master requesting all holds to be clean-swept prior to loading in Duluth but this letter simply begs the question as to who was expected to pay for it.
[88]
From the general tenor of the charter-party and by adopting a reasonable approach, especially when the cargo carried from Belize to Toronto and Montreal was raw bulk sugar. I should find that such cleaning was for the charterers' account and the owners' claim for $3,000 should be allowed. I have considered discounting this sum by reason of the fact that hold No. 3 was not loaded with raw or bulk sugar at Belize. I have no evidence to guide me, however, to enable an apportionment to be made and in any event, the charterers have not advanced this argument.
[89]
The charterers in turn claim $1,945.20 for stevedore labour in cleaning 'tween decks in Duluth. I find that this work was necessary and if I am to be consistent with my determination respecting the cost of cleaning on the Great Lakes run, I should in turn allow the charterers' claim for extra cleaning in Duluth. I should not think that the failure of the charterers to inspect the holds at the first opportunity to do so when the "Marina" arrived at Belize should be a bar to their claim.
9.
Extra Insurance
[90]
The owners had submitted an invoice from their insurers in the sum of $14,695.82 as extra premium for the Seaway transit of the "Marina" from Montreal to Duluth and return. The charterers had acknowledged owing $13,204.98 on this item and had discounted the remaining $1,490. I see no reason, nor is there in my view sufficient evidence of commission or other indirect payments back to the owners, to vary the amount. I should allow the owners the total claim of $14,695.82.
10.
The Atlantic Crossing: December 16, 1970 - January 11, 1971
[91]
It will be recalled that the combination of the "Marina's" malfunctions as well as the very foul weather it encountered during so many days of transit across the North Atlantic required the ship to spend some time in both St. John's, Newfoundland and Ponta Delgado in the Azores. In both instances, she also had to deviate from her normal rhumb-line course towards Rotterdam.
[92]
The charterers' claim for off-hire during this transit was for some 16 days, 3 hours and 23 minutes for a total of $33,088.91. The owners found this length of time excessive and allowed some 9.70833 days of off-hire amounting to $19,902.
[93]
In order to arrive at a fair and proper assessment of the charterers' claim, I should think there is required an analysis of the experiences encountered by the "Marina" which precipitated her diversion to both St. John's and the Azores and her record of performance from the Azores to Rotterdam.
(1)
The St. John's Diversion
[94]
The charterers claimed off-hire of 5 days, 22 hours and 52 minutes amounting to $12,203.14 when the "Marina" underwent repairs in St. John's. This claimed amount, on analysis, is pretty close to the mark. Nevertheless, I should venture an off-hire calculation of my own. I find, first of all, that perils of the sea did account in part for the "Marina's" master to seek refuge in St. John's on Sunday morning, December 20, 1970, at 0830 hours. The "Marina" docked some 17 hours and 10 minutes later on the early morning of December 21, 1970. No doubt, the "Marina" might not have been one hundred percent operational, nevertheless there is some limit to what ship and crew can take in an environment which an armchair observer may only dimly perceive let alone comprehend. I would therefore allow the owners one-half of the deviation time of 17 hours and 10 minutes and fix the off-hire period for the deviation run to St. John's at 8 hours and 35 minutes.
[95]
I would also allow the owners the period from 2400 hours on the night of December 25 to 0700 hours on the morning of December 26 to account for the delay in the projected boarding time of the pilot on leaving St. John's harbour.
[96]
As a result, I would calculate the off-hire period from 0830 hours on December 20 to 2400 hours on the night of December 26, 1970, at 5 days and 15 hours minus half the elapsed time from deviation point to St. John's for a net off-hire of 5 days and 7 hours. The off-hire amount for this is $10,848.
(2)
The Azores Diversion
[97]
I have previously referred to the evidence made available to me with respect to the period of some 8 1/2 days from December 26, 1970, when the "Marina" left St. John's to January 3, 1971, when she docked at Ponta Delgada in the Azores. The "Marina" and her crew continued to experience very bad weather. Day in, day out, the ship pitched into very rough seas, always heading into strong winds of near gale force. After the experience encountered on her way to St. John's from Les Escoumains, the continuing dirty weather as she headed on her rhumb-line course for Rotterdam must have been excessively trying on master and crew and have put considerable strain on the workings of the ship.
[98]
It is also a fact, however that the "Marina" continued to experience problems with her capricious boilers. She also continued to have problems with her steering gear and rudder causing sea water to flood her tiller flats. The decision of the master on December 30, 1970, to alter course several times and finally, to steer southeasterly in the direction of the Azores appears to have been wise, even though, according to the witness Raguso, the "Marina" would have met more temperate weather had she continued on her rhumb-line course. The deviation to the Azores as well as the period for repairs at Ponta Delgado from the afternoon of January 3, 1971, to the morning of January 6, 1971, increased the number of hours which would have otherwise taken the ship to transit across Atlantic from St. John's to Rotterdam. The charterers have estimated the total of off-hire at 10 days, 4 hours and 31 minutes amounting to $20,885.
[99]
As I have already indicated to the parties in the course of the trial, I should find that the proper off-hire time lies somewhere between the time claimed by the charterers and the time already allowed by the owners. As appears fairly conclusive from the evidence, the "Marina" continued to battle some pretty fierce elements when she left St. John's in the direction of Rotterdam. She was experiencing strong head winds and high waves were continuing to wash over her bow and flood her upper deck. There was little respite for the crew. Concurrently, however, her boiler problems had become chronic and she appeared to have encountered generator problems as well. No doubt while on-going or temporary repairs were being made, the ship did not have the degree of manoeuverability which she otherwise might have enjoyed. Conversely, she would probably have been able to overcome her mechanical deficiencies had she profited from a following wind or had the weather not been incessantly hard on her and on her crew. With greater luck, the deviation to the Azores might have been avoided and the owners might only have been liable for the shortfalls in the "Marina's" warranted speed, shortfalls which might have been substantially reduced by sea and weather conditions.
[100]
In order to arrive at a fix, I must necessarily deal with the twin factors of weather and ship breakdown. The actual elapsed time from St. John's to Rotterdam is some 17 days. From the evidence, I am led to believe that the charterers took the best expected time of seven days for that run to arrive at some 10 days of off-hire. As the witness Pederson suggested, it was a good bargaining point but regard must be had to the incessant and continually heavy seas the "Marina" encountered after leaving St. John's causing her, if the safety of the ship and her crew was to be assured, to proceed to half her warranted speed or less.
[101]
It has been estimated that the deviation to the Azores added some 600 miles to the normal distance to travel between St. John's and Rotterdam. I find that half of that extra mileage is from the point of deviation to Ponta Delgada and the other half, from Ponta Delgada to a point somewhere west of the English Channel where the "Marina's" original rhumb-line course would have taken her.
[102]
As to the first half of this deviation, I should find the "Marina" off hire for the time it took her to reach the Azores, i.e. December 30, 1970, at 1600 hours to January 3, 1971, at 1700 hours. For the second half of this diviation, I should hold the "Marina" to a speed which is indicated in the ship's log of approximately ten knots for an elapsed time of one day and six hours. The total elapsed time for the whole distance comes to five days and six hours. I add the two days, fifteen hours in Ponta Delgada for a total of seven days and 22 hours of off-hire. There should therefore be credit to the charterers in the amount of $16,229.24.
[103]
With the exception of the first and second day out of the Azores, when the ship recorded a speed made good of some 10 knots, the balance of the transit time to Rotterdam was at speeds varying from 11.61 knots, to 12.96 knots, to 13.12 knots and to 13.87 knots. I have already discounted the first day plus six hours of that in my deviation calculations. I have considered off-hiring the ship for the remainder of the voyage to account for the shortfall in the stated speed of about 17 knots in good weather conditions. The best I can do in allowing for fog and for traffic restrictions in the narrower fairways of the English channel and the Rotterdam estuary is to calculate the elapsed time of some 100 hours at 15 knots, indicating a forhire elapsed time of 86.6 hours and representing an off-hire allowance to the charterers of some 13.4 hours. This amounts to $1,110 of off-hire.
[104]
The total off-hire for the whole run from Montreal to Rotterdam, which began on December 16, 1970 and ended on January 11, 1971, would therefore be as follows:
St. John's diversion
$10,848.00
Azores diversion
16,229.00
Off-hire for speed not made good, Azores-Rotterdam
1,110.00
Total
$28,187.00
[105]
I should observe here to assist the parties that in the Statement of General and Particular Average filed as Exhibit P-3, there is disclosed an estimation of deviation time for both St. John's and the Azores as follows:
St. John's:
6 days, 13 hours, 3 min.
Azores:
10 days, 15 hours, 50 min.
Total
17 days, 4 hours, 53 min.
Less Advance on course
5 days, 2 hours, 22 min.
Net deviation time
12 days, 2 hours, 31 min.
[106]
My own calculations given hereunder in equally graphic form are as follows:
St. John's:
5 days, 7 hours
Azores:
7 days, 22 hours
Total time
13 days, 5 hours
[107]
The spread is of roughly one day and three hours and may be accounted by the statement found in Exhibit P-3 at page 62 that the assumed speed of the "Marina" on what would have otherwise been her advance on her rhumb-line course was 10.4 knots. If one should increase that assumed speed by some 1.6 knots to 12 knots, the two methods of calculation add up to within a few hours of each other.
12.
Rotterdam
[108]
The positions of both the owners and the charterers with respect to the circumstances surrounding the unloading of the "Marina" when she finally anchored at Rotterdam on January 11, 1971, are involved. They reflect some fairly complex situations with respect to which the evidence is neither altogether clear nor conclusive and invoke matters of contract law which are not easy to resolve.
[109]
The owners' position is that they are entitled to three heads of payment from the charterers, namely: (1) full-hire for the period of January 11, 1971, to the date of redelivery on January 28, 1971; (2) the cost of cleaning the holds of the ship in the amount of $9,696; and (3) the cost of repairs to a window in the amount of $115.
[110]
The charterers on the other hand claim (1) a total of eight days off-hire at Rotterdam in the amount of $16,400; (2) extra discharging expenses in No. 3 hold amounting to $8,792; (3) reduced demurrage in the amount of $12,750; and (4) legal fees of $7,500. A claim for some $2,300 of bunker C remaining on board on redelivery was abandoned at trial.
[111]
Before determining the complementary or conflicting claims of the parties, some of the facts disclosed at trial in both the verbal and documentary evidence should be stated. It will be recalled that in the Duluth-Rotterdam voyage, the "Marina" was on a trip-charter for the shipper, I.S. Joseph Shipping Company, to carry some 7,300 tons of cargo to various consignees in Rotterdam. The unloading of the cargo in Rotterdam being to shipper's account; the usual demurrage clause applied. Delays having been experienced in unloading the cargo, substantially by reason of the difficulties in removing the wet and damaged cargo from some of the holds of the ship, demurrage at the cost of $3,000 per day soon started to run against the shipper. The demurrage charges became the subject of a lawsuit between the charterers and the shipper in which the charterers claimed 12 days plus of demurrage charges totalling $37,750. In its defence, the shipper claimed that the delays in unloading were by reason of wet and damaged cargo caused by the neglect of the charterers or by acts of God, namely the heavy weather and severe storms occasioned during the Duluth - Rotterdam voyage. Furthermore, the defendant shipper counterclaimed for $8,792 representing the extra cost of unloading the cargo. It will be recalled that the parties to the suit eventually settled for a lump sum of $25,000 which was paid over by the shipper to the charterers.
(1)
Off-hire
[112]
The logical base for demurrage is that should shippers or consignees delay the unloading of their cargos, the owner or charterer of a ship is denied the use of it. Similarly, the logical base for off-hire in a charter-party is that should the owner's vessel become disabled otherwise than through acts of God or perils of the sea, the charterer is denied the use of it. In the situation at Rotterdam, we are therefore facing a conundrum: may the charterers claim demurrage against the shipper because the charterers were denied the use of the ship and at the same time claim off-hire against the owners for substantially the same reasons?
[113]
I would concede that in some instances, the contractual base on which some particular claim is founded may be substantially different from the contractual base upon which another similar claim is founded. In the case before me, however, neither claim may be regarded as clearly established. The shipper, in resisting a demurrage charge, alleged negligence of the charterers or perils of the sea. The owners, in resisting the off-hire claim, alleged perils of the sea, inefficient unloading operations, unfavourable weather causing delays, cluttered port facilities and so on. More so said the owners, how could the "Marina" be unavailable to the charterers under the charter-party when she was perfectly available to them under the voyage charter? The owners cite the decision of Kerr, J., in The "Mareva A.S.", [1977] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 368, where it was held that a ship which is otherwise fully capable of performing every service required of her and fully capable of discharging cargo, is not for that matter off-hire if discharging, by reason of damaged cargo caused by faulty hatches, takes 15 days longer than would otherwise have been required.
[114]
Other matters come into play to add clutter to the final disposition of this case. These matters are set out in the Statement of General and Particular Average (Exhibit P-3). A reading of this comprehensive statement leads one to conclude that the good ship "Marina" suffered one accident after another, had chronic boiler and generator problems and added to these, faced through many days of her transit from Montreal to Rotterdam, heavy and continuing winds and seas unusual in their strength and duration even for that time of the year in the North Atlantic.
[115]
As a result of all these circumstances, the "Marina" was subjected to surveys relating to the damages suffered in the Welland Canal, to the storm damages caused to many parts of her upper deck prior to her deviation to St. John's, to further damages on transit to the Azores, and to damages caused when she attempted to tie up at Ponta Delgada. All of these incidents came to a point when she was again surveyed in Rotterdam.
[116]
Three conclusions material to the issue before me may be made from a study of these surveys:
i. There were deficiencies, chronic perhaps, but nevertheless obvious ones to the "Marina's" propulsion system. These deficiencies contributed to delays, and to diversions, all of which have been considered in the determination of off-hire in Lake St. Clair, in Lake Superior, in St. John's and in the Azores.
ii. The "Marina" did suffer considerable damages prior to the St. John's diversion and on her next leg to the Azores. No doubt, especially with respect to the loss of the breakwater with consequential damages to cargo in the No. 1 hold, there is an element during that voyage of perils of the sea which cannot be easily discounted. Other damages to the ship included bent pipes, bulkheads set in, handrails distorted, a water-tight door and a flagstaff torn off and lost, derrick legs bent, fire and washdeck lines broken, crew accommodation, alleyways flooded and various parts of the rudder assembly damaged. Severe loss was also occasioned to ship's stores, electrical apparatus and spares.
iii. I must also find that corrosion was a factor in the loss of the breakwater. I depend for this on observations made by surveyors in both St. John's and Rotterdam. It was the conclusion of the insurance adjusters involved that the damage to the breakwater and steel decking should be attributed equally between heavy weather and corrosion.
[117]
To the foregoing, there must be added a reference to the damage done to cargo in the No. 3 hold by reason of the burst laundry pipes. This, in my view, cannot be attributed to heavy weather. The evidence is not clear whether or not the pipes were insulated against freezing cold or whether any insulation had become deficient. I can only find that no owner should venture into the North Atlantic in winter and expect balmy temperatures. On a straight liability basis, I would attribute consequential damage to the owners.
[118]
I now return to Rotterdam and the period of January 11, 1971, to January 28, 1971. Discharging of the "Marina" was the responsibility of the shipper. The owners had no stay in the matter. The shipper or his consignees proceeded to discharge the cargo. They did it in a way which would best limit the damage to cargo in hold No. 1 and hold No. 3 and to avoid mixing the damaged cargo with the good cargo. This took time, much longer than would have been anticipated. The charterers fix the additional time for unloading at eight days, or at least, claim off-hire for this period. They also claimed 12 days' demurrage against the shipper, which claim in a gross amount of $27,750 was compromised at $25,000. They claim the difference of $12,750 against the owners and further $8,792 for extra discharging expense to No. 3 hold.
[119]
If I should follow the extensive reasoning of Kerr, J., in The "Mareva A.S." (supra), there is no acceptable formula whereby owners may claim a credit on an off-hire claim by the charterers for demurrage received by the charterers from a third party. In circumstances remarkably similar to the ones before me, His Lordship states at page 380:
"... But in one way or another the charterers have clearly paid for the right to demurrage as part of their bargain. The owners, as wrong-doers, cannot be entitled to lessen their liability by claiming credit for one benefit which accrued to the charterers from this bargain, ignoring whatever the charterers may have had to concede in order to obtain this benefit."
[120]
Kerr, J., then quoted with approval the statement of Baron Pigott in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 3:
"The Plaintiff is entitled to recover the damages caused to him by the negligence of the defendants, and there is no reason or justice in setting off what the Plaintiff had entitled himself to under a contract with third persons, by which he has bargained for the payment of a sum of money in the event of an accident happening to him. He does not receive that sum of money because of the accident, but because he has made a contract providing for the contingency; an accident must occur to entitle him to it, but it is not the accident, but his contract, which is the cause of his receiving it."
[121]
If in such circumstances, therefore, demurrage is the charterers' to keep, it does not necessarily follow that the charterers may also claim off-hire against the owners. Kerr, J., somewhat in the manner in which I have earlier expressed it, found it difficult to reconcile a claim for demurrage because the shipper denies the charterers the use of a ship with a claim for off-hire because the owners deny the charterers the use of the same ship. His Lordship found that if a ship is ready to unload and if the ship's ability to work fully is not prevented or impaired by reason of damaged cargo and the ship remains fully efficient in all respects, the ship cannot be considered off-hire.
[122]
I find myself subscribing fully to Kerr, J.'s, reasoning. The factual situation facing him in the "Mareva A.S." case was substantially the one before me. The time charter was on the New York Produce Exchange form. Clause 15 of the form was identical. The cargo aboard the ship on its passage from Houston, Texas, to Algiers was damaged by reason of faulty hatch covers, an owners' responsibility. His Lordship ruled that the charterers could not bring themselves within the terms of clause 15 and could not establish off-hire during the 15-odd days of unloading.
[123]
With respect to the "Marina", I find myself reaching the same conclusion. Off-hire as such cannot be claimed during the period when the Marina was unloading at Rotterdam.
(2)
Lost Demurrage
[124]
The foregoing determination, however, is not the end of the matter. By reason of the settlement of their claim against I.S. Joseph Shipping Company, the charterers lost the equivalent of four days and some of demurrage worth $12,750. If the owners cannot be credited with demurrage in any event, charterers cannot charge the notional loss of demurrage to the owners. That amount consequently cannot be claimed.
(3)
Extra Cost of Unloading No. 3 Hold
[125]
There is left to consider, however, that an element in the settlement with the shipper was the amount of $8,792 paid by the shipper for extra unloading charges out of No. 3 hold. I believe the evidence of Mr. Francis O'Brien that this was part of the settlement and was in fact a material ingredient which enabled the parties to agree on terms. I find further that the settlement was, for want of a better term, a judicious one and reflected in its essential features the realities of the situation and avoided further costs and multiplication of proceedings. A pity that the case before me was not settled in a similar fashion.
[126]
As to the charterers claiming over this amount of $8,792 from the owners, I believe that on the face of it, the charterers suffered this loss by reason of the owners' negligence in not taking sufficient care of the ship's laundry pipes running in No. 3 hold. The water-damaged cargo in that hold imposed extra unloading charges and was a consequence of the owners' fault. It has often been repeated when dealing with equitable set-off that such a principle is to recognize the inherent fairness of allowing it or the inherent unfairness in refusing it. It is evident, however, that the charterers' counterclaim is not a case of applying the set-off principle and avoids the somewhat murky jurisprudence on that subject. As Lord Denning, M.R., remarked in the case of The "Nanfri", [1978] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 132, where an analysis of equitable set-off in general is made, there is some confusion between set-off or a defence properly so-called and a counterclaim or cross-action. This appears to be particularly true in charter-party cases. We are dealing here, however, with a counterclaim, where the charterers state that they have suffered damages by having, effectively, to compromise their demurrage claim against the shipper, a compromise which is the consequence of the "Marina's" unseaworthy condition in hold No. 3. Forgetting for the moment the confusion which multiple insurance contracts might create as between owners, charterers, voyage charterers, consignees and the like, the factual connection between the negligence of the owners and the extra cost of removing damaged cargo from that particular hold of the "Marina" is sufficiently strong and clear that the liability connection should follow as well. Applying again the fairness and fitness test applicable to equitable remedies, I should find that it is fair and proper that the charterers be compensated for that amount of $8,792.
(4)
Legal Fees on Demurrage Action
[127]
The charterers further claim an amount of $7,500 for legal fees. For the same reasons I advanced with respect to extra unloading expenses, I should allow for legal fees as well. The allowance, however, should be proportionate to the separate interest of both charterers and owners to the dispute. I should fix that proportion at $2,500 and allow that amount to the charterers.
(5)
Cleaning Holds on Redelivery
[128]
The owners claim $9,696.97 for this item. I am satisfied on the basis of the Amsterdam shipyard invoice of June 23, 1971 (Exhibit P-34) that this work was done. I should nevertheless discount this claim. As I have already found, the cost of cleaning the holds is attributable in part to the owners' own negligence, especially in respect of No. 3 hold and partly in respect of No. 1 hold. I should think therefore, that an allowance of $5,000 for cleaning would balance the equities between the parties.
(6)
Repairs to Window
[129]
This is a claim by the owners in the amount of $115 for these repairs. The liability fixes on it are not clear. I should not wish to make a leading case out of it. I should simply allow it and be done with it.
13.
Miscellaneous Items
(1)
Calculation of Total Time on Charter
[130]
As the "Marina" was delivered at Key West, Florida, and redelivered in Rotterdam, there is a time spread of some five or six hours in charter time calculations. Article 4 of the charter-party speaks of "hire to continue until the hour of the day of her redelivery". Absent any other indication as to the intention of the parties in this respect, I should agree with the finding in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and fix the total hire otherwise due at 88 days, 11 hours and 40 minutes for the total of $181,396.51.
(2)
Claim for Bunkers on Delivery
[131]
This claim, amounting to $8,895. 25 for some 391 tons of bunker C at $23 U.S., has been agreed.
(3)
Claim for Diesel Oil on Delivery
[132]
This claim by the owners is for some 10 tons of diesel oil amounting to $715.68. Although the charterers had not been made aware of these diesel oil requirements when they authorized their agents to sign the charter-party, the representation is clearly stated in the contract. The amount is properly to the charterers' account.
(4)
Costs of Cables
[133]
This claim by the owners in the amount of $104.96 has not been seriously disputed and it should be allowed.
(5)
Bunker C Allowance for Off-Hire
[134]
The calculations made by the charterers in this respect amount to $2,433.54 representing about 105 tons of fuel. These calculations were made on the basis of the actual daily consumption of fuel as shown in the ship's log and appear to be fair and reasonable. I should not disturb it.
(6)
Diesel Fuel Consumption
[135]
The charter-party in article 33 represents the "Marina's" port consumption of diesel fuel at 1.5 tons daily. On the evidence, there seems to be no doubt that a steam turbine propulsion system requires some other power source when alongside and to fuel its generators while at sea. This dual system is what might have prompted the London agents to the charterers to negotiate a $2,050 daily hire instead of the $3,000 originally proposed. There is also evidence that these diesel oil requirements were not known to the charterers and took them considerably by surprise. In fact, it might very well have been the initial factor which turned them off the deal. Yet, the owners cannot be held accountable for this. Diesel oil requirements were plainly stated in the charter-party.
[136]
The total diesel oil consumed during the charter appears to be some 104 tons. This seems to accord with rated consumption. I should nevertheless allow the owners some amount for diesel consumed during off-hire periods. I would assess this at some 20 tons in the amount of $715.
(7)
Overtime
[137]
On the basis of the total overtime charge of $500 per month for a 30.5 day month, less the total of the off-hire periods, I would fix the total overtime due to the owners at $1,259.
(8)
Cost of Premium Fuel at Duluth
[138]
Some unexplained, perhaps unexplainable error occurred in Duluth when 108 long tons of premium fuel were taken on board resulting in an excess cost of some $520.49 over ordinary bunker C. It is difficult to pin the error on either the owners or the charterers. As the cost of fuel under the charter-party is generally to the account of the charterers, however, I should be reluctant to allow this amount to them.
(9)
Charterers' Disbursements for Owners' Account
[139]
Exhibit D-10 discloses brokerage commissions paid by the charterers in the amount of $7,019.84. This amount is not in dispute. With respect to the other items listed, the claim for diesel oil in Invoice M-11-1698 in the amount of $3,020.08 is reduced in $715 and the claim for excess fuel cost in Duluth in Invoice M-11-1692 in the amount of $520.49 is disallowed. This has the effect of reducing the total claim by the charterers under this head from $25,597.69 to $22,906.91.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
[140]
I should explain here for the benefit of the parties any view of the threads of evidence which warp and weft their way throughout the fabric of this charter-party.
[141]
In some cases, the evidence on which I could base my findings were relatively clear cut, my only contribution being to make necessary adjustments as to quantum.
[142]
In other cases, the evidence was controverted if not outright conflicting and the legal conclusions somewhat difficult to draw. I give as examples the credit to charterers for the cleaning of holds at Duluth and the extra discharging expense in Rotterdam. I give as further examples the credit to owners for the cleaning of holds during the Great Lakes transit and for the cleaning of holds subsequent to redelivery. Many more examples of claims of like nature run through the case.
[143]
What I have tried to do is to make sure that the warp of the owner's claims was as straight as the weft of the charterers' claims so that the fabric thereby woven would have some integrity and so that the patterns of claims which are repeated throughout would follow as best as possible their logical design.
[144]
To achieve this purpose, I have taken the evidence of the parties at face value. I have assumed that each party, although deeply suspicious of the other, nevertheless was deserving of credibility before this Court.
CONCLUSION
[145]
I have set out hereunder in tabular form a list of credits and debits indicating the various heads of claims submitted by the parties.
-
-
Recapitulation
-
-
Debit
-
Credit
Gross hire
-
-
$181,396.51
Off hire
$28,443.25
-
-
Overtime
-
-
1,259.00
Extra Insurance
-
-
14,695.82
Freeport deviation
-
-
597.94
Fuel on delivery
-
-
8,895.25
Diesel oil on delivery
-
-
715.68
Cash received
-
-
2,000.00
Paid on account
113,486.96
-
-
Disb. to owners' Account
22,906.91
-
-
Off-hire fuel
2,433.54
-
-
Cleaning in Duluth
1,945.20
-
-
Net Seaway fittings
3,870.00
-
-
Oil spill
9.89
-
-
Extra unloading costs
8,792.17
-
-
Legal fees
2,500.00
-
-
Cleaning
-
-
3,000.00
Repairs
-
-
115.00
Cables
-
-
104.96
Off-hire diesel fuel
715.68
-
-
Cleaning on redelivery
-
-
5,000.00
-
$185,102.92
-
$217,780.16
Net amount due owners
-
$32,677.24
-
[146]
On the state of the pleadings, there is indicated a judgment for the plaintiff of $43,969.41 on its statement of claim and judgment for the defendant for $11,292.17 on its counterclaim. These amounts already account for the exchange rates on U.S. dollars and Dutch guilders prevailing at the relevant times. In my view, they require no further adjustments.
[147]
I should allow a measure of interest on the net amount due the plaintiff. In so doing, however, I should take into consideration the extremely long period of time between the year 1971 when the cause of action arose and the year 1986 when the trial finally took place. I should also ascribe a fair proportion of this delay to the plaintiff. The action was not instituted until December 1975. There were changes of solicitors. The original trial date set for January 1982 was aborted. Delays in complying with various interlocutory orders of this Court provoked further interlocutory motions by the defendant to have the action dismissed. On the other hand, I should note from the Court record any number of initiatives taken by the defendant which also caused delays to the issues coming to trial.
[148]
Counsel for the defendant argued that the slipshod manner in which the owners or the master of the "Marina" complied with the conditions of the charter-party respecting the filing of ship's logs contributed greatly to the dispute and to the hardening of positions. I agree with him on this. I must also find, however, that from very early on in the game, the charterers concluded that they had got a bad bargain and their subsequent actions certainly contributed to the feud.
[149]
From a practical point, any award of interest would still leave the parties in a no win situation. It was admitted by counsel at the conclusion of the trial that counsel fees, expert witness fees and the costs of a lengthy trial would far exceed any recovery which either party could reasonably hope to get.
[150]
I have considered a number of ways in which an award of interest would reflect the particular circumstances of this litigation. I have concluded that the simplest way is to award interest on the plaintiff's net recoverable amount at the robe of 7.41% per annum from the date of the institution of the action to the date of payment, the rate being 60% of the average prime rate over that period of time.
[151]
There is remaining the question of costs. Success between the parties on their claim and counter-claim has been divided. In my view, the whole experience is a classic one where each party should bear its own costs. The court record discloses, however, some interlocutory proceedings where costs were awarded on an "in any event" basis. These may be taxed in the usual way.
[152]
I intend to defer the signing of the formal judgment for two weeks from this date. This should enable counsel to check my calculations and agree to whatever minor adjustments might be warranted. In the meantime, I should remain seized of the case.
[153]
One final comment. It will be nice to lay the saga on the "Marina" to rest.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]