 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Preston, Assessment Officer
June 8, 2009.
Counsel:
Charles C. Roach, for the plaintiff;
Michelle Ratpan, for the defendant.
Solicitors of Record:
Roach Schwartz & Associates, Toronto, Ontario, for the plaintiff;
John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the defendant.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Preston, Assessment Officer
: By way of Reasons for Order and Order dated November 6, 2008, the Court dismissed the plaintiff's motion appealing the decision of Prothonotary Milczynski dated May 27, 2008, struck the Amended Statement of Claim in its entirety and the action was dismissed with costs to the respondent (defendant) throughout.
[2]
On January 5, 2009 the defendant filed its Bill of Costs together with a letter requesting an appointment for an assessment of their Bill of Costs.
[3]
Upon reviewing the file it was determined that this was an assessment that would be suitable for disposition by way of written submissions. By direction dated January 12, 2009, amended January 23, 2009, a timetable was established for the filing of written submissions. The time limits set by the direction have now passed and materials have been filed by both parties.
[4]
Counsel for the plaintiff submits "the Plaintiff is impecunious and has no money or assets to pay costs". Counsel proceeds to outline the issues before the Court on the motion to strike and concludes:
Justice Harrington relied on the cases of
Bernath
to support the proposition that an action for damages for breach of
Charter Rights
could proceed without resort to judicial review.
There are several subsequent decisions that support the view that a Plaintiff can sue for damages for breach of
Charter
rights as a result of administrative action without the prerequisite of judicial review where the remedy being sought was independent of issues arising in judicial review and where judicial review is unable to grant the money damages sought. This was such a case.
For these reasons the Plaintiff submits that no costs should be allowed.
[5]
In the Affidavit of Anthony Moodie, the plaintiff provided evidence supporting the submission that the plaintiff is impecunious and outlines the failures of the grievance process. At paragraph 2 of his affidavit Anthony Moodie submits that:
I am in a dire financial position and I am currently facing pressing and enormous financial obligations, especially with this current obligation as a result of the cost awarded by the Courts to the Respondent in the above case. This has placed additional financial strain on my limited resources upon which my family relies for our subsistence.
[6]
In the Affidavit of Claudette Paul, the plaintiff simply submits a copy of the Reasons for Order and Order of The Honourable Justice Harrington dated August 26, 2008 rendered on this file.
[7]
Throughout the submissions of the plaintiff, including the supporting affidavits, there was an absence of submissions relevant to the issue before me. The only submission directly relating to the award of costs addressed the dire financial position of the plaintiff.
[8]
The plaintiff's argument regarding his inability to pay costs considering his dire financial position cannot be a consideration in the assessment of costs. As held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and confirmed in many subsequent decisions:
Furthermore, in deciding whether costs should or should not be awarded against an unsuccessful plaintiff, neither the ability to pay nor the difficulty of collection should be a deciding factor but, on the contrary, the awarding or refusal of costs should be based on the merits of the case. Unless special circumstances exist to justify an order to the contrary, costs should normally follow the event.
[9]
Faced with the circumstances set out above, I will follow the reasons in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] F.C.J. No. 256, at paragraph 2:
Effectively, the absence of any relevant representations by the Plaintiff, which could assist me in identifying issues and making a decision, leaves the bill of costs unopposed. My view, often expressed in comparable circumstances, is that the
Federal Courts Rules
do not contemplate a litigant benefiting by an assessment officer stepping away from a position of neutrality to act as the litigant's advocate in challenging given items in a bill of costs. However, the assessment officer cannot certify unlawful items, i.e. those outside the authority of the judgment and the Tariff.
[10]
In keeping with the above, I have reviewed the file and find the disbursements claimed to be reasonable and necessary. I will allow disbursements as presented in the amount of $250.40. The $1,200.00 lump sum award of costs from the order of Prothonotary Milczynski dated May 27, 2008 is allowed as the order was upheld by the order of November 6, 2008.
[11]
Concerning the motion appealing the decision of the prothonotary, I have confirmed from the file that there was a hearing on September 22, 2008, which resulted in the Reasons for Order and Order dated November 6, 2008. The defendant has submitted claims under Tariff B section E (Trial or Hearing) for Items 14 (counsel fee per hour in court) and 15 (preparation and filing of written argument, where requested or permitted by the Court). Although there is no mention of the date of the hearing, the defendant's submissions make it clear that the costs submitted relate to said order.
[12]
Pursuant to Tariff B of the
Federal Courts Rules
, under section B of assessable services (motions), there are only 3 items which may be allowed respecting motions:
Item 4 - Preparation and filing of an uncontested motion, including materials and responses thereto.
Item 5 - Preparation and filing of a contested motion, including materials and responses thereto.
Item 6 - Appearance on a motion, per hour.
[13]
Having regard to the above provisions, and the plaintiff having submitted a claim for attendance at court under Item 14, and having reviewed the file and confirmed that there was a hearing of said motion, I will allow 1 unit for 30 minutes for the appearance on the motion (Item 6).
[14]
I am not able to allow the amounts claimed under Item 14(b) for second counsel or Item 15. Under both of these items there is a requirement for the Court to make an award or direction. Item 14(b) includes the provision "where Court directs" and Item 15 includes "where requested or permitted by the Court".
[15]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2004] F.C.J. No. 536, at paragraph 6 the assessment officer states:
Rule 400(1), which vests full discretionary power in the Court over awards of costs, means that orders and judgments must contain visible directions that costs have been awarded. Given the
Federal Courts Act
, ss. 3 and 5(1) defining the Court and Rule 2 of the
Federal Court Rules,
1998 defining an assessment officer, the absence of that exercise of prior discretion by the Court leaves me without jurisdiction under Rule 405 to assess costs.
[16]
Since an assessment officer is not a member of the Court, and there is no direction or order concerning second counsel or written submissions, I am without jurisdiction to allow the amounts claimed under Items 14(b) and 15.
[17]
Further to these reasons, the Bill of Costs presented at $2,667.90 is allowed for a total amount of $1,510.40. A certificate of assessment will be issued.
[End of document]