[1]
Dubé, J.
: The applicant, an inmate at Warkworth Institution, Northumberland County, Ontario, applies for writs of certiorari and mandamus pursuant to the respondent's refusal of his application to participate in the Private Family Visiting Program at the institution with Mr. Leslie Beu. The latter is the applicant's homosexual partner.
[2]
The applicant first applied to participate in the program on June 14, 1988. He was refused at all levels of grievance. On January 31, 1989, the respondent denied the grievance in these terms:
"Existing policy does not support your wish to have the private family program extended to common law partners of the same sex. This fact, notwithstanding, you have raised an important policy question which merits a much more intense examination. Such an examination will continue at National Headquarters and a decision on the question you raised will be handed down sometime in the near future.
"For the present, your grievance is denied."
[3]
The program is described in a booklet published by Correctional Service Canada. The introduction reads as follows:
"Private Family Visiting is a program established by The Correctional Service of Canada to provide eligible inmates of federal penitentaries with the privilege of having extended private visits with members of their families.
"The goal of the program is the maintenance of family ties and the preparation of inmates for their return to life in the community outside the penitentiaries."
[4]
The booklet outlines the qualifications for eligibility to the program. It is common ground that the applicant meets the requirements, except for his choice of a partner to participate in it. The booklet further describes the members of the family who are eligible to participate as follows:
"The Family
"The following family members are eligible to participate in the program: wife, husband, common law partners, children, parents, foster-parents, brothers, sisters, grandparents and, in special cases, in-laws."
[5]
The applicant alleges that he applied to participate in the program with his homosexual partner because he wishes to maintain their relationship throughout his incarceration, and because he believes that his successful reintegration into society will depend to a very great extent on the continuing support of persons in the community: the applicant's relationship with Mr. Beu is his closest and most supportive relationship in the community. He argues that he has been denied a benefit available to other inmates of a heterosexual orientation and that the basis of the denial is his own sexual orientation. He claims that such a denial is a violation of his rights under s. 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms which reads:
"15(1) Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination and, in paticular, without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability.
"(2) Subsection (1) does not preclude any law, program or activity that has as its object the amelioration of conditions of disadvantaged individuals or groups including those that are disadvantaged because of race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability."
[6]
Section 37(3) of the Penitentiary Act authorizes the Commisioner to make rules to be known as "Commissioner's Directives" for the custody, treatment and discipline of inmates and the good government of penitentiaries. Section 27 of the Penitentiaries Service Regulations provides that the visiting privileges permitted to inmates shall be calculated to assist in the reformation and rehabilitation of the inmate.
[7]
Paragraph 19 of the Commissioner's Directive 770, entitled "Visiting", provides that the Deputy Commissioner shall establish a list of relatives considered eligible for the Private Family Visiting Program.
[8]
The respondent submits that these classes include (with the exception of foster-parents, who are in loco parentis) only persons related to the inmate by consanguinity, marriage (including common law marriage) or affinity. He avers that a commonlaw marriage is between a woman and a man and not between two persons of the same sex: there is no common law applicable to relationships of cohabitation between persons of the same sex. He argues that the appellation "common law partners" in the program is synonymous with common law spouses and does not include persons who live together in a homosexual relationship: the applicant cannot have the man with whom he formerly lived approved for a private family visit, not because of the applicant's sexual orientation, but because the person he has nominated for the proposed visit is not his spouse or otherwise within one of the classes of listed relatives.
[9]
The applicant does not dispute these propositions. He agrees that his homosexual partner is not his spouse. He recognizes that his partner does not fit under "the family" as described in the program. He says that the program is discriminatory because it excludes homosexual relationships and, therefore, that his application has been denied on the basis of his sexual orientation.
[10]
There are no cases directly on point. Sexual orientation is not a ground specifically enumerated in s. 15 of the Charter. However, it is now well-established that discriminatory treatment will infringe s. 15 of it is based on grounds "analogous" to those specifically enumerated in that section of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[11]
In order to identify the characteristics which are analogous to the prohibited grounds of discrimination enumerated in s. 15, the social, political and legal context ought to be considered.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 115 (S.C.C.), Wilson, J., of the Supreme Court of Canada said at pages 39 and 40:
"In determining whether there is discrimination on grounds relating to the personal characteristics of the individual or group, it is important to look not only at the impugned legislation which has created a distinction that violates the right to equality but also to the larger social, political and legal context.
...
"McIntyre, J., recognized  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that 'the "enumerated and analogous grounds" approach most closely accords with the purposes of s. 15 and the definition of discrimination outlined above' and suggested that the alleged victims of discrimination  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  i.e. non-citizens permanently resident in Canada were 'a good example of a "discrete and insular minority" who came within the protection of s. 15'. Similarly, I suggested in my reasons  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that the determination of whether a group falls into an analogous category to those specifically enumerated in s. 15 is 'not to be made only in the context of the law which is subject to challenge but rather in the context of the place of the group in the entire social, political and legal fabric of our society." If the larger context is not examined, the s. 15 analysis may become a mechanical and sterile categorization process conducted entirely within the four corners of the impugned legislation. A determination as to whether or not discrimination is taking place, if based exclusively on an analysis of the law under challenge is likely, in my view, to result in the same kind of circularity which characterized the similarly situated similarly treated test clearly rejected by this court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ."
[12]
In the above mentioned Andrews case, McIntyre, J. (at pages 174-175), defined the term "discrimination" as follows:
"There are many other statements which have aimed at a short definition of the term discrimination. In general, they are in accord with the statements referred to above. I would say then that discrimination may be described as a distinction, whether intentional or not but based on grounds relating to personal characteristics of the individual or group, which has the effect of imposing burdens, obligations, or disadvantages on such individual or group not imposed upon others, or which withholds or limits access to opportunities, benefits, and advantages available to other members of society. Distinctions based on personal characteristics attributed to an individual solely on the basis of association with a group will rarely escape the charge of discrimination, while those based on an individual's merits and capacities will rarely be so classed."
[13]
In considering the entire legal and social fabric of our present day Canadian society, it is proper to consider provincial and territorial human rights legislation which expressly includes sexual orientation as a prohibited ground of discrimination. The Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms, R.S.Q. 1987, c. C-12, s. 10 of the Province of Québec provides as follows, at s. 10:
"10. Every person has a right to full and equal recognition and exercise of his human rights and freedoms, without distinction, exclusion or preference based on race, colour, sex, pregnancy,
sexual orientation
, civil status, age except as provided by law, religion, political convictions, language, ethnic or national origin, social condition, a handicap or the use of any means to palliate a handicap.
"Discrimination exists where such a distinction, exclusion or preference has the effect of nullifying or impairing such right." (my underlining)
[14]
The Manitoba Human Rights Act, S.M. 1987-88, c. 45, s. 9(2), describes the applicable characteristics at s. 9(2):
"9(2) The applicable characteristics for the purposes of clauses (1)(b) to (d) are
(a) ancestry, including colour and perceived race;
(b) nationally or national origin;
(c) ethnic background or origin;
(d) religion or creed, or religious belief, religious association or religious activity;
(e) age;
(f) sex, including pregnancy, the possibility of pregnancy, or circumstances related to pregnancy;
(g) gender-determined characteristics or circumstances other than those included in clause (f);
(h)
sexual orientation
;
(i) marital or family status;
(j) source of income;
(k) political belief, political association or political activity;
(l) physical or mental disability or related characteristics or circumstances, including reliance on a dog guide or other animal assistant, a wheelchair, or any other remedial appliance or device." (my underlining)
[15]
The Human Rights Act, S.Y. 1987, c. 3, s. 6, of the Yukon Territory lists the prohibited grounds under s. 6, as follows:
"6. It is discrimination to treat any individual or group unfavourably on any of the following grounds:
(a) ancestry, including colour and race,
(b) national origin,
(c) ethnic or linguistic background or origin,
(d) religion or creed, or religious belief, religious association, or religious activity,
(e) age,
(f) sex, including pregnancy, and pregnancy related conditions,
(g)
sexual orientation
(h) physical or mental disability,
(i) criminal charges or criminal record,
(j) political belief, political association or political activity,
(k) marital or family status," (my underlining)
[16]
The House of Commons Parliamentary Committee on Equality Rights released a report in October 1985 entitled "Equality For All", in which it recommended that sexual orientation be included as a prohibited ground in the Canadian Human Rights Act. Recommendation 10 reads (at page 30):
"10. We recommend that the Canadian Human Rights Act be amended to add
sexual orientation
as a prohibited ground of discrimination to the other grounds, which are race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, age, sex, marital status, family status, disability, and conviction for an offence for which a pardon has been granted." (my underlining)
[17]
Most of the grounds enumerated in s. 15 of the Charter as prohibited grounds of discrimination connote the attribute of immutability, such as race, national or ethnic origin, colour, age. One's religion may be changed but with some difficulty; sex and mental or physical disability, with even greater difficulty. Presumably, sexual orientation would fit within one of these levels of immutability. Another characteristic common to the enumerated grounds is that the individuals or groups involved have been victimized and stigmatized throughout history because of prejudice, mostly based on fear or ignorance, as most prejudices are. This characteristic would also clearly apply to sexual orientation, or more precisely to those who have deviated from accepted sexual norms, at least in the eyes of the majority.
[18]
Of course, the purpose of these proceedings is not to pass moral judgment on sexual orientation, but to decide whether or not the rights of the applicant have been violated under s. 15 of the Charter on the ground that he was excluded from the program because of his sexual orientation. Again, sexual orientation is not a prohibited ground listed under s. 15 but, in my view, it is an analogous ground recognized by the above provincial and territorial human rights acts, as well as the House of Commons Parliamentary Committee on Equality Rights. In my view, the applicant's rights have been violated.
[19]
Having determined that his right to equality has been infringed as a result of discrimination based on an analogous ground under s. 15, I must now turn to s. 1 of the Charter and find whether the denial of his right falls within such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.
[20]
The first question to be resolved is whether the purpose of this differential treatment based on sexual orientation is to further a desirable social goal. Bearing in mind that a goal of the program is the preparation of inmates for their return to life in the community through the preservation of their most supportive relationships, this desirable goal is not furthered by denying the applicant's access to his most supportive relationship. Obviously, the successful reintegration into the community of this inmate would be a benefit not only to him, but to the community as a whole.
[21]
The respondent argues that the granting of the release sought would place the applicant in considerable personal danger and would threaten the peace and good order of the institution within which he is held. The Deputy Warden at Warkworth Institution filed an affidavit wherein she states that it is her belief, "based on my knowledge of the mores prevailing amongst inmates in penal institutions, including a high regard for family values and a strong belief in traditional morality, coupled with a strict, harsh and retributive inmate code, prevailing therein", that the applicant is now at "some degree of risk". The risk is due to the nature of his conviction, "particularly sexual assault with a weapon upon a 15-year old male and given the strong disapproval with which such crimes are, in general, regarded by inmate populations".
[22]
However, the applicant has been in prison in Kingston Penitentiary since January 15, 1988, and was transferred to Warkwroth Institution on September 7, 1989, and there is no evidence of any retribution on the part of the other inmates.
[23]
The Deputy Warden goes on to state that the placement of the applicant upon the eligibility list for the program would put him at "very considerably greater risk to his personal security, as well as being a considerable risk to the peace and good order of the Institution".
[24]
While the opinion of the Deputy Warden deserves very serious consideration, that opinion is not sufficient, in my view, to overcome the burden upon the respondent to show that the violation of right is justified. After all, the applicant himself would know what risk he is taking. Moreover, he filed the affidavits of three other inmates at Warkworth to the effect that the safety of inmates is not compromised there because of their sexual orientation. It must be borne in mind that Warkworth is a medium security institution wherein the inmates are not considerated to present as much security risk as at Kingston, a maximum security penitentiary.
[25]
The second justification criterion is the proportionality test of balancing the nature of the right affected with the extent of the infringement and the degree to which the limitation furthers a desirable social goal. It appears to me that the respondent can reduce any risk to the safety of the applicant merely by maintaining the confidentiality of the applicant's participation in the program, and for that matter, the confidentiality of the participation of any and all inmates. No evidence has been adduced to show that such an obvious precaution would present any particular difficulty to the administration and good order of the institution.
[26]
Consequently, the decision of the respondent denying the applicant's grievance is quashed and the Commissioner of the Correctional Service is ordered to reconsider the applicant's grievance in accordance with the provisions of s. 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Costs of this motion to the applicant.
Application allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slg
[End of document]