[1]
Addy, J.
: The present application comes before me, pursuant to s. 36.2(d) of the Canada Evidence Act, as a judge designated by the Chief Justice of this court for the determination of an objection to disclosure of information made by Thomas D'Arcy Finn as Director of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (hereinafter referred to as C.S.I.S.) in a certificate dated the 15th of July 1986.
[2]
The certificate was filed in the Court of Appeal in support of a motion by the Deputy Attorney General for Canada for an order varying the contents of the case prescribed by rule 1402 of this court, in order to exclude material described in the certificate from the material to be filed in the Court of Appeal. The application followed a request by Mr. Henrie for a review under s. 28 of the Federal Court Act of a decision of the Security Intelligence Review Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Review Committee).
[3]
Mr. Henrie, an employee of the Government of Canada, had previously been cleared for security at the "secret" level. In March 1984 the department to which he had been seconded requested an up-date of his security clearance to the level of "confidential". C.S.I.S. forwarded a letter to his department indicating that he was a member of the Workers' Communist Party Marxist/Leninist (hereinafter called W.C.P.M.-L.) and also of the Groupe Marxiste Leniniste Liberation, (hereinafter referred to as G.M.L.L.). He was subsequently interviewed by members of C.S.I.S. and a final report from that organization recommended that he be denied a security clearance.
[4]
A complaint was filed by the applicant pursuant to s. 42(3) of the C.S.I.S. Act, S.C. 1984, c. 21, addressed to the Review Committee stating that he had been refused a security clearance requesting that the Review Committee conduct an investigation. The matter was heard by the Review Committee in private pursuant to s. 48(1) of the C.S.I.S. Act. Seven witnesses, including the appellant, gave testimony and 35 exhibits were filed with the Committee. Of the above, the following evidence was heard and considered by the Review Committee, in camera, and, for security reasons, in the absence of the applicant or his counsel: (1) the evidence of one witness whose identity and whose evidence was not disclosed in the report of the Review Committee; (2) part of the evidence of one witness who had also testified in the presence of the applicant and his counsel; (3) the whole or part of some 14 exhibits.
[5]
In addition, portions of the argument of counsel for C.S.I.S. were not shown to counsel for the applicant nor were two letters with attachments addressed to the Committee pertaining to some of the testimony given during the hearing which was closed to the respondent and his counsel.
[6]
The Review Committee, in its report, found that both the W.C.P.M.-L. and the G.M.L.L were organizations whose activities constituted a threat to the security of Canada as defined in s. 2(d) of the C.S.I.S. Act which reads as follows:
"(d) activities directed toward undermining by covert unlawful acts, or directed toward or intended ultimately to lead to the destruction or overthrow by violence of, the constitutionally established system of government in Canada,"
[7]
The Review Committee also found that, on his own admission, the applicant was a member of the G.M.L.L., to which it was felt he manifested a serious attachment in loyalty. The Committee also made a finding to the effect that the applicant was an active supporter of the W.C.P.M.-L., as he supported it financially, and in addition, attended at party functions, public meetings, seminars, training sessions and public demonstrations organized by the party or in which its members participated. Finally, it recommended that security clearance be denied.
[8]
There was an initial objection to my jurisdiction to hear the matter made by Mr. House, counsel for the applicant. He submitted that ss. 36.1, 36.2 and 36.3 of the Canada Evidence Act had no application because it could not be used to repeal the effect of rule 1402 of the Federal Court, which requires that all papers relevant to the matter and which were considered by the Tribunal whose decision is to be reviewed by the Court of Appeal as well as a transcript of the evidence at the hearing and all affidavits and exhibits filed are to form part of the case. I rejected the objection to jurisdiction and gave oral reasons therefor at the hearing. However, following the request of Mr. Noël as counsel for C.S.I.S., I agreed to include herein, written reasons for my decision on the question of jurisdiction.
[9]
It is well established that where a conflict exists between the provisions of a statute and those of a regulation or a rule of court approved by Order in Council, the statute must of necessity prevail. There is also a principle to the effect that, where two equivalent pieces of legislation cannot be reconciled, the more recent enactment will normally prevail. In addition, if rule 1402(1) were held to prevail, then the very intent and purpose of the C.S.I.S. Act would be defeated in the case at bar. If the objection were wellfounded, national security could be seriously jeopardized by the mere application of a rule of court.
[10]
Until the enactment of the amendments to the Canada Evidence Act with which we are concerned, a certificate of the Minister to the effect that a divulsion of certain information would be injurious to national security was final and completely unassailable before any court. No evidence which was subject to such an objection could have been considered by the Court of Appeal. Section 36.2 merely provides a means pursuant to which the written or oral objections to evidence on those grounds may now be reviewed and, if deemed unjustified or too broad, may be set aside in whole or in part. That section provides that, where national security is involved, the validity of the objection to nondisclosure may be determined only by the Chief Justice of this court or by a judge designated by him. Unlike objections made on the grounds of other types of specified national interest, the initial jurisdiction to determine whether objections made on the grounds of national security or defence or international relations should be maintained, is restricted to one specified person or a nominee of that person and the hearing must be carried out in camera. The public policy reason for such a restrictive method of review is quite evident. The Court of Appeal can deal with the subject-matter only by way of appeal pursuant to s. 36.2(3) and has been granted no initial jurisdiction to try the issue any more than it possesses initial jurisdiction regarding ordinary trials.
[11]
Finally on the question of jurisdiction, since the Court of Appeal in this matter in effect decided to refrain from entertaining the application pursuant to rule 1402(2) until the initial objection had been dealt with, its decision at least implies that it would not have the jurisdiction to do so. I therefore feel that I am bound by that decision although there was no specific finding regarding my jurisdiction.
[12]
Counsel for all parties involved in this matter were of the view that, from a practical standpoint, it would be highly desirable for the Court of Appeal to be empowered to deal with the whole matter in the first instance in all cases such as the present one, where decisions of the Review Committee are being examined by that court pursuant to s. 28 of the Federal Court Act. The court would then be in a much better position to pass judgment on how the Review Committee conducted its inquiry than when it is completely deprived of the right to examine all of the evidence heard by that Tribunal. This jurisdiction would seem to be the most logical and practical, since the Appellate Division of our court, in any event, upon a regular appeal does have the jurisdiction to consider the entire issue of any objection from a decision of a judge under s. 36.2 and, of course, to examine all of the relevant documents should the court deem it necessary.
[13]
I agree with counsel. I feel that the main reason why evidence which might prove injurious to national defence or security or to international relations, should be treated statutorily in a different manner in cases where decisions of the Review Committee are being considered pursuant to s. 28 of the Federal Court Act, than cases involving decisions of all other federal boards, commissions or tribunals, is that the evidence has actually been heard and considered by the Review Committee in arriving at its decision, while, in all other cases, the tribunals are denied access to it as long as the objection is not overturned. The evidence therefore cannot have influenced any of their findings one way or the other. Unfortunately, however, the restrictive wording of s. 36.2 does not permit that course of action to be adopted. Section 69 of the C.S.I.S. Act imposes a statutory obligation for a comprehensive review of the Act within five years of its promulgation. That time is fast approaching and consideration might well be given to providing for these specific situations. The relevant portions of s. 39 of the C.S.I.S. Act read as follows:
"39(2) Notwithstanding any other Act of Parliament or any privilege under the law of evidence, but subject to subsection (3), the Review Committee is entitled
(a) to have access to any information under the control of the Service or of the Inspector General that relates to the performance of the duties and functions of the Committee and to receive from the Inspector General, Director and employees such information, reports and explanations as the Committee deems necessary for the performance of its duties and functions; and
(b) during any investigation referred to in paragraph 38(c) to have access to any information under the control of the deputy head concerned that is relevant to the investigation.
"(3) No information described in subsection (2), other than a confidence of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada in respect of which subsection 36.3(1) of the Canada Evidence Act applies, may be withheld from the Committee on any grounds."
[14]
It is to be noted that s. 38(c) refers to s. 42 on which the applicant's present complaint is based.
[15]
The applicant further argued that I had no jurisdiction to consider the certificate of objection, because it was not issued at the time of the hearing before the Review Committee and it was now too late to do so. In other words, the Director was precluded at law from issuing the certificate at the later stage of the application before the Court of Appeal since he had originally failed to do so at the hearing before the Review Committee when the evidence was first presented and considered. This argument would be valid if the evidence had been divulged to the applicant at the time because the security classification would automatically have been lost. However, it is common ground between the parties that the chairman, without having stated that there was any objection made by the Director or any other person, chose to exclude the classified evidence and documents ex proprio motu and to consider the classified documents, exhibits and arguments in the absence of the applicant and his counsel. There was obviously no reason in those circumstances for the Director to either object orally or to issue a certificate of objection since the chairman was respecting the security classification in any event. One does not request what has already been granted.
[16]
On a further related issue, the applicant also argued that the chairman was not authorized to exclude the evidence in the absence of the certificate and also that s. 48(2) of the C.S.I.S. Act only authorizes him to exclude the applicant during "representations" made to the Review Committee and not while evidence is being presented. Whatever might be the legal validity, if any, to be attached to these arguments, they are obviously matters which fall to be decided by the Court of Appeal in its review of the conduct of the hearing before the Committee. It might well be that, before the hearing commenced or at some other time in a confidential manner, the Director might have informed the chairman what evidence he considered to be classified for security purposes. But this is mere speculation on my part and, in any event, if it did occur it is again a matter for the Court of Appeal to consider and obviously not for me to decide.
[17]
There were also written arguments submitted to the effect that the proceedings before the Review Committee offended on various grounds against s. 2(e) of the Bill of Rights and s. 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Liberties, the principles of fundamental justice and of natural justice and the principle of equality before the law. Again, all of these matters and arguments refer to the hearing before the Review Committee. Of course I am not at all seized with those issues nor do I have the jurisdiction to try them. The area of my jurisdiction has been clearly defined and limited by ss. 36.1(1) and 36.2(1)(5) (6) of the C.S.I.S. Act.
[18]
Having decided that I have jurisdiction to hear the matter I now turn to the substance of the application. Public interest in the administration of justice requires complete openness of the judicial process. That principle must be jealously guarded and rigorously applied, especially where evidence which appears to be relevant to a judicial determination is at stake. That cardinal rule not only safeguards the rights of litigants generally but, more importantly, it is fundamental to the public interest in the preservation of our free and democratic society. There are, however, very limited and well-defined occasions where that principle of complete openness must play a secondary role and where, with regard to the admission of evidence, the public interest in not disclosing the evidence may outweigh the public interest in disclosure. This frequently occurs where national security is involved for the simple reason that the very existence of our free and democratic society as well as the continued protection of the rights of litigants ultimately depend on the security and continued existence of our nation and of its institutions and laws.
[19]
One of the matters to be taken into consideration in deciding whether the public interest in disclosing evidence outweighs the public interest in non-disclosure, is the importance of the issue to which the evidence relates. The present applicant is in effect claiming, apparently with some possible justification, that the refusal of a higher security clearance will impede his promotion to a better and a more lucrative position in the public service for which he appears to be otherwise fully qualified. Although the matter is undoubtedly considered an important one for the applicant, its relative importance is not great when compared with certain other similar matters which the courts are called upon to decide or especially with criminal proceedings, where such vital matters as the reputation and the liberty of the subject are at stake.
[20]
Another fundamental consideration is the importance of the evidence itself and its relevance to the issue to which it relates, especially where the issue is vital and essential to the ultimate determination of the dispute.
[21]
In the present case the relevance and possible importance of the evidence can hardly be of a higher order: counsel now all agree that the key issue, if not the sole issue, which remained to be determined by the Review Committee by means of the evidence heard and considered in the absence of the applicant, was whether the W.C. P.M.-L and the G.M.L.L. or either one of them may be classified as an organization constituting a threat to the security of Canada. From the other evidence given both by the applicant and others in his presence he would apparently have to be denied the security clearance which he seeks should either organization be found to constitute such a threat. It is admitted by the respondents that there is no evidence of the applicant himself ever having been personally engaged in any subversive actions of any kind. The conclusions to be drawn from the aims and actions of these two organizations thus constitute the key issue and indeed the sole issue. The evidence relating to it is not only relevant but would appear to be absolutely vital in deciding whether the denial of a security clearance was justified. The evidence on this matter, adduced in the presence of Mr. Henrie and his counsel, may well be considered as somewhat tenuous and therefore subject to being contradicted, tempered or modified by evidence classified as secret and tendered in their absence and of which they were not aware.
[22]
For the above reasons and also because the classified oral evidence, exhibits and other documents were in fact considered judicially and not discarded or set aside by the Review Committee as occurs in all other types of cases, I have decided to exercise my discretion in favour of the applicant and to examine the evidence. In the applications under s. 36.2 dealt with in the cases of Goguen and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the last two of which were heard by me at the trial level, the discretion of the judge trying the validity of the objection was, for the reasons mentioned in those cases, exercised against actually reviewing the classified evidence. However, contrary to the present situation, the relevance of the evidence and its importance to the determination of the issues before the courts concerned were minimal or nonexistent in each of the above-mentioned cases and, as previously stated, the classified evidence was, for that reason, not considered.
[23]
In conducting my examination of the documents and evidence referred to in the certificate of objection I was conscious of the fact that, unlike all other cases, the classified evidence had already been considered by the tribunal exercising original jurisdiction and, in addition, that it related directly to a final decision of a tribunal as opposed to evidence relating to an on-going trial or proceeding.
[24]
The material before me, in addition to the secret material covered by the certificate of objection, consisted of affidavits submitted by both parties which were filed for the hearing together with summaries of the arguments. In addition to the questions regarding the jurisdiction, counsel for the parties addressed me on the merits of the application.
[25]
During the hearing counsel for C.S.I.S. requested, on the grounds of national security, permission to present, in the absence of counsel for the applicant, an additional affidavit marked secret which purported to explain why the evidence and each of the documents mentioned in the certificate of objection would be injurious to national security if the contents were divulged to the public. I acceded to his request. He also furnished me, for the same reason, in the absence of counsel for the applicant, a brief explanation regarding one or two paragraphs of the affidavit. I considered the classified evidence and upon reconvening, in the absence of counsel for the applicant, I addressed certain questions to counsel for C.S.I.S. regarding some of the documents mentioned in the certificate. Following that, counsel for all parties presented closing arguments. Before adjourning I advised the parties that, should any question arise in my mind regarding the possibility of editing any of the documents and of releasing part thereof, there remained a possibility of the hearing being reconvened for further argument.
[26]
In considering whether the release of any particular information might prove injurious to national security and in estimating the possible extent of any such injury, one must bear in mind that the fundamental purpose of and indeed the raison d'être of a national security intelligence investigation is quite different and distinct from one pertaining to criminal law enforcement, where there generally exists a completed offence providing a framework within the perimeters of which investigations must take place and can readily be confined. Their purpose is the obtaining of legally admissible evidence for criminal prosecutions. Security investigations on the other hand are carried out in order to gather information and intelligence and are generally directed towards predicting future events by identifying patterns in both past and present events.
[27]
There are few limits upon the kinds of security information, often obtained on a long-term basis, which may prove useful in identifying a threat. The latter might relate to any field of our national activities and it might be an immediate one or deliberately planned for some time in the relatively distant future. An item of information, which by itself might appear to be rather innocuous, will often, when considered with other information, prove extremely useful and even vital in identifying a threat. The very nature and source of the information more often than not renders it completely inadmissible as evidence in any court of law. Some of the information comes from exchanges of intelligence information between friendly countries of the western world and the source or method by which it is obtained is seldom revealed by the informing country.
[28]
Criminal investigations are generally carried out on a comparatively short-term basis while security investigations are carried on systematically over a period of years, as long as there is a reasonable suspicion of the existence of activities which would constitute a threat to the security of the nation.
[29]
When considering the issue of the relative merits of the public interest in nondisclosure as opposed to the public interest in disclosure, it is evident that the considerations and circumstances to be taken into account which might militate against the proper control or suppression of threats to national security are considerably more numerous and much more complex than the considerations which involve a national interest other than those mentioned in s. 36.2 of the Evidence Act. In criminal matters, the proper functioning of the investigative efficiency of the administration of justice only requires that, wherever the situation demands it, the identity of certain human sources of information remain concealed. By contrast, in security matters, there is a requirement to not only protect the identity of human sources of information but to recognize that the following types of information might require to be protected with due regard of course to the administration of justice and more particularly to the openness of its proceedings: information pertaining to the identity of targets of the surveillance whether they be individuals or groups, the technical means and sources of surveillance, the methods of operation of the service, the identity of certain members of the service itself, the telecommunications and cypher systems and, at times, the very fact that a surveillance is being or is not being carried out. This means for instance that evidence, which of itself might not be of any particular use in actually identifying the threat, might nevertheless require to be protected if the mere divulging of the fact that C.S.I.S. is in possession of it would alert the targeted organization to the fact that it is in fact subject to electronic surveillance or to a wiretap or to a leak from some human source within the organization.
[30]
It is of some importance to realize than an "informed reader", that is, a person who is both knowledgeable regarding security matters and is a member of or associated with a group which constitutes a threat or a potential threat to the security of Canada, will be quite familiar with the minute details of its organization and of the ramifications of its operations regarding which our security service might well be relatively uninformed. As a result, such an informed reader may at times, by fitting a piece of apparently innocuous information into the general picture which he has before him, be in a position to arrive at some damaging deductions regarding the investigation of a particular threat or of many other threats to national security. He might, for instance, be in a position to determine one or more of the following: (1) the duration, scope intensity and degree of success or of lack of success of an investigation; (2) the investigative techniques of the Service; (3) the typographic and teleprinter systems employed by C.S.I.S.; (4) internal security procedures; (5) the nature and content of other classified documents; (6) the identities of service personnel or of other persons involved in an investigation.
[31]
An examination of the documents and of the evidence mentioned in the certificate of objection convinces me that the disclosure of whatever information in those documents which might in any way pertain to the issue of whether the W.C.P.M.-L. or the G.M.L.L. were organizations which might or might not constitute a threat to the security of Canada, would prove injurious to national security because, generally speaking, such disclosure would either (a) identify or tend to identify human sources and technical sources; (b) identify or tend to identify past or present individuals or groups who are or are not the subject of investigation; (c) identify or tend to identify techniques and methods of operation for the intelligence service; (d) identify or tend to identify members of the service; (e) jeopardize or tend to jeopardize security of the services telecommunications and cypher systems; (f) reveal the intensity of the investigation; (g) reveal the degree of success or of lack of success of the investigation. I also find that most documents fall under two or more of the above categories.
[32]
It would in these reasons be improper for me to comment directly on any particular document or piece of evidence as there would be a serious risk that such comments might serve to identify the evidence and its source to any knowledgeable person who might be or whose organization might be a target of the investigation.
[33]
Having concluded that the disclosure would be injurious to national security, I also find that it is abundantly clear that the national interest served in nondisclosure far outweighs any national interest in disclosure in this case. In arriving at this conclusion the ultimate object and importance of the litigation or dispute as well as the relevance of the information to the issue to be determined have been taken into consideration.
[34]
There can be no question of editing or disclosing portions of the documents as the portions which do not relate to the issue between the parties would be of no use whatsoever to the applicant and there can exist no true legal basis for disclosing it. Furthermore, there always remains the danger that, however innocuous the disclosure of information might appear to be to me, it might prove in fact prove to be injurious to national security.
[35]
For the above reasons the application will be dismissed with costs and the certificate of objection in issue will be confirmed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]