[1]
Joyal, J.
: The applicants, Kingcome Navigation Co. (Kingcome) and Tymac Launch Services Ltd. (Tymac), have applied to the respondent Commission for leave to operate a once-a-day public trailer-ferry service between Departure Bay in Nanaimo Harbour and the north foot of Main Street  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Harbour. This service is identical to one operated for many years by Kingcome on behalf of C.P. Coastal Marine, using Kingcome's ferry, "M.V. Haida Transporter". The charter arrangement with C.P. having been terminated, Kingcome wished to develop an identical service in competition with C.P. or any other outfit offering to the public a trailer-ferry service between the two harbours.
[2]
In order to do so, Kingcome entered into a joint venture with Ocean Construction Supplies Ltd. (Ocean) for use of their facilities in Departure Bay. Concurrently, a similar deal was made with Tymac in Burrard Inlet for the Vancouver end of the run. This required substantial expenditures on the part of Tymac in order to adapt its facilities to the specific requirements of a trailer-ferry service.
[3]
Kingcome eventually applied to the respondent Nanaimo Harbour Commission to operate its service from the Ocean ramp in Departure Bay. It also wished to carry certain categories of dangerous goods as defined in the
Dangerous Goods Shipping Regulations
, the security features of which are handled by the Harbour Master. Representations were made by the applicant to the respondent and written authorization, containing some observations or conditions, was communicated to Kingcome on June 9, 1993, authorizing the application. Later on, however, on July 5, 1993, the respondent provided the applicants with what might be described as an ambiguous decision, i.e., it seemed to confirm the original decision, but at the same time restricted the applicants in the carriage of dangerous goods to another area of the harbour called Duke Point. This decision was later more elaborately set out in a letter to the applicants on July 19, 1993.
The Issue
[4]
It is with respect to the prohibition of carriage of dangerous goods from Departure Bay that the applicants seek judicial review. The grounds, briefly stated, are that the respondent failed to provide equality of access to the harbour; that it improperly revised its own decision; that it improperly discriminated against the applicants by imposing the restriction; and that it failed to afford the applicants a fair opportunity to answer the respondent's concerns respecting the carriage of dangerous goods.
The Background
[5]
Before entering into a consideration of the mass of documentary and affidavit evidence filed by the parties, it might be useful to outline the institutional and geographic context of the issue between the parties and provide some background on both current and projected operations within Nanaimo Harbour. The respondent Commission is a body corporate established under the provisions of the
Harbour Commissions Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-1. Its statutory duties are to help carry out the objective of the national ports policy outlined in the
Act
and to regulate and control the use and development of all lands, buildings and equipment within the confines of the harbour.
[6]
Nanaimo Harbour contains extensive port facilities. For purposes of this case, these may be grouped in three locations. There is first of all the Inner Harbour in downtown Nanaimo. It is a busy area. It is from here that C.P. Coastal Marine operates its trailer-ferry service to the mainland. Scheduled seaplane facilities are also located here and traffic is pretty heavy. The second area is Departure Bay, located a short distance north by northwest of the Inner Harbour. The B.C. Ferry Terminal is located here and its ferries service both Horseshoe Bay and Tsawwassen on the mainland. The third area is Duke Point. This is located at some distance from the other two areas. It was developed in the mid-1980's by the Harbour Commission as an industrial and commercial area. Its purpose is of course to ease the congestion in the harbour generally, to gentrify or urbanize the downtown portions of the harbour and to offer to both industrial and commercial users an alternative to a downtown location. Considerable promotion appears to have been done by the Commission to attract business to Duke Point and in fact, certain installations are already located there, including loading and offloading facilities which could be available to the applicant Kingcome.
[7]
The basic premise on which the applicants structured their approach to the Harbour Commission was that Kingcome's vessel, the "M.V. Haida Transporter", on behalf of C.P. Coastal Marine, had been running the same kind of service for many years, with the same master and the same crew. Its schedule of sailings was to be very restricted, namely one run leaving Vancouver at around midnight, offloading and loading at Nanaimo at about 2:30-3:00 a.m., and leaving for the return trip to Vancouver, between 3:30 and 4:00 a.m. This once-a-day service would be during the quiet hours, when traffic in Nanaimo Harbour is greatly reduced, when no aircraft landings or take-offs are allowed, and when there would be minimum risks of collision. The applicant, in fact, could point to a record of ferry service stretching from 1969 to the present, when not one single marine casualty was reported.
[8]
It meant therefore that if anyone ever expressed any concern over navigation hazards or high levels of traffic or congestion, the trailer-ferry service, as proposed, provided a quick answer to the respondent Commission.
[9]
The other element at issue was the carriage of dangerous cargoes. As mentioned earlier, these cargoes are regulated by the
Dangerous Goods Shipping Regulations
. The Harbour Commission, in s. 88 of its bylaws, provides some control in this regard by stating that "No vessel that has dangerous goods on board shall moor or anchor in the harbour except at a place set aside for the purpose by the Commissioners".
[10]
In that respect, the applicant could suggest that it had been carrying dangerous goods for years, that C.P. Coastal Marine had continued its operation in the same manner as had Ocean Construction Supplies Ltd. from its facilities in Departure Bay, which was being used jointly with the applicants. In terms of the applicants' traffic, dangerous goods would encompass small quantities of items such as acetylene tanks, aerosol spray cans, paint and car batteries. The categories would not include such goods as explosives, bulk petroleum, radioactive material or acids, which goods were currently handled by C.P. Coastal Marine.
The Evidence
[11]
The evidence, as far as determining the Harbour Commission's policies in respect of allowing additional services or the carriage of dangerous goods within the areas of the Inner Harbour and Departure Bay, is somewhat oblique. There is evidence that the Commission intended to clean up these areas and return them to more urban or recreational uses. This was at least one of the reasons why it had developed Duke Point and was promoting its use to developers, industrial and commercial users. There is also evidence that over the latter years, some industries had moved from the downtown areas to Duke Point and the vacant areas returned to more pristine uses like townhouses and walkways.
[12]
If one can infer from that evidence a general policy expressed in generic terms to rehabilitate the downtown harbour areas by moving the industrial and commercial traffic to Duke Point, the evidence, in my view, falls short of disclosing at any material time, any specific written policy to close these areas to further traffic of any kind or to prohibit any further carriage of dangerous goods to or from them.
[13]
I am aware, of course, of the evidence disclosed in a lengthy affidavit, sworn September 26, 1993, by Mr. William Mills, Port Manager with the Harbour Commission. In his evidence, Mr. Mills describes the various areas of Nanaimo Harbour, the kind of industrial and commercial uses found there, the presence of C.P. Coastal Marine, the B.C. Ferry Terminal and other installations both in the Inner Harbour and in Departure Bay. He also evidences concerns over traffic hazards and the risk of dangerous goods contaminating the waters where ferry passengers are found and recreational activities conducted.
[14]
Nowhere, however, is there disclosure as to a firm prohibition against new services in the harbour or the carriage of dangerous goods in all areas except Duke Point. Nor is there evidence of any prior designation by the Commission of any place set aside for the purpose of vessels carrying dangerous goods, pursuant to s. 88 of the Commission's bylaws.
[15]
The first indication of concerns regarding the carriage of dangerous goods is found in a letter dated May 20, 1993, from Capt. Chris Badger, the Harbour Master, to Kingcome, with respect to the new ferry service from Departure Bay to Vancouver. The Harbour Master requests details of the service, including whether dangerous goods will be carried. There is further reference to this item in the Harbour Commission minutes of a meeting on June 7, 1993 (Tab 11-D, Applicants' Record), where Mr. Mills reported on a meeting between the Harbour Master and Kingcome: the minutes suggest "there was concern by the N.H.C. as well as the City as to whether or not they were carrying dangerous cargo". The extract also refers to a discussion taking place, "encouraging them to use Duke Point", and it was generally agreed that "the current service of one trip during graveyard hours, carrying nondangerous goods, could continue but if they intend to increase runs they should contact the N.H.C.".
[16]
And then comes the letter from the Port Manager to Kingcome, dated June 9, 1993 (Tab 11-E, Applicants' Record) and which is reproduced hereunder in full:
"We write to remind you that the Nanaimo Harbour Commission has the authority and the obligation to regulate navigation and the handling of dangerous goods - as defined by the
Dangerous Goods Shipping Regulations
- within the boundaries of the Nanaimo Harbour, and to confirm that you may continue to operate your public trailer-ferry service out of the Ocean Cement property at Departure Bay, provided that the service
(a) will not involve more than one departure per day from Departure Bay and that each departure will take place during the night, after the BC Ferry service to and from Nanaimo has closed for the day;
(b) will carry no dangerous cargo or carry any trailer containing dangerous cargo except in accordance with such terms as the Harbour Master may require.
"The Departure Bay area is already heavily burdened by passenger ferries, float plane and pleasure craft so the Commission would prefer to limit its use by cargo-carrying vessels and prevent its use altogether by vessels carrying dangerous goods. On the other hand, we would like to allow for your view that you must operate from the northern end of the city, rather than from Duke Point, in order to compete with the existing service and we will do our best to accommodate you. But if the congestion in Departure Bay increases, or we discover that it is greater than anticipated, we might have to require you to relocate your Nanaimo terminus.
"Furthermore, the Harbour Master might, depending upon the quantity and quality of any given amount of dangerous goods, require that they be loaded or unloaded elsewhere, probably at Duke Point. We enclose Part IV of our
General Bylaw
which contains detailed provisions dealing with the handling of dangerous goods and you will note that you must give notice to the Commission whenever you intend to handle dangerous goods anywhere within the harbour."
[17]
The applicants urge the court to find that on its face, this represents a decision or the Harbour Commission to permit the operation of the trailer-ferry service out of the Ocean Cement property at Departure Bay, restricted to one departure per day during the night and on condition that no dangerous cargo will be carried except in accordance with such terms as the Harbour Master may require.
[18]
Overlooking for a while that as the Harbour Master controls at all times the carriage of dangerous goods within the harbour, this particular condition might be somewhat redundant, the story does not end there. There is further evidence that another meeting was held between the parties on July 5, 1993 (Tab 11-F, Applicants' Record). The Commission discussed again the movement of dangerous goods with the Harbour Master, stating that safety of navigation was "a valid reason for not increasing Kingcome's services and not allowing transport of dangerous goods". When the Kingcome people arrived, the record indicates that they were soliciting N.H.C.'s authorization to handle dangerous goods, without which the applicant could not compete with C.P. Furthermore, the Duke Point site would add an hour to trucking time, making the service too costly. After deliberation, the Commission adopted the following resolution:
"That the Board reaffirm to Kingcome Navigation Company Ltd. its position as outlined in the letter of June 9, 1993 to Capt. Gosse."
[19]
This reaffirmation, if indeed it may be called a reaffirmation, was expressed in the following letter dated July 5, 1993, from the Port Manager to the applicant:
"I would like to thank you and Capt. Joe Gosse for attending the Harbour Commission Board meeting held earlier today and outlining in more detail your ferry service and planned dangerous cargo movements through the Ocean Cement property at Departure Bay.
"Unfortunately, I must advise you that the decision of the Harbour Commission Board remains unchanged from the position that was outlined in our letter of June 9, 1993, that stated, in part, your service will be allowed for one departure per day from Departure Bay and departure will take place during the night after the BC Ferry service to and from Nanaimo has closed for the day, and that no dangerous cargo will be transported into or out of Departure Bay using your service.
"The Port is prepared to work with you in using Duke Point as a site to handle dangerous cargo arrivals and departures. In this respect if I can be of any further assistance to you, please do not hesitate to contact me."
[20]
On July 14, 1993, the Commission held a special meeting to consider again the issue of dangerous goods. The minutes of that meeting (Tab 11-H, Applicants' Record) disclose again the applicants' position that in the short term, they could not compete if Duke Point had to be used for dangerous goods. On the longer run, Duke Point would be no problem if it became the site for receiving cargoes and dangerous goods. It was also a fact that Kingcome had on hand a ferry which constituted an asset to be used and which would provide competition and employment in the community.
[21]
Ocean Construction was also represented at that special meeting and disclosed that over the years, it had moved dangerous cargoes, including dynamite, from its ramp without incidents.
[22]
The Commission adjourned to July 19, 1993, to discuss under what terms, if at all, dangerous goods under section (b) of the June 9, 1993 letter could be brought into the Departure Bay area. It was at that meeting (Tab 11-I, Applicants' Record) that the Commission finally came to terms with the whole issue of dangerous goods. It adopted three resolutions, namely:
1. that the administration be directed to formulate a comprehensive policy on all dangerous goods entering the Port;
2. that existing operations bringing in dangerous goods at current locations, including those of C.P. Ferries, B.C. Ferries, Ocean Construction (for their own manufacture and production) be recognized; and
3. that except for the foregoing operations, no person shall load or offload dangerous goods onto or from a vessel at any places within Nanaimo Harbour other than Duke Point.
[23]
Earlier in the month, however, namely on July 5, 1993, the applicants had appeared before the City Council of Nanaimo in order to obtain the necessary municipal business license. The minutes of that meeting of the Council disclose that at a meeting of its Financial and General Government Committee held earlier, the Harbour Commission had expressed concern that the ferry would be operating in a busy area of the Port, within close proximity to passenger ferries, float planes and pleasure craft. The Commission had also expressed concerns with respect to dangerous goods being brought into the area.
[24]
At the City Council level, the respondent Commission repeated its concerns with respect to maritime safety. It was the Commission's position that no further expansion of service be allowed and that no dangerous goods be brought in except through Duke Point.
[25]
In reply, Kingcome stated that its service had been performed for C.P. Coastal Marine since 1969; that it had a perfect safety record; that Duke Point was not a viable alternative; that it was breaking a monopoly that had existed for 20 years; that it was not adding to the flow of dangerous goods, but only moving dangerous goods that were already coming into the city; that its operations are conducted at nighttime when there are no aircraft and very little marine traffic; that its percentage of dangerous goods to be carried is very low and that the classes of such goods are also on the low side.
The Case For The Applicants
[26]
The applicants make their point on the basis of the facts, namely the kind, type and hours of operation of the ferry service, their track record over the years, their inability to operate from Duke Point and other similar elements of fact, to have the court conclude that the respondent's decision is unreasonable.
[27]
The applicants also make much of the original decision of the Commission dated June 9, 1993, allowing Kingcome leave to operate its services subject to Harbour Master control over the carriage of dangerous goods, a control which the applicants had reason to believe would apply equally to all carriers.
[28]
The applicants suggest that the Commission's position, taken from its own declarations and testimony, is not founded on facts but on conjecture. In effect, the Commission cannot restrict the operations from Departure Bay when the once-a-day service at nighttime does not add to aircraft or any other traffic hazard. Whatever hazards there are with respect to dangerous goods apply equally to the operations of C.P. Coastal Marine out of the Inner Harbour, and the latter is not being disturbed in that area. Further, as far as traffic conditions are concerned, a member of the Commission had said these were "not relevant at the time of the morning Kingcome operates". This view had been acknowledged by the Commission when it made its representations to City Council, leading anyone to infer that the emphasis on Duke Point might have been motivated by a desire to increase traffic there.
[29]
The applicants, on the basis of the foregoing factual analysis, raise the following grounds justifying intervention:
1. that the respondent failed to exercise its authority to achieve the stated purpose of its mandate under the
Harbour Commission Act
, namely to promote accessibility and equality of access to the Port for all carriers;
2. that the respondent improperly and without jurisdiction reversed its own decision of June 9, 1993, by later revoking permission to carry dangerous goods at all;
3. that the respondent improperly discriminated against the applicant by allowing C.P. Coastal Marine to continue its service unhindered;
4. that the respondent failed to disclose the nature of its concerns respecting the carriage of dangerous goods and denied an opportunity to the applicants to give full answer to these concerns.
The Case For The Respondent
[30]
The respondent states that it has plenary power or jurisdiction over all activities in the Harbour. Its duty is to regulate and control the use and development of all land, building and other property within its limits.
[31]
The respondent has bylaw making power, including bylaws 88 and 89, as follows:
"88. No vessel that has dangerous goods on board shall moor or anchor in the harbour except at a place set aside for the purpose by the Commissioners.
"89. Except as permitted by the Harbour Master, no person shall handle dangerous goods in the harbour."
[32]
The respondent states that its decision is consonant with its policy objective to move commercial and industrial activities to Duke Point. It could not break with this objective simply on the grounds that the Duke Point alternative was not economically viable for the applicants. Its decision therefore cannot be characterized as an excess of its jurisdiction, or reached unfairly or upon consideration of irrelevant matters.
[33]
The respondent further states that an analysis of the kind of jurisdiction exercisable under its statute and bylaws suggests that it has no duty of fairness. The prohibition regarding the handling of dangerous goods and the requirement that designated areas only be used for anchoring and mooring are clearly set out. There is no right or privilege enjoyed by the applicants without express sanction of the respondent.
[34]
With respect to the statutory duty of providing equal accessibility under s. 3 of the
Act
, that is a ministerial objective and any grievance in that respect should be directed to the Minister. The Commission's own duties and obligations are contained in ss. 13 to 18 of the
Act
.
[35]
As far as discrimination is concerned, the respondent submits that existing ferry services have operated for many years. If traffic congestion or other factors come slowly into play, requiring the respondent to put a lid on any additional service, the prohibition involved is not discriminatory in a legal sense. The respondent, on the basis of its analysis of all the facts of the case, adopted a reasonable policy in deciding that no further services dealing with dangerous goods would be permitted except at Duke Point. In so doing, its decision is fully valid and nonreviewable.
[36]
In fact, says the respondent, the prohibition as to the carriage of dangerous goods is only in respect to the Inner Harbour and Departure Bay. The rights of the applicants are not encumbered at Duke Point, which is just as much part of Nanaimo Harbour as are the other two locations.
[37]
Finally, the respondent concludes that throughout the proceedings leading to its decision on July 5 and July 19, 1993, it acted with evident respect for the commercial importance of the applicants' service; that it allowed the applicants full opportunity to make their case; that it received and considered the applicants' representations; that it considered these representations in the context of its policy objective to clean up the Inner Harbour and Departure Bay from industrial and commercial usage.
The Law
[38]
It is perhaps by reason of the depth and strength of any board or commission in whom Parliament has vested exclusive authority to regulate and manage affairs within its jurisdiction that its decisions are so often the subject of judicial scrutiny. The power and control exercisable in such cases over the rights or interests of citizens are sufficiently wide that courts have consistently laid down various principles of conduct to make sure that such power and control is in accordance with the law.
[39]
As its powers are delegated by Parliament, its jurisdiction is strictly construed. If, as is usual, its terms of reference include both factual and policy considerations, the law imposes the following necessary safeguards: its decisions must be even-handed; they must be based on relevant considerations; the processes involved must be conducted fairly; the rules of natural justice must be preserved; the area of enquiry and decision must be within its statutory jurisdiction; the decision must be founded on relevant consideration and not on extraneous factors.
[40]
These principles are substantially set out in s. 18.1(4) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7. As the current version of it is fairly recent vintage, I should set it down here in full:
"18.1(4) The Trial Division may grant relief under subsection (3) if it is satisfied that the federal board, commission or other tribunal
(a) acted without jurisdiction, acted beyond its jurisdiction or refused to exercise its jurisdiction;
(b) failed to observe a principle of natural justice, procedural fairness or other procedure that it was required by law to observe;
(c) erred in law in making a decision or an order, whether or not the error appears on the face of the record;
(d) based its decision or order on an erroneous finding of fact that it made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before it;
(e) acted, or failed to act, by reason of fraud or perjured evidence; or
(f) acted in any other way that was contrary to law."
[41]
Applying these challenge grounds to specific facts is not always an easy operation. A court looks to case law for guidance, but obviously, no precedent is determinative, no matter how similar the underlying facts might be.
[42]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 215, the Supreme Court of Canada was faced with an appeal of a municipal council's authority to approve a residential subdivision plan which covered land zoned for that purpose. The council considered the land to be flood-prone and refused to consider proposals to remedy that problem. In allowing an appeal from the Manitoba Court of Appeal, the court held that the council erred in refusing to consider the scope of the flood problem and possible solutions to it. The mere mention of flooding as a decisive factor and the refusal to consider mitigation did not satisfy the requirement that all highly relevant considerations be taken into account.
[43]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), it was held that clear and unequivocal evidence is required that an administrative decision is quite unfair and works a serious injustice before a court will intervene.
[44]
The oft-quoted case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), is of course authority for the proposition that if, for any reason, a discretionary authority is exercised so as to thwart or run counter to the policy and objectives of a statute, it would be unconscionable to refuse to people aggrieved the protection of the court.
[45]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), MacKay, J., of this court had occasion to deal with the legal consequences of certain policy directives dealing with contaminated seed potatoes. At p. 202, the learned justice stated that:
"Insofar as the standards or their application depend upon policy directives designed to foster consistency in dealing with individual cases, he or she is entitled to know the policy directives and to have opportunity to provide information, to demonstrate or to make representations that the policy ought not to apply in the particular case. The decision maker is not entitled to decide on the basis of policy directives not known to the applicant."
[46]
Later, at p. 203, MacKay, J., added:
"Moreover, in failing to provide full information about the application of standards and failing to provide an opportunity for the applicants to indicate how they met the standards before decisions were made to reject their sixteen growing crops, the procedure followed did not comply with principles of fairness necessary even in the exercise of discretionary authority."
[47]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Smith's
Judicial Review of Administration Action
(2nd Ed.), p. 294, to the effect that "a tribunal entrusted with discretion must not, by the adoption of a general rule or policy, disable itself from exercising its discretion in individual cases".
[48]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the British Columbia Supreme Court was asked to consider a refusal by a licensing inspector to extend a license under the
Sales of Goods on Closing Out Act
. The grounds alleged were that the applicant was in violation of city bylaws. Locke, J., had no trouble in deciding that the inspector must exercise his discretion according to proper legal principles and that he had failed to do so when he considered matters irrelevant to the provincial statute.
[49]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , on the subject of the unreasonableness of certain bylaws as involving "such oppressive or gratuitous interference with the rights of those subject to them as could find no justification in the minds of reasonable men".
[50]
Wilkinson, J., goes on to comment:
"It is not a matter of the judge replacing the judgment of council with his own. Unreasonableness may arise if any use of a property is effectively denied the owner, if there is no rational basis for the regulations or, in my view, although some purported use is allowed, if the effect of the bylaw in an economic sense is to deny any use."
[51]
Two further decisions of some relevance to the facts before me might be cited. One is
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.), where the trial court ruled that it is improper discrimination and lack of good faith to effect a zoning change after an owner has set out to develop his property; that the zoning change was not made to apply to all similar property; and that the change was not made pursuant to a pre-existing policy.
[52]
This decision, however, was overturned on appeal. In a judgment of the B.C. Court of Appeal, CA 21-80 Victoria Registry, dated February 15, 1992, the court found that the respondent had not been "singled out"; that in any event, the singling out of one lot is not necessarily discriminatory; that so long as the amending bylaw is reasonable and in furtherance of evident public interest considerations, it is a valid exercise of legislative authority.
[53]
In
K & B  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , McLeod, J., of the Saskatchewan Queen's Bench said at p. 632:
"Without statutory sanction, councils cannot create a virtual monopoly by granting a single license in cases where licensing power has been delegated to them, for it would be doing indirectly what they cannot do directly."
[54]
That decision was also reversed by the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. As reported in [1978] 1 W.W.R. 399, Culliton, C.J.S., said at p. 401 that on an aggrieved party rests the burden of proving that the requirements of good faith, without discrimination and in the public interest, imposed on municipalities, have not been met. In so doing, more is needed than the mere fact that the application was refused.
[55]
The court fully appreciates that it cannot always intervene with impunity whenever a decision of a statutory board is challenged on grounds set out in s. 18.1(4). Rules of fairness, for example, as exemplified in the right to be heard or expressed in the doctrine of audi alteram partem do not apply to all so-called administrative or quasi-judicial decisions.
[56]
This was the finding of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Inuit Tapirisat of Canada and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 1, which held that under s. 64(1) of the
National Transportation Act
, the Governor-in-Council did not have to comply with the usual fairness rule.
[57]
The respondent quotes from Reid and David in
Administrative Law and Practice
(2nd Ed.), Butterworths, p. 142, that it is contrary to the fundamental division between legislative, executive and judicial powers for courts to interfere in purely legislative, administrative or executive functions. At least, I understand this statement to mean that the scope of judicial review might be somewhat narrower.
[58]
There is also the case of
Koslowski and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.), which stands for the proposition that if a board might have more than one policy objective or purpose, its decision will be upheld if one of them is legitimate.
[59]
On the subject of discriminatory treatment, there is the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the Supreme Court of Canada, facing a challenge to the constitutional validity of a sizeable increase to judges' pension contributions enacted in 1975 on grounds, inter alia, that this created discrimination contrary to s. 1(b) of the
Canadian Bill of Rights
, held that different treatment of judges appointed at different times did not constitute discrimination. In effect, the court recognized the "grandfather" principle.
Analysis Of The Evidence
[60]
Upon reviewing all of the evidence submitted by the parties as well as the excellent briefs argued by both counsel, I find myself in front of a complex case. There is no doubt that, as a general principle, the authority exercisable by the respondent Commission under s. 13 of the
Harbour Commissions Act
provides it with considerable discretionary power. Its decisions therefore carry considerable weight and grounds for judicial review must be fairly evident and persuasive.
[61]
I must admit, nevertheless, that I am somewhat troubled by the processes through which the respondent laboured in finally deciding as it did. It seems to me that when the applicants first made known to the respondent the details of their trailer-ferry service between Nanaimo and Vancouver, it would not appear to have raised many serious policy issues. This is evident on a reading of the letter of June 9, 1993, from the Port Manager to the applicants, which authorized substantially the kind of service disclosed by the applicants. Although consideration of this application at a June 7, 1993, meeting of the respondent Commission reflects some ambiguous concerns, the letter of authorization appears to be clear in referring to a service involving a once-a-night departure per day from the Ocean Cement property at Departure Bay, and that no dangerous cargo be carried except in accordance with such terms as the Harbour Master may require. The respondent, in the light of the heavy burden of traffic in that area of the Harbour, indicated its preference for Duke Point. Yet, I read the message as an acknowledgement that the economic reality of the new service required it to operate from Departure Bay. There is also a caveat that depending on quantity or quality of any given cargo of dangerous goods, the Harbour Master might require that Duke Point be used. However, as the Harbour Master controlled the carriage of dangerous goods in any event, that comment would not be of a nature to raise any hackles.
[62]
Yet, at a City Council meeting on July 5, 1993, the position taken by the respondent was that no further expansion of services should be allowed and no dangerous goods brought into the downtown harbour area. It was stated that this area was becoming very congested and any further expansion may pose a safety hazard to the community. In spite of this, City Council approved the issuance of a business license. I should observe in this regard that the carriage of dangerous goods on trailers is as much a concern to a municipality as it is to a harbour commission.
[63]
I should also refer to a further letter from the respondent to the applicants, dated July 5, 1993. Although that letter states that the Commission's position remains unchanged from that disclosed in the June 9, 1993 letter, it goes on to say that no dangerous cargo will be transported into or out of Departure Bay using the applicants' service. There is an obvious contradiction here. Perhaps the respondent was having second thought, but from their knowledge that dangerous goods would be involved and that it was not feasible for the applicants to carry anything from Duke Point, I can only interpret that letter as a reversal of the earlier decision communicated to the applicants.
[64]
As we shall see, further complexities develop and I can only suspect that many subsequent reasons for refusal as expressed by the respondent were an ex post facto rationalization of newly articulated policy grounds stating that no further services would be allowed in the downtown harbour area. The respondent would not appear to have that policy in mind when it originally gave carte blanche to the applicants to operate the ferry service from Departure Bay. It seems to me that if there are policy considerations, they must be well-known to the respondents and, equally important, to the people who wish to venture into the marine business.
[65]
A similar riddle arises over the navigation safety issue at Departure Bay. Airborne traffic is first raised as an issue, but later, it is admitted that aircraft traffic is not relevant at the time of the morning the applicants operate.
[66]
That kind of situation applies equally to the dangerous goods issue. It is admitted that dangerous goods have been loaded and unloaded for years in the downtown area. C.P. Coastal Marine have been doing it since early this century. The evidence before the respondent is that the applicants' service would not add to the volume of dangerous goods, i.e., there is only so much volume carried by C.P. Coastal Marine, and whatever the volume of dangerous goods which might be carried by the applicants would simply have to come from C.P.'s existing and exclusive service.
[67]
The issue of the volume or percentage of dangerous goods to be carried is raised by the respondent when it had previously had in mind that only "very minor amounts" would be of that nature and that it had now come to its knowledge that the volume would be greater. There is no evidence, as far as I can see, that would lead the respondent to pursue this and then submit it as a reason for its change of tack. The respondent was well aware that dangerous goods were being carried by C.P. Coastal Marine and that if the applicants were to enter into competition with that service, the same proportional amount of such goods would be carried.
[68]
It is also noted that whereas C.P. Coastal Marine, subject to regulations, had an open license to carry all categories of dangerous goods, the applicants had represented that it would not carry such goods as explosives, radioactive material or any bulk dangerous goods such as petroleum, chemicals or acids. This was the same restriction which the Vancouver Harbour Commission, on May 11, 1993, had imposed on the applicants when it approved the Vancouver end of the service. Yet, the record fails to disclose that the respondent ever considered this limitation when considering the application.
[69]
I should also refer to the provisions as found in ss. 88 and 89 of the respondent's
Bylaws
. These speak of designated places for vessels carrying dangerous goods. It appears to me that the respondent was only reminded of this requirement when it had already restricted the service in its letter of July 5, 1993. In fact, action on it was only taken on July 19, 1993, as is clearly indicated in the minutes of a meeting (Tab 11-I, Applicants' Record) which I have summarized earlier. There is little doubt in my mind that it was on that date, and not earlier, that the respondent laid down a firm written policy closing all further dangerous goods traffic from the downtown area and limiting it to Duke Point.
[70]
I have a further observation to make with respect to dangerous goods. If we look at the relevant
Regulations
, there are a few goods left in the kind of traffic going through Nanaimo Harbour which are not classified as dangerous. C.P. Coastal Marine and particularly the large B.C. Ferry, carry dangerous goods as a matter of course. So does Ocean Cement from its base at Departure Point, which is the chosen base for the applicants. And yet, though there is evidence of the respondent's concern with the volume of traffic within the downtown area and with the need for strict navigational controls, I have failed to find a specific reference to any prior concerns respecting the incidence of traffic carrying dangerous goods. It is noted, of course, that apart from ss. 88 and 89 of the
Bylaws
, the regulation of dangerous goods is by way of another statute altogether, the enforcement of which is traditionally left to the Harbour Master. Nevertheless, the question this raises is to explore to what extent, in having found that the traffic in goods out of Departure Bay would not constitute added risk to navigational safety, the respondents could reasonably impose a kind of restriction on the applicants which effectively denies it any possibility of commerce from that location.
[71]
Finally, I should refer again to the respondent's policy issues, but in a larger or longer term sense. There is evidence before me, as expressed in general observations of members of the respondent Commission, that in their view, the downtown harbour area showed a preponderance of commercial and industrial activities over more recreational and aesthetically pleasing usage. Commercial and industrial establishments impacted on what is termed the uplands. The material before this court contains adequate evidence of urban owners' concerns over the back-up of vehicular traffic extending onto city streets and waiting to get on B.C. Ferry, over the noise and other disturbances when B.C. Ferry had late night or early morning departures. Obviously, these concerns were made known to the respondent. Although there might not be explicit policy statements in that regard, it is quite obvious that among the purposes of the respondent's decision in the early 1980's to develop Duke Point as an industrial and commercial park and build there the necessary infrastructure, was the idea of concentrating more and more of the commercial and industrial activities of the harbour to the more remote location of Duke Point.
[72]
Since 1985, there is evidence that some of these operations did move to Duke Point and the surplus lands turned into residential enclosures, walkways and the like. Obviously, it constituted a long range vision having a more evolutionary character to it than a firm development plan comprising a phasing-in and phasing-out process. Furthermore, it is evident that Duke Point was not developed simply to absorb the commercial and industrial establishments in the down harbour but to attract and accommodate new industries and new businesses in the area of Nanaimo where promoters were voluble in their praise of the city's prime location on the east coast of Vancouver Island.
[73]
However, there is little evidence of firm, documented planning or of public policy pronouncements by the respondent on the more current or contemporary restrictions which might otherwise be imposed on new waterborne services or, more particularly, on such new services carrying dangerous goods.
[74]
These observations are certainly not meant to criticize the performance and activities of the respondent. It is recognized that its decisions must always keep in balance public policy considerations, safety, economic viability, competitive factors and, of course, the spill-over of its operations, both positive and negative, on its mainland neighbour, the City of Nanaimo and its council. It might be said that the respondent cannot be faulted for its failure to adopt and promulgate broad policy measures, but it must as a consequence eschew an ad hoc approach. Otherwise, it runs a risk of having its decisions reviewed.
Conclusion
[75]
On the basis of the foregoing findings, I must conclude that the respondent fell short of the standards imposed by law when it was called upon to deal with the application before it. These standards might be deemed somewhat excessive from time to time, and it could be argued that many of these standards relate more to matters of form than to matters of substance. It might also be said that they too frequently open the door to judicial intervention and interfere with the proper, efficient and orderly discharge of statutory duties and responsibilities. It does not add to the objective, realistic and detached approach which is a prerequisite to the discretionary process to have this shadow of judicial intervention hovering overhead. It has also been said that when a statutory body is given wide discretion to administer and run an establishment like a deep-sea harbour, it is presumed to have the power to do its job to the best of its ability, without undue hindrance or interference.
[76]
I observe from the evidence before me that the respondent exercises its role along broad policy grounds which, as its enabling statute provides, are to further the development, use and operation of Nanaimo Harbour as a concomitant operating agency in the carrying out of the statute's evident purposes. In this regard, it is assumed that its regulatory functions will be exercised fairly and equitably with due regard to the physical, environmental, economic and security restraints which the nature of an active harbour installation imposes.
[77]
I also observe that the concerns of the respondent over the volume of traffic in the downtown harbour have been expressed for some time. There is evidence of the respondent's decision a dozen years ago to develop Duke Point with a view to attracting there some new industries as well as those which had traditionally operated from downtown. This was obviously a part of the respondent's long range policy with respect to harbour development and it is indicated that it was also in response to the strains imposed on the municipality of Nanaimo and its infrastructure to accommodate the volume of city traffic which marine transit generated.
[78]
No doubt, at the relevant time of the submission made to it by the applicants, these concerns were ever-present. Yet, it was conceded by the respondent that by the nature of the ferry service and of its terms of operations, no additional hazard to navigation was contemplated. It was plainly declared by the applicants that their once-a-day nighttime service would be in direct competition with C.P. Coastal Marine for the carriage of goods on trailers commuting between Nanaimo and Vancouver, and that it wanted to get a share of C.P.'s business.
[79]
It was also known to the respondent that the service would not require any new installations within the downtown harbour. The existing facilities of Ocean Cement were adequate for that purpose.
[80]
The respondent was also aware that the applicant Kingcome had some fairly strong credentials: its own ferry had been operating that service for years on behalf of C.P. Coastal Marine and it could boast of an unblemished record of casualty-free operations.
[81]
The respondent did make known its preference for Duke Point. This was a very logical preference to express in the light of the respondent's long range plan. The applicants, however, made it clear that if they were to run a competitive service, Duke Point was not a viable alternative. The respondent, as I interpret its June 9, 1993 authorization, recognized that this factor had merit and simply cautioned the applicants that the carriage of dangerous goods was subject to Harbour Master control. No one would have been apprehensive in that respect, as this control over dangerous goods applies to everyone in Nanaimo Harbour. I should therefore view the June 9th letter as providing the applicants with the kind of authorization they required and which in all respects was consonant with all the representations the applicants had made to the respondent.
[82]
The evidence is far from clear as to what provoked the respondent to have a change of heart. The only hard evidence is that on July 5, 1993, the respondent decided to make representations to the Municipal Council of Nanaimo, which was considering the issue of a business license to the applicants. By that time, I can only infer that a preference for Duke Point was slowly becoming policy, and that policy was to prohibit the carriage of dangerous goods in the downtown area. The sole concern of the respondent, in its Chairman's address to City Council, was navigation safety, an issue which the applicants' nighttime service was admittedly not facing. It was also a nonissue when C.P. Coastal Marine expanded its service to a much larger sized vessel, as it might also have been a nonissue when Royal Sealink Express inaugurated a fast harbour to harbour link for passengers between Vancouver and Nanaimo some months earlier.
[83]
From my view of the evidence, the term "dangerous goods" might have become a buzz-word. I have permitted myself to look at the
Regulations
and at the
International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code
(
IMCO
) incorporated therein. The
Regulations
themselves run 45 pages. The
IMCO Code
runs to four volumes. There are eight classes of dangerous goods, from the more benign to the more critical, listing some twenty-three hundred products or substances. The
Regulations
impose quantity and volume criteria, prescribe detailed handling and storage conditions and list a whole series of safety equipment to be carried on board and safety routines to be followed. The
Regulations
might be said to be so pervasive and incorporate so many goods that one might suggest that there is no traffic in Nanaimo Harbour where such goods are not carried. Be that as it may, it does explain the comments by some members of the respondent Commission that the issue of dangerous goods required the formulation of a comprehensive policy and that legal research would be involved.
[84]
This leads me to suggest that having found that the applicants' service per se did not constitute a navigation hazard, the respondent simply adopted a fall-back position on the issue. In doing so, it entered into a process which was discriminating and unfair and which did not take into consideration pertinent evidence as to the applicants' track record, as to the minimal if any increase in the carriage of dangerous goods by the applicants, and that the carriage of such goods from the designated Ocean Cement location had been going on for years.
[85]
This in turn leads me to find that the unqualified prohibition is discriminatory, and that no opportunity was provided to discuss what are the obvious ramifications of an ad hoc policy affecting the whole of Nanaimo Harbour.
[86]
It is trite law that in dealing with citizens, a regulatory authority must deal fairly, objectively and with full consideration of all the evidentiary and policy factors before it. The scope and extent of this obligation cannot be defined any more than the principle of equity. In this regard, I beg to disagree with respondent's counsel who argues that s. 3(1)(c) of the enabling statute, the
Harbour Commissions Act
, is not relevant to the parameters of the respondent's discretion. If the objective of a national ports policy is to create a port system that "provides accessibility and equitable treatment in the movement of goods and people to users of Canadian ports", it is made abundantly clear in s. 3(2) that the achievement of the objective is by way of the establishment of harbour commissions. This is, in my respectful view, one of the measures undertaken by the Minister under s. 4 to achieve the objective of the national ports policy. In any event, any regulatory authority must be exercised in a manner consistent with the purpose and object of the statute and this certainly includes fair, equitable and nondiscriminatory dealings.
[87]
There is also in evidence some incidents where certain applications for water leases, for pile-driving operations or para-sailing services were refused by the respondent. In my view, these are not comparables. The decision with respect to water leases was consistent with the gentrification of the downtown harbour. The pile-driving application involved a new industrial installation which was deemed inappropriate for the Newcastle Island Channel. The para-sailing services, obviously not of a nature to be conducted in the quiet of the night, were regarded as a purely recreational pursuit which would add to congestion and, presumably, create undue risk for the para-sailors themselves.
[88]
Not so, in my view, the proposed trailer-ferry service, if one keeps in mind its single nighttime run, its use of existing facilities at Ocean Cement and the admitted competitive problem in operating out of Duke Point.
[89]
In summary, the issue before me is not to test the respondent's statutory discretion to run its affairs. Nor is the issue one of challenging the respondent's concerns respecting congestion in harbour traffic and the increased navigational risks. The respondent, in allowing the use of Ocean's facilities, makes that clear. The test is more with regards to the reversal of its own decision of June 9, 1993, purportedly based on a policy which the evidence discloses was only expressed at the July 19, 1993 meeting of the respondent. The minutes of that meeting (Tab 11-I, Applicants' Record) indicate that:
"J. Dulman felt the Board should take a stand regardless of legal action and supported the position that no dangerous cargoes be allowed into Departure Bay on Kingcome's vessel. E. Duncan agreed no dangerous goods should be allowed in Departure Bay unless for extreme emergency reasons. He felt the Commission should move towards establishing a policy to have a dangerous goods centre at Duke Point but thought this process would take several months."
[90]
Contrary to what E. Duncan believed, the process of implementing such policy did not take a few months, as at the end of the meeting, the Commission adopted a resolution that
"Except for the operations recognized in Resolutions 93-07-12, no person shall load or offload dangerous goods onto or form a vessel at any place within Nanaimo Harbour other than at Duke Point."
[91]
The policy was adopted after the applicants had received the approval to use Departure Bay. It was further adopted so as to prevent the applicants and other eventual persons concerned from preparing submissions as to the implications of such policy and presenting them to the Commission. Such error on the part of the Commission is subject to judicial review, and I refer in that respect to the
Griffin
case (supra), and to
Central Ontario Coalition  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Div. Ct.). I would also refer to the observations of MacKay, J., of this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[92]
It is my view that such ex post facto decisions do not stand up to the tests of fairness, reasonableness and equity imposed upon decision-making authorities. It could be said that regard for these tests became unconsciously overshadowed by the evident desire of the respondent to finally decide that a policy respecting the carriage of dangerous goods in the downtown area should finally be created and developed, and that it should apply retroactively to applicants who had already been given leave to run their service.
[93]
One may very well subscribe to the biblical postulate that "The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away". But that is not good law: just as in the civilian doctrine of "
donner et retenir ne vaut
", a decision-making authority which has received an application, has analyzed the facts before it, has considered the areas of concern and has allowed the application, cannot, in my view, on the basis of subsequent elaboration of policy, effectively reverse itself to the evident financial prejudice of the applicants who had asked for no more than what they got.
[94]
As to the designations of various locations in the downtown harbour area made pursuant to the respondent's
Bylaws
, there is no evidence before me that any such designations had hitherto been made. Its retroactive effect constitutes an excess of jurisdiction which the law cannot countenance.
[95]
The so-called confirming decision in the respondent's letter to the applicants, dated July 5, 1993, as well as the decision communicated to the applicants on July 19, 1993, are hereby quashed. The June 9, 1993 letter to the applicants remains the only valid decision of the respondent and shall be given its full effect.
[96]
The applicants are entitled to their costs on a single party basis.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]