[1] Nadon, J.
: The defendants have applied for an order staying that part of the order of Jerome, A.C.J., dated November 10, 1993, granting a Mareva injunction against the corporate defendants, thus, preventing these defendants from disposing of, incumbering, releasing or dispossessing themselves of any assets or from removing them from Canada.
Facts:
[2]
The relevant facts can be summarized as follows:
1. In November of 1992, one of the defendants, Blyth & Company Travel Ltd. ("B.C.T.L."), entered into a joint venture agreement with the plaintiff, Marine Atlantic Inc. The purpose of the agreement was to provide environmentally-oriented cruise expeditions using the M.V. "Northern Ranger". The plaintiff is the owner of the "Northern Ranger".
2. As part of its obligations under the joint venture agreement, B.C.T.L. purchased three (3) inflatable boats known as Zodiacs which were leased to the joint venture for use on the expeditions.
3. The cruise expeditions took place between December of 1992 and April of 1993 at which time the "Northern Ranger" made its way back to Canada.
4. It appears from the pleadings filed in the court record, that the expeditions encountered serious problems.
5. A dispute has arisen between B.C.T.L. and the plaintiff with respect to their mutual obligations under the joint venture agreement.
6. Attempts were made to settle this dispute and in particular a meeting, at which the parties and their counsel were in attendance, was held on June 11, 1993. The settlement discussions were not successful.
7. On June 25, 1993 the plaintiff filed a statement of claim claiming damages against the defendants for breach of the joint venture agreement and for negligent misrepresentation.
8. On August 4, 1993 the defendants filed a statement of defence and Counterclaim seeking damages against the plaintiff for breach of the joint venture agreement and for negligent misrepresentation. On September 7, 1993 the plaintiff filed a statement of defence to the Counterclaim.
9. On October 19, 1993 the defendants filed a reply to the plaintiff's defence to counterclaim.
10. In the Counterclaim which they have filed, the defendants seek, in addition to damages against the plaintiff, the return of the Zodiacs which they purchased and which, they allege, the plaintiff has refused to return.
11. In view of the plaintiff's refusal to return the Zodiacs, the defendants, by notice of motion dated September 23, 1993, applied to this court for summary judgment on their claim for the return of the Zodiacs.
12. In response to this application, the plaintiff filed a cross-motion seeking from this court an order permitting it to set off the value of the Zodiacs and for a Mareva injunction against the defendants.
13. Both motions were heard by Jerome, A.C.J., on October 5, 1993 and on November 10, 1993, the A.C.J., delivered his order and reasons.
14. Jerome, A.C.J., ordered the plaintiff to return to the defendants the Zodiacs. In addition, Jerome, A.C.J., granted the plaintiff's application for a Mareva injunction, thus preventing the corporate defendants from disposing of, incumbering, releasing or dispossessing themselves of any assets or from removing them from Canada.
15. On November 11, 1993 the defendants appealed the decision of Jerome, A.C.J.
16. The defendants, by notice of motion dated November 17, 1993, applied to this court for an order staying that part of Jerome, A.C.J.'s decision which granted the Mareva injunction against all the defendants.
[3]
There is no doubt that the trial division of this court has jurisdiction to grant a stay of an interlocutory order issued by the trial division pending the appeal of that order to the court of appeal.
[4]
In determining whether a stay of an interlocutory order of this court should be granted, this court has considered various factors, namely:
1. the chances of success on the appeal;
2. the balance of convenience;
3. the existence of irreparable harm.
[5]
In
Eli Lilly and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Rouleau, J., was asked to stay an order rendered by Reed, J. In reviewing the authorities, Rouleau, J., referred to a decision of Teitelbaum, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and particularly to that part Teitelbaum, J.'s, decision where the latter states:
"Therefore, what must be shown in order for a stay to be granted is that the applicant must show it has an arguable case, will suffer irreparable harm, and that the balance of convenience is in its favour.
"I am satisfied that a stay of an interlocutory order, as in the present case, should only be granted in the clearest of cases and the onus is on the applicant to show that he or she has an arguable case, will suffer irreparable harm and that the balance of convenience favours the granting of a stay."
[6]
I accept the above as being the applicable test in deciding whether a stay of an interlocutory order of this court should be granted. I also wish to adopt the following words of Strayer, J., pronounced in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 134 and 135:
"It is clear from the authorities that there is no automatic or presumptive right to a stay of an interlocutory order (such as my order of October 31, 1986) pending the determinations of an appeal from that order. Application for stays under s. 50 of the
Federal Court Act
, under rule 1909, or through the extension of time for filing a defence under rule 402, would appear to me all to involve the same principle. What that principle should be is less clear. At times it has been suggested that the test should be that of balance of convenience: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.). Elsewhere it has been said that the appropriate test is the one normally associated with s. 50 of the
Federal Court Act
, namely that the onus is on the party seeking a stay of an order or judgment to show that the denial of a stay would cause an injustice to him and the grant of the stay will not cause an injustice to the other party: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)]; see also
La Société Radio Canada contre l'Association des Réalisateurs
, [1982] 2 F.C. 337 (T.D.). Again, it has been said elsewhere in this court that a stay pending appeal should not be issued unless 'irreparable injury' will otherwise be caused;"
The Merits Of The Appeal:
[7]
The defendants submit that their chances of succeeding on their appeal of the decision of Jerome, A.C.J., are excellent. The defendants base their submission on three grounds, but I shall discuss only one.
[8]
The defendants submit that the Mareva injunction should not have been granted as the evidence before Jerome, A.C.J., did not disclose that the defendants were removing, or intended to remove, or were dissipating, or were intending to dissipate, their assets "in order to avoid the possibility of a judgment".
[9]
In support of their submission, the defendants referred to the decision of Estey, J., of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241. After a careful review of the authorities, Estey, J., concluded that the Superior Courts of every province in Canada had the authority to grant Mareva-type injunctions where it appeared to be just or convenient to do so.
[10]
Estey, J., reviewed the English Mareva authorities which he summarized as follows. A Mareva injunction may issue against a foreign or resident defendant in an action justiciable in England, in order to prevent that defendant from removing his assets from the jurisdiction where there is a "real" risk that the assets will disappear so as to render a judgment nugatory. It is a prerequisite that the plaintiff must have a good arguable case on the merits. In addition, the balance of convenience must be considered as with any other injunction. A Mareva injunction does not give the plaintiff preferred status over other creditors, nor does it prevent a defendant from paying his debts in the ordinary course of its business.
[11]
While holding that the Mareva injunction should be available in Canada, Estey, J., held such relief should be available on a more restricted basis than in England.
[12]
First of all, Estey, J., states that in order to obtain a Mareva injunction in Canada, a plaintiff must demonstrate a "strong prima facie case" and not merely a "good arguable case" which appears to be the requisite in England.
[13]
Secondly, Estey, J., emphasized that a plaintiff should not use a Mareva injunction as a means to obtain execution prior to the obtaining of a judgment. Rather, the danger against which a Mareva injunction is granted is the risk that the manner in which the defendant is dealing with his assets will make a judgment in the plaintiff's favour highly difficult, if not impossible, to collect. At p. 10, he writes as follows:
"A second and much higher hurdle facing the litigant seeking the exceptional order is the simple proposition that in our jurisprudence, execution cannot be obtained prior to judgment and judgment cannot be recovered before trial. Execution in this sense includes judicial orders impounding assets or otherwise restricting the rights of the defendant without a trial. This was enunciated by Cotton, L.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  probable if the action were brought the plaintiff could establish that there was a debt due to him by the defendant, the defendant has been ordered to give a security till the debt has been established by the judgment or decree.'"
[14]
At p. 37 of his judgment, Estey, J., goes on to state:
"There is still, as in the days of
Lister
, a profound unfairness in a rule which sees one's assets tied up indefinitely pending trial of action which may not succeed, and even if it does succeed, which may result in an award of far less than the caged assets. The harshness of such an exception to the general rule is even less acceptable where the defendant is a resident within the jurisdiction of the court and the assets in question are not being disposed of or moved out of the country or put beyond the reach of the courts of the country. This sub-rule or exception can lead to serious abuse. A plaintiff with an apparent claim, without ultimate substance, may, by the
Mareva
exception to the
Lister
rule, tie up the assets of the defendant, not for the purpose of their preservation until judgment, but to force, by litigious blackmail, a settlement on the defendant who, for any one of many reasons, cannot afford to await the ultimate vindication after trial."
[15]
Turning to the facts of the case before him, Estey, J., stated that there was no finding in the courts below of any improper motive behind the transfer of assets by the defendant. The transfer, according to Estey, J., was made in the ordinary course of business and reflected the history of the conduct of the appellant's business in the past. He added that there had been no finding of any intention by the defendant to default on his obligations, either generally or specifically towards the plaintiff. He then stated that the defendant had not been found to be insolvent and that the Court of Appeal had expressly ruled out this element as a consideration governing the issuance or denial of a Mareva injunction.
[16]
The defendants also referred me to two (2) Ontario decisions, namely,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[17]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Ontario Court of Appeal refused to renew a Mareva injunction which had been granted ex parte. In making his order, MacKinnon, A.C.J.O., on behalf of the court, stated, at p. 83, that:
"Turning finally to item (iv) of Lord Denning's guidelines -- the risk of removal of these assets before judgment -- once again the material must be persuasive to the court. The applicant must persuade the court by his material that the defendant is removing or there is real risk that he is about to remove his assets from the jurisdiction to avoid the possibility of a judgment, or that the defendant is otherwise dissipating or disposing of his assets, in a manner clearly distinct from his usual or ordinary course of business or living, so as to render the possibility of future tracing of the assets remote, if not impossible in fact or in law."
[18]
The operative words in that part of MacKinnon, A.C.J.'s, decision are, in my view, "to avoid the possibility of a judgment, ...".
[19]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a decision of the Divisional Court of the Ontario High Court of Justice rendered on May 31, 1989, the facts, briefly put, were as follows. The defendant was a foreign national who lived in Canada and who had used the services of the plaintiff in respect of stock market transactions. As a result of a stock market crash, the defendant lost a considerable sum of money and was sued by the plaintiff in respect of the loss. The defendant's only asset within the jurisdiction was his house, which he had put on the market for sale in view of the fact that his employer had transferred him to the United States. The Plaintiff obtained a Mareva injunction which prevented the defendant from removing the proceeds of the sale of his house out of the jurisdiction.
[20]
The Divisional Court held that the plaintiff had met the first requirement of the test obtaining a Mareva injunction by showing that it had a prima facie case against the defendant, but held that the plaintiff had failed to satisfy the second requirement of the test. In order to meet this requirement, the plaintiff would have had to satisfy the court that the defendant was removing his assets from the jurisdiction in order to avoid the possibility of a judgment or was dissipating or disposing of his assets in a manner distinct from the usual course of his affairs.
[21]
In my view, the authorities are clear that it is not sufficient for a plaintiff, in order to obtain a Mareva injunction, to simply allege that his judgment may be frustrated by the removal of assets. The plaintiff must go further and satisfy the court that the defendant is removing his assets with a view of avoiding a further judgment. A strong indication of such fraudulent intent would be if it could be demonstrated by the plaintiff that the defendant is removing assets outside the ordinary course of his business.
[22]
In the present matter, the plaintiff did not allege in the proceedings nor in its application to obtain a Mareva injunction that the defendants were intending to transfer funds or remove assets from the jurisdiction other than in the ordinary course of their business, namely that of retail travel companies which sell tour packages to institutions and to the public. According to the affidavit of Graham David Blyth, 95% of that business involves organizing and selling international tour and educational packages. In his affidavit, Mr. Blyth sets out clearly, at para. 8 thereof, the payments which must be made by the defendants to institutions outside of this court's jurisdiction. In addition, at para. 11 of his affidavit, Mr. Blyth explains why the defendants wish to remove from the jurisdiction the Zodiac boats which they own.
[23]
In both cases, it is clear that the defendants seek to remove assets from this jurisdiction in order to fulfil their business and commercial commitments. Clearly, there is no intention on the part of the defendants to make themselves judgment-proof.
[24]
Thus, in my view, the strength of the defendants' case is sufficiently strong in order to grant a stay. I shall now consider the other requisite factors for staying an Order.
Irreparable Harm:
[25]
As I have stated earlier, Mr. Blyth, in his affidavit, states that 95% of the defendants' business involves organizing and selling international tour and educational packages. Mr. Blyth, at para. 5 of his affidavit, states that the effect of Jerome, A.C.J.'s, decision granting the Mareva injunction is tantamount to preventing the defendants from "carrying on their normal and ordinary business operations and may well jeopardize their ability to survive".
[26]
In support of his assertion, Mr. Blyth attaches as Exhibit A to his affidavit a complete list of the international tour and educational programs offered in 1993 by the defendants. The gross revenue received by the defendants in respect of these programs was approximately $10 million. However, the defendants had to pay, out of the jurisdiction, close to $2.3 million as deposits and progress payments to suppliers outside of Canada.
[27]
As Exhibit B, Mr. Blyth has attached a list of the tour and educational programs scheduled for the end of 1993 and 1994, in respect of which the defendants have concluded agreements, or will shortly be concluding agreements, and which will require them to make deposits and progress payments to persons outside of Canada within the next 12 months.
[28]
Exhibit B lists those tours in respect of which payments must be made within the next 12 months. At para. 8 of his affidavit, Mr. Blyth states that in connection with the programs listed in Exhibit B seven programs require payments totalling $340,000 in the immediate future. Paragraphs 9 and 10 of his affidavit give a brief explanation of the programs in respect of which these amounts are to be paid.
[29]
Finally, Mr. Blyth, at para. 11 of his affidavit, explains why the defendant companies wish to remove their Zodiac boats from Canada. In a nutshell, these boats are to be used as utility boats on international cruise expeditions to transport passengers to and from land visits. In the short term, these boats are required in respect of a cruise-expedition to the Antarctic commencing December 4, 1993 and involving 1,000 people.
[30]
In light of the foregoing, I am satisfied that the Mareva injunction is causing and will cause irreparable harm to the defendants in the short term.
The Balance Of Convenience:
[31]
Should I grant the stay which the defendants seek to obtain, what prejudice, if any, would the plaintiff suffer?
[32]
It should be pointed out, once again, that the Mareva injunction does not place the plaintiff in a preferred position vis-à-vis the defendants' other unsecured creditors. Should the defendants fail to meet their financial obligations, and therefore declare bankruptcy, as the plaintiff implies, the plaintiff will have to share equally with all other unsecured creditors of the defendants. It is therefore not to the plaintiff's advantage that the defendants be prevented from carrying out their legitimate business. The payments which the defendants wish to make are intended, hopefully, to generate revenue which can or should improve the defendants' financial position.
[33]
The plaintiff has taken the position that all the defendants have to do in order to free their assets is post security in the sum of $1 million. The defendants, through the affidavit of Mr. Manny Braun, office manager for the defendants, state that they are unable to provide security in the sum of $1 million. It is clear that what the plaintiff seeks to obtain, by way of Mareva injunction, is security for its claim. That is not the purpose of the Mareva injunction.
[34]
As was made clear by Estey, J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Financial
, a plaintiff is not entitled to obtain satisfaction of his judgment prior to obtaining that judgment. The Mareva injunction is an exception to that rule in cases where a plaintiff can show that his defendant is attempting to avoid a future judgment by removing his assets from the jurisdiction or by dissipating them within the jurisdiction.
[35]
I have not been able, yet, to find a decision, whether in Canada or in the United Kingdom where the court has prevented a defendant from paying its debts in the ordinary course of its affairs. Indeed to do so would be tantamount to closing down that defendant's business.
[36]
I therefore come to the conclusion that the balance of convenience lies in favour of the defendants.
Conclusion:
[37]
I will therefore stay the Mareva injunction in order to allow the defendants to make payments in respect of those programs which appear in Exhibit B to Mr. Blyth's affidavit. I will also allow the defendants to remove from the jurisdiction the three Zodiac boats which are referred to at para. 11 of Mr. Blyth's affidavit.
[38]
Costs will be in the cause.
Application allowed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/saf
[End of document]