[1]
MacKay, J.
: In this action, commenced by statement of claim filed July 12, 1993, the late Angeline Eva Jones sought, and now in succession to her, the executors and trustees of her estate (the "plaintiffs") seek, declaratory relief, and the defendant Howard Louis (the "defendant") by counterclaim also seeks declaratory relief, concerning their respective rights to a certain lot of land located on reserve lands. The lot in question is within the reserve of the third party, the Okanagan Indian Band, near Vernon, British Columbia. Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada is owner of the lands in question and is joined as a defendant.
[2]
With the filing of the Statement of Defence the defendant also filed on August 26, 1993 on the Okanagan Indian Band a third party notice claiming entitlement to contribution and indemnity to the extent of 100% of "any sum which the plaintiff may recover against him [Mr. Louis] on the ground that the Okanagan Indian Band negligently failed to register [with the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development] a transfer of Lot 23 duly executed by the plaintiff [i.e., the late Angeline Jones] and the defendant, Howard Louis".
[3]
Pretrial preparations involved the original plaintiff, Angeline Jones and the defendant, Howard Louis. In advance of trial the solicitor for the third party, the Okanagan Indian Band, advised that the Band did not wish to participate in the trial, though it had earlier entered an appearance in response to the third party notice to it. At commencement of trial the defendant Her Majesty the Queen was represented by counsel who, with consent of the court, then filed a Defence claiming that Her Majesty, her officers and employees had acted reasonably and lawfully at all material times. Counsel advised that the Crown would not actively participate in the trial but would acknowledge the court's jurisdiction in the matter and would expect to give effect to any judgment of this court or of the court of Appeal in relation to this matter, by any documentation necessary to reflect the judgment, assuming that was not inconsistent with Her Majesty's defence. After setting out the basic position of the Crown, counsel for Her Majesty withdrew, and the case then continued as an issue between the plaintiffs and the defendant, Howard Louis.
[4]
By agreement between the parties certain facts were settled for purposes of the trial, and it was further agreed that evidence on behalf of the plaintiffs would include evidence given in discovery by the late Angeline Jones, and given in discovery by the defendant, Howard Louis, read in from the transcript. The defendant also testified at the trial.
[5]
The rights of the parties, subject to the
Indian Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5 as amended (the "
Act
") concern entitlement to possessory title to a lot of land known and described as Lot 23, Block A, Fry sketch 319-37, Okanagan Indian Reserve No. 1 (hereafter referred to as "Lot 23"). Their rights are dependant upon whether there was an agreement between the late Angeline Jones and Howard Louis and if there was an agreement, what its terms were and how those affected the interests of the parties. In resolution of that dispute neither the third party nor Her Majesty the Queen have an interest except that the matter be resolved.
Interests In Lands On A Reserve
[6]
The
Act
establishes the legislative framework relating to interests in lands on a reserve.
[7]
A "reserve" is a tract of land, the legal title to which is vested in Her Majesty, that has been set aside by Her Majesty for the use and benefit of a Band (s. 2(1)) and a "band" includes a body of Indians for whose use and benefit in common Crown land has been set apart (s. 2(1)). Reserves are held by Her Majesty for the use and benefit of the respective Bands for which they were set apart (s. 18(1)). Possession of land in a reserve may be held by an Indian with approval of the Minister when possession has been allotted to the Indian by the council of the Band (s. 20(1)). The Minister may issue a Certificate of Possession as evidence of the right of an Indian who has lawful possession of land in a reserve (s. 20(2)). Where possession of land in a reserve has been allotted to an Indian by the council of the Band, the Minister may withhold approval and may authorize the Indian to occupy the land temporarily on such conditions as the Minister may prescribe (s. 20(4)), and the Minister shall then issue a Certificate of Occupation to the Indian, valid for two years (s. 20(5)). The Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development ("DIAND") maintains a Reserve Land Register in which is entered particulars relating to Certificates of Possession and of Occupation, and to other transactions respecting lands in a reserve (s. 21).
[8]
An Indian who is lawfully in possession of lands in a reserve may transfer to the Band or to another member of the Band the right to possession of the land, but no transfer or agreement for the transfer of the right to possession of lands in a reserve is effective until it is approved by the Minister (s. 24). If an Indian ceases to be entitled to reside on a reserve he or she may, within a limited period, transfer to the Band or to another member of the Band the right to possession held in any lands in the reserve, and if that is not done the right to possession of the lands reverts to the Band (s. 25). With the exception of ministerial permits for use of reserve lands the
Act
declares void any deed, or document of any kind, written or oral, by which a Band or a member of a Band purports to permit a person other than a member of that Band to occupy or use or exercise any right in relation to land in a reserve (s. 28).
The Background
[9]
The late Angeline Jones, a member of the First Nations and a Band member of the Okanagan Band, inherited possessory title to Lot 23 from her brother, Clement Gottfriedson, in 1981 and she obtained a Certificate of Possession to that lot on January 21, 1982. She farmed Lot 23 from the early 1970's until 1990.
[10]
In late 1989 and early 1990, Angeline Jones began discussions with the defendant Howard Louis about possibilities of him taking over Lot 23 and continuing the farming operations. The defendant was a nephew of Angeline Jones, and he too was a Band member of the Okanagan Band. In 1989 and 1990 he had helped with her farming activities. She was then nearly 70 years of age. She was known to have had a heart condition for some years, and, with her health failing somewhat, she had begun to think of giving up farming activities.
[11]
The defendant and Angeline Jones, according to her statement of claim and her subsequent evidence in discovery, and his evidence at trial, were agreed that in the fall of 1990 Angeline Jones had signed a document to transfer possessory title to Lot 23 to the defendant. It was anticipated that the transfer papers, when executed, would be forwarded by the Band office to the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development ("DIAND") for approval of the Minister, and for registration of the transfer. This was not done, and until trial, as noted in the Defence filed at trial on behalf of Her Majesty, "from and after 1981 the plaintiff i.e., the original plaintiff, Angeline Jones] has been the holder of a certificate of possession to Lot 23, Block A, Fry sketch 319-37, as registered in the Indian Land Registry, issued pursuant to the provisions of the
Indian Act
".
[12]
Discussions between Angeline Jones and Howard Louis in 1989 and 1990 appear to have been intermittent, when he was present to assist her with fence mending, with occasional cattle operations, with haying and once with seeding and harvesting a crop of oats. Their discussions do not appear to have been very precise, though it is clear that they included the possible transfer of possession to Lot 23 from Angeline Jones to the defendant and they also included possible continuing assistance to Ms. Jones in her farming activities by Howard Louis, and the possibility of the defendant purchasing from Ms. Jones certain farming equipment. That equipment included a tractor, a baler, a swather and irrigation equipment, which Ms. Jones was prepared to sell for $20,000. Money for such a purchase, and for purchase of some of Ms. Jones' cattle for continuing with the cow-calf operations she was engaged in, would have to be borrowed by Mr. Louis, and that was understood by both parties.
[13]
Mr. Louis first made application for a loan for his proposed venture in farming in April 1990 and thereafter additional assessments of loan possibilities for the venture were made by the Western Indian Lending Association, to which he had applied. These ultimately led to approval in June 1991 of a loan in the amount of $66,000 to provide for purchase of farming equipment and some 50 head of cattle with moneys to be advanced on the basis of invoices as purchases were made.
[14]
Various of the applications and business plan assessment forms prepared in the course of developing a loan proposal that ultimately was approved include references to the proposed transactions involving land transfer and the purchase of equipment and livestock from Angeline Jones. In a resumé with a review of Mr. Louis' assets and liabilities, dated April 2, 1990 in connection with his loan application, it is noted that the real estate assets do not include a calculation in relation to "Land gift from A. Jones". That document also includes the following references to arrangements understood by the loan officer who completed the forms in discussion with the defendant Howard Louis.
"The vendor of this equipment, Mrs. Angeline Jones, is Howard's Aunt. She is getting ready for retirement and is slowly winding down her own herd of 70 brood cows.
"Mrs. Jones, with whom Howard is very close, has offered to give him 30 acres of land which is currently under hay and upon which irrigation equipment is set up provided that Howard purchases the equipment from her at the price of $25,500."
In a later Technical Report and Recommendations relating to Louis' loan application, signed August 31, 1990 with approval by the loan officer of the Lending Association, it is noted that "Client needs funds to consummate land deal. If client gets funds for the machinery and cattle he will get CP [i.e., a Certificate of Possession] for A. Jones land".
[15]
The interrelation of the transfer of title to Lot 23 and the purchase of the farm equipment is portrayed differently by the parties. In the statement of claim, Angeline Jones set out her claim, in part, as follows:
"6. In the fall of 1990, the plaintiff and the defendant purported to enter into an agreement wherein the plaintiff agreed to sell the said Lot 23 to the defendant, providing the defendant was prepared to pay certain monies to the plaintiff and complete other services for the plaintiff.
"7. That it is the plaintiff's belief that an agreement was signed in the fall of 1990 wherein Lot 23 was to be acquired by the defendant, however, as of this date that agreement has never been registered in the Indian Land Registry.
"8. That at the time the agreement was signed it was one day after the plaintiff had been released from the Vernon General Hospital as a result of an accident she suffered while farming. The defendant knew the plaintiff was in ill health and approached the plaintiff. The defendant agreed that he would purchase Lot 23 from the plaintiff on the understanding that he would pay $20,000 for the equipment which was essentially a tractor, a bailer, a swather and the irrigation equipment as well as he would provide personal services to the plaintiff to help her in her farming operations as the plaintiff was living on her own and he would do so up until the time that she decided to stop farming.
"9. That the defendant never honoured the terms of the purported agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant and he completed little or no personal services for the plaintiff and he never paid the $20,000 for the equipment as part of the purported agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant."
[16]
In her examination for discovery Ms. Jones affirmed her understanding that transfer of title to Lot 23 was to be conditional upon the defendant purchasing certain farming equipment from her and performance of other tasks in assistance to her farming operations.
[17]
In his Defence filed in the action the defendant claims, inter alia:
"3. The defendant, Howard Louis, says that in the fall of 1990 the plaintiff and defendant did in fact enter into an agreement wherein the plaintiff conveyed her interest in its entirety to the said Lot 23 to the defendant, Howard Louis, without conditions.
"4. The defendant, Howard Louis, says that the said agreement was properly executed by the defendant, Howard Louis, and the plaintiff and was intended to be registered by both the plaintiff and the defendant, Howard Louis, in the Indian Land Registry.
"5. The defendant, Howard Louis, says that it was only as a result of the negligence of the representatives of the Okanagan Indian Band that the agreement was not registered and that it was the intention of both the plaintiff and the defendant, Howard Louis, at all material times that the transfer of Lot 23 be effective for all purposes from and after the date of execution of the agreement.
"6. The defendant, Howard Louis, specifically denies the allegations of fact contained in paragraphs 8 and 9 of the statement of claim and puts the plaintiff to the strict proof thereof.
"7. The defendant, Howard Louis, specifically denies that the transfer of Lot 23 was in any way conditional upon his purchase of equipment from the plaintiff. The defendant, Howard Louis, says that there was in fact discussions independent of the transfer of Lot 23 regarding the purchase by the defendant, Howard Louis, of the plaintiff's equipment, however the plaintiff ultimately refused to sell the equipment to the defendant, Howard Louis, although the defendant, Howard Louis, was ready, willing and able to purchase the equipment."
In his examination for discovery and his evidence at trial the defendant affirmed his understanding that transfer of title to Lot 23 was independent of any other agreement and, in particular, of the alleged agreement to buy farm equipment for $20,000.
[18]
In September 1990 Angeline Jones and Howard Louis appeared at the Okanagan Band office and there completed a form document, entitled
"Indian and Northern Affairs
TRANSFER OF LAND ON
AN INDIAN RESERVE
Under the Indian Act"
This form provides for transfer from Angeline Eva Jones to Lawrence Howard Louis of all her estate and interest in Lot 23, in consideration of the sum of one dollar paid by the defendant to Ms. Jones, receipt of which is acknowledged in the document. The document was signed by Angeline Jones, and her signature was witnessed by two persons, Matthew Bonneau and Martha Marchand, and an Affidavit of Execution of the document was completed by Matthew Bonneau, and reportedly by Martha Marchand as well.
[19]
The document to transfer possessory title in Lot 23 was signed on September 24, 1990 by Angeline Jones. It was not thereafter forwarded to the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development. A letter of February 19, 1991 to Indian Affairs and Northern Development Canada, at Vancouver, to the attention of the Manager, Lands, Revenues and Trusts, from the Public Works Manager of the Okanagan Indian Band, filed on behalf of the defendant, refers to the original of a Transfer of Land dated September 1990 executed by Angeline Eva Jones in favour of Lawrence Howard Louis, relating to Lot 23, and it is stated that the document is attached to that letter. The letter asks for registration of the transfer and issuance of evidence of title to the defendant Howard Louis. There is no evidence that letter, or any other, relating to the transfer to the defendant of Lot 23, was ever received by the department. As earlier noted, up to the time of trial the Reserve Land Registry maintained within DIAND included continuing registration of Angeline Eva Jones as the person entitled to possession of Lot 23.
[20]
The circumstances of the day the transfer document was executed are differently described in the examination for discovery of Angeline Jones and in the evidence for the defendant, Howard Louis. Ms. Jones' evidence was that on the day prior to signing the transfer she had been released from hospital, where she had a broken arm attended to and she was still on medication the following day, September 24, when Howard Louis appeared at her home and asked her to go with him to the Band office to complete the transfer of Lot 23. Although she stated she had been having second thoughts about possible transfer of the land to him she did accompany him to the Band office, where they went directly from her home, and there she signed the transfer document. She did so despite her second thoughts, because she had earlier indicated she would transfer the lot to him, and because she believed this would settle a simmering dispute within her family about entitlement to the lot. Finally, she believed the arrangement was conditional, depending upon the defendant getting a loan and purchasing the farm equipment from her for $20,000.
[21]
Mr. Louis' evidence differs in that he says on September 24 Angeline Jones called upon him at his house, a matter confirmed by the evidence of the defendant's wife, who served tea. That visit was not recalled by Ms. Jones, but her presence at the home of the defendant on that occasion was also recalled by testimony of a sister of the defendant's wife, who dropped in to visit while Ms. Jones was there and who recalls the occasion, in part, because it was the first time she had met Ms. Jones. His wife's sister and his wife corroborate the evidence of the defendant, that Angeline Jones and he left from his home to go to the Band office to complete transfer of the lot to Howard Louis. They travelled in Ms. Jones' vehicle because the defendant did not have one at the time, according to his wife.
[22]
At the Band office the document was dealt with before Ms. Molly Marchand (Ms. Penning, as she then was), the Finance Officer employed by the Band and a Commissioner for the taking of oaths. Ms. Marchand knew the parties. She followed her usual practice when documents were executed before her. She reviewed the document with Ms. Jones, confirmed her Band number as stated on the document, reviewed the description of the lot, asked where the land was located, questioned Ms. Jones about the stated consideration of one dollar, and finally asked her if she understood, and if she desired, the transfer of the lot to Howard Louis as was provided for in the document. She had then called Matthew Bonneau and Martha Marchand in to her office to be witnesses to the signature of the transfer document by Angeline Jones. After the transfer was signed by Ms. Jones and the witnesses had signed, Ms. Molly Marchand then completed the affidavits of execution by the two witnesses.
[23]
Ms. Marchand testified that there was nothing unusual about the circumstances when Angeline Jones and Howard Louis were in her office, except for the fact that Ms. Jones had a broken arm. She had teased Ms. Jones about that, asking if the defendant had twisted her arm to get her to sign the papers, to which Ms. Jones laughed and said no, that "she had wanted to do this for a while and she was just getting around to doing it".
[24]
Earlier brief reference was made to Ms. Jones' anticipation that by transferring Lot 23 to Howard Louis she might settle a simmering family difference. That difference was referred to in her statement of claim where it is alleged that soon after Ms. Jones inherited Lot 23 from her brother, his will was contested by her sister, Howard Louis' mother, on the basis that the defendant should have inherited that lot. In her evidence in discovery Angeline Jones referred to argument in public on one occasion, between Howard Louis and her daughter, over entitlement to Lot 23. She had a sense that some members of her family perceived that the defendant had a greater claim to the lot, as land of the Gottfriedson family, than did her daughter who was adopted. At the trial of this matter, her sister, the defendant's mother, denied that she had earlier contested the will by which Ms. Jones inherited Lot 23. Howard Louis testified that, while he had some sense that he was entitled to claim Lot 23 because Ms. Jones' brother, Clement Gottfriedson, who had left the lot to her, was his godfather, but he had no factual basis upon which to found such entitlement, only his hope. The continuing family difference perceived by Angeline Jones may have been one ground for her decision to convey title to the defendant, but that has little or no significance in determining at this stage the rights of the parties to the lot in question.
[25]
After the transfer was executed Mr. Louis testified that he had inquired of DIAND in February of 1991, and subsequently on a number of occasions at the Band office, about some record of the transfer to him. In June 1992, some time after it was clear to Ms. Jones that the defendant did not intend to purchase her farm equipment, both Angeline Jones and counsel on her behalf apparently contacted the Land Administration Officer of DIAND at Vancouver, to advise that she did not wish the transfer of Lot 23 from her to Howard Louis to be registered. That officer then wrote to the Okanagan Indian Band to convey that information and to note that the transfer referred to had not been registered and that there was no record the transfer had been received by the department.
[26]
Subsequently, in July 1993 the statement of claim in this action was filed, and the defence of Howard Louis was filed on August 26, 1993. Not long before trial of this matter, Angeline Eva Jones died, on April 26, 1995. By her will, dated April 10, 1995, she named her son Truman Clarence Jones, and her daughter, Sandra Lee Lewis as executors and trustees. Her will also provided, inter alia, that the trustees are to transfer the entire interest of Ms. Jones in and to Lot 23 to her daughter Sandra Lee Lewis, for her own use absolutely.
The Issues
[27]
For the plaintiffs at trial it was urged there were three primary issues before the court: first, the credibility of the evidence adduced on behalf of the parties; second, whether there was any legal agreement between the parties; and third, if there was an agreement, what its terms were in relation to the competing claims to possessory title to Lot 23.
[28]
The first of those issues I do not consider essential to comment upon, though each party questions the consistency and credibility of certain facets of the evidence adduced by the other party. In my view, it is not surprising that the memories of Angeline Jones when examined in discovery, and of Howard Louis in discovery and in later testimony at trial, were somewhat vague and imprecise about details of conversations and understandings between them some five years earlier. Moreover, since certain matters were clearly agreed upon, a finding that evidence offered by one or other party is generally not credible is neither appropriate nor helpful.
[29]
Thus I turn to the issues raised by the pleadings and argument concerning the agreement, if any, and if there was an agreement, concerning its effects.
Findings - Arrangements Between
The Parties
[30]
For the plaintiffs it was urged at trial that there was not an agreement with legal effect concluded in this case because, under s. 20 of the
Act
possession of the land in question, Lot 23, is only lawful where it has been allotted to an Indian, who is a member of the Band, by the Council of the Band, and where possession is approved by the Minister. Until the Minister's approval is obtained, a matter within the Minister's discretion, it is said there is no agreement with legal effect. Indeed, this is precisely what s. 24 of the
Act
provides.
"24. An Indian who is lawfully in possession of lands in a reserve may transfer to the band or to another member of the band the right to possession of the land, but no transfer or agreement for the transfer of the right to possession of lands in a reserve is effective until it is approved by the Minister."
[31]
Counsel for the plaintiffs cited several authorities dealing with the application of s. 20 but all of them related to circumstances where there had not been approval of the allotment of possessory title by a Band Council or approval of possessory title by the Minister. In my opinion, the cases were not helpful in determining the claims of the parties here.
[32]
Counsel did not refer to jurisprudence applying s. 24 of the
Act
. There are two cases dealing with that provision which have some relevance in the circumstances of this case.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), my colleague Mr. Justice Denault dismissed an application for an interlocutory injunction pending trial of an action relating to competing claims to possessory title to land in an Indian reserve. The applicant, claiming title to the lot in question, sought to restrain a housing project on the land. The applicant's claim to possessory title to the land was based upon transfer to him of all the interest in the land of the widow of the former possessory title owner, now deceased, who had left an interest in the land to his widow. Denault, J., found there was no serious issue raised for the applicant's claim to possessory title was not a serious claim since the transfer of title to him had not been approved by the Minister, as required by s. 24. The deed of transfer under which the applicant claimed the land was not in effect.
[33]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), my colleague Mr. Justice Dubé interpreted s. 24 of the
Act
to recognize that a person holding a valid Certificate of Possession may transfer his or her interest in land in a reserve upon approval of the Minister, without the requirement of formal Band Council approval as is required under s. 20 where possession of land is first granted.
[34]
For the respondent it was urged that since counsel for Her Majesty had indicated that a determination by this court of entitlement to possessory title would be implemented, the court should not be concerned with the question of the Minister's approval of any transfer. Rather, the court should be concerned with determining which of the parties, in light of the arrangements between the late Angeline Jones and the defendant, is entitled to call upon the Minister for approval of the claim to possessory title.
[35]
I am not persuaded that s. 24 of the
Act
can be ignored in this matter. By its terms it states "no transfer or agreement for the transfer of the right to possession of lands in a reserve is effective until it is approved by the Minister". That surely applies to the transfer executed by Angeline Jones in September of 1990. While it may be that the parties to that transaction did at the time anticipate that the transfer as executed would be forwarded to the department for the Minister's approval, that, in fact, was not done. The transfer has not yet been approved by the Minister. It has no legal effect. Approval by the Minister is a matter within his discretion, which this court by its order cannot direct. In effect, s. 24 of the
Act
makes a transfer conditional upon and until approval by the Minister of the transfer of possessory title. Until that approval is granted there is not a legally enforceable obligation created by the person lawfully in possession of lands in a reserve who executes a transfer of that interest in the lands.
[36]
Thus, I find that no legally enforceable agreement was concluded by Angeline Jones by her execution of the transfer form purporting to transfer her interest in Lot 23 to the defendant.
[37]
If I am wrong in this conclusion and a legally enforceable agreement was concluded in September of 1990, was that agreement conditional, as the evidence of Angeline Jones indicates, upon purchase by the defendant of certain equipment valued at $20,000. The defendant does not deny that discussions between the parties in 1989 and 1990 included an agreement on his part to purchase equipment from Ms. Jones, provided he could obtain a loan for this purpose, but that agreement it is said was collateral to and not a condition of the transfer to him of Lot 23.
[38]
The evidence of Greg Mazur, who in 1989-90 was a loans officer with the Western Indian Lending Association, and who dealt with Mr. Louis' application for a loan in 1990, supports the conclusion that through the spring of 1990, and until the end of August of that year when Mr. Mazur approved the application of Mr. Louis to be forwarded to Mr. Mazur's superiors, the loan officer was clear, from discussions he had at the time with Angeline Jones and particularly the defendant, that the transfer of land from Angeline Jones was interrelated with and conditional upon purchase of her farming equipment by Howard Louis. It is said that the discussions between the parties changed over time in relation to the equipment purchase, and it is clear that Mr. Mazur understood by the spring of 1991 that the defendant was purchasing at least some farming equipment from a dealer rather than from Angeline Jones. In my opinion, on the evidence before me, at the time the transfer was executed, i.e., on September 24, 1990 it was understood between the parties, Angeline Jones and the defendant Howard Louis, that the two transactions were interrelated. She would have no need of the equipment once Lot 23 was taken over by the defendant for her cow-calf operation on other lands were essentially managed by another and her other lands were leased. She would transfer the land and he would purchase from her farm equipment valued at $20,000. At that time he did not have a loan arranged which would fund the purchase of the equipment but since his application had been approved by the loans officer, Mr. Mazur, at the end of August 1990, the defendant must have had some understanding that his application for a loan had met with preliminary approval and that ultimately he might expect to obtain funds to purchase equipment.
[39]
It is true that no reference to the purchase of equipment was apparently made when the parties were at the Band Council office to execute the transfer and the transfer form makes no reference to any obligation of the defendant to purchase equipment. It is urged that evidence of an oral arrangement between the parties ought not to be permitted to vary the terms of the written agreement. That is a general principle which does not preclude a finding that a written agreement in the circumstances of the case at hand was intended by the parties to be conditional upon the purchase of equipment by Mr. Louis when a loan was obtained by him.
[40]
That condition was not met. In the defence pleaded it is said that at a later stage Angeline Jones refused to sell the equipment to the defendant, but no evidence of this was adduced at trial. In the circumstances, I find that it was a condition of the transfer of the land that the defendant would purchase farming equipment from Angeline Jones. He did not do this. The condition was not met. The transfer of the land was not approved by the Minister and was not registered. Until it was approved by the Minister, in my opinion, Angeline Jones was free to withdraw her transfer of possessory title to the defendant when it became clear that he would not purchase equipment from her as had been earlier agreed. That she sought to do by advice to the department in June of 1992 and subsequently by initiation of this action in July 1993.
[41]
In the statement of claim and in argument for the plaintiffs it was urged that the execution of the transfer on September 24, 1990 was somehow an unconscionable transaction which ought not to be enforced. While passing reference was made to the fact that Angeline Jones had been released from hospital on the previous day and was apparently still under some medication, there simply was not evidence which would establish grounds for finding that the transaction was unconscionable.
Conclusion
[42]
In my opinion, the transfer of land in an Indian reserve relating to Lot 23, executed by Angeline Jones on September 24, 1990, was not a transfer with legal effect since the Minister had not approved the transfer, as is required by s. 24 of the
Indian Act
.
[43]
Even if that transfer were to be considered as determinative of the legal rights of the late Angeline Jones and the defendant Howard Louis inter se, I find that the transfer was intended by the parties to be conditional upon the purchase by Howard Louis of farming equipment from Angeline Jones at a price of $20,000. While it was understood that purchase would be conditional upon his obtaining a loan for the purpose, he did not acquire that equipment at any time, even after his application for a loan was ultimately approved in July of 1991. Indeed, he purchased some other equipment, in particular a tractor, from a dealer rather than from Angeline Jones. In my opinion, in these circumstances, and since the transfer of title to Lot 23 had not yet been approved by the Minister, she was entitled to withdraw her transfer to the defendant of her possessory title to the lot.
[44]
For these reasons, I find that the plaintiffs, executors and trustees of the estate of the late Angeline Jones, are entitled to a declaration that at the time of her death Angeline Jones was entitled to possessory title to Lot 23 in accord with the Certificate of Possession issued some years earlier and in accord with the registration maintained within the department in regard to those lands.
[45]
I make no order as to alternative relief sought by the plaintiffs. An order goes dismissing the counterclaim of the defendant to a declaration that he is entitled to a Certificate of Possession to Lot 23.
[46]
Since there is no claim by the plaintiffs for damages and none are awarded to them against the defendant, his third party claim to indemnity against the Okanagan Indian Band of any sum the plaintiff may recover against him, is dismissed.
[47]
The plaintiffs shall have reasonable costs of the action. I do not consider this a complex case. It arose in part because both of the original parties left it to third parties to take the steps necessary to perfect the transfer of possession, steps which both parties anticipated but which were not performed. In these circumstances if the parties cannot agree on reasonable costs to be recovered by plaintiffs, pursuant to rule 344 of the
Federal Court Rules
I direct that costs be assessed, insofar as that relates to items included in Tariff B, Part II of the Court's Rules, in accord with column II of that Part.
Postscript - The Court's Jurisdiction
[48]
In advance of trial, when no defence had been filed by Her Majesty, I requested counsel for Ms. Jones, as I understood the plaintiff was, and for the defendant, Howard Louis, to consider and advise the court at the opening of trial any question concerning the court's jurisdiction in light of the decision of my colleague Mr. Justice Wetston in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). There, in an action seeking to enforce an agreement for purchase and sale of land located in a reserve, the plaintiffs' action and the counterclaim by the defendant were dismissed and Wetston, J., found the matter not to be within the jurisdiction of the court.
[49]
In this case, submissions from counsel for the plaintiffs and for the defendant, Howard Louis, were supportive of the court's jurisdiction, and that jurisdiction was recognized by counsel for the defendant Her Majesty the Queen. The submissions of counsel were helpful. I am persuaded that this case can be distinguished from
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Indians and members of the same Band, that the land in question lies within the reserve of their Band, that the original plaintiff had a Certificate of Possession to the lot in question and that by a transfer document her interest had purportedly been conveyed to Mr. Louis. Moreover, here Her Majesty, in whom title to the land is vested, was a party to the action, and acknowledged the court's jurisdiction to resolve the conflicting claims to possessory title. That jurisdiction I find exists by virtue of s. 17(4) of the
Federal Court Act
, which confers concurrent original jurisdiction on the Trial Division "to hear and determine disputes where the Crown is or may be under an obligation, in respect of which there are or may be conflicting claims". Here that obligation arises in relation to Indian people and under the
Indian Act
, with regard to the management of Indian lands. The obligation here concerns approval of possessory title to certain of those lands, to which there are conflicting claims by the parties.
[50]
In my opinion, the requirements established by jurisprudence in relation to this court's jurisdiction are met in this case, as they were found to be in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  F.T.R. 161; 57 D.L.R.(4th) 197. There resolution of a dispute between two Indian Bands to entitlement to certain reserve lands was held to be within the jurisdiction of the Federal Court.
Judgment for plaintiffs.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/saf
[End of document]