[1]
MacKay, J.
: By application dated January 14, 1992, heard in Toronto on January 21, the plaintiffs seek an order with directions to the taxing officer pursuant to rules 344(6) and (7) to authorize increases for services rendered or disbursements incurred over the amounts specified, or for services not specifically mentioned, in Tariff B, concerning party and party costs, which would otherwise be applicable in accord with rule 346(1).
[2]
The motion arises in connection with the plaintiffs' motion for judgment, heard the previous day, to implement reasons dated November 14, 1991, issued after judgment was reserved at the conclusion of trial for alleged infringement of two patents, and a counterclaim concerning validity of the patents, which trial was heard during 11 days over three weeks from September 18 to October 6, 1989. In those reasons this court found infringement of both patents but that the claims in issue of one of the patents, Canadian Letters Patent No. 741,825, were invalid by reason of s. 41(1) of the
Patent Act
as it applied at all relevant times. Claims in issue in the other patent, Canadian Letters Patent No. 907,014, were held to be valid, and infringed by the defendant.
[3]
The motion for judgment as allowed provides arrangements for a reference under rule 500 et seq., in accord with the order of Mr. Justice Addy, made in this matter August 17, 1983, in relation to any question as to the extent of infringement, or any question of damages or profits arising from infringement, as the plaintiffs may elect. The judgment also provides, in part,
"8. The plaintiffs shall be entitled to 75% of their costs of this action and counterclaim to be taxed on a party and party basis subject to any directions made pursuant to the plaintiffs' notice of motion under rules 344(6) and (7), dated 14th January 1992."
The reference in that clause to the plaintiff's motion is, of course, to the matters dealt with in these reasons and the order that follows, which deal with particular matters to be considered by the taxing officer in assessing costs.
[4]
The rules relating to costs include the following provisions pertinent in this matter. The court has full discretionary authority over the payment of costs (rule 344(1)) and in the exercise of its discretion stipulated factors are to be considered (rule 344(3)). The court may give directions to the taxing officer, including directions for increases over the amounts specified in Tariff B or for services rendered or disbursements incurred that are not included in that tariff (rule 344(6)), and the court may record directions to the taxing officer and may include reference to directions requested but refused or to directions requested but left to the discretion of the taxing officer (rule 344(6.1)). Application to request directions to the taxing officer may be made at the time of a motion for judgment or as otherwise specified (rule 344(7)). Unless otherwise ordered by the court all costs between party and party are to be taxed in accord with Tariff B (rule 346(1)). In taxing and determining costs to be allowed pursuant to Tariff B the taxing officer is to consider certain factors, including some similar to those included in rule 344(3), and any directions of the court to the taxing officer and any refusal of the court to make a direction (rules 346(1.1) and (1.2)). Costs taxed are subject to review by the court on application by a party dissatisfied with the taxation (rule 346(2)).
[5]
It is accepted that the 1987 changes in the
Rules
relating to costs provided increased latitude for allowing costs beyond the maximum amounts specified in Tariff B, as well as providing for increases in costs for steps in an action above levels previously provided. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), per Stone, J.A., at p. 6; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.I.P.R. 195 (F.C.T.D.), per Addy, J., at p. 196). In the exercise of discretion in relation to directions to a taxing officer, my colleagues have recognized certain general principles. Included among these are that parties cannot expect to recover all their costs under the tariff relating to party and party costs and that exorbitant increases over the tariff items should not be countenanced for the court should not interfere lightly with the
Rules
relating to sums intended to be allowed on a party and party basis. (
Diversified Products Corp and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 313 (F.C.T.D.), per Cullen, J., at pp. 324-325;
Stiga Aktiebolag and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 258 (F.C.T.D.), per Dubé, J., at p. 261). While patent cases by their nature may be somewhat complex, general tariffs are set and there is no provision that patent cases should be accorded a treatment different from other types of cases. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 469 (F.C.T.D.), per Reed, J., at p. 470; and per Dubé, J., in
Stiga Aktiebolag
, supra, at p. 261). Finally, the view expressed by Teitelbaum, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  tariff, has been endorsed by Cullen, J., in
Diversified  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 324, and by Dubé, J., in
Stiga Aktiebolag
, supra, at p. 261, namely: "Only rarely and only under the most exceptional circumstances should the court allow extra costs to the attorneys conducting a trial."
[6]
With this background to the exercise of discretion under rule 344(6), in this case the plaintiffs' motion seeks directions to the taxing officer in relation to three matters: the services of counsel, both senior and junior, for preparation and for conduct of the trial, the fees and disbursements of expert and other witnesses, and the full recovery of taxed costs of those experts whose evidence and assistance was essential in establishing infringement of both patents-in-suit.
[7]
Rule 344(3) enumerates factors to be considered in the exercise of discretion as to costs. Among the factors the following are here said to be relevant to the plaintiffs' application, (a) the result of the proceeding, (c) the importance of the issues, (i) the volume of work, (j) the complexity of the issues, (k) the conduct of any party that tended to shorten or to lengthen unnecessarily the duration of the proceeding, and (p) any other matter relevant to the question of costs.
[8]
In considering these factors some general comments about the proceedings provide background for specific aspects giving rise to the plaintiffs' application for directions. The action involved claims by the plaintiffs that two of its patents concerning intermediate products used ultimately for production of a substance that was in turn used for production of medicines, and counterclaims by the defendant that the patents were invalid. The two patents-in-suit were complicated, together comprising a total of 78 pages in length, describing and claiming some 11 claims in one and 120 claims in the other, both product and process claims. On the pleadings all but one of the 11 claims and some 60 of the 120 claims were in issue, though at trial the plaintiffs reduced the scope of its claims for infringement to two claims and to three principal claims under the respective patents, a narrowing of issues not accepted by the defendant for purposes of its counterclaim but implicitly accepted, aside from process dependant claims, in the defendant's argument. The descriptions, the examples and the claims of the two patents involved chemical and pharmacological descriptions, including numerous formulae, of products and processes.
[9]
The substance used for medicines by the defendant was purchased abroad and the defendant had no knowledge of the method of its production. The defendant had not sought a compulsory license for use of the substance, though it might have done so. Establishing that the substance used by the defendant contained intermediates claimed under product claims in the plaintiffs' patents, produced by processes claimed pursuant to s. 39(2) of the
Patent Act
in the absence of proof to the contrary, required sophisticated trace analysis conducted by experts in chemistry by means of modern techniques to detect traces of the intermediates.
[10]
The action was the first, I believe, involving patent claims to intermediate substances and concerning imported substances used in the production of medicines and the first court action directly raising the application of s. 41(1) of the
Patent Act
, as it applied until 1987, in relation to intermediate products. In the result, this court found infringement of both patents but the two claims ultimately at issue in one of the patents were held to be invalid by reason of requirements under s. 41(1) of the
Act
for specific descriptions. Much of the evidence adduced, mainly through the reports and testimony of experts for both parties, concerned the alleged infringement; the question of validity in relation to the two claims at issue in one patent, held to be invalid, turned mainly on the issue of statutory interpretation while the validity of claims in the other patent-in-suit involved assessment of the evidence of experts relating to the usual grounds for attacking validity, including the assessment of evidence offered in some 16 scientific articles or excerpts concerning prior art.
Services Of Counsel
[11]
For counsels' services the plaintiffs seek directions to the taxing officer:
"(a) that the efforts of plaintiffs' counsel in participating in the plaintiffs' tests of the defendant's products, reviewing the outcomes of those tests, and preparing materials concerning the tests for use at trial, be accounted for under Tariff B paragraph 1(1)(h);
"(b) that, with respect to the services of counsel described in Tariff B, paragraphs 1(1)(h) and (i), the taxing officer may exceed the maximum figures set out therein; and
"(c) to allow amounts under paragraphs 1(1)(h) and (i) of Tariff B for both senior and junior counsel."
[12]
In support of the application the plaintiffs filed the affidavit of Immanuel Goldsmith, Q.C., senior counsel involved in the preparation for and the conduct of the trial. It is urged, in relation to the importance of the issues, that they were of great importance to the plaintiffs, involving significant commercial products which warranted substantial testing and preparation on the matter of infringement and in defending the defendant's impeachment of the validity of the patents-in-suit. I have no doubt that this was important for the plaintiffs, but that is the case for any patent holder seeking to protect its exclusive rights. Here the action was qualitatively different, and important in my view, in another sense, that is, in raising the matter of patent protection for chemical or pharmaceutical intermediate substances used in the production of medicines and in the matter of the application of s. 41(1) of the
Patent Act
as it applied until 1987.
[13]
In regard to complexity of the proceedings, while the basic issues were those of a typical patent action, the nature of the case, in my view, was more complex and difficult than many other patent actions, because the patents-in-suit concerned chemical intermediates and because in the circumstances of this case the defendant had no knowledge of the presence of those intermediates in the imported substance it had used for manufacture of its products or the process by which that substance was produced. For the record I note that counsel for the defendant did not agree that the circumstances of this case created particular difficulties or made matters of evidence and its presentation more complex than in many other patent infringement actions. I do not share that view. Sophisticated trace analysis testing, conducted by experts, was essential to the plaintiffs' case. That in turn required involvement of counsel not only as an observer of the testing process undertaken in the United Kingdom, but at least peripherally in its design and to assess and develop the evidentiary value of that work, in the preparation by experts of their reports and in their presentation of evidence. It necessitated also consultation concerning the defendant's Particulars of Objections to the plaintiffs' patent claims, filed originally in 1983 and subsequently amended on three occasions, and consultation with experts concerning the prior art filed by the defendant as well as the experts' reports filed, and concerning the assessment of testimony of defendant's experts, and presented at trial.
[14]
Other pretrial activities of the plaintiffs involving counsel included the preparation of a substantial glossary of relevant terms, largely chemical, which was agreed to by the defendant and entered as an exhibit for the assistance of the court, the preparation of visual aids of chemical formulae and structures which were introduced in evidence at trial, and the drafting and negotiating of an agreed statement of facts.
[15]
None of the plaintiffs' witnesses were resident in Toronto where the trial was held. Senior counsel met with witnesses, one in Ottawa on two occasions, once in North Carolina, and with four others in the United Kingdom on two occasions. Senior counsel was involved for more than 325 hours in pretrial preparations and was assisted by junior counsel who expended at least 80 hours preparing for the trial. Junior counsel was involved as well throughout the trial. The trial itself was originally scheduled for 20 days, though in the result 11 days, including more than two days for argument, was required, over the course of three weeks. In my view, trial was shortened by the agreement of the parties on certain facts, by the narrowing of the claims in issue by the plaintiffs at commencement of trial, by the effective presentation of evidence and generally efficient cross-examination by counsel for the parties.
[16]
I have no doubt there was a very significant volume of work undertaken by counsel and that the organization and presentation of evidence on the issues involved was a complex task because of the nature of the patents-in-suit and the facts of the case, in particular, the defendant's lack of knowledge of the method of production of the chemical substance imported for its product.
[17]
For the defendant it is submitted that mere volume of work and complexity of the issues involved do not, in themselves, warrant directions to the taxing officer that the normal tariff be exceeded. Counsel for the defendant had no objection to inclusion of reasonable costs for junior counsel both in pretrial preparation and for conduct of the trial. It was suggested, however, that if directions were to be given authorizing the taxing officer to fix costs above levels provided by Tariff B, this court should fix a maximum amount for pretrial costs not higher than $20,000 following the examples of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  fixing an amount but expressed the view that $20,000 was "far in excess of the amount the plaintiff should receive on a party-and-party basis";
Diversified Products Corp. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 323, where Mr. Preston, Prothonotary, in dealing with an application for directions in regard to costs on a reference while authorizing discretion of the taxing officer in relation to services of counsel in preparation for the reference indicated that the requested authorization for senior and two junior counsel totalling $24,000 was excessive;
Diversified Products Corp. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 385, at 409 (F.C.T.D.), concerning objection to and confirmation of a referee's report, where Reed, J., allowed costs of preparation for the hearing to exceed provisions of Tariff B up to $500 per day for senior counsel, and up to $300 per day for junior counsel, for each three and one-half days. One other case in which a fixed sum for prehearing preparation was determined is
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the sum at $30,000 following a nine-day hearing in the Court of Appeal for which counsel, both senior and junior, were said to have devoted more than 2,300 hours in preparation, a time commitment the court characterized as "luxurious".
[18]
I note for the record that the plaintiffs here do not seek increases above the levels set by Tariff B for various stages in pretrial preparation, but rather for inclusion of services of counsel in relation to the testing of defendant's products and preparation of materials about those tests for use at trial under Tariff B paragraph 1(1)(h) as pretrial preparation, that services of senior and junior counsel be allowed under that paragraph and under paragraph 1(1)(i) for conduct of the trial, and authority for the taxing officer to exceed the amounts for counsel set out in those paragraphs. In the first two
Diversified Products
cases, supra, and in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), and related cases, in addition to increasing amounts for services of counsel in pretrial preparation or at trial, increases in other costs, for their services in relation to various pretrial proceedings were also authorized.
[19]
In my view, this case involved lengthy preparation and a relatively long trial. The evidence was complex in the nature of the case and, while it may not constitute a test case in the regular sense, it did raise for the first time issues concerning the application of the
Patent Act
to chemical intermediates used for production of a substance used in turn for the production of medicines. In the circumstances, it warrants directions to the taxing officer for increases in services for counsel above the costs set by Tariff B for preparation for trial and for the conduct of trial for both senior and junior counsel.
[20]
In the circumstances I would direct the taxing officer
(a) that the efforts of plaintiffs' counsel in participating in the plaintiffs' tests of the defendant's products, reviewing the outcomes of those tests, and preparing materials concerning the tests for use at trial, be accounted for under Tariff B paragraph 1(1)(h);
(b) that with respect to the services of counsel for preparation for trial described in Tariff B paragraph 1(1)(h) provision for services of both senior and junior counsel be made, at reasonable rates, but not to exceed the sum of $35,000 in total;
(c) that with respect to services for conduct of trial described in Tariff B paragraph 1(1)(i), provision for services of both senior and junior counsel be made, at rates exceeding the rates of $300 and $100 provided by that paragraph, to the amounts of $600 and $200 respectively, per half day.
Fees And Disbursements For
Expert And Other Witnesses
[21]
The plaintiffs seek directions concerning fees and disbursements for expert and other witnesses, as follows:
". . . . .
"(d) that the allowable disbursements by the plaintiffs in association with the fees and expenses of three of their expert witnesses at trial, Drs. Holmes, Whalley, and Burchall, include all those reasonable fees and expenses (including travel and accommodation expenses) that arose as a result of their efforts in: meeting with plaintiffs' counsel; participating in planning, conducting and analysing the results of the tests done by the plaintiffs in the U.K. on the defendant's products; drafting and executing their affidavits; reviewing the patent-in-suit, the prior art and the expert affidavits of the defendant; assisting in the creation of the glossary; preparing to testify and testifying at trial both in chief and in reply; and as a result of the time they spent in court during the trial when they were not testifying.
"(e) ... that the allowable disbursements by the plaintiffs include all those reasonable disbursements that arose as a result of the travel to and accommodation in Toronto of the following witnesses, relating to the time spent testifying as well as the time spent in court during trial when they were not testifying: (i) Dr. A.J. Rollins, (ii) Dr. D.S. Ashton; and (iii) Dr. A.S. Gilbert.
"(f) that, notwithstanding paragraph 8 of the judgment herein, the plaintiffs shall be entitled to recover 100% of the taxed amounts with respect to Drs. Holmes, Ashton and Gilbert."
[22]
In relation to the first two of these proposed directions the defendant has no serious objection to taxing costs for expert and other witnesses at reasonable rates. It is urged, however, that costs incurred in relation to services of Dr. Burchall, though heard as an expert witness, be treated in the same way as those named in paragraph (e) above, who were employees of the plaintiff Wellcome Foundation, since Burchall was employed by a United States based subsidiary of that plaintiff and a sister company of the other plaintiff Burroughs Wellcome Inc. There is insufficient evidence of the intercorporate relationships to determine this question and I leave it to the discretion of the taxing officer, noting for his attention the comments of Mahoney, J.A.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Canada Ltd.
, supra, at page 4, in relation to expenses claimed for an employee of one party who did not serve also as a witness. The principle that party-and-party costs should not include expenses of the successful party in instructing counsel and attending the hearing, however necessarily they have been incurred, should apply in relation to fees charged for services as an expert of one who is deemed to be in a position equivalent to that of an employee of a party.
[23]
I am not prepared to apply the principle enunciated by Mahoney, J.A., to the reasonable disbursements of witnesses who were employees of one of the parties. In my view, the fact that they happened to be employed by one of the parties ought not to result in different treatment for their expenses for travel and living accommodation than for other expert witnesses. This seems to me to be consistent with the provisions made for witnesses under the Tariff and no objection to this aspect of the plaintiffs' application was made by the defendant. None of the aspects of the services of experts set out in paragraph (d) above and none of the expenses of other witnesses referred to in paragraph (e) above should be considered by the taxing officer to be beyond his discretion to tax as costs reasonable expenses claimed by the plaintiffs, including reasonable fees of experts, or disbursements of experts or other witnesses for travel and accommodations in Toronto for time spent in court testifying and time spent in court not testifying so long as their attendance was reasonably necessary for presentation of the plaintiffs' case or for dealing with the defendant's defence and counterclaim.
[24]
Counsel ultimately agreed that discretion be left to the taxing officer in relation to the matters raised under paragraphs (d) and (e), as Tariff B now does, and that no special direction in relation to these matters is required. The order to follow reflects that, which is a situation comparable to that recognized by Dubé, J., in
Stiga Aktiebolag
, supra.
[25]
The final direction sought by the plaintiffs would have the taxing officer directed to include 100% of the amounts taxed with respect to its expert witnesses, Drs. Holmes, Ashton and Gilbert, whose evidence concerned testing by trace analysis and the matter of infringement which led this court to conclude that both patents had been infringed. Plaintiffs acknowledge that the claims argued in one of the patents were deemed invalid on legal grounds, but they urge that the significance of the experts' evidence ought not to be overlooked. Nevertheless, success on the issues was divided and while it is true that the major expense in time and money for the plaintiffs may well have been in relation to the development of evidence of infringement, ultimately that is reflected adequately, in my view, in the general provision, paragraph 8 of the judgment, for recovery of 75% of taxed costs. I decline to direct that 100% of the taxed costs in relation to three of the plaintiffs' expert witnesses be recovered by the plaintiffs.
[26]
In the result, an order goes granting the plaintiffs' motion in part. Costs of this motion are awarded to plaintiffs.
Application allowed in part.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/blk
[End of document]