[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The applicants move, pursuant to section 18 of the Federal Court Act, as follows:
"1. for certiorari - quashing the decision of the officers and employees of the Department of External Affairs concerning an application made by the Applic-cant, Mean Kha, for sponsorship of Sa Ry Kha, Minh Kha, Kas Sal Thou, Eng Chay Kha, as Convention Refugees and the application for permanent residence by the aforesaid Convention Refugees being within the Indochinese designated class.
"2. for mandamus - quashing the decision [sic] of the officers and employees of the Department of External Affairs concerning an application made by the Applicant, Mean Kha, for sponsorship of Sa Ry Kha, Ming Kha, Kas Sal Thou, Eng Chay Kha, as convention Refugees and the application for permanent residence by the aforesaid Convention Refugees being within the Indochinese designated class be processed fairly and in accordance with the law."
Ordinarily, certiorari is for quashing and mandamus is for compelling, but nevertheless one can discern from the second above recited paragraph that the applicants seek to compel the respondents to have the applicants' actual applications considered anew, with results more to their liking, if they can first persuade the Court to quash the respondents' adverse decisions already made thereupon.
[2]
Three affidavits have been lodged in these proceedings: one by and on behalf of the applicant, Mean Kha, a Canadian citizen; and two by public servants, Jean M. Brisson and Michael R. Watts on behalf of the respondents.
[3]
Those paragraphs of the applicant's affidavit which are pertinent to the matters in dispute herein, are:
"3. That the applicants, Sa Ry Kha, Minh Kha, Kas Sal Thou, and Eng Chay Kha are all citizens of Democratic Kampuchea and reside at present in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
"4. That I am the sister of Sa Ry Kha, who is a widow, and Eng Chay Kha, who is not married.
"5. That Minh Kha and Kas Sal Thou are the minor children of Say [sic] Ry Kha.
"6. That our mother currently resides with myself and my spouse in the City of Ottawa.
"7. That I have given an undertaking of assistance with respect to the other applicants, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 'B'.
"8. That the aforesaid applicants now resident in Vietnam and have obtained exit visas, copies of which are attached hereto as Exhibit 'A'.
"9. That the aforesaid applicants have made application for permanent residence in Canada and have been interviewed by employees of either or both respondents and have been refused as indicated in the copies of letters attached hereto as Exhibits 'C' and 'D'.
"10. That the grounds for the said refusal are that the applicants did not obtain the required units of assessment and that there is no demand in Canada for the type of employment to which they are suited as indicated in a letter, copy of which is attached as Exhibit 'E'.
"11. That the applicants, Sa Ry Kha and Eng Chay Kha, have obtained a guarantee of employment, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 'F'.
"12. That I have sufficient living accommodation [sic] at the present in order that the other applicants may reside with myself, my spouse and my mother.
"13. That the combined income of our household will be approximately $47,000 per annum including the other applicants, myself and my spouse.
"14. That I have been informed by my solicitor that the respondent Minister of State for Immigration has been informed or is aware of the facts herein deposed as indicated in a letter, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 'G'."
The affidavit was read over and interpreted to the applicant and sworn by her through the services of an interpreter, one Loc Tran.
[4]
First of all it should be noted that one of the Canadian applicant's requests were granted, the application for approval of her undertaking to assist the landing in Canada of the other applicants. This successful application for approval of undertaking is confirmed by the first five paragraphs and Exhibits "A" to "D" of Michael Watts' affidavit.
[5]
Exhibit "C" to the applicant's affidavit is a copy of a letter from the immigration counsellor at the Canadian Embassy in Bangkok, Thailand, dated October 22, 1985, and addressed to Eng Chay Kha in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, informing him that the does not meet admission requirements for Canada. (Official Vietnamese documents exhibited reveal the spelling "Chhay".) Probably the most important documents exhibited by the applicant are those marked as "D" and "E", the alphabetical reverse of their true sequence of dates. Both are letters addressed to the applicant's solicitors.
[6]
The applicant's Exhibit "E", dated May 8, 1986, runs as follows:
"Re: Mean Kha - Application for her relatives.
This is with reference to your letter of May 1, 1986, with respect to Ms. M.S. Kha's application to assist the admission to Canada of her brother Eng Choy [sic] Kha, sister Sa Ry Kha and two accompanying dependents [sic].
As you are aware both applicants were assessed and subsequently refuded by our office in Bangkok. According to information provided by that office they were unable to achieve the required units of assessment. Neither has a skill which is in demand in Canada nor knowledge of either official language. Given their educational background, occupational and language skills the visa officer was of the opinion both would experience great difficulty establishing themselves in Canada. The case was also considered under humanitarian and compassionate guidelines. As both were employed and have relatives in Vietnam insufficient grounds were found to warrant approval on discretion.
Per your request attached please find copies of the refusal letters dated October 22, 1985. Based on the information available at this time it appears the decision to refuse was in accordance with commission guidelines for such cases. However, we have taken the liberty of forwarding a copy of your letter to senior officials within this district.
I regret my reply could not be more favourable. Should you require any further information with respect to this matter please do not hesitate to contact [name] of this office at [telephone number].
[signed]
Manager, Canada Immigration Center
. . . . .
Ottawa, Ontario"
[7]
The applicant's Exhibit "D", dated July 29, 1986, came from the office of the Minister of State for Immigration, one of the respondents herein. It runs:
"This refers to your letter of May 21, 1986, addressed to the Honourable Walter McLean, concerning the applications for immigration to Canada submitted by Sa Ry and Eng Chaay [sic] Kha (File No. HQ6-15622).
To qualify for immigration to Canada, assisted relatives required either a validated job offer or a history of employment in an occupation which has been identified as offering reasonable prospects of employment with a minimal impact on the Canadian labour market. Additionally, they must demonstrate the potential for successful establishment in Canada. Sa Ry and Eng Chaay's [sic] applications were carefully assessed and refused because they were unable to meet our assessment criteria. The former was assessed as a hairdresser's helper and her only employment as such was at home. Eng Chaay [sic] worked at home as a jewellery solderer and neither spoke the English or French language. Also, we have noted that the job offers from the Independent Linen Service were not validated.
The humanitarian and compassionate aspects of these cases were examined; however, it became apparent that insufficient grounds exist for special consideration. At the time of these applicants' interview, they indicated that they had a married sister living in Vietnam. It appears, based on information presented to us, that Sa Ry and Eng Chaay [sic] are not alone in Vietnam and can benefit from the emotional support of each other and their sister. Added to this is the fact that they are able to earn a living and do not appear to be suffering unduly when compared with other Vietnamese residents in similar circumstances.
Apart from some Vietnamese Government employees, life for the largest percentage of applicants would seem to be virtually unaffected by a refusal to issue an immigrant visa to a person who has been granted an exit document. The Vietnamese have assured our officials that persons not accepted by Canadian authorities will be reintegrated back into their society. It is, therefore, unlikely that these applicants would experience undue hardships.
Lastly, although it is true that these applicants could conceivably be considered as refugees, and therefore the point system would not be applicable, the applicants must nonetheless demonstrate that they could successfully establish themselves in Canada. As Sa Ry and Eng Chaay [sic] lacked this important requirement, visa officials felt that there is little likelihood that they would be accepted as refugees.
I realize that my reply is not the favourable one you desire; however, I hope that I have given you a better understanding of the reasons for the decisions in these cases.
. . . . .
[signed]
Departmental Assistant
- Immigration"
[8]
Those exhibits "E" and "D" evince the respondents' decisions about which the applicants are complaining in this proceeding. The applicants' counsel submitted, on the matter of this Court's jurisdiction, a body of jurisprudence not least among which were the judgments in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The subject of immigration in this instance is constitutionally constrolled by the Parliament and government of Canada acting through responsible ministers who are the heads of governmental departments whose officials, officers and employees administer and enforce the provisions of the Act and the Regulations. They must all act lawfully and their actions are subject to review by this Court because they all have, exercise or purport to exercise jurisdiction or powers conferred by or under the Immigration Act, 1976 and its Regulations, all in contemplation of the definition of "federal board, commission or other tribunal" expressed in section 2 of the Federal Court Act. It goes almost without saying that the decisions subject to review are the decisions made in regard to the very applications received by the responsible ministers' departmental staffs as originally formulated and when received.
[9]
There are three applications or areas for decision by the respondents and those for whose actions they are responsible.
1. The Canadian applicant's application to assist relatives. This has been approved and is not in contention.
2. The applications of the two other adult applicants for permanent residence in Canada. These have been refused and those decisions are contested.
3. The request made on May 21, 1986, (Exhibit "G" to the applicant's affidavit) by her solicitors asking the respondent Minister of State for Immigration to "permit the forementioned [sic: four mentioned?] persons landing in Canada." This request appears to engage neither paragraph 37(1)(a) of the Act, nor subsection 115(2).
[10]
Mr. Brisson has appended to his affidavit the copies of the files of the other two adult applicants for permanent residence, which were transmitted by the immigration counsellor in Bangkok. From those files it appears that those applicants reside with their married sister, Sovanna Kha, in Vietnam. There is no record of any issuance to her of a visa.
[11]
The applicants' counsel asserts that in regard to the denial of the respective applications for permanent residence, the respondents based that denial on four objections against the applications:
I The applicants seeking permanent residence have not enough "points" or units pursuant to the regulations which refer to Schedule I of the Immigration Regulations, 1978 and subsequent amendments;
II The applicants seeking permanent residence have not evinced the potential to become successfully established in Canada;
III The applicants seeking permanent residence have not established validated employment prospects in Canada or in Ottawa, the place of residence of the assisting Canadian relative; and
IV The applicants seeking permanent residence have additional family members in Vietnam.
[12]
In addition, the applicants' counsel invokes section 3 of the Act, and in particular paragraph (c) thereof, which declares:
"3. It is hereby declared that Canadian immigration policy and the rules and regulations made under this Act shall be designed and administered in such a manner as to promote the domestic and international interests of Canada recognizing the need
(c) to facilitate the reunion in Canada of Canadian citizens ... with their close relatives abroad;"
Also invoked in the Act is:
"6.(2) Any Convention refugee and any person who is a member of a class designated by the Governor in Council as a class, the admission of members of which would be in accordance with Canada's humanitarian tradition with respect to the displaced and the persecuted, may be granted admission subject to such regulations as may be established with respect thereto and notwithstanding any other regulations made under this Act."
[13]
In invoking subsection 6(2) above, the applicants' counsel in perforce invoking Regulation 7 which in its most pertinent parts provides:
"7.(1) Where a visa officer has determined that a person is a Convention refugee seeking resettlement, the visa officer, for the purpose of determining whether that Convention refugee and his dependants
will be able to become successfully established in Canada
, shall take into consideration
(a) each of the factors listed in column I of
Schedule I
;
. . . . .
"(3) Where a Convention refugee seeking resettlement makes an application for an immigrant visa, a visa officer may issue an immigrant visa to him and his accompanying dependants if he and his accompanying dependants
(a) meet the requirements of the Act and these Regulations; and
(b) in the opinion of the visa officer,
will be able to become successfully established in Canada
." (emphasis added)
Counsel for the applicants also sought support for the nonresidents' application in the Indochinese Designated Class Regulations. Pertinent provisions of those Regulations are:
"2. In these Regulation,
'Indochinese Designated Class' means a class of persons the members of which
(a) are citizens or habitual residents of a country listed in the schedule,
(b) have left their country of citizenship or former habitual residence subsequent to April 30, 1975,
(c) have not become permanently resettled,
(d) are unwilling or unable to return to their country of citizenship or former habitual residence,
(e) cannot avail themselves of the protection of any other country, and
(f) are outside Canada and seeking resettlement in Canada.
"3. The Indochinese Designated Class is hereby designated for the purpose of subsection 6(2) of the Immigration Act, 1976 as a class the admission of members of which would be in accordance with Canada's humanitarian tradition.
"4. The Immigration Regulations, 1978, other than sections 7 to 9 and subsection 14(1) thereof, apply to members of the Indochinese Designated Class.
"5.(1) Where a visa officer has determined that a person is a member of the Indochinese Designated Class, the visa officer, for the purpose of determining whether that member and his dependants will be able to become successfully established in Canada, shall take into consideration
(a) each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I to the Immigration Regulations, 1978;
(b) whether any person in Canada is seeking to facilitate the admission or arrival in Canada of that member and his accompanying dependants;
. . . . .
"(2) A person who,
(a) in the case of an individual, is a member of a group of not less than five individuals, each of the members of which is a Canadian citizen or permanent resident, has attained at least eighteen years of age and resides in the expected community of settlement, or
. . . . .
may seek to facilitate the admission or arrival in Canada of a member of the Indochinese Designated Class and his accompanying dependents where
(c) each member of the group or the corporation has given a written undertaking to the Minister to make provision for lodging, care, maintenance and resettlement assistance for the member of the Indochinese Designated Class and his accompanying dependants for a period of one year,
. . . . .
"(3) Where a member of the Indochinese Designated Class makes an application for an immigrant visa, a visa officer may issue an immigrant visa to him and his accompanying dependants, if he and his accompanying dependants
(a) meet the requirements of the Immigration Act, 1976 and these Regulations; and
(b) in the opinion of the visa officer,
will be able to become successfully established in Canada
." (emphasis added)
The schedule to these particular Regulations designate only three countries: Democratic Kampuchea, Peoples Democratic Republic of Laos; and Social- ist Republic of Vietnam.
Indochinese Class Status
[14]
First, if the Indochinese Designated Class Regulations do operate here, having been invoked only after the nonresidents' application in August, 1985, it is apparent that the applicants cannot avoid the factor of the visa officer's opinion about their being unable to become sufficiently established in Canada, a factor which is a recurring theme throughout the Act and Regulations. Nor, evidently, can they avoid consideration of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I. Moreover, page 3 of each adult nonresident's completed form IMM 1343(8-81), the Application for Permanent Residence discloses the same sole residential address in Ho Chi Minh City since 1975 (whether commencing before or after April 30, is not therein revealed). In terms of Regulation 2(c) of the Indochinese Designated Class Regulations, above cited, the applicants' counsel conceded that their fixed address for about a decade seriously dilutes, if it does not entirely obviate, the requirement that the applicants "have not become permanently resettled". In this instance the visa officer did consider column I of Schedule I to the Immigration Regulations, 1978, and did form the considered opinion that the nonresident applicants would not be able to become successfully established in Canada. The undertaking given by the Canadian applicant alone, furthermore, appears not to comply with Regulation 5(2). The applicants are not entitled to any relief in regard to the respondents' actions in contemplation of the Indochinese Designated Class Regulations.
Convention Refugee Status
[15]
The Canadian applicant's affidavit makes no mention of any claim by the nonresident applicants for any Convention refugee status, and no such claim appears ever to have been made by them in their applications for permanent residence. That status was mentioned by the applicants' counsel in his letter dated May 21, 1986, to the Minister of Employment and Immigration. In that letter (Ex. "G" to the Canadian applicant's affidavit), counsel mentioned advice, received from an immigration counsellor employed by the Regional Municipality of Ottawa-Carleton, which contradicts the respondents' position on the matter. However, no affidavit of that individual was tendered in this proceeding. The nonresident applicants, not having raised a claim of refugee status, have tendered no evidence in support of such a claim. Item (b) of the definition of "Convention refugee" appearing in subsection 2(1) of the Act is applicable but does not aid those applicants because of their ten-year habitual residence in Ho Chi Minh City. But even if those applicants were shown to be Convention refugees, and they are not so shown, they still fail to surmount the provisions of Regulation 7(3), which provides:
"7.(3) Where a Convention refugee seeking resettlement makes an application for an immigrant visa, a visa officer may issue an immigrant visa to him and his accompanying dependants if he and his accompanying dependants
(a) meet the requirements of the Act and these Regulations; and
(b) in the opinion of the visa officer, will be able to become successfully established in Canada."
[16]
Regulation 7(3) is founded on the statutory authority of subsection 6(1) of the Act:
"6.(1) Subject to this Act and the regulations, any immigrant including a Convention refugee, a member of the family class and an independent immigrant may be granted landing if he is able to establish to the satisfaction of an immigration officer that he meets the selection standards established by the regulations for the purpose of determining whether or not a immigrant will be able to become successfully established in Canada."
The applicants are not entitled to any relief in regard to the respondents' actions in contemplation of the statutory provisions and Regulations relating to Convention refugees.
Objectives According to Sec. 3 of the Act
[17]
The applicants' counsel asserts that, fundamentally, the respondents have unfairly failed to heed the duty expressed in clause 3(c) of the Act, above recited. That provision declares that immigration policy and the Rules and Regulations promulgated under the Act be administered so as to promote the domestic and international interests of Canada, recognizing the need to facilitate the reunion in Canada of citizens with their close relatives from abroad.
[18]
The nonresident applicants here would be "assisted relatives" according to the definition expressed in Regulation 2(1) and would not be sponsored family class members, being adult siblings of the Canadian applicant. Indeed, there is no evidence of any application by her for sponsorship, as alleged in her notice of motion. The offer of employment dated April 21, 1986, (Ex. "F" to the Canadian applicant's affidavit) came into existence seven months after the applications for permanent residence were rejected and it is not validated so as to generate any units whatever, in regard to the criteria of item 5 of column II in Schedule I, according to information provided by the National Employment Service.
[19]
In regard to the applicants' sister who is said to be residing in Vietnam, the best and only evidence herein is found in the files exhibited with Mr. Brisson's affidavit. In each of the nonresident applicant's files is a tri-lingual document, family composition information, in which those applicants disclose that the sister then resided at their address. The following document on the files, a message from Bangkok to "E and I Hull", states:
"BOTH SUBJS CLAIMED A MARRIED SISTER, KHA SAVANA [sic] 1962, LIVING WITH THEM IN SRVN, WHEN INTERVIEWED 13 AUG 85. ... ASSUME SHE IS STILL IN SRVN."
Upon this evidence it does appear that the applicants seeking permanent residence to have additional family members in Vietnam.
[20]
What then are the respondents to do about the provision of paragraph 3(c) of the Act? Being an expression of the legislative will of Parliament, that provision must operate according to its tenor in regard to Act and Regulations. It obviously supports the regulatory provisions concerning assisted relatives and would do so in and of itself. It certainly directs visa officers and immigration officers not to be astutely technical officious or petty when assessing the applications of the "close relatives from abroad" of Canadian citizens. It should permeate the mental attitudes of all those who administer the Act and Regulations. Despite the foregoing observations, paragraph 3(c) is not expressed so as to displace, override or supplant all the other provisions of the Act and the Regulations which, of course, also express direct or delegated enactments.
[21]
The applicants' counsel relies, among other authorities, on the words of Lord Cairns, quoted by Lord Pearce in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 1052-53:
"... the cases to which I have referred appear to decide nothing more than this: that where a power is deposited with a public officer for the purpose of being used for the benefit of persons who are specifically pointed out, and with regard to whom a definition is supplied by the legislature of the conditions upon which they are entitled to call for its exercise, that power ought to be exercised, and the court will require it to be exercised."
Unfortunately paragraph 3(c), in and of itself, falls far short of prescribing "a definition ... by the legislature of the conditions upon which they [the applicants] are entitled to call for its [the alleged power's] exercise." The conditions to which the nonresident's applications for permanent residence are subject are specified in those other provisions of the Act and those provisions of the Regulations already quoted herein, among others. The need expressed in section 3 is not described as an overriding need; nor is the facilitation of reunion expressed in paragraph (c) enacted to be in derogation of the other provisions of the Act and Regulations. Indeed the objectives stated in section 3 are enacted by Parliament in precatory expression, such that any duty which they impose amounts to an imperfect obligation, more structured and more precisely compelling than an extrastatutory moral duty, but not so detailed and specific as to compel pompliance in disregard of the other detailed and specific provisions of the legislation.
[22]
A similar sort of expression of statutory policy was considered by Mr. Justice McIntyre, for the Supreme Court of Canada, in Maple Lodge Farms & Government of Canada, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 1; 44 N.R. 354, at p. 7 S.C.R. in this succinct example:
"In any case, the words employed in s. 8 do not necessarily fetter the discretion. The use of the expression 'a permit will normally be issued' is by no means equivalent to the words 'a permit will necessarily be issued'. They impose no requirement for the issue of a permit."
In yielding all due respect for a solemn enactment by Parliament, one necessarily respects the form and tenor of the provisions which Parliament has enacted in the context of the legislative scheme in which they are enacted. Thus, the general power or duty conferred by paragraph 3(c) of the Act does not thwart the specific powers and duties conferred by those other provisions upon which the respondents rely to support the legality of their actions.
[23]
In order to demonstrate their position the respondents cited:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Walsh J., in the Trial Division at p. 536; and Re Ferguson and Commissioner for Federal Judicial Affairs (1982), 140 D.L.R.(3d) 542, Cattanach J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> T.D. at p. 548.
Conclusions
[24]
So it is, that in these circumstances, the provisions of paragraph 3(c) of the Act do not support the issuance of either certiorari or mandamus. The Court finds that certiorari will not issue because the respondents have not been shown to have exceeded their jurisdiction, nor have they dealt unfairly with the applicants. Mandamus will not issue because the Court has not found any failure of the respondents to perform a duty, without any discretion on their part, to do that which the applicants would have them do. In such circumstances, there is no basis for the exercise of judicial discretion to accord to the applicants the relief which they seek.
[25]
The result of this litigation will inflict sorrow upon the Canadian applicant and her relatives, for which all sensitive people will be sympathetic. In view of the fact that the nonresident applicants have resided for a decade at the same address in Ho Chi Minh City and have apparently never expressed to Canadian officials any well-founded fear of persecution for any of the reasons listed in subsection 2(1) of the Act, it may be only small consolation to the applicants that nothing in these reasons or in the consequent order is to be taken to impede or to foreclose later applications for permanent residence in Canada.
[26]
Counsel for the respondents has been instructed by his clients to confirm that the refusal of an application for permanent residence does not preclude the filing of a subsequent one at any time. Of course, such application will be dealt with and considered in light of the existing requirements of the Act and Regulations which the applicant has to meet. It is noted, also, that it is less difficult to have an interview scheduled for applicants residing in Vietnam who have valid exit visas, as do the applicants herein. So, contrary to what was alleged by the applicants' counsel, these proceedings are not the applicants' last resort. No oral argument was uttered, and no jurisprudence or other material was received referring to the Constitution Act, 1982.
[27]
The legal effect of this present disposition is merely that there is no merit in the applicants' complaints for which they seek relief.
[28]
Accordingly, the applications must be dismissed with costs in favour of the respondents.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]