[1]
Pinard, J.
: These are applications by the Information Commissioner of Canada (Court files T-1051-87, T-1169-87, T-1355-87) pursuant to s. 42(1)(a) of the Access to Information Act, S.C. 1980-81-82, c. 111 (Schedule I) and by Stephen Bindman (Court file T-931-87) pursuant to s. 41 of the Access to Information Act for a review of the decision of the Immigration Appeal Board to refuse to disclose records relating to its decision to grant Convention refugee status to Dewey Go Dee.
[2]
The access to information requests for the records which are the subject of these applications were made in 1986 by Alan Merridew, Brian M. Power, John Honderich and Stephen Bindman. The records requested by Messrs. Merridew, Power, Honderich and Bindman under the Access to Information Act were not otherwise available to them as a public record of the Board because the Immigration Appeal Board had, on June 17, 1985, ordered that Mr. Dee's application for a redetermination of his status as a Convention refugee be heard in camera and that the record in his application be sealed.
[3]
By letters dated February 21, 1986, April 2, 1986, May 23, 1986 and October 2, 1986, the Immigration Appeal Board rejected the requests, relying on s. 17 of the Access to Information Act. That provision reads:
"The head of a government institution may refuse to disclose any record requested under this Act that contains information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to threaten the safety of individuals."
[4]
The requestors complained to the Information Commissioner, who investigated their complaints. By letter dated July 4, 1986 to M. Falardeau-Ramsey reporting the results of her investigation, the Information Commissioner advised the respondent of her finding that there was not identified sufficient justification to support the total exemption of the records on the basis claimed by the Immigration Appeal Board, that of s. 17 of the Access to Information Act. Pursuant to s. 37 of the Act, the Information Commissioner recommended to the respondent that the records be released subject to the Act.
[5]
By letter dated July 14, 1986 from M.J. Denis, Executive Director of the Immigration Appeal Board to the Information Commissioner, the Immigration Appeal Board refused to disclose the records, on grounds that the Board was bound by an order of a quorum of the Board on June 17, 1985 allowing a motion for an in camera hearing in the Dewey Go Dee application. In her letter, the Executive Director of the Board wrote, in part, as follows:
"I find myself in a rather difficult situation. Section 65 of the Immigration Act, 1976 reads in part, as follows:
'65(1) The Board is a court of record and shall have an official seal, which shall be judicially noticed.
'(2) The Board has, as regards the attendance, swearing and examination of witnesses, the production and inspection of documents, the enforcement of its orders and other matters necessary or proper for the due exercise of its jurisdiction, all such powers, rights and privileges as are vested in a superior court of record and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing may, ...'
"Section 82 reads:
'An appeal to the Board shall be heard in public but if any party thereto so requests the Board may in its discretion direct that the appeal be heard in camera.'
"On June 17, 1985, a quorum of the Board designated to hear the Dee case, delivered a decision from the Bench allowing a motion for an in camera hearing. An order of the Board was issued to that effect. (Generally the record is public information. An in camera hearing is very rarely ordered.)
"I find no authority to vary that decision."
[6]
Even though s. 82 of the Immigration Act, 1976 is referred to in that letter, it was recognized by the Immigration Appeal Board itself, in its reasons for the decision granting the hearing in camera, that s. 82 does not apply in the case of an application for redetermination of convention refugee status; however, the Board found that both the provisions of s. 65 of the Immigration Act, 1976 and rule 4 of the Immigration Appeal Board Rules (Convention Refugees), 1981 are wide enough to cover such a situation.
[7]
The Assistant Information Commissioner reported the results of the investigation to the requestors by letter dated March 31, 1987 advising them of the last refusal of the Immigration Appeal Board to disclose the records and stating the view of the Information Commissioner that the provisions of the Access to the Information Act requiring disclosure of the records superceded the order of the Immigration Appeal Board.
[8]
The Assistant Information Commissioner advised the requestors that they could file application for a review of the refusal by the Federal Court either on their own under s. 41 of the Act or through the Information Commissioner under s. 42. One requestor, Stephen Bindman, chose the former alternative, the rest signed consents to allow the Commissioner to act on their behalf. The applications were filed in April, May and June 1987.
[9]
The Information Commissioner appears as a party intervenant in the application by Stephen Bindman (Court File T-931-87) pursuant to an Order of the Associate Chief Justice dated September 4, 1987 under s. 42(1)(c) of the Access to Information Act. On September 15, 1987 Mr. Justice Rouleau signed an order joining the four applications, allowing the subject of the Board hearing, Mr. Dewey Go Dee, to intervene, and declaring that the following preliminary question of law should be determined:
"'Does the Access to Information Act apply to the Immigration Appeal Board records which are the subject of these four proceedings?'; in the alternative, 'Are the Immigration Appeal Board records properly subject to an examination under the Access to Information Act?'"
[10]
This is the question that came before me in Ottawa, on March 30, 1988, and which was debated by learned counsel for the parties. The real issue in other words is whether an in camera order by the Immigration Appeal Board can be overcome by a request under the Access to Information Act.
[11]
In my view, the answer is found in the plain words of a well structured statute.
[12]
Indeed, the purpose of the Access to Information Act is set out in s. 2 and states as follows:
"2(1) The purpose of this Act is to extend the present laws of Canada to provide a right of access to information in records under the control of a government institution in accordance with the principles that government information should be available to the public, that necessary exceptions to the right of access should be limited and specific and that decisions on the disclosure of government information should be reviewed independently of government.
"(2) This Act is intended to complement and not replace existing procedures for access to government information and is not intended to limit in any way access to the type of government information that is normally available to the general public."
[13]
Section 3 of the Act defines "government institution" as "any department or ministry of state of the Government of Canada listed in Schedule I or any body or office listed in Schedule I". Thus, in addition to the Departments and Ministries of State of the Federal Government, Schedule I lists a large number of the federal administrative boards, tribunals and review agencies. The Immigration Appeal Board is listed in Schedule I and is therefore a "government institution" within the meaning of the Act.
[14]
Section 4 of the Act creates a right of access to information which is specified to prevail over any other Act of Parliament. Subsection 4(1) states as follows:
"4(1) Subject to this Act,
but notwithstanding any other Act of Parliament
, every person who is
(a) a Canadian citizen, or
(b) a permanent resident within the meaning of the Immigration Act, 1976,
has a right to and shall, on request, be given access to any record
under the control of a government institution
." (Emphasis added.)
[15]
At this stage, assuming that s. 65 of the Immigration Act, 1976 and rule 4 of the Immigration Appeal Board Rules (Convention Refugees), 1981 authorize the Board to conduct in camera hearings, which is firmly disputed by counsel for the applicant Stephen Bindman, it is clear to me that the above provisions of the Access to Information Act make the records which are the subject of these four proceedings prima facie subject to disclosure.
[16]
The "notwithstanding" provision in s. 4 of the Access to Information Act clearly overrides any provision of the Immigration Act, 1976 which might restrict disclosure of Immigration Appeal Board records as a result of decisions by the Board to hold in camera hearings or to seal its files.
[17]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.C.A.), Anderson, J.A., of the British Columbia Court of Appeal stated, at pages 70 and 71:
"He submits further that by reason of the provisions of the collective agreement the Crown has 'contracted out' of s. 9 of the Correction Act and the regulations, and that the Human Rights Code, as a matter of contract, must prevail.
"In my opinion, this appeal cannot succeed. The legislature by clear and unequivocal language expressly declared in s. 9 of the Correction Act that 'Notwithstanding the Public Service Act or any other Act ...' the Lieutenant Governor in Council could prescribe the compulsory retirement age for certain employees. The legislature, when it enacted the Human Rights Code, could not be said by implication to have repealed the clear and unequivocal 'non obstante' clause."
[18]
In Ex Parte Sasges (1974), 56 D.L.R.(3d) 309 (B.C.S.C.), Craig, J., of the British Columbia Supreme Court had also expressed the following view, at page 313:
"While it is a fundamental principle that the court should attempt to interpret apparently conflicting legislation in a manner which permits effect to be given to both pieces of legislation, the Court cannot give an interpretation which does violence to what appears to be the plain meaning of the words of the paramount legislation. I regard the amending s. 57 as paramount legislation because it specifically says that it shall govern notwithstanding the provisions of any other act, except the Small Claims Act."
[19]
(See also Re Chalifoux and Dmytrash (1974), 47 D.L.R.(3d) 51 (Alta. C.A.), Re Thompson and Lambton Board of Education (1972), 30 D.L.R.(3d) 32 (Ont. H.C.), and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[20]
In specific cases, provisions of other statutes prohibiting the disclosure of information have been effectively incorporated by reference into the Access to Information Act through s. 24(1) which reads as follows:
"24(1) The head of a government institution shall refuse to disclose any record requested under this Act that contains information the disclosure of which is restricted by or pursuant to any provision set out in Schedule II."
[21]
Schedule II contains many such provisions, of which only one refers to the Immigration Act, 1976, namely s. 40(3) which is no longer in force and did not refer to the Immigration Appeal Board. There is no reference in Schedule II to either s. 65 of the Immigration Act, 1976, or to rule 4 of the Immigration Appeal Board Rules (Convention Refugees), 1981.
[22]
I agree with the applicants' submission that Parliament intended that the invocation of provisions in other statutes to prevent disclosure under the Access to Information Act be made as restrictive as possible by requiring that Parliament itself mandate resort to such provisions through s. 24. Subsection 24(2) confirms this restrictive approach:
"24(2) Such committee as may be designated or established under section 75 shall review every provision set out in Schedule II and shall, within three years after the coming into force of this Act or, if Parliament is not then sitting, on any of the first fifteen days next thereafter that Parliament is sitting, cause a report to be laid before Parliament on whether and to what extent the provisions are necessary."
[23]
Indeed, as stated by Jerome, A.C.J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 5 F.T.R. 287 (T.D.), at page 69:
"... the purpose of the Access to Information Act is to codify the right of access to information held by the Government. It is not to codify the Government's right of refusal. Access should be the normal course. Exemptions should be exceptional and must be confined to those specifically set out in the statute."
[24]
Therefore, the records which are the subject of these four proceedings are indeed subject to disclosure under the Access to Information Act unless the provisions of that Act either apply to exempt the information from disclosure (ss. 13 to 23 and 26) or specify that the Act does not apply to the information (ss. 68 and 69).
[25]
The applicability in this case of the exemptive provisions contained in ss. 13 to 23 and 26 of the Act is not at issue at this stage of the proceedings. Sections 68 and 69, which set out situations when the Act will not apply to certain materials, also do not apply here.
[26]
Consequently, I fully agree with the opinion as expressed by the Assistant Information Commissioner of Canada in his letter dated March 31, 1987, reporting the results of the investigation to the requestors, and I do make mine his following words:
"In my opinion, based on the foregoing, the issue of paramountcy between the two statutes is resolved simply by their wording in favour of disclosure pursuant to the Access to Information Act. I am reinforced in this view by noting that the Access to Information Act was passed at a later date than the Immigration Act, 1976 and I also note that the in camera hearing order itself was made in June 1985, two years after the Access to Information Act came into force."
[27]
It is my view that the plain words of a well structured statute which sets out its own purpose and also contains clear sections and correlated Schedules, make it obvious that Parliament intended to allow the Access to Information Act to prevail over any other Acts of Parliament in order to give substantially broader access to information held by the Government, unless a clear and unequivocal exception is stipulated in the Act itself.
[28]
I must emphasize, before concluding, that the provisions to the Access to Information Act will apply with respect to Immigration Appeal Board records only in those cases where the Board refuses access to documents relating to in camera hearing, or otherwise does not maintain a public record. In the usual course, the Board's proceedings are open and rights of access already exist, so that the Access to Information Act need not be invoked.
[29]
For all these reasons, the preliminary questions set by Rouleau, J., ought to be answered in the affirmative, with the qualification that the second question should be answered as follows: "The Immigration Appeal Board records
which are the subject of these four proceedings
are properly subject to an examination under the Access to Information Act".
[30]
In view of this conclusion, it will not be necessary to deal with the additional submission that the respondent had no power to conduct in camera hearings.
[31]
Judgment will be rendered accordingly and costs may be spoken to at the request of any of the parties.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]