I.
[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: The case before me arose out of two separate actions commenced in this court. The first action, T-2652-85 was commenced by the plaintiff, the Wewayakum Indian Band (also known as the Campbell River Indian Band and hereinafter referred to as Campbell River) against two defendants, Her Majesty the Queen (hereinafter referred to as the Crown) and the Wewaikai Indian Band (also known as the Cape Mudge Indian Band and hereinafter referred to as Cape Mudge), who, in their Statement of Defence, made a counterclaim. Subsequently the defendant in the first action, the Wewaikai Indian Band, commenced an action against the Queen, T-951-89. The actions were joined by order of Martin, J., dated October 19, 1989.
[2]
The Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indian Bands are two bands belonging to the Lekwiltok (Laichkwiltach or Euclataw) Tribe of Indians or Nation, who have and continue to inhabit the east coast of Vancouver Island and the west coast of the mainland of British Columbia. The Lekwiltok Tribe (Nation) has been said to be comprised of the following Bands: Salmon River Band (also known as the Hahamatis Band), the Kwiakah Band, Campbell River and Cape Mudge. As I understand, the Lekwiltok itself is part of a larger group of Indians who speak the same language, namely the Kwakiutl or Kwakwala speaking peoples.
[3]
Essentially, what this court has been called upon to do is to determine which of the two Indian Bands have possession and exclusive use of two Indian Reserves, namely, the Campbell River Indian Reserve, also known as Reserve No. 11 (hereinafter referred to as Reserve No. 11) and the Quinsam Indian Reserve, also known as Reserve No. 12 (hereinafter referred to as Reserve No. 12), both of which are located in the Campbell River area of British Columbia.
[4]
Approximately 120 members of Campbell River reside on Reserve No. 11, which is located on the right bank of the mouth of the Campbell River, in the District of Campbell River on Vancouver Island, British Columbia. Reserve No. 11 comprises approximately 350.5 acres.
[5]
Reserve No. 12 is located on the right bank of the Quinsam River, approximately one mile from its confluence with the Campbell River and is approximately two miles southwest of Reserve No. 11. The exact acreage of Reserve No. 12 is in dispute, in this action, at least for the purposes of the quantum of damages. The Department of Indian Affairs considers the reserve to be approximately 287.5 acres, while the experts retained by Campbell River show Reserve No. 12 to comprise approximately 304 acres.
[6]
Although, this action in a formal sense pits the plaintiff Campbell River against Cape Mudge as occupants of Reserve No. 11, the plaintiff and defendant Indian Bands do not characterize the dispute as one between two Indian Bands. Both allege that the Crown is responsible for the situation the two Bands find themselves in with respect to Reserves Nos. 11 and 12. Furthermore, before me, counsel for both Bands have insinuated, if not declared, that they do not wish to dispossess either Band from the land that they now possess but are only seeking damages.
[7]
On the other hand, the Crown characterizes the action as a dispute which is squarely between the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indian Bands. Each Band claims possession of the other Band's reserve. Each Band pleads reliance on a duty alleged to be owing to that band in isolation, independent of the Crown's duty to balance and effect a peaceful resolution of the dispute between the two bands.
Campbell River Indian Band's Position
[8]
Specifically, Campbell River seeks to settle its title to Reserve No. 11. In addition, Campbell River seeks a declaration that Reserve No. 12 was set aside solely for its use and benefit, including the immediate right of possession thereto. Campbell River also claims damages against the Crown on the grounds that: the Crown acted negligently; is in breach of trust, and is in breach of the laws of Canada, including the
Indian Act
and Orders in Council of both the Federal and Provincial Governments, which according to Campbell River, provide that Reserve No. 12 is for its use and benefit. Campbell River alleges that the Crown, through it officers, has caused significant damage to Campbell River as a result of:
1) appropriating the use and benefit of the Reserve No. 12 to Cape Mudge;
2) denying the use and benefit of Reserve No. 12 to Campbell River;
3) granting possession of an interest in portions of Reserve No. 12 to third parties without first obtaining the consent of Campbell River, and without first obtaining surrenders of those portions of Reserve No. 12 by Campbell River.
[9]
Campbell River's position is that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were intended to be set aside for one band. At the time of its survey, the only people  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River were the Wewaiakum people, in the person of Chief Kwaksistala (also known as Captain John, Kwaksistal or Quocksister) and his immediate family. At the time of the survey no one was occupying Reserve No. 12 on any kind of a permanent basis. Evidence was that it was used for hunting. In other words, Reserves No. 11 and 12 were really treated as one and were set aside for the Indian people. Neither Sproat, O'Reilly or Ashdown Green had authority to allocate these reserves. They only had the authority to delineate the areas of reserves for the people living there. According to Campbell River, the only people living on the west side of the passage were the Campbell River people, namely Kwaksistala and his family, while the Cape Mudge Indians were on the other side, on the island.
[10]
Campbell River further submits that in order to resolve all matters relating to Indian lands in British Columbia, the McKenna McBride Commission travelled through the Province and after hearings and deliberations confirmed that Campbell River Indian Band was entitled to Reserves No. 11 and 12. Campbell River submits the issue of the earlier reserve allotments, including the Minutes of Decision and sketch maps were before the Commission during the hearings. The Commission after considering all the evidence before it, confirmed Campbell River was entitled to Reserves No. 11 and 12. The Commission's findings were reported to the respective levels of government. The Commission's report was reviewed and the Schedule of Reserves certified by the Ditchburn-Clark Inquiry and subsequently confirmed by Orders-in-Council 911 and 1265. Based upon the confirmation of the Commission's report, the Provincial government conveyed Indian Reserves No. 11 and 12 to the Dominion government in trust for Campbell River. Order-in-Council 1036 finally completed the process of Indian reserve allotment in the Province of British Columbia. Much of Campbell River's argument focuses on the reserve creation process in British Columbia. As I understand Campbell River's argument, they maintain that an analysis of the legal principles involved in the reserve creation process, within the context of the facts of the case before me, can only lead to the conclusion that federal legislative jurisdiction did not in fact attach to these lands (ie. reserve lands) until 1938 or 1924, or 1923 at the earliest. According to Campbell River, formal conveyance of the administration and control of reserve lands from the province to the federal government was necessary to create a post confederation Indian reserve in the province of British Columbia. It is Campbell River's position that the conveyance of administration and control over provincial lands to the federal government contemplated by the Terms of Union and the
Land Act
could not have taken place at the time of the Orders in Council appointing Green or at the time Green surveyed the Reserves. Rather, the transfer of administration and control took place when the lands were vested in the Federal Crown by British Columbia Order-in-Council 1036 in 1938 or alternatively by virtue of British Columbia Order-in-Council 911 in 1923. Further, federal acceptance of conveyance of administration and control of these lands could not have occurred any earlier than 1924 by virtue of Federal Order-in-Council 1265. Moreover, all these Orders in Council show that the reserves at issue were created for the Campbell River Indian Band.
Cape Mudge Indian Band's Position
[11]
The Cape Mudge Indian Band also seeks to settle title, possession and benefit of Reserves No. 11 and 12. Cape Mudge alleges that both Reserves No. 11 and 12 are Cape Mudge Reserves and Cape Mudge is requesting a declaration to that effect. Cape Mudge also seeks a declaration that both reserves were never surrendered. In the alternative to a declaration that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were set aside for the exclusive use and benefit of the Wewaikai and that the Wewaikai have the right to exclusive occupation of the reserve as well as injunctive relief, Cape Mudge claims with respect to Reserve No. 11, damages and compensation equal to the present value of Reserve No. 11. Cape Mudge maintains that the defendant Crown breached its fiduciary duty, duty of care and duties under the
Indian Act
. Cape Mudge also seeks compensation for the loss of use and benefit against the Crown, as Cape Mudge maintains that the Crown has breached its fiduciary duty that it owed to Cape Mudge by treating Reserve No. 11 as if it were a Campbell River reserve from 1907. Cape Mudge also asks for compensation equal to the highest and best use that it could have put Reserve No. 11 to, over the past 85 years. Cape Mudge seeks exemplary damages against the Crown.
[12]
Essentially Cape Mudge's position is that Ashdown Green allotted Reserves No. 11 and 12 to the Wewaikai Band and the Wewaikai Band never surrendered them. Cape Mudge maintains that some eight years after the Crown allotted the two reserves to the Wewaikai Band, the Crown permitted another Band, the Wewaiakum Band, to come and live on the Campbell River Reserve (No. 11). This violation, according to Cape Mudge, was exacerbated when the Crown, faced with the problem of one Indian band living on the reserve of another Band, tried to deal with this problem by arriving at an arrangement whereby the Wewaikum Band could stay  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. The arrangement came in the form of a ceding resolution in March of 1907, which Cape Mudge maintains failed to comply with the mandatory surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
, in force at the time, and was, therefore, void ab initio.
Crown's Position
[13]
The Crown argues that in April 1888, Ashdown Green, who surveyed the lands in dispute, allotted Reserves No. 11 and 12 to the Laich-kwil-tach Indians, which includes the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indian Bands. The Crown denies that both reserves were set aside exclusively for Cape Mudge's benefit. The Crown submits, that in the event this court finds that in 1888, Reserves No. 11 and 12 were set aside for the exclusive use and benefit of Cape Mudge, Cape Mudge released its rights to reserve No. 11 to Campbell River in 1907. As I understand the Crown's position with respect to this resolution, the Crown maintains that the provisions of the
Indian Act
in force in 1907 relating to surrender of reserves did not apply to the resolution whereby Cape Mudge gave Campbell River the use and benefit of Reserve No. 11. The basis for this proposition is, that the 1907 Resolution was in effect a means of settling or resolving a conflict between two Indian bands of the same tribe and to confirm the status quo as to the occupation of Reserve No. 11. Basically the Crown position is that an agreement to resolve the issue of allocation of Reserve No. 11 between the Wewaiakay and Wewaikum does not constitute an "alienation" of Reserve No. 11 within the meaning of s. 48 of the
Indian Act
. In the alternative, the Crown argues by virtue of the 1876 Proclamation all reserves in British Columbia were explicitly exempt from the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
and that the 1876 Proclamation was never repealed because s. 97 of the
Indian Act
required that the Proclamation could only be removed or repealed by a further Proclamation and there was no evidence of such a proclamation.
[14]
With respect to Reserve No. 12, the Crown is of the view that Cape Mudge is in lawful occupation of and entitled to the use and benefit of Reserve No. 12. The Crown also denies the Crown was under or breached any statutory duty, fiduciary duty or duty of trust and that the Crown acted fraudulently.
[15]
The Crown further maintains that both the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indian Bands' actions are: barred by reason of laches and acquiescence; statute barred pursuant to s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 (formerly s. 38 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1970, 2nd Supp., c. 10), pursuant to ss. 3, 8 and 14 of the
Limitation Act
, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 236, and pursuant to the
Statute of Limitations
, R.S.B.C. 1936, as amended.
[16]
It should be added at the outset that there has been no suggestion by the parties that the claim by the Campbell River Indian Band or the Cape Mudge Indian Band to the reserves relates to an aboriginal entitlement, namely that the use and occupation of the areas in dispute can be traced back to "time immemorial" or any time in the reasonable distant past.
[17]
After reviewing the extensive written submissions, oral submissions, expert reports and evidence, together with the countless documents, so eloquently described by one witness in the following terms: "there are many, many, many documents ..." [vol. 48, p. 6553] the one thing that the parties have in common is that all three parties have attempted to reconstruct events that took place over the past 100 years, based on numerous documents, which at times are contradictory, without the benefit of witnesses to the actual events which transpired. As such, the court is in effect left to rely on the documentary evidence and is faced with the unenviable and daunting task of sifting through the thousands of documents and the expert reports to somehow ascertain and understand events which transpired over the past 100 years. At the same time, the court must also avoid the tendency to look at one document, in isolation, to support one of the parties' submission, without examining the evidence as a whole. As well as not succumbing to the tendency of fastidious over analysis of a particular word or phrase in a particular document. In the case before me, a simple sentence in a letter containing the phrase "these Indians" either referring to Lekwiltach or Wewaikai became the subject of extensive debate. I would add that I am in no way belittling the role or ability of any counsel, simply that the very nature of this case seemed to draw out a propensity for painstaking analysis. Matters were further complicated by the fact that there did not always appear to be consistency within the documents or by the author of the documents. For example, an individual may have written one thing in one letter and then five years later said the exact opposite in another letter. Therefore, in order to attempt to somehow understand a contradiction or an inconsistency the court must examine the document in the context of the year it was written, what was transpiring at that time and what occurred in the interval. For that reason, in a case such as the one before me, it is crucial and essential that the documents be viewed in their historical context. Ultimately, the task of the court will be to weigh all of the evidence and make findings of fact that are reasonable. In doing so, emphasis must also be placed on interpreting the evidence in the context of the entire historical record rather than to isolate a particular event or document as determinative of the issue in each action.
[18]
I would like to note that in the reasons, references to a document in square brackets, eg. [document 54], refers to Common Book of Exhibits, Exhibit 1, Tab 54. Reference to the parties' exhibits is as follows: Cape Mudge exhibit - CM followed by the number of the exhibit; Campbell River - CR followed by the number of the exhibit and the Crown - C followed by the number of the exhibit.
II. Historical Background
[19]
What I have attempted to do in the following pages is to reconstruct the events of the last hundred years. It is by no means intended to be an exhaustive detailed account of the facts, but is to serve as background in order that all may have a better understanding of the case at bar.
[20]
I believe that it can be safely said that the Laichkwiltach were newcomers to the Campbell River area. Anthropologists have dated that migration of the Laichkwiltach to Campbell River in the latter half of the 19th century. James Douglas reported that in 1840 the Comox Salish, who spoke a very different language than the Laich-kwil-tach, occupied Campbell River and Cape Mudge and that the Kwakiutl-Salish boundary was the north end of Discovery Passage at Chatham Point. By 1853, Douglas on his second voyage, noted that the Laich-kwil-tach had apparently established a presence at Cape Mudge:
"The war stories outlined above, which set the date when the Comox withdrew from the Cape Mudge area at about 1850, receive confirmation from historical sources. In January 1853, Douglas was again at Cape Mudge, and recorded that 'A number of Laycultas exceeding one hundred hung about the vessel all day' (Diary, ms. 1853). In the same year, when he reworked earlier Indian censuses to compile his 'Original Indian Population of Vancouver Island' he noted the place of habitation of the 'Laycooltach' was 'Point Mudge and other parts of Johnstone's Straits', and that of the Comox as 'Point Home' (Cape Lazo, Douglas Papers, 1853).
. . . . .
"By the early 1850's they [the Euclataw] had laid claim to fishing rights at Comox and on the Qualicum River, and they continued to fish there for several decades after that, but any thought they may have had of making permanent settlements in the area were thwarted by gunboats sent to protect the white settlers who began to move to the Comox area in about 1862.
"The Euclawtaw apparently claimed fishing rights at Comox even before they established their village at Cape Mudge ..." [Document 2307, pp. 84 and 85]
[21]
From the entry of British Columbia into Confederation in 1871, the principles for the establishment of Reserve lands for Indians in the province of British Columbia remained an ongoing dispute between the Federal and Provincial Governments. It appears that in the 1870's the British Columbia government was resisting the Federal Government's position that there should be an allocation of 80 acres per capita for reserve lands as opposed to the provincial position that per capital acreage not exceed 20 acres [Document 32, Memorandum to the Honourable Privy Council, dated November 2, 1874].
[22]
In 1875, the Federal and British Columbia Governments, in an attempt at compromise, agreed to the establishment of a Reserve Commission. According to the Memorandum from R.W. Scott, Acting Minister of the Interior to the Privy Council [document 56] it was recognized by both governments that: "no basis of acreage for Indian Reserves be fixed for the Province as a whole, but that each nation (and not tribe) of Indians of the same language be dealt with separately" (paragraph 1); "for the proper adjustment of Indian claims the Dominion Government do appoint an agent to reside with each nation" (paragraph 2); "reserves of land be set aside for each nationality of Indians"; "such Reserve to contain in addition to agricultural land, a large portion of wild and forest land ..." (paragraph 3); and "each Reserve shall be held in trust for the use and benefit of the nation of Indians to which it has been allotted, and, in the event of any material increase or decrease hereafter of the numbers of a nation occupying a Reserve, such Reserve shall be enlarged or diminished, as the case may be, so that it shall bear a fair portion to the members of the nation occupying it". (para. 4). As a result, the Federal and B.C. governments appointed a three member joint commission, with a view to a speedy resolution of the Indian Reserve question in British Columbia. The three member Reserve Commission comprised of Gilbert M. Sproat (hereinafter referred to as Sproat), McKinley and Anderson, continued its work from 1876 to 1878.
[23]
Federal Order-in-Council PC 1088 [document 57] passed by the Dominion Government on November 10, 1875, defined the terms of reference and mandate to be followed by the Reserve Commissioners in recommending reserves for the Indians of British Columbia and stated in part:
"...
the said Commissioners
shall as soon as practicable after their appointment meet at Victoria and
make arrangements to visit
, with all convenient speed in such order as may be found desirable,
each Indian Nation (meaning by Nation all Indian tribes speaking the same language)
in British Columbia and after full enquiry on the spot, into all matters affecting the question,
to fix and determine for each Nation separately the number, extent and a locality of the reserve or reserves to be allowed to it
." (Underlining mine)
Therefore, reserves were to be defined for "each Indian Nation".
[24]
British Columbia accepted the terms of reference as set out by the Dominion by passing its own Order-in-Council, with essentially the identical wording, on January 6, 1876 [document 61]. It appears that no Order-in-Council was ever passed specifically amending theses terms of reference. In fact, the Dominion's instructions to Reserve Commissioner Anderson issued on August 25, 1876 [document 72] confirmed that reserves were to be assigned to Indian nations:
"... Should the circumstances require that the number of reserves for a particular nation be three, or even more, from the fact of the nation being divided by natural physical barriers, or from differences in the habits, pursuits and modes of life of different portions of the nation or for other causes, you will in determining the number of reserves to be assigned to any particular Indian nation be guided rather by the special circumstances of that nation, their habits, tastes, pursuits and physical surroundings, than by fixed theoretical rule."
[25]
Similar instructions were issued by the Province, on October 23, 1876, to the provincially appointed Commissioner McKinley [document 80]. Establishing reserves in the name of one larger tribal group or nation of Indians, achieved the Dominion's objective of quickly securing land for Indians before white settlement alienated all the desired locations and avoided the necessity of a long and complex inquiry by the Commissioners into the individual sub-tribal allocation of such reserves. In this regard, it would seem to me that the Commissioners could therefore concentrate on determining the needs of the Indians by selecting their village sites to be defined as reserves for the larger tribal group or Indian nation and leave the more time consuming task of effecting the individual allocation of such reserves to sub-tribal groups to be carried out later by the Indian Agents.
[26]
To further facilitate the progress of the Reserve Commission, the Dominion Minister of Justice issued under the authority of s. 97 of the
Indian Act
, S.C. 1876, c. 18, a Proclamation in December of 1876 excluding and exempting all Indian lands in British Columbia from the operation of the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
. The Proclamation, published in the
Canada Gazette
on December 30, 1876 provided in part:
"... Whereas we deem it advisable that all the reserves and Indian lands in the Province of British Columbia should be exempt from the operation of sections twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven and twenty-eight of the said Act -
"... We by virtue of the authority vested in Us by the said Act, proclaim, order and declare that all the Reserves and Indian Lands in the Province of British Columbia are by this Royal Proclamation, exempted from the operation of sections twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven and twenty-eight of the Act ... and We hereby exempt all the Reserves and Indian Lands in the Province of British Columbia from the operation of sections twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven and twenty eight of the said Act accordingly."
[27]
In 1878, Sproat was appointed the sole reserve Commissioner of the British Columbia Indian Reserve Commission. He continued the Commission's work from 1878 to 1880, setting aside Reserves throughout the province of British Columbia.
[28]
In 1879 Commissioner Sproat visited the Campbell River area. Sproat set aside Reserve land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River corresponding to the present day Reserve No. 11 and No. 12. Sproat's notes dated October 11, 1879, make reference to the Laich Kwil tack Indians and a "Reserve on the right bank and at the mouth of Campbell River, Discovery passage to be bounded as follows ... The Indians are to have the right of encamping to catch and dry fish at their old fishery about 1/4 of a mile on right bank of Campbell River above Kemper's landing" [document 190]. In his further report of Progress, dated November 1879, Sproat wrote that he was about to proceed further north among the Laich Kwil tachs commonly called Euclatawa. He indicated that "there are two principal places affording good lands such as these people should have a share of, if anything is to be made of them, which places are  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River just inside Cape Mudge and at Salmon River, further to the north".
[29]
Sproat's Minutes of Decision forwarded to the Indian Superintendent Powell are contained in document 249 (the actual Minutes of Decision are in document 189). I note that the Minutes of Decision recommending the reserves at Salmon River, Campbell River and Discovery Passage, the South Fork of Campbell River (Quinsam) and on the Cape Mudge Peninsula are all captioned "Laich-kwil-tach Indians" with no designation of any subgroup or band. Further, a schedule of Indian reserves published in 1885 [document 316] listed all 20 of the Sproat reserves under the designation "Laich-kwil-tach - 233 Indians" with no designation as to any individual subgroups or bands. Also no individual subgroup designation is found on the sketch maps. Moreover, Sproat described the procedures of the Commission in a letter to the Dominion Government dated February 25, 1879 [document 167] thusly:
"It occurs to me, on reflection, however, that for the future, I should change the procedure of the Commission (a) little as regards decisions. The actual written decision of the Commission is the important document - the survey sketch map being merely explanatory ...
"I propose to follow my present practice of preparing at all places a Field Minute which being dated and signed is really a rough Minute of Decision."
[30]
The allotments by Sproat of Indian Reserves were subsequently disapproved and disallowed by the Province of British Columbia [Document 327]. In March of 1880, Sproat resigned as Commissioner and in his place Peter O'Reilly (hereinafter referred to as O'Reilly) was appointed the sole Indian Reserve Commissioner for the province of British Columbia.
[31]
The Order-in-Council appointing O'Reilly [document 248] reads as follows:
"... on the 3rd of March last Mr. Gilbert Mr. Sproat tendered his resignation as Indian Reserve Commissioner for the Province of British Columbia.
"That it consequently becomes necessary to procure the services of a suitable person to fill the position rendered vacant by Mr. Sproat's resignation; the responsible duties connected which consists mainly of ascertaining accurately the requirements of the Indian Bands in that Province, to whom lands have not been assigned by the late Commissioner, and allocating suitable lands to them for tillage and grazing purposes.
"That this Department has recently been advised by the Hon. J.W. Trutch, Confidential Agent at Victoria of the Dominion, that after consultation with the Hon. Mr. Walker, Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works, and Dr. J.W. Powell, Indian Superintendent for British Columbia, they had agreed as to the suitability for the position, of Patrick O'Reilly, Esqr., one of the County Court Judges and Stipendiary Magistrates of the Province. And that in the joint recommendation of these gentlemen, he the Minister, expresses his concurrence, and he submits Mr. O'Reilly's appointment to the position for Your Excellency's approval.
"That Mr. Trutch suggests that the Reserve Commissioner instead of being placed, as at present, under the direction of the Indian Superintendent for British Columbia, should act on his own discretion, in furtherance of the joint suggestion of the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works, representing the Provincial Government, and the Indian Superintendent representing the Dominion Government, as to the particular points to be visited, and Reserves to be established, and that the action of the Reserve Commissioner should in all cases be subject to confirmation by those officers; and that failing their agreement, any and every question at issue between them should be referred for settlement to the Lieutenant Governor, whose decision should be final and binding."
[32]
O'Reilly's directions were outlined in a letter dated August 9, 1880 from L. Vankoughnet [document 250] and provided:
"... You should in making allotments of lands for
Reserves
make no attempt to cause any violent or sudden changes in the habits of the Indian band for which you may be setting apart the Reserve land; or to divert the Indians from any legitimate pursuits or occupations which they may be profitably following or engaged in, you should on the contrary encourage them in any branch of industry which you find them so engaged." (Underlining in document)
These instructions also referred to the jurisdiction of the Reserve Commissioner under the 1876 Proclamation (referred to above) to adjust reserves without the necessity of obtaining compliance with the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
:
"I likewise enclose a copy of the
Indian Act 1880
and beg to inform you that ss. 25, 26, 27 and 28 of that
Act
correspond with ss. 37, 38, 39 and 40 of the
Indian Act 1876
which were rendered inoperative by a Proclamation of His ex. the Governor General as regards Indian Reserves and the Bands in British Columbia the same having been found to conflict with the powers conferred on your predecessors and now delegated to you."
[33]
Therefore, in accordance with the Order-in-Council, decisions made with respect to reserve land was subject to the approval of the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works and the Indian Superintendent for the province of British Columbia. Campbell River submits that without these approvals, the reserves which had been set aside were neither formally constituted as reserve lands nor irrevocably allotted to any specific tribal unit.
[34]
It should also be noted that O'Reilly's appointment as Reserve Commissioner coincided with the establishment of Indian Agencies throughout the province and the appointment of Indian Agents to such Agencies or Districts. In my view, as these agents were familiar with the tribal subdivisions within their jurisdiction it would follow that the Commissioner would designate reserves for the larger tribe or nation and then the Indian agents with their special knowledge, would divide and individually designate reserves to the sub-tribal bands or groups.
[35]
Reserves for the Laich-kwil-tach were surveyed in 1886 and 1888. In 1886, O'Reilly allotted 10 reserves for the Indians of the Laich-kwil-tach. O'Reilly's Minutes of Decision and accompanying sketch maps sent for approval to the Superintendent General Indian Affairs are contained in Documents 362 and 349. O'Reilly writes:
"I have the honor to enclose herewith for your information, and approval, minutes of decision, and sketches of the land reserved for the use of the 'Laich kwil tach' (Euclataw) Indians who inhabit portions of the coast between Cape Mudge, Discovery passage, and Loughborough Inlet, Johnstone Strait ..."
A review of the Minutes of Decision show that the ten reserves were set aside for the Laich kwil tach (Euclataw) Indians and that no reference was made to particular bands of the Lekwiltok. However, the sketch maps contained in document 362, show a sketch of the reserves allotted to a named Indian band.
[36]
In O'Reilly's report to the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, dated October 30, 1886, he commented on Reserves No. 1 through 10. O'Reilly stated he had visited the Campbell River area but found that none of the Indians were present. As such, he felt that on this trip he should not allot any reserves on the Campbell River site. O'Reilly writes:
"I have the honour to inform you that I visited the Laich-quil-tach, (or Eu-claw-taw,) tribe of Indians on the 5th October, and following days, for the purpose of defining lands for their use.
"At one time these Indians were constantly at war with one other of the Northern tribes, and were consequently held in dread by them, but of late years they have been more peaceably disposed, and have obtained their living by fishing and hunting ...
"This tribe [Laich-kwil-tach] is divided into four bands; viz. the Kah-kah-mat-is, We-way-a-kum, Kwe-ah-kah, and We-way-a-kay having a population in the aggregate, of three hundred and thirty-one. They inhabit portions of the coast between Loughboro Inlet, Johnstone Strait, and Cape Mudge, on Discovery Passage. ...
"I did not succeed in meeting any considerable number of the tribe at any one point, yet at each village that I visited, a few members were present, and to them I explained that I was commissioned by the government to define reserves for their use; that I was there for the purpose of consulting with them as to their requirements; and I pointed out to them the advantages they would derive from having lands so set apart, which would virtually give them control of their fisheries.
"With their assistance I marked off the following plots of land.
"... [Reserves no. 1 through 10 listed and described]
"In addition to the allotments already referred to, I visited the Campbell river, where I was informed the Eu-cla-taus are desirous of possessing land: Here there is a valuable fishery, and possibly one or more patches suitable for agriculture may be found: I proceeded some miles up the river, but as the Indians were all absent, I deemed it advisable to delay making reserves until they are present to point out the place they wish to have.
"I regret that I was unable to make this selection, as it would have completed the reserves for the tribe ...
"Sketches and Minutes of Decision of the above reserves are enclosed herewith. Similar Sketches and Minutes accompany all the reports of the reserves recently defined by me for the use of the Indians on the Coast of the Island, and Mainland." [Document 367]
[37]
O'Reilly never did return to survey the Campbell River area, as he injured himself and left on convalescent leave to England for 6 months in November of 1887 [Documents 393, 394, 395 and 397].
[38]
It would seem that the Campbell River Reserve would not have been dealt with until O'Reilly's return had it not been for the growing dispute between the white settlers named Nunns and the Indians of Campbell River.
[39]
In 1887, two brothers who had settled in the Campbell River area started a letter writing campaign to get the provincial government to deal with the problems they were having with a number of Indians also living  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. The most vocal figure in this dispute, at least on the Indian side, was Captain John Quacksister. He was known as "Captain John" or "Chief Quacksister". Captain John's last name enjoys a variety of spellings by the non-Natives of the time, including Quocksistala, Kwasitah, Kwaksistah, and Qua-ches-ta. Captain John is the great grandfather of the present Chief of the Campbell River people and plaintiff, Roy Anthony Roberts. It was Chief Robert's father, William Roberts Sr. who changed his name from Quocksister to Roberts.
[40]
Captain John's tribal affiliation was also the subject of dispute between the parties. Campbell River claims Captain John's tribal affiliation is with the Wewaykum. Cape Mudge argued that the evidence shows that in 1888, at the time of allotment of the reserves, Captain John was affiliated with the Wewaikai Band through marriage, residence, social ties and possibly birth right. Cape Mudge contends that it was only afterwards, in 1896, that Captain John invited the Wewaikum down from Green Point to join him  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and shifted his principle affiliation from Wewaikai to Wewaikum.
[41]
What is clear is that Captain John was a Laichkwiltok. Moreover, from a review of the evidence and especially that of the experts, about the only conclusion that one can safely draw is that it is very difficult to determine the tribal affiliation of any given individual over a hundred years after the fact. Such a determination is further complicated by the high degree of intermarriage and interconnection between the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indian bands. A good illustration of this comes from Harry Assu's book, wherein he writes:
"Our We-Wai-Kai people are married with the We-Wai-Kum of Campbell River and it makes it very hard on everybody to carry on these bitter disputes. During the struggle in the thirties my father spoke for Cape Mudge, and Bill Roberts and Jim Smith from Campbell River opposed him. My father and Bill Roberts were close 'cousins' through Wamish, the greatest Chief at Cape Mudge in those early times. Wamish was my father's uncle ... Bill Roberts' mother was Wamish's only daughter. She married George Quocksister from Campbell River. (Bill gave up the name 'Quocksister' when he joined the army and they couldn't say his name; so they called him 'Roberts'). My own daughter, Jean, is married to Bill Robert's son, Tony. He is Chief Counsellor of the Campbell River Band ..." (Harry Assu's Book, exhibit C-91, pp. 20-21)
[42]
Although Captain John's tribal affiliation is subject to debate, in my view there is no dispute that Captain John and some of his family were the first to reside in the Campbell River area. According to the evidence of Mrs. Lucy (Lavina) Hovell, Captain John and his family were the first to reside  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. Agent Halliday, who farmed in the area, also reported that Captain John and his family were the only Indians living  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River in 1883 [Document 1822].
[43]
The Nunns complained that the Indians were claiming all of the land up to Quinsam. In a letter dated December 15, 1887, the Nunns wrote the following to the Commissioner of Lands and Works in Victoria:
"About the beginning of Sept. we preempted Land 2 chains (thro Mr. Drabble) adjoining the Indian Reserve on this River and have since been living on and clearing the land up to date, having stated Etc as far as was compatible with the 'indian Reserve' being unsurveyed. A family of Indians are living on Government land between Reserve and River at place marked Fishing Station on map, the head of the family is called Quacksister or Captain John, he has three sons, and some women, also another man some relation, they all live together, and are the only Indians living on Campbell River Reserve, and we have been informed that this is the first winter they have remained for up to the 11th inst. these Indians made no objections to our being here but on the 11th we noticed that they were cutting and burning down trees on our land about ten chains up from their Reserve and where we have been clearing, on enquiring they told us they were clearing the land for themselves.
"On our protesting they told us that they owned all the land up to the 'Quinsam' and that white men had no right in the country and wanted to know who told us to come here, we told them that it was no use talking as Government would settle things all right ..." [Document 403]
It would appear that Captain John was claiming all of the land pointed out to him by Sproat in 1879, namely Reserves No. 11 and No. 12.
[44]
On February 8, 1888, Indian Agent Pidcock (hereinafter referred to as Pidcock) wrote to Indian Superintendent Vowell stating:
"I have the honor to report to you that on my recent visit to Cape Mudge to the Wewaikai Band, I found that some trouble is likely to arise between some of the Indians of that Tribe and some white men who have pre-empted land claimed by the Indians on the Campbell River Reserve ... The Indians say they have occupied the site in question for more than ten years, either as a fishing station or for planting potatoes and I know myself that about fourteen years ago when I was there it had been recently used, as houses were upon it. These Indians I found are exceedingly anxious to cultivate some of their land on the Reserve, but are afraid to do so until it had been properly staked out ..." [document 440]
[45]
In March 1888, Indian Agent Lomas (hereinafter referred to as Lomas) was dispatched to Campbell River in an attempt to ensure calm prevailed between the Nunns and Chief Quacksister until such time as O'Reilly could visit Campbell River and settle the matter of the Reserves. Lomas was instructed by his superior Mr. Moffatt to interview Chief Quocksister and inform him that he was not to threaten or interfere with the Nunns, but should live in "peace and harmony with them pending the final allotment of his reserve by the Commissioner in whose hands he must safely leave the adjustment of his apparent trouble" [Document 455].
[46]
On March 19, 1888, Lomas reported the following to Moffatt:
"The Indian Kwawksistah and his sons were away at Fort Rupert and are not expected back for a fortnight. I went over the ground in dispute with the other Indians and explained to them the necessity of not interfering with the white settlers, as there was no doubt their interests would be looked after on Mr. Commissioner O'Reilly's return.
"It appears that Kwawksistah claims all the land (several hundred acres) pointed out to him by Mr. Sproat, and has been lately using his influence to induce his sons and other Indians to occupy the land preempted by Messrs. Nunns which lies further up the river.
"I explained to them that when a Reservation was laid off for them it would be for the use of all the Euclataw Indians, and not for one man alone, and that they were mistaken if they thought that Mr. Sproat had allotted them all the lands on the south of the Campbell River up as far as the Quinsam River
"... I think however the matter could be satisfactorily arranged if taken in hand at once - At present at least one half of the Euclataw Band care nothing about the land on the Campbell River, but wish a larger reserve between their village and Cape Mudge ..." [document 467]
[47]
Mr. Moffatt in reporting to his superior, Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, on March 26, 1888, indicated:
"... In 1879 the then Commissioner Mr. Sproat laid out a reserve for the Uclataw Indians  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River, but it was not confirmed by the Provincial Government. In 1886 Mr. Commsr. O'Reilly visited the above place for the same purpose, but as the Indians were absent no allotment was really made - consequently there is no defined reserve at that point.
. . . . .
"I assumed the responsibility of requesting Mr. Lomas to proceed to the disputed ground and make known to the Chief Kwaksistah that he must not in anyway interfere with the Messrs. Nunns but leave the adjustment of his apparent difficulty to Mr. Commsr. O'Reilly who would no doubt look well after his interests ..." [Document 474]
[48]
The dispute between the Nunns and Chief Quacksister continued to escalate and due to O'Reilly's absence, the federal and provincial governments commissioned Ashdown Green (who had surveyed for O'Reilly and is referred to hereinafter as Green) to travel to Campbell River "to proceed without delay to Campbell River with authority to determine the extent and boundaries of the Indian Reserve at that place" [Document 484]. Specifically the Report of the Committee of the Honourable the Executive Council, approved by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor [Document 484] provided:
"... That a misunderstanding has arisen between certain white settlers named Nunns, and the Indians respecting the right to certain lands situated on the south side of Campbell River, on the East coast of Vancouver Island, near Seymour Narrows.
"That several years ago, Mr. Sproat, Indian Reserve Commissioner allotted certain lands to these Indians but his decision was not confirmed pending the report of Mr. Commissioner O'Reilly. That when Mr. O'Reilly visited the locality in 1886, the Indians were absent consequently no action was taken in the matter.
"That the Messrs. Nunns recorded their claims to land adjacent to and outside of the allotment made by Mr. Sproat but owing to the interference and repeated threats of the Indians they are unable to proceed with the cultivation and improvement of their land, to their serious loss, and inconvenience.
"That a speedy settlement of the difficulty is desirable and that owing to the migratory habit of these Indians it should be effected as soon as possible, as it is their custom to leave the locality before the time when the return of Mr. Commissioner O'Reilly to the Province may be expected.
"And recommending that the Dominion Government be requested to sanction
the appointment of Ashdown H. Green Esq. C.E., to proceed without delay to Campbell River with authority to determine the extent and boundaries of the Indian Reserve at that place
..." (Underlining mine)
[49]
The Memorandum to the Privy Council of Canada from John A. MacDonald, Acting Superintendent of Indian Affairs, dated May 14, 1888 reads in part:
"... having reference to certain misunderstandings between some White Settlers and the Indians in respect to certain lands situated  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River on the East Coast of Vancouver Island, and requesting for the reasons therein set forth that the appointment of Ashdown Green, Esquire, C.E.,
be sanctioned by the Dominion Government to proceed to the Campbell River with authority to determine the extent and boundaries of the Indian Reserve at that place
..." (document 515, Underlining mine)
[50]
The corresponding Dominion Order-in-Council P.C. No. 1318.G. passed on May 29, 1888 provided:
"The Superintendent General of Indian Affairs to which Despatch and enclosures were referred states that in anticipation of Your Excellency's approval of the recommendation made by the Committee of the Executive Council above referred to, and as the matter was one of great urgency, the Indian Superintendent at Victoria was telegraphed on the 16th of April, 1888 on receipt of a letter from him enclosing a copy of the Order-in-Council above referred to and recommending that he be telegraphed that the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs concurred in the proposed appointment of Mr. Ashdown Green to determine the extent and boundaries of the Indian Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River, and the Indian Superintendent at Victoria having stated that he would instruct Mr. Green on receipt of a telegram to the above effect to attend to the duty at once." [document 520]
[51]
Green pursuant to his instructions (the Orders in Council) went to Campbell River in May of 1888. Unfortunately, the only firsthand accounts of Green's activities  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River are contained in Green's Minutes of Decision [document 517], letter of transmittal [document 521], survey notes [document 512] and the diary of Frederick Nunns [document 507]. These documents show that on his arrival, Green met with an Indian named Quacksister or "Captain John" and six young men and the Nunns, as these were apparently the only persons interested in the land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River at that time. In a letter dated May 28, 1888 to Superintendent General of Indian Affairs [Document 517], Green reported that he had met with the Indians (namely Quacksister and family) residing near the mouth of the Campbell River and surveyed the boundaries and extent of Reserves No. 11 and 12. In his report Green stated:
"... I proceeded to Campbell River on the 25th ultimo to determine the extent and boundaries of the Indian reserves at that place.
"The Reserves for the Laich-kwil-tach were defined by Mr. Sproat in 1879, but were disapproved by the Provincial Government.
"Subsequently in 1886, Mr. O'Reilly allotted ten reserves to the tribe, and also visited Campbell river, the Indians however being absent, he deemed it advisable to delay making reserves until they were present to point out the places they wished to have (See Report Oct. 30th 1886).
"
Although the Indians had been previously informed of the date of my intended visit, I found on my arrival that the head chief, 'Waw mish', and almost all of his band, had left the day before for Alberni. The sub chief, Quacksister, or Capt. John, and six young men, being most interested parties in the settlement of these reserves, were however present, and begged me to give my decision at once, so that they could also leave
. (Underlining mine)
"I informed them that before I came to any conclusion, I intended to examine the land, and make a survey of it; when I had done so, I would ask the white settlers with whom they were at variance, to attend and I would render my decision.
"On the 4th Inst., having completed the survey and defined the boundary of the reserve, I requested both parties to meet at my camp, and informed them of my determination.
"I am pleased to report that my decision gave satisfaction to all concerned, and I think rightly so, for while the Indians are awarded the site of their houses, which had been omitted by Mr. Sproat, the whites obtain access to the sea, the head of steamboat navigation on the river being now within Mefs Nunns' claim.
. . . . .
"I enclose herewith a Minute of decision and sketch of the reserves as surveyed by me. [note: the Minutes of Decision are dated May 7, 1888 and are found in Document 511]
"
Reserve No. 11
, Campbell river, contains 375 acres mostly excellent land, and capable of being made of great value. 15 acres near to the Indian houses are open fern prairies, ready for the plough. Another 15 acres are lightly timbered with large alders, and can be cleared with little labor. On the seashore a narrow strip of sandy soil, which forms a sea wall, affords 50 acres of excellent grazing, while about 100 acres of marshy land, partly overflowed at high tide, may be easily dyked, and reclaimed.
"Not the least valuable part of the reserve is the timber upon it which for quantity and quality is unsurpassed. Trees of five feet in diameter, and fifty feet without a limb are common, and their proximity to the sea enhances their value.
"The Campbell river is one of the principal salmon fishing resorts of this tribe, and the sea affords an unlimited supply of fish of various kinds. Game is abundant, elk, bear, and deer are found in the immediate vicinity of the reserve and the flats at the mouth of the river teem with wildfowl.
"
No. 12 Quinsam
, a reserve of 284 acres, is principally heavily timbered land. Although larger than I consider necessary for the Indians, I did not deem it advisable to alter the boundaries as assumed by the surveyor of the surrounding claims.
"At present this place is only frequented by the Indians when hunting, it being a favourite resort of large game.
"About thirty acres are open fern prairie, ready for cultivation and this area could be largely extended by clearing. The soil is excellent and the timber upon it very valuable.
"During my stay  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River I met, at different times, members of some of the four bands belonging to the 'Laich kwil tach' tribe. Every place they mentioned to me had already been reserved for them by Mr. O'Reilly, and all expressed themselves satisfied with their allotments ..." [document 517]
Therefore, it would seem that Green was looking for Wamish, the chief of the Laich kwil tach and the Cape Mudge Indians. When Wamish was not available, Green dealt with the subchief, Quocksister.
[52]
On May 29, 1888, Green sent a shorter letter regarding the reserves to the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works for the province of British Columbia [Document 521]. Green stated he was forwarding "a sketch, and Minutes of Decision of the reserves so defined by me for the use of the 'laich-kwil-tach' tribe". The enclosed sketch map appears to be identical to the one Green sent to the Federal Government. At the top of the sketch map, the following words are printed:
"LAICH-KWIL-TACH (EU-CLA-TAW)
INDIANS
WE-WAY-A-KAY BAND"
[53]
What is interesting to note, is that Green's original field notes [Document 512] contained maps of Reserves No. 11 and 12 with no designation by Green as to which band of the Laich kwil tach Tribe the reserves were allotted. The notes specified "Laichwiltach Indian Reserves No. 11, Campbell River No. 12 Quinsam with maps attached.
[54]
The Minutes of Decision [contained in Document 510 and 517] read as follows:
Minutes of Decision
Laich-kwil-tach
(Euclataw) Indians
No. 11
"
A Reserve
of three hundred, and seventy five (375) acres, situated at the mouth of Campbell River, Discovery Passage.
"Commencing at the Northeast corner post of Lot forty nine (49) Sayward District, and running West thirty five chains, one link (35.01); thence North to Campbell River; thence following the right bank of the said river, in a Northerly direction, to its mouth; thence Southerly, following the sea shore, to a point due East of the starting point, and thence West to the place of commencement.
No. 12
"
Quinsam
, a Reserve of two hundred and eighty four (284) acres, situated on the right bank of Quinsam River, about a mile from its confluence with Campbell River.
"Commencing at the Southwest corner post of Lot forty nine (49) Sayward District, and running West to the Quinsam River; thence following the right bank of the said river, in a Northerly direction, to the Southern boundary of Lot forty seven (47); thence East to the Southeast corner post of the said Lot forty seven (47), and thence following the Western boundary of Lot forty nine (49) in an Easterly, and Southerly direction, to the place of commencement."
The Minutes of Decision are signed by Green, with the title Surveyor to IRC (Indian Reserve Commission) and dated Campbell River May 7, 1888. As noted above, the accompanying sketch map, contained in documents 517 and 510, had on it the notation "We-way-akay Band" under the main heading "Laich-kwil-tach (Eu-cla-taw) Indians".
[55]
The Crown and Campbell River take the position that Green delineated reserves for the Lekwiltok and did not make any allocation to a particular band, either to Cape Mudge or Campbell River. According to Campbell River, Green was authorized to delineate reserves, not to allocate them to a particular band. Campbell River maintains that it was not until the completion of the legislative process following the Mckenna McBride Commission that the reserves were formally and legally allotted to Campbell River.
[56]
It is the Crown's position, that prior to 1900, the practice of the Indian Commission was to delineate reserves for the larger group or Nation, such as the Lekwiltok, as opposed to allocating to a particular band or sub-group. This practice, according to the Crown, changed after 1900.
[57]
I am satisfied that Green's authority was limited by the Orders in Council appointing him [documents 484 and 520] to "determining the extent and boundaries of the Indian Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River". As noted earlier, Green's purpose in going to Campbell River was to settle the "boundary dispute" between the Laichkwiltach Indians and the Nunns, per Green's own words in document 521. Moreover, in his letter to the Commissioner of Lands and Works [document 521] Green reported that the dispute between the Nunns and the Indians was settled, which lends support that one of the reasons for Green's appointment was to settle this dispute. I can see nothing in Green's appointment indicating that Green was to determine sub-tribal allocation of the Laichkwiltach Reserves  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. In my view, Green's authority only extended to determining the size of the Reserves and the location of its boundaries and to recommend such reserves to the Provincial and Dominion Governments for their approval. Further, in his report to the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs [document 517], as well as in the letter to the Commissioner of Lands and Works [document 521], Green himself stated that: "I proceeded to Campbell River on the 25th ultimo to determine the extent and boundaries of the Indian reserves at that place". Clearly, Green saw himself as going to the Campbell River area to determine the extent and boundaries of the reserves, and not to allocate reserves to any one subgroup or band.
[58]
Further, all the documentary evidence, with the exception of the notation on the sketch map, support a finding or the inference that if anything, the intention was to recommend Reserves No. 11 and 12 for the Laichkwiltach. The Minutes of Decision [document 510] refer only to the Laichkwiltach (Euclataw) and make no mention of an allocation to a subgroup of the Laichkwiltach, even though Green was aware that four bands or subgroups belonged to the Laichkwiltach. Green's letter of transmittal [document 517] refer to the bands belonging to the Laickwiltach and that every place the Indians had mentioned to him (Green) had already been "reserved" for them by O'Reilly. In 1886, when Green accompanied O'Reilly to the Campbell River area, the Indians had been absent, and O'Reilly deemed it advisable to delay in making reserves. It would seem that if O'Reilly had wished to allocate to a subgroup, such as the Cape Mudge, he would have consulted with the Indians at Cape Mudge for that purpose.
[59]
In addition, Green's field notes and survey sketches [document 512] refer only to the "Laich-kwil-tach Indian Reserve No. 11 Campbell River, No. 12 Quinsam". The sketch depicting the Campbell River Reserve is preceded by a page entitled "Traverse of Reserve 11, Lach-kwil-tach Indians  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River" and the sketch for Quinsam Reserve No. 12 is preceded by the caption "Quinsam Reserve No. 12 Laich-kwil-tach Indians".
[60]
Moreover, following the survey of Reserves No. 11 and 12, two documents also refer to the Laichkiwtach tribe as opposed to any subgroup. In his letter of May 29, 1888 to the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works [document 521], Green wrote:
"Enclosed I beg to forward for your approval, a sketch and Minutes of decision of the reserves so defined by me, for the use of the 'Laich-kwil-tach' tribe."
In Green's report [document 1177] found in the files of the McKenna McBride Commission, Green indicated that:
"The Laich-kwil-tach (Euclataw) reserves were re-alloted by Mr. O'Reilly in 1886.
No allotments were made to separate bands. The division into bands were made by the Agents
." (Underlining in document)
[61]
It is also Campbell River's contention that the sketch map contained in document 517 or document 510, ie. the map with the Wewaikai notation, is not the sketch map that was originally attached to Green's Minutes of Decision. Unfortunately, no other sketch map was located. The basis of Campbell River's contention, in part, relates to answers given by the Crown to interrogatories. In the interrogatories the "We-way-a-kay" notation was explained as follows:
"The only document located to date which specifically refers to the 'We-way-a-kay Band' in connection with the survey of the Quinsam reserve in 1888 is a sketch map which may have been attached to Ashdown Green's Minutes of Decision. We have no first hand knowledge which directly indicated when, by whom or why the notation 'We-way-a-kay Band' was made on this particular sketch map. Our research however indicated that it is very unlikely that Ashdown Green himself drew or labelled this sketch map. The handwriting on the map, and in particular the notation 'We way a kay Band' on the map appears to correspond to the handwriting of the same draughtsman who prepared the sketch maps apparently attached to Commissioner O'Reilly's previous Minutes of Decision dated October 8, 1886. This draughtsman may have used these earlier sketch maps as a precedent and therefore inserted the name 'We way a kay Band' under the title 'laich-kwil-tach (Eu-cla-taw) Indians' and failed to note that neither Mr. Green's Minutes of Decision nor his survey notes made any specific mention of the 'We way a kay band' with reference to the Quinsam Reserve.
"Furthermore, the sketch map found in Mr. Green's field book of Survey Notes for the Quinsam Reserve is titled 'Laichwiltach Indians' and does not refer to the 'We-way-a-way Band'. The four sketch plans identified as Green's working maps of the Campbell River and Quinsam reserves also make no reference to any individual band." (Campbell River Document 270, 272, 273, 274)
[62]
Further, it would also appear that Cape Mudge has been unable to conclusively show who made the notation, why or when. Mr. Borthwick (called by Cape Mudge), a high ranking civil servant with personal knowledge of the workings of the Lands Branch of the British Columbia Government dating back to 1949, was of the opinion that such a sketch map would not have been prepared by Green (vol. 65, November 19, 1993, pp. 8565, 8481-8482). I should add that the sketch map identified by Mr. Borthwick is undated, and its whereabouts and custody were unknown until located by Mr. Borthwick in 1975 (vol. 65, November 19, 1993, p. 8533). Moreover, it would appear that the practice was to have a draftsman, not the Reserve Commissioner, prepare the sketch map (Exhibit C-135A, Cape Mudge Interrogatories, tab A, 6, Q.29(a)). The Minutes of Decision would probably have been dictated by O'Reilly or Green, or prepared under O'Reilly's (or Green's) direction and signed by O'Reilly (or Green) as Reserve Commissioner. Such a practice was confirmed by Mr. Borthwick (vol. 65, pp. 8465-8466, 8481-8482). As such, there is at least some doubt in my mind as to whether it was Green who actually prepared the sketch map of Reserve No. 11 and No. 12.
[63]
Reserve Commissioner O'Reilly returned from leave shortly after Green's survey of Reserve No. 11 and No. 12.
[64]
As noted earlier, the requirement that all reserves recommended by the Reserve Commissioner be subject to the approval of the Provincial Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works and the Dominion Superintendent was a major limitation on the authority of the Reserve Commissioner (see Order-in-Council 1334).
[65]
On May 29, 1888, Green forwarded to the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works a "sketch and Minute of Decision of the Reserves so defined by me for the use of the Laich-kwil-tach tribe" [document 521].
[66]
The marginal note written on the copy of Green's letter to Ottawa to the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs [Document 517] dated June 11, 1888 and signed "LVK" (presumably L.Vankoughnet), reads:
"1. Mr. ? [Mcdowell, Merril] ack[knowledge] + say the satisfactory settlement of this matter is very gratifying.
"2. To the Chief Srv [Surveyor] Bray to note Minutes of allotment + lay them down on plan of B.C."
[67]
On June 8, 1888, L. Vankoughnet, replied to Green's report, stating:
"I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 28th ultimo, reporting the result of your mission to Campbell River to determine the extent and boundaries of the Indian Reserve at that place and in reply I beg to inform you that the satisfactory settlement by you of this matter is very gratifying to the Department." [Document 529]
[68]
It should be noted that changes were made to some reserves after the date of the Commissioner's Minute of Decision and before so-called "final approval". The example cited by the Crown, is Reserve No. 10. Reserve No. 10 was originally recommended by O'Reilly as a Reserve of 946 acres [documents 367 and 362], but during the survey of this reserve by surveyor Skinner in July 1888, an alteration to the reserve was recommended, namely to extend Reserve No. 10 to include the garden and open land at Cape Mudge. Skinner wrote to the Reserve Commissioner on July 28, 1888 indicating that:
"I have the honour to inform you that I have finished the Reserves for the Euclataw tribe and hope to receive further instructions by mail tomorrow. I have made alterations in two reserves one at Phillips Arm where in order to include all of the Village I extended the reserve ten chains north, and the other at Cape Mudge where to include the garden and open land ... I enclose sketches of the Reserves with the alterations coloured yellow and as in neither case is the acreage much increased I trust they will meet with your approval ..." [document 535]
A comparison of the sketch map for Reserve No. 10 (Cape Mudge) and No. 5 (Matsayno and Phillips Arm) [document 349] and the map of the Reserve approved on the Official Plan [document 535] reveals that the alterations which were made by Skinner were approved. Dr. Pritchard, an expert anthropologist called by the Cape Mudge Band, admitted that the alterations made by Skinner to the reserves were an alteration of O'Reilly's "allotments", vol. 25, June 3, 1993, pp. 3393-3394.
[69]
On May 13, 1889 Commissioner O'Reilly sent the plans of the various reserves, including the Laichkwiltach reserves, to the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works for his approval and signature. O'Reilly wrote [document 550]:
"I have the honour to forward herewith for your final approval, and signature, the original plans (8) of the Reserves for the following tribes viz
Bella Coola	Mah teelth pe
Bella Bella	Laich Kwil tach
Kokyet	Nah witti
Kemsquit	Klahoose
"The Minutes of Decision for Bella Coola, Bella Bella, Kemsquit, Kokyet, Mah teelth pe, Laich kwil tach and Nah witti were approved by the late Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works, Mr. Smithe, on the 5th of June, 1884 and 5th of November, 1886 and those for Klahoose on the 16th of January, 1889."
[70]
The approval given on November 5, 1886, is found in document 371. However, I note this "approval" predated the subsequent alterations to the Laich kwil tach reserve and that the 1886 "approval" did not include Reserve Nos. 11 and 12. As such, it could not be considered an "approval".
[71]
On May 18, 1889, the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works and Indian Reserve Commissioner O'Reilly approved and signed a map depicting all twelve of what the map labelled "LAICH-KWIL-TACH INDIAN RESERVES". This map is known as Survey Plan 184 [document 553] and is the official plan of these reserves.
[72]
The approval of the Laich kwil tach Reserves was further confirmed by letter of the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works dated May 20, 1889 [document 560] to Commissioner O'Reilly in which Mr. Vernon stated:
"I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 13th inst, and in reply I beg to say that the Reserves set aside by you for the use of the following Tribes of Indians have been approved of, viz:-
Bella Coola	Mah teelth pe
Bella Bella	Laich kwil tach
Kokyet	Nah witti
Kemsquit	Klahouse"
[73]
It would appear that the Indian Superintendent's approval of the reserves for the Laichkwiltach was obtained between May 21, 1889 and May 27, 1889 [documents 561 and 562]. After receiving a copy of the approved official plan for the Laichkwiltach reserves under cover of O'Reilly's letter of May 21, 1889 [document 561] the acting Indian Superintendent Mr. Moffat wrote to O'Reilly on May 27, 1889 to acknowledge receipt of the plans "of the reserves allotted for the use of the several tribes at ... Laich-kwil-tach" [document 562]. I also note that Dr. Pritchard during his cross-examination by counsel for the Crown, after reviewing documents 550, 553, 560 561 and 562 confirmed that this sequence of documentation constituted the
first
approval of Reserves Nos. 11 and 12 (see vol. 26, June 3, 1993, p. 3407). The same point was also confirmed by Dr. Pritchard during his cross-examination by counsel for Campbell River (see vol. 27, p. 3713).
[74]
The Wewaikai's position is that this map together with the letter from the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works, dated May 20, 1889 [Document 560], represented a provincial confirmation of the twelve Lekwiltok reserves. However, I do not agree that this confirmation affected or purported to affect the existing Band ownership of the individual reserves.
[75]
There appears to be no evidence indicating approval by the Superintendent of Indian Affairs of British Columbia for Reserves No. 11 and 12, (see vol. 19, pp. 2661-2662). As noted above, Campbell River argues that this approval was required pursuant to the Order-in-Council appointing O'Reilly as the Indian Reserve Commissioner.
[76]
On the other hand, it should also be noted that the map is entitled "Plan of the Laich-kwil-tach-Indian reserves" and contains sketches of the 12 Lekwiltok reserves, together with the approval of F.G. Vernon, Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works, dated May 18, 1889 and the signature of P. O'Reilly, I.R.C.. There are no specific band designations on this document with respect to the individual reserves. It is also to be noted that the area of the reserves depicted in this plan differs from the area of reserves depicted in the sketch maps. However, it is the area depicted in the plan that appears in the Schedule of Indian Reserves.
[77]
It would also appear from the federal plan and the provincial plan and testimony of Mr. Frey, who testified that the provincial plan is the "official plan" approved by Vernon, was approval for the Laichkwiltock generally and not for specific bands.
[78]
It is most significant to me that none of the documents relating to the approval of Reserves No. 11 and 12 make any reference to an approval of these reserves for the subgroups of the Laichkwiltach nor do any of the approval documents [534, 535, 550, 560, 561, 562, 563, 586 and 587] refer to any of the Laichkwiltach subgroups.
[79]
I am therefore satisfied that the documentary and opinion evidence establishes that the approval was limited to confirming the allocation of Reserves No. 11 and 12 to the Laickwiltach. I am not convinced that these reserves were "finally and irrevocably alloted" to the Cape Mudge Band in 1888, as alleged by the Wewaikai. I would add that although the terms "alloted" or "allocated" are used by all the parties, as well as the court, there is no magic to these terms, at least not until this court makes a finding of fact regarding the reserve creation process in British Columbia. I am also satisfied that the procedure followed and mandated by the Orders in Council appointing the Reserve Commission required that the Reserve Commissioner define reserves which were recommended to the Provincial and Dominion Governments for their approval. The recommendations of the Reserve Commissioner as set out in his Minutes of Decision were neither "final" nor "irrevocable". Whether one terms the recommendations an "allotment" or an "allocation", what is significant is that in law no interest as defined by the Reserve Commissioner was created out of the interest which the Province held in those lands, until such time as there was a final approval or allocation. Suffice to say at this point, that the parties are in disagreement as to when this occurred. The issue of the reserve creation process will be dealt with later in these reasons.
[80]
The Department of Indian Affairs 1900 Schedule of Indian Reserves found in the 1901 Annual Report lists both Campbell River and Quinsam as "We-way-akay band" reserves. This schedule contains a marginal note indicating these two reserves were "Allotted by Mr. Ashdown Green, under special authority from the Provincial and Dominion Governments, May 7, 1888. Surveyed, 1888. Final confirmation, May 18, 1889" [document 810, p. 107].
[81]
On August 27, 1889, Pidcock wrote that:
"In June I visited the Lien-kwil-ta Indians and stayed some time at the We-wai-ai-kai Village. These Indians have a splendid reserve on Campbell River, just opposite their village. I found that an old man and his three sons with their families had located themselves on this reserve, to the exclusion of all the other Indians, he imagining that the reserve belonged entirely to himself and family. I had a good deal of trouble to convince him that the reserve belonged as much to the other members of the tribe as to himself, and I intended on my next visit, this autumn, to allot portions of it to several young men who wish to go there, but have hitherto been prevented by the old man and his sons." [document 569]
In a letter dated March 24, 1896, Pidcock wrote to Vowell [document 685]:
"I am requested by the Indians who claim the Reserve on Campbell River and who are only five in number, to ask if you would obtain permission for them to cut the timber on the Reserve for saw logs. At a meeting in the house of the Chief yesterday, the Indians of the We-way-ai-kai band who reside on the reserve at Cape Mudge, said they always considered the Reserve on Campbell River to belong to Chief Kwaksista and they do not claim any of it ..."
[82]
During the first half of the 1890's the Wewaikum Band resided at Matlaten or Green Point and that prior to that they lived at Tatapowis or Hoskyn Inlet.
[83]
It appears that in 1896, Pidcock was approached by some members of the Wewaikum Band who wished to move from Green Point to Campbell River. Pidcock writes the following in his diary for July 1896 [document 696]:
"I have run a few survey lines on the Campbell River Reserve and I find there is much larger area of good grass land than I supposed ... Some Indians of the We-wai-kum Band have spoken to me to give them locations on this reserve which I promised to do if they would come and reside on it."
Cape Mudge submits that Pidcock had no business making that promise; this was the genesis of all the problems that would follow. Once the Crown had allowed the Wewaikum Band to take up residence on the Wewaikai's Band reserve, the Crown's ability to diligently protect the interests of the Wewaikai Band was effectively compromised.
[84]
Superintendent Vowell wrote to Pidcock on September 24, 1896 with the following instructions [document 706]:
"... take action in this matter as soon as possible and report in duplicate to me the results thereof.
"By all means encourage the Indians to take up locations in severalty on their Reserves ... In this particular I have to remind you to be very careful in having all land tenures made strictly in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Act. See s. 16 and foregoing and subsequent sections touching Indian possessory rights in their lands."
[85]
The evidence indicates that Captain John died sometime in 1902 [Document 2541]. Shortly before his death a dispute arose between the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indians. This dispute arose when Indians residing at Cape Mudge camped on the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River in order to fish from that river. Pidcock reports on October 8, 1900 that:
"[T]he old Chief Captain John [Kwawksistah] objecting to the men [from Cape Mudge] camping on his reserve, but I went over and persuaded him to accept a small payment and they agreed to give him and his two sons work at the same time they were fishing and also to replace the Japanese with Indians with which he was properly satisfied." [document 833]
In November 4, 1905, Mr. Rendle, a missionary at Cape Mudge wrote to Indian Agent DeBeck (hereinafter referred to as DeBeck) stating:
"A dispute has arisen between our Indians and those of Campbell River, as to the ownership and right to fish  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. Cape Mudge chief and people claim that Campbell river belongs to them exclusively; and that the Campbell River people are those that should remain at Loughborough.
"Trouble has been brewing for some time past, but has now reached its climax." [Document 915]
DeBeck wrote to Vowell on November 18, 1905 [Document 916] and described the dispute in the following terms:
"I have the honor to inform you that considerable friction exists between the We-wai-a-kai, Indians of Cape Mudge & the We-wai-ai-kum Indians now living on the Indian Reserve at the mouth of the Campbell River; it seems that the trouble began by the We-wai-ai-kum people trying to prevent the others from fishing for salmon in the Campbell river, and the We-wai-ai-kai people retaliate by ordering them to leave that reserve, claiming that it belongs to themselves.
"As you [sic] aware, the We-wai-ai-kum Indians from Green Point, took possession of this reserve a good many years ago, they now claim it as their own, saying that it had been surveyed for them by a Mr. Grey. As there is nothing in this office to show but that it belongs exclusively to the We-wai-ai-kai band on the other hand it seems strange that they would be allowed to take possession of a Reserve belonging to another band without permission from the Department."
Superintendent Vowell replied on December 1, 1905, [document 917] stating that:
"[Reserve #11] ... was allotted to the We-way-a-kay band by Mr. Ashdown Green under special authority from the Dominion and Provincial Governments on 7th May, 1888.
"At that time the only Indians resident on the ground were the sub-chief Quack-sister, or Capt. John, and six young men, (of the We-way-a-kay Band handwritten) the head chief Waw-mish having left the day previous to Mr. Green's arrival.
"These Indians stated that they were from the We-way-a-kay village on Cape Mudge (Reserve No. 10) and the reserve was therefore assigned to that band.
"During Mr. Green's stay  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  river he met members of each of the four bands comprising the Laich-kwil-tach tribe, all of whom expressed themselves satisfied with their allotments, and none questioned Capt. John's tribal right to the land."
Mr. Blueschke, qualified as an expert in handwriting, testified that it was a very strong probability that the person who made the handwritten notation in this letter "of the We-way-akay band" and who wrote the signature on the letter "A.W. Vowell", was the same person who wrote and signed a number of "A.W. Vowell" letters from the 1890's.
[86]
By 1906, Indian Agent Halliday (Halliday) had taken over from Agent DeBeck and reported to Vowell further particulars on the dispute between the two groups of Indians. In a letter to Vowell, dated August 29, 1906, [document 926] Halliday indicated that he had met with the Wewaikum Band, who as Halliday noted were living on Reserve No. 11, and asked whether they could cut timber on the Campbell River Reserves and use the proceeds to create a pipeline to bring water into the reserve. In this same letter Halliday made the following comment:
"Mind however that the reserve which they [the Wewaikum] are occupying at present  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River is not their own reserve at all, but belongs to the We-wai-kai band many of whom resent the intrusion of the We-wai kum tribe on their reserve. It seems that by an old tribal custom that certain hunting grounds were set apart for certain families and the portion round Campbell River belonged to the family of the man who is now chief of the We-wai-kum band and he has called his people from Greene Point to live with him."
[87]
Vowell responded by letter dated September 19, 1906 [Document 928], wherein he stated:
"It seems from a perusal of the records at this office that the We-wai-kum band have the following reserves of their own, viz, - Homayno, 38 acres; Loughborough 21 acres; Matlaten 96 acres; Matsayno 118 1/2 acres; Sa-ai-yonck 51 1/2 acres. Under the above circumstances some very good reason should be given for the occupation by the We-waikum band of the reserve belonging to the We-wai-kai Indians."
[88]
Halliday then visited the Wewaikum and Wewaikai who were  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and noted the following in his letter to Vowell, dated November 10, 1906 [Document 934]:
"With further reference to your letter No. 32 A-5 [document 928] and my letter of August 29 No. 118/5 [document 926] having reference to the occupation of the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River, I have the honour to report that I have just returned from a visit to the tribes  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and Cape Mudge. They were all  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and I called them together to gather information with regard to the occupation of the [Campbell River Reserve] ... by the We-wai-kum band
. . . . .
"From the evidence given it seems that originally before any white settlers came that the reserve there was inhabited by Comox Indians. They had a fierce fight with another tribe and were almost extinguished. For many years the only family thereon was that of 'Captain' John Quacksista who afterwards became chief of the We-wai-kum as his mother was a Comox and his father a We-wai-kum. He had a large lodge house there the remains of which are still visible. He handed over his position as chief George to the present chief.
"At the time it was surveyed the Quacksista family were the only ones living there. The only way the We-wai-kum band can understand the fact that it is put on the records of the office that the reserve belongs to the We-wai-kai band who live at Cape Mudge is the similarity of the names.
"On the other hand the We-wai-kai state that although the land according to the Indian Custom belongs to the Quacksista family that the We-wai-kai people asked for it as a reserve while the other parties did not.
"I questioned them very carefully on the matter and said I would report the evidence given and leave it to the Department to decide which had prior or rather the better claim to the reserve.
"I gathered from the remarks made by both that they planned uniting in the near future so that they might have enough children to keep the school open.
"The We-wai-kum band also claims that when they lived at Green Point that there was very little chance for them to earn any money as they were so far away that they were out of touch with all the outside world.
"I should be very pleased if you will advise me what to do in the matter as the We-wai-kum people have torn down all their buildings at Green Point and have re-erected some of them  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River besides having built a number of good frame buildings."
The documents presented contain no reply to Halliday's letter of November 10, 1906.
[89]
In the meantime, Halliday was contacted by International Timber Company, (ITC), a company wishing to conduct logging operations on the Campbell River Reserve, (noted in document number 944).
[90]
In an attempt to resolve the difficulties between the bands, Halliday called a meeting at Cape Mudge in March 1907. At this meeting a resolution was passed by the Indians at Cape Mudge ceding any rights they may have had with respect to Reserve No. 11 to the We-wai-kum, subject to retaining fishing rights in the area.
[91]
On March 23, 1907, Halliday wrote to Vowell, stating that he attended a "general meeting of the Cape Mudge or We-wai-kai Band". Halliday reports that the following resolution was unanimously passed:
"Resolved that whereas there is a difference of opinion as to the ownership of the reserve known as the Campbell River Reserve, this reserve being claimed by both the Wewaiaikai and Wewaiaikum Bands, and as the reserve is gazetted in the office of the Indian Department as belonging to the Wewaiaikai Band, as the reserve is at present occupied by the Wewaikum Band, as it would entail hardship on the members of the Wewaiaikum Band to be obliged to move, and as the first Indians to live on this reserve were of the Wewaiaikum Band, and as the object of the Wewaiaikai Band in asking for this land for a reserve was to have the use of the river for fishing purposes, therefore, the members of the Wewaiaikai Band in council here assembled, do cede all right to the Campbell River Reserve to the Wewaiaikum Band forever, with the proviso that at any and all times the Wewaiaikai Band shall have the undisputed right to catch any and all fish in the waters of Campbell River, this right to be in common with the Wewaiaikai Band.
"Resolved further that the Indian Agent who is presiding at this meeting is hereby authorized to take what steps are necessary to have this resolution made official and properly carried out.
"In view of the fact that very shortly a proposition from the International Lumber [sic] Company will be submitted to the Department in which they will ask for permission to build a railroad for logging purposes across the Campbell River reserve, I deemed it necessary to get an expression of opinion from the Indians regarding ownership of this reserve. In my letter of November 10, No. 208-5 [document 933] the merits of the rival claims are dealt with.
"At the meeting at Cape Mudge held on the evening of the 20 inst. most of the male members of the tribe were present and there was not one dissenting voice to the resolution. My correspondence was told to them fully and they fully understand the exact position of affairs.
"I would suggest therefore, that on the strength of the resolution that the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River be gazetted as belonging to the Wewaiaikum band otherwise known as the Campbell River Band. They have been in possession of this reserve for upwards of ten years." [document 944]
[92]
Cape Mudge takes the position that the ceding resolution noted above, did not constitute a valid surrender pursuant to the provisions of the
Indian Act
in force at the time. Cape Mudge argues that the ceding resolution was void ab initio. Cape Mudge also argues that in the eyes of the Superintendent of Indian Affairs [documents 917 and 928] and the Indian Agents [Documents 569, 916 and 926] the Campbell River Reserve belonged to the Wewaikai or Cape Mudge Indians. The Crown's fiduciary obligation to advise the Band as to its interest in the Reserve required that Halliday underline to the Wewaikai that, as far as the Crown was concerned, the ownership of the Reserve was not in question. It is Cape Mudge's position that the Crown, having permitted the Wewaikum to move onto the Wewaikai's reserve, namely Reserve No. 11, had impaired its own ability to fulfil its fiduciary duty of "utmost loyalty" to the Wewaikai Band. In essence, what Cape Mudge is saying is that the Crown effectively encouraged the Wewaikai Band to engage in an improvident transaction, ie. the giving away of its reserve. This, according to Cape Mudge, was a breach of the Indian Agent's fiduciary obligation to the Wewaikai Band.
[93]
Cape Mudge argues that the Schedule of Reserves published prior to 1907 stands as a strong affirmation by the Crown that Green allotted the two reserves to the Wewaikai Band in 1888.
[94]
The Federal Government published a Schedule of Indian Reserves in 1902 [document 836]. The Schedule listed reserves no. 7 to 12 as follows:
7: Village Bay -	We-way-akay band
8: Open Bay -	" "
9: Drew Harbour	" "
10: Cape Mudge -	" "
11: Campbell River	" "
12: Quinsam -	" "
Therefore, it appears that prior to the 1907 ceding resolution, the above-noted reserves, including Nos. 11 and 12, were allotted to the Wewaikai band.
[95]
The "many, many, documents" submitted by the parties also contains a 1902 Official Schedule of Indian reserves that is identical to the schedule noted above except for the words "We-way-akum band" written in over the ditto marks beside Reserve No. 11 [Document 842].
[96]
As noted by Cape Mudge, it would seem that the handwritten notation beside Reserve No. 11 made on a copy of the 1902 official Schedule of Indian Reserves was made by Indian Superintendent Vowell or by someone at his instruction in 1907 after he had been informed of the March 1907 ceding resolution. As noted earlier, on March 23, 1907 Halliday informed Vowell of the ceding resolution [document 946]. Vowell wrote back to Halliday on April 3, 1907 stating that:
"I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 23rd ultimo, No. 378-5, in reference to the surrender of the Laichkwiltok Reserve No. 11, Campbell river, by the Wewayakay band to the Wewayakums, and to inform you that a note to the effect has been made in the Schedule of Indian Reserves.
"Quinsam Reserve No. 12 was defined at the same time as Reserve No. 11, and the same Indians accompanied Mr. Green when he visited it. Is this reserve still claimed by the Wewayakay's?" [document 955]
It would therefore follow, that this notation is the hand written notation in the annotated version of the 1902 Schedule.
[97]
In a letter to Vowell, dated April 25, 1907, in response to Vowell's request for clarification, Halliday made it clear that only Reserve No. 11 was the subject of the ceding resolution of 1907. Halliday indicated:
"Referring to your letter of April 3 ..., regarding the transfer of the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River from the Wewaiaikai band to the Wewaiaikum band and asking if the reserve No. 12 at Quinsam [illegible text], included in the transfer, I have the honor to state that the reserve at Quinsam is not included in the transfer as the matter was specifically brought up at the meeting and it was decided only to allow the Wewaiaikai band to have the one Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River." [document 962]
It appears that despite this clarification and confirmation the ditto marks remained below the Wewayakum notation, thereby giving the appearance of a transfer of the Quinsam reserve as well as the Campbell River reserve.
[98]
In 1913, a new Schedule of Reserves was published [document 1114]. In this schedule the words "Wewayakum band" were printed beside Reserve No. 11. The ditto mark notation beside Reserve No. 12 remained:
7: Village Bay -	We-way-akay band
8: Open Bay -	" "
9: Drew Harbour	" "
10: Cape Mudge -	" "
11: Campbell River	Wewayakum band
12: Quinsam -	" "
Therefore, the so-called "ditto mark" error was incorporated into the Official Schedule of Indian Reserves giving the impression that both reserves had been transferred to the Wewaikum.
[99]
The Crown conceded in its amended statement of defence that this ditto mark error did take place as described above. On the other hand, Campbell River maintains that the ditto marks were not misplaced but were intended to indicate that Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were to be set aside for the use and benefit of Campbell River. Campbell River argues, that on the basis of all the evidence, including what it submitted was the evidence relating to the tribal affiliation of Captain John and historical rights of Campbell River to Reserves No. 11 and 12, it was in fact the earlier Schedule of Indian Reserves that were incorrect with respect to Reserves No. 11 and 12. Campbell River, argues further, that the Schedule of Indian Reserves are part of the annual report of the Department of Indian Affairs and have no legal consequence for allotting specific reserves to any specific band.
[100]
In 1912 the federal and provincial governments established the McKenna McBride Commission in order to resolve the ongoing issues between the respective levels of government in relation to the lands to be reserved for Indians in the province of British Columbia. The whole issue of lands to be reserved for the Indians in British Columbia could be described as contentious at best. British Columbia's position was that their reversionary interest in Indian Reserve land entitled them to have reserves reduced in size where the land was not demonstrably required by the Indians for whom the reserves had been created. The Federal government's position was that any necessary additional reserves should be created and that legal title to all existing and new Reserves should be conveyed to the Federal Government, as stipulated by Article 13 of the Terms of Union. It was because of the unsatisfactory negotiations which took place between the Provincial and the Federal Government that the McKenna McBride Commission was established. It should be noted that one of the essential purposes for establishing the McKenna McBride Commission was to obtain from British Columbia a conveyance to the Federal Government of all the lands which would be set aside for reserve purposes. Further, before the Province would convey the legal title in Indian Reserves in British Columbia to the Federal Government, the size and number of Indian reserves in British Columbia would have to be resolved. The preamble to the Mckenna McBride Agreement [document 1074], reads as follows:
"WHEREAS it is desirable to settle all differences between the Governments of the Dominion and the Province respecting Indian lands and Indian Affairs generally in the Province of British Columbia, therefore the parties named above, have, subject to the approval of the Governments of the Dominion and of the Province, agreed upon the following proposal as a final adjustment of all matters relating to Indian Affairs in the Province of British Columbia."
The two levels of government differed on the size and number of Indian Reserves. They differed on the issue of the province's reversionary interest and the related issues of conveyancing of reserves to the Federal Government (see Pritchard's report
The Royal Commission on Indian Affairs and the Confirmation of the Campbell River and Quinsam Reserves
, CM-36, report of Tennant, and specifically noted in the Orders-in-Council and agreement of the Royal Commission on Indian Affairs for British Columbia, document 1074). Further, as noted by Cape Mudge, there is no record of any dispute between British Columbia and the Federal Government as to the issue of which reserves particular Bands were entitled to (see also Tennant's evidence on cross-examination, vol. 9 pp. 1331-1332). Upon review of the agreement, it is clear that the Commission was not granted any powers to make decisions relating to band entitlement of Reserves. The powers of the Commission are outlined in paragraph 2 of the Agreement which is reproduced below:
"2. The Commission so appointed shall have power to adjust the acreage of Indian Reserves in British Columbia in the following manner:--
(a) At such places as the Commissioners are satisfied that more land is included in any particular Reserve as now defined than is reasonably required for the use of the Indians of that tribe or locality, the Reserve shall, with the consent of the Indians, as required by the Indian Act,
be reduced to such acreage as the Commissioners think reasonably sufficient
for the purpose of such Indians.
(b) At any place at which the Commissioners shall determine that an insufficient quantity of land has been set aside for the use of the Indians of that locality, the Commissioners shall
fix the quantity that ought to be added
for the use of such Indians. And they may set
aside land for any Band of Indians for whom land has not already been reserved
." (Underlining mine)
[101]
The Commission did not have any final decision making authority. It was authorized to prepare a report and present it to the two levels of government. The Federal Order-in-Council approving the McKenna McBride Agreement provided that the report had to be accepted by both the Federal and Provincial Governments. The
Indian Affairs Settlement Act
and the
British Columbia Indian Land Settlement Act
subsequently authorized the Lieutenant Governor in Council and the Governor in Council to adopt the Commission's report in whole or in part.
[102]
Cape Mudge's position is that the Commission's mandate was to alter the size of existing reserves, to eliminate reserves, and to make new ones, not to alter the entitlement to existing reserves between Bands.
[103]
On the other hand, Campbell River argues that because one of the issues outstanding between the two levels of government was the failure of the Province to convey lands to the Federal Government for the use and benefits of the Indians as required by the Terms of Union, one of the purposes of the McKenna McBride Commission was to confirm the lands comprising all of the reserves in the Province which had not been conveyed as well as to determine which band or tribe was beneficially entitled to the lands comprising the reserves.
[104]
The Commission's report dated June 30, 1916, [document 1348] comprised four volumes and contained Orders relating to the confirmation of all the reserves in the Province of British Columbia. The report was subsequently presented to both levels of government. Both governments then enacted enabling legislation to authorize the Governor in Council and the Lieutenant Governor in Council to accept the report "in whole or in part". The portion of the report dealing with Reserves No. 11 and 12 was rendered on August 14, 1914.
[105]
The report included a section entitled "Analysis of Evidence", contained in tabs A through C [document 1350 and document 1348]. The following notes regarding Reserve No. 12 are found in the "Analysis of Evidence" Table A, under the heading "Special" with respect to Reserve No. 7, Village Bay, Laichkwiltok Tribe or Wewayakay or Wewaiakai Band:
"This Band [Wewaikai] claims also the Quinsam or Quinsam reserve No. 12, assigned in the Schedule to the Wewayakum Band and this claim is endorsed by Agent Halliday."
On the following page, the following remarks are found in respect of Reserve No. 12, Quinsam:
"This reserve [Quinsam] appears in the Schedule as one of the Wewayakum Band. It is not so regarded by that Band and is claimed by the Wewayakay Band, with right according to Agent Halliday. It has been counted as in Schedule in estimating per capita acreage."
However, the Confirmations portion of the Commission's final report contained the following entry:
"ORDERED: That the Indian Reserves of the Laichkwiltach Tribe, We-way-akay Band, numbered 7 to 10, both inclusive, described in the Official Schedule of Indian Reserves, 1913, BE CONFIRMED as now fixed and determined and shewn on the Official Plans of Survey, viz:
No. 7 - Village Bay, 11.0 acres;
No. 8 - Open Bay, 9.00 acres;
No. 9 - Drew Harbour, 240.50 acres
No. 10 - Cape Mudge, 1117.50 acres.
"ORDERED: That the Indian Reserves of the Laichkwiltach Tribe, Wewayakum Band, numbered 11 and 12 and described in the Official Schedule of Indian Reserves, 1913, BE CONFIRMED as now fixed and determined and shewn on the Official Plans of Survey, viz.:
No. 11 - Campbell River, 350.5 acres;
No. 12 - Quinsam, 287.50 acres." [Document 1350, pp. 428-429]
[106]
Therefore, the McKenna McBride Commission confirmed all of the Reserves in the Kwakwelth Agency in the names of the bands listed in the 1913 Schedule of Indian Reserves. It would seem that the confirmation was made, despite the Commission's awareness of the errors contained in the 1913 Schedule. This supports the view that the Commission's role was not to deal with beneficial ownership of reserves, but simply with size. Ownership was a matter to be dealt with by the Department of Indian Affairs. In fact, years after the McKenna McBride Commission hearings, a number of errors with respect to the individual allocation of reserves to bands or subgroups were brought to the attention of various department officials by Halliday as well as by Indian Commissioner Ditchburn.
[107]
The McKenna McBride Commission's report was submitted to the two levels of government in June of 1916, however the report did not satisfy the provincial government which demanded further adjustments to the size of various Indian reserves in British Columbia. As such, a second federal provincial commission was established to review the results of the McKenna McBride report. W.E. Ditchburn (Ditchburn) was appointed the federal representative with Major Clark (Clark) representing the province of British Columbia. It was agreed that the Ditchburn Clark inquiry would review the McKenna McBride Commission's proposals before any steps would be taken to implement them.
[108]
The Ditchburn Clark Commission issued its report in 1923. As part of its review, an anthropologist and three prominent leaders of the Allied Indian Tribes of British Columbia were hired to investigate and report to Ditchburn on the Indian reaction to the McKenna McBride Commission's recommendations.
[109]
Document 1810, produced at the Ditchburn Clark Inquiry, deals with, among other agencies, the Kwawkewkth Agency. A reading of the first page of the document, clearly shows that the Inquiry was dealing with recommendations and confirmations of acreages of reserves. For example:
"Application No. 86 for the Turner island Band is allowed but this makes only .78 acres per capita. It is requested that from 5 to 10 acres of application No. 89 be allowed to include the Indian houses on Lot 500. Lease No. 4 Powell river Company Pulp Limit, out file 16898-f. The Indians use these houses every year for that fire risk, if any, will be no greater than prevails under present conditions.
. . . . .
"There are 55 members in the Band (see evidence p. 164) and it is the lowest in the per capita acreage of 18 tribes. If the above requests are allowed the per capita acreage will be approximately 7 acres, I therefore recommend that they be allowed and confirmed as reserves accordingly."
Page 3 of the document deals specifically with the "Wewayakum Band", and lists Campbell River as 350.5 acres and Quinsam as 287.5 acres, with a total five reserves as 795 acres. The document also contains the following notation:
"R C. Report, Table A, p. 388, per capita acreage 13.793 acres for 25 males as above equals a per capita of 31.72 acres. R.C. Report, p. 416, Confirmation of Reserves, show only half-interest in Homayno, Loughborough & Matlaten, thus a reduction of 77.50 acres and R.C. Report, Table A, p. 388 marginal note if allowed, means a further reduction of 287.5 acres. Total acreage for this band would then be 428 acres, a per capita of 7.01 [kk] acres and for males as above a per capita of 17.12 acres."
[110]
Under "Wewayakay Band" the total acreage of reserves is listed as 1378 acres. The notation reads:
"R.C. Report, Table C, p. 399, population 89.
A.R.D.I.A. 1917, Table 1, population 85 and males 16 years and upward total 27.
R.C. Report, Table A, p. 387 per capita acreage 15.5 acres. 1378 acres for 27 males as above equals a per capita of
51.03 acres
"
[111]
I am satisfied that the above document shows that the per capita acreage consequence of removing Reserve No. 12 (Quinsam) from the Campbell River Band was a factor in determining whether the Ditchburn Clark Inquiry would recommend that Quinsam would remain with the Wewayakum Band.
[112]
The province of British Columbia subsequently enacted the
Indian Affairs Settlement Act
, S.B.C. 1919, c. 32 to give the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council of British Columbia, the authority to carry out and implement the report of the McKenna McBride Commission.
[113]
The Federal Government enacted corresponding legislation in the
British Columbia Indian Lands Settlement Act
10-11, George 5th, c. 51.
[114]
The federal government adopted the McKenna McBride Commission's (subject to modifications made by the Ditchburn Clark Commission) recommendations in Order-in-Council PC 1265 [document 1743], dated July 19, 1924. The Schedule of Indian Reserves annexed to the Order-in-Council were certified as correct by Ditchburn for the Dominion government and by Clark for the provincial government. The certification is dated May 10, 1923 and appears on the first page of the schedule. This schedule includes all of the reserves in the province of British Columbia. The Order-in-Council reviews the history of the Mckenna McBride Commission and confirms that representatives of the governments were appointed and that:
"... an agreement was arrived at, subject to the approval of the Governments of the Dominion and the Province, for the purpose of settling all differences between the said Governments respecting Indian lands and Indian affairs generally in the province of British Columbia, and for the final adjustment of all matters relating thereto,
. . . . .
"That the said Commission has since reported as to lands reserved and to be reserved for Indians in the province of British Columbia, and otherwise for the settling of all differences between the said Governments respecting Indian lands and Indian affairs generally in the said Province.
"That by Chapter 51, 10-11 George V, Statutes of Canada, 1920, an Act entitled 'The British Columbia Indian Lands Settlement Act,' the Governor-in-Council was empowered to do, execute and fulfil every act, deed, matter or thing necessary for the carrying out of the said Agreement between the Governments of the Dominion and the Province, according to its true intent, and for giving effect to the report of the Commission, either in whole or in part, and for the full and final adjustment and settlement of all differences between the said Governments respecting Indian lands and Indian Affairs in the Province.
"That for the purpose of adjusting, readjusting, or confirming the reductions, cut-offs, and additions, in respect of Indian reserves proposed in the said report of the Commission, the Governor-in-Council was also empowered to carry on such further negotiations and enter into such further agreements, whether with the Provincial Government or with the Indians, as might be found necessary for a full and final adjustment of the differences between the said Governments.
"That representatives of the two Governments were subsequently appointed for the purpose of adjusting, readjusting, confirming and generally reviewing the report and recommendation of the Royal Commission.
"That the said representatives have reported in respect of their adjustment, readjustment and review of the said report:
"AND TO RECOMMEND
"That the Report of the Royal Commission of Indian Affairs as made under date of the 30th day of June, 1916, with the amendments made thereto as made by the representatives of the two Governments, viz: Mr. W.E. Ditchburn, representing the Dominion Government, and Major J.W. Clark, representing the Province,
insofar as it cover adjustments, readjustments or confirmations
of the Reductions, Cut-off and additions in respect of Indian reserves proposed in the said report of the Royal Commission, as set out in the annexed schedules, be approved and confirmed as constituting full and final adjustment and settlement of all differences in respect thereto between the Governments of the Dominion and the Province, ... except in respect of the provision for lands for Indians resident in that portion of British Columbia covered by Treaty No. 8 ..." (Underlining mine)
[115]
The Provincial government adopted the McKenna McBride Commission recommendations (also subject to the same modifications as the federal order-in-council) by two separate Orders-in-Council. The first Order-in-Council 911, dated July 26, 1923, contains similar wording to the federal Order-in-Council [document 1733] and confirms the Indian reserves as set out in the Schedule of Indian reserves attached to the Order-in-Council. This Schedule is similar to the one attached to the Federal Order-in-Council and was certified as correct by Ditchburn and Clark. As noted earlier, the Schedule lists Reserves No. 11 and 12 as belonging to the Campbell River Band.
[116]
Subsequent to the enactment of Order-in-Council 911, the Provincial Government enacted Order-in-Council PC 1036, dated July 29, 1938 [document 2058]. This Order-in-Council basically conveyed legal title to the land comprising the Indian Reserves in British Columbia to the Federal Government in trust for the Indians in British Columbia. In addition, the Provincial Government, by this Order-in-Council, defined the beneficial rights which it would retain with respect to land which was being conveyed to the Dominion in trust for the Indians. Order-in-Council 1036, was enacted pursuant to the authority of the
Land Act
and the
Indian Settlement Act
. Annexed to the Order-in-Council is a schedule entitled "Index to Indian Reserve Conveyance". Therefore, in essence Order-in-Council 1036 consisted of an instrument of conveyance together with an appended Schedule of Reserves. This schedule was a copy of the Ditchburn Clark Schedule, which was the McKenna McBride Schedule of 1916, as modified by the Ditchburn Clark Inquiry.
[117]
As noted earlier, the McKenna McBride Commission, in its confirmations, followed the existing 1913 Schedule of Indian Reserves. Accordingly, the Schedule appended to Order-in-Council 1036 listed Indian Reserve No. 11 as a Wewaiakum reserve. It also included what has been termed the "ditto mark" error listing Indian Reserve No. 12 as a Wewaiakum reserve.
[118]
Order-in-Council 1036 reads in part:
"THAT under the authority of s. 93 of the
Land Act
, being c. 144, 'Revised Statutes of British Columbia, 1936', and s. 2 of c. 32, 'British Columbia Statutes 1919', being the 'Indian Affairs Settlement Act', the lands set out in schedule attached hereto be conveyed to His Majesty the King in the right of the Dominion of Canada in trust for the use and benefit of the Indians of the Province of British Columbia, subject however to the right of the Dominion Government to deal with the said lands in such manner as they may deem best suited for the purpose of the Indians including a right to sell the said lands and fund or use the proceeds for the benefit of the Indians subject to the condition that in the event of any Indian tribe or band in British Columbia at some further time becoming extinct that any lands hereby conveyed for such tribe or band, and not sold or disposed of as hereto provided, or any unexpended fund being the proceeds of any such sale, shall be conveyed or repaid to the grantor, and that such conveyance shall also be subject to the following provisions ..."
[119]
In the years after the McKenna McBride Commission hearings, a number of errors with respect to the allocation of reserves to subgroups were brought to the attention of various departmental officials by Halliday as well as by Ditchburn.
[120]
In a letter, dated May 10, 1920, [document 1576] Halliday reported to the Department of Indian Affairs that:
"... In looking carefully over the list of reserves as contained in the supplement of the Annual report for the year ended March 31st 1913, I notice several places where the information is somewhat misleading. With regards to the Gilford Island band there are four distinct bands or tribes who have their winter village at Guyasdums on Gilford Island and their summer village on Quanso Reserve No. 7 at the head of Kingcome Inlet. Each of these bands claims certain reserves as their own and they are very jealous of any infringement on their tribal rights to these reserves. These tribes and there reserves are as follows:
. . . . .
"With regard to the Kwickswotaineuk Band it will be noted that they are claiming some of the reserves credited to the Village Island Band, and I have gone very carefully into this matter with all the Indians concerned, and I find their contention is correct.
. . . . .
"With regard to the Knights Inlet, Tanakteuk and Ahwaheettlals Bands, they claim reserve No. 1 Tsawwati, reserve No. 2 Keogh, reserve No. 3, Kwatse, reserve No. 4, Graveyard as shown on p. 71 of the schedule and also reserve No. 5 Dead Point as credited to the village Island band.
. . . . .
"With regard to the reserves credited to the Laichkwiltach, Kahkahmatis, Wewayakum, Wewayakay and Kwiahkah Bands, they claim their reserves as follows:
Kahkahmatis or Salmon River Band,	Reserve No. 1 Salmon River
Wewayakum or Campbell River Band, Reserve No. 2 Homayno
" " 3 Lou
ghb
oro
ugh
" " 4 Mat
late
n
" " 11 Ca
mpb
ell Riv
er
Kwaih kah Band claims Reserve No. 5 Matsayno
" " 6 Saai
you
ck
Wewayakay or Cape Mudge claims Res. No. 7 Village Bay
" " 8 Ope
n Bay
" " 9 Dre
w Har
bour
" " 10 Cap
e Mu
dge
" " 12 Qui
nsa
m
"With these exceptions as noted the reserves are correct according to the Indians own ideas of the same and there is no dispute amongst them if located as mentioned above in my letter
"I consider it very essential that these reserves should be properly classified amongst the various subbands so that when the time comes for the reserves to be subdivided and given to the Indians individually instead of collectively it will avoid any friction or hard feelings"
[121]
In response, the Department of Indian Affairs directed the Assistant Indian Commissioner for British Columbia, Mr. C.C. Perry (Perry) to correct the inaccuracies in the Department's records as to the subgroup allocation of various Indian reserves, and in particular to take into consideration the "information contained in Agent Halliday's letter of May 10, 1920 and make your recommendation to the Department" [document 1577].
[122]
By letter dated May 4, 1928, Ditchburn wrote to the Department of Indian Affairs drawing to the Department's attention the typographical error in the Official Schedule of Indian Reserves for 1913. In this letter, Ditchburn stated:
"I beg to draw your attention to an apparent typographical error in the Official Schedule of Indian Reserves of 1913 and also the Schedule Confirming Reserves in the Report of the Commission on Indian Affairs pertaining to Reserve No. 12 of the Laichkwiltach (Euclataw) Indians, in the Kwawkewlth Agency, allotted by reserve Commissioner O'Reilly on 8th October, 1886.
"In the Official Schedule of Reserves issued in 1902 it will be observed that on p. 67 Reserves Nos. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 were classified as belonging to the We-way-akay Band. In 1907, however, owing to representations made by Mr. Indian Agent Halliday, Reserve No. 11 (Campbell River) was decided upon as belonging to the We-way-akum Band, and so marked by writing in the 1902 Schedule. Unfortunately, however, the ditto marks opposite Quinsam Reserve No. 12 were not scored out and the word We-way-akay written in with the consequence that the 1913 Schedule was printed as showing that Reserve No. 12 also belonged to the Wewayakum Indians and the Royal Commission on Indian Affairs confirmed it in this way.
"As Quinsam Reserve No. 12 has always been claimed by the We-way-akay (Cape Mudge) Band and the claim has not been disputed by the Wewayakum (Campbell River) Band, I would recommend that it be officially decided as belonging to the We-way-akay Indians and notations made in the Schedule accordingly." [attached to letters comprising document 1878]
[123]
In February of 1932, the Wewaikum retained the services of the local Magistrate C.R. Bates (Bates), Manager, Comox Valley Lands to investigate any possible claim by the Wewaikum to Reserve No. 12. Bates wrote to Ditchburn in February 1932 regarding the claim by the Wewaikum to Reserve No. 12. Ditchburn replied on February 8, 1932 with a comprehensive letter to Bates setting out in fair detail the history of the survey and allocation of Reserves No. 11 and 12, including the full text of the 1907 ceding resolution, the circumstances which led to the typographical "ditto mark error" in the 1913 Schedule and the apparent confirmation of this error by the McKenna McBride Commission. Ditchburn also enclosed his own letter, dated May 4, 1928, to the Department of Indian Affairs drawing attention to the ditto mark error in the Schedule with respect to Reserve No. 12. Further, Ditchburn extended an invitation to Bates to attend at the Department's offices in Victoria so that Bates might personally examine the Department's copies of the "official records, reports, schedules, etc." [document 1854]. Ditchburn's letter reads in part:
"I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of February 2nd, instant, in regard to a claim being made by two Indians named Wm. Roberts and J. Smith, of the Wewayakum Band, to Indian reserve No. 12 known as Quinsam which is believed to be rightfully belonging to the We-way-akay Band by virtue of its allotment to this Band on May 7, 1888.
. . . . .
"In order, however, that you may be further advised regarding the issue which has now arisen, I beg to say that in the official Schedule of Indian Reserves, published in blue-book form by the Indian Department in 1902, the reserves of the We-way-akay Band were fully set out and they numbered from 7 to 12, the latter being Quinsam Reserve which contained 287 1/2 acres. The original confirmation of this reserve can be seen in the bound book of surveys at this office which confirms the entry in the schedule.
"In the year 1907 a resolution was passed at a general meeting of the Cape Mudge (We-way-akay) Band of Indians as follows: -
. . . . .
"From this resolution passed by the Band for whom the Campbell River Reserve as well as the Quinsam Reserve was originally set aside, it is obvious that the cession of their interest by the We-way-akay Band in the Campbell River Reserve did not include the Quinsam Reserve which is separate and far removed therefrom, otherwise it would have been mentioned in their resolution.
"As a result of this transfer to the Wewayakum Band of reserve No. 11, the Department's official Schedule revised in 1913, had the No. 11 Reserve listed as belonging to the Wewayakum Band. This entry, however, was preceded in the old Schedule by the reserves 7, 8, 9 and 10 belonging to the We-way-akay Band, the No. 7 reserve having the name of the Band shown on the margin to correspond with the number of reserve, Nos. 8, 9, and 10 being 'dittoed'.
"Unfortunately, in preparing the 1913 Schedule, and in writing in the No. 11 reserve (as now, by virtue of the transfer, being the reserve of the We-way-akum Band, formerly marked with a 'ditto'), the No. 12 Quinsam was left 'dittoed' as before which resulted in giving the Quinsam No. 12 the appearance of belonging to the same band as that owning the No. 11 reserve. The Department, however, should have caused the name We-way-akay to have taken the place of the 'ditto' and thus followed the contents of the previous Schedule in all but the No. 11 Reserve.
"In 1914 a Royal Indian Commission investigated all reserve matters throughout the Province and visited Cape Mudge to meet the Indians of that district. The royal Commission reviewed the Schedule of Reserves with the Wewaykum Indians, the latter only claiming Nos. 11 (Campbell River); No. 2 Homayno; No. 3 Loughborough and No. 4 Matlaten. In addition the Indians asked for other places outside the reserves. No mention, however, was made by these Indians regarding Quinsam No. 12 which was apparently then held by them to belong to the We-way-akay Band and not to We-way-akum Band.
"Nor was claim made to the Quinsam reserve to the Royal Commission by the allied band of the Wewayakum - the Kw ahkah for whose benefit also all the reserves of the Wewayakums are shown in the official Schedule as jointly grouped.
"A letter of Agent Halliday to the Royal Commission dated January 27th, 1914, covers a list showing that while the Schedule shows Quinsam as belonging to the Way-way-a-kum Band, the reserve really belongs to the Wewayakay Band. At his last visit to Cape Mudge he was informed that a Cape Mudge family intended immediately opening up a trail to it. (See file 571G.)
"The Royal Commission, on p. 388 of its Report, in Table A, remarks re Quinsam:
'This reserve appears in the Schedule as one of the Wewayakum Band. It is not so regarded by that Band and is claimed by the Wewayakay Band, with right according to Agent Halliday. It has been counted as in Schedule in estimating per capita acreage.'
"It is apparent from the foregoing that the We-way-a-kum Band had not claimed Quinsam Reserve No. 12, yet, it confirmed the Reserve together with No. 11 for the We-way-a-kum Band ... as numbered and described in the official (1913) Schedule of Reserves. This, however, is believed to have been an oversight made by the Commission who followed the 'ditto' mark against No. 12 Reserve just as had apparently been done by the Department.
"I called the attention of my Department at Ottawa to the apparent error, by letter dated May 4th, 1928, copy of which is sent herewith for your perusal. I regret to say I have as yet received no reply to this letter. It is quite possible that the Department is holding this revision in abeyance owing to the fact that a new Schedule of Reserves embracing all surveys to date is in course of preparation in connection with numerous conveyances now being made by the Province as a result of surveys made since the last Schedule was printed. The new Schedule will therefore in all probability show the Quinsam No. 12 Reserve correctly listed as one of the reserves of the We-way-akay Band.
"It should be pointed out that Chief Charlie Smith and his son, James Smith, both appeared before the Royal Commission at the meeting above mentioned when the Wewayakum Band made no mention of Quinsam Reserve but confirmed their identity with their other reserves of Wewayakum Band as listed in the Schedule under review ..."
Bates accompanied by William Roberts and James Smith travelled to Victoria in February 1932 to meet with Indian Commissioner Ditchburn.
[124]
Shortly after the Wewaikum consulted with Bates, the Wewaiakai retained Thomas McLelan of the Vancouver law firm of McLelan & Pyke to ascertain the standing of title to Reserves No. 11 and 12 (see document 1875, letter from McLelan to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Ottawa). The Wewaikai appeared to be concerned about a potential claim by the Wewaikum to Reserve No. 12. On January 30, 1932, Chief Billy Assu of the Wewaikai sent a telegram to Ditchburn in Victoria stating:
"Two men going to interview you in regards to Quinsam Reserve. They think it belongs to Wewaykums. Please explain to them the original lay that it belongs to Wewaykay tribe.
I gave them the right to settle  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River only not including Quinsam
. Mr. Halliday was here recently and explained to them but they do not believe him. Please note that the majority of Wewaykum do not agree with these men who are making trouble. The Chief does not agree with them and I would advise you to write him explaining the situation so he can tell his tribe, perhaps they think the reserve is small, they must remember they also have Greenpoint, Haydenbay, also Grassybay. They were surveyed for Wewaykum. I have the road to Quinsam near completed." (Underlining mine) (text taken from document 1856)
[125]
On February 8, 1932, Ditchburn wrote to Halliday, advising that he had received the above noted telegram from Chief Billy Assu and that Bates together with William Roberts and J. Smith had called on the office in Victoria in regard to the claim of the Wewayakum to Reserve No. 12. [document 1856]
[126]
Halliday wrote to Chief Billy Assu on February 11, 1932, [document 1866] noting that Bates, William Roberts and Jim Smith had been to see Ditchburn with regards Reserve No. 12. He indicated that Ditchburn was busy and promised to write Bates a full explanation and added:
"I think I can do no better than to have a transcript made and send you a copy of it, and you will see that the matter is definitely settled, and that the Quinsam prairie absolutely belongs to the Cape Mudge Band, and under the circumstances it will not be necessary for you to spend money in going to interview Mr. Ditchburn.
"This letter contains a full copy of the resolution which was passed in 1907 whereby the Cape Mudge Indians gave over the right to Campbell River reserve only, and it would be just as well for you to have the enclosed resolution placed in such a position that all members of your tribe can see it."
[127]
Halliday, in a letter to Ditchburn dated February 23, 1932, reported [document 1872]:
"... On board the boat on which your letter [Ditchburn's letter of February 8, 1932] came a deputation from Cape Mudge consisting of Billy Assu, Charlie Peterson and Charlie Wilson came to have an interview with me, and they apparently had written someone, a lawyer whose name I did not make a note of, and he told them that in looking up the Schedule of reserves, he had found the ditto mark under the Campbell River Band for Quinsam reserve, but further than that he could not give them no information.
"This delegation returned to Cape Mudge a few hours later, as the boat was due a very short time after the arrival of the north-bound boat and they intended taking the matter up personally with you. However when I received your letter the next day I sent them a telephone message advising them that I had received the letter from you asking them not to make any move until they heard from me, and I sent them a copy of the letter which you addressed to Mr. Bates. Since then I have heard nothing more on the matter.
"When I was  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River last, the members of the Campbell River Band brought the matter up for discussion at the meeting held  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River, and I recapitulated the whole history of these reserves from the beginning, and I advised the Indians of Campbell River that I did not consider they had any claim whatever to the Quinsam Reserve, as in the resolution which was passed in 1907 at a meeting at which I was present and presiding, it was expressly understood that the Quinsam Reserve was not included in the gift which Cape Mudge made to the Campbell River Indians.
. . . . .
"I told them further that when the royal Commission were around they did not stress their claim to Quinsam reserve, and it was a printer's error that placed it so they could be considered to have any claim on that reserve ..."
[128]
The Wewaikai's solicitor, McLelan, made two written inquiries for information regarding Reserves No. 11 and 12 on March 2, 1932 [document 1875] and April 4, 1932 [document 1883]. Mr. A.F. MacKenzie, Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs (Mackenzie), responded to McLelan's written request on March 16, 1932 [Document 1877] and April 14, 1932 [document 1885], respectively. On March 16th, MacKenzie wrote:
"... I have to advise you that after the 1913 Schedule, to which you refer, was published the Indian Agent called attention of the Department to the [error] in listing the Quinsam Indian reserve No. 12 as belonging to the Weewayakum Band. This reserve is listed in the official schedule of the Department as belonging to the Weewayakay band. According to the department record the Campbell River Indian reserve No. 11 belongs to the Weewayakum band."
[129]
In the meantime, Ditchburn had responded to MacKenzie's letter, enclosing McLelan's letter, by letter dated March 22, 1932 [Document 1878]. The letter of March 22nd, contains a background of Reserves No. 11 and 12, as well as copies of Green's report, dated May 28, 1888 and letter to the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works; letter from Halliday, dated March 23, 1907 to Vowell, outlining the 1907 ceding resolution; and Ditchburn's letter of May 4, 1928 to the Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs regarding the "ditto mark error". Ditchburn stated:
"In reply I beg to say that the Reserves Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the Laichwiltach Indians were set apart by Commissioner O'Reilly on the 8th October, 1886, and Nos. 11 and 12 were allotted by Mr. Ashdown Green under special authority on May 7th 1883. Mr. Ashdown Green's report in regard to this matter is attached hereto for your information.
"In 1902 official Schedule of Reserves, reserves Nos. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 were classified as for the Wewayakay Band, but on 22nd March 1907 Mr. Indian Agent Halliday wrote to the late Superintendent Vowell that the Wewayakay Indians of Cape Mudge gave over No. 11 to the Wewayakum Indians of Campbell River. A copy of Mr. Halliday's letter to Mr. Vowell in this connection is also attached hereto for your information.
"My copy of the 1902 Schedule shows that the word 'Wewayakay' had been crossed out after No. 11 and 'Wewayakum' written in its place. When doing this, however, the Department left the ditto marks, thus making it appear that No. 12 also belonged to the Campbell River Indians. I drew this matter to your attention on the 4th May, 1928, as shown in copy of letter attached.
"The sketch in the volume of Minutes of Decision clearly shows that the reserves Nos. 11 and 12 were intended to be set apart for the Wewayakay Band, but as above shown No. 11 was relinquished by that Band in favour of the Wewayakums of Campbell River.
"There has been a dispute of late between the Cape Mudge Band and Campbell River Band as to the ownership of No. 12 Reserve Quinsam, and I have had considerable correspondence with both Bands. I have decided, however, that the Quinsam Reserve belongs to the Wewayakays of Cape Mudge and not to the Wewayakums of Campbell River." [document 1878]
[130]
On April 14, MacKenzie wrote to McLelan that:
"In reply to your letter of the 4th instant, I have to advise you that owing to conflicting claims as to the ownership of the Campbell River reserve No. 11, on the 20th March 1907, at a general meeting of the Wewayakay or Cape Mudge Band of Indians, a resolution was passed by that band ceding all claim that they had to that reserve to the Wewayakum (or Campbell River) band. The band stipulated, however, that it would have the same rights to fish in the waters of Campbell River as the Wewayakum band.
"At this meeting of the band in Council, held at Cape Mudge on the evening of the 20th March 1907, a majority of the male members of the tribe were present and the Indian Agent who presided at the meeting, stated that there was not one dissenting voice to the resolution.
"In the resolution of the Wewayakay band it was stated that the reserve was then occupied by the Wewayakum band and also that the Wewayakum band were the first Indians to live at that reserve." [document 1885]
[131]
It appears to me, after reviewing these documents, and in particular Ditchburn's letter to Bates of February 8, 1932, that both the Wewayakay and the Wewayakum were informed of the Department's position with respect to Reserves No. 11 and 12, including the circumstances and full text of the 1907 ceding resolution.
[132]
In 1934, Indian Agent Todd (Todd) was appointed to the Kwawkewlth Agency, replacing Halliday. In response to Perry's instructions to correct the inaccuracies in the Department's records as they related to the allocation of various reserves, Perry wrote to Todd on March 24, 1936 [document 1985] with the following instructions:
"You will remember the interview you had here with Mr. Halliday in regard to his understanding as to the recognized ownership of several reserves in Kwawkewlth Agency which had been the subject of dispute in some of the Indian bands.
"I would be much obliged if you will be good enough to peruse carefully the enclosed correspondence received from Ottawa and let me know what is the situation from your point of view, as a result of your contacts with the Indians. Perhaps you will set out in the categories suggested by the Department the lists of reserves of the several bands as you think they should appear in the new Schedule of Reserves.
. . . . .
"If there is any condition which you find to be different to those set out in Mr. Halliday's report of May 10th 1930, perhaps you will be good enough to make your own representations in regard to them ..."
[133]
Todd's response, dated April 14, 1936, [document 1987] outlines the procedure he adopted in obtaining the necessary information and opinions of the Indians as to the correct sub-tribal or subgroup allocation of reserves:
"... When I first came to the agency there were several reserves in dispute amongst the various bands, and we have slowly been getting all the information possible with a view to placing a complete list of all the reserves in the agency before the Department as agreed upon by the Indians of the different bands. With this in mind we have prepared a sworn statement and at meetings held at various times, explained to each band the reserves allotted to them as shown by the Schedule of Reserves and asked the bands if there were any dispute over the ownership of any of the reserves belonging to their tribe and whether the list as shown was a complete list of all the reserves belonging to them. When this was agreed upon I had the Declaration signed by the chief and principal men of the tribe, in triplicate, one copy to the Commissioner's office in Victoria and one retained here.
"We have not been able to get all the bands together as yet to sign a Declaration but hope to have meetings with them all before many months go past ...
"There are no other reserves in dispute in this Agency [not Laichkwiltach] other than the three referred to, although there are many reserves shown under the Schedule of Reserves under joint ownership.
. . . . .
"It is very imperative before a new Schedule of Reserves is printed, that each separate band owning separate and distinct reserves should be shown under its proper name with the reserves belonging to that band listed together. We have gone to a lot of trouble and work to get these matters straightened out for the Department, and now have them completed, and for their information we are forwarding sworn statements which show the name of the band, the number and name of each reserves belonging to that band, together with the acreage and location of each reserve ... As mentioned before, we are forwarding the signed Declarations of the bands which have completed to date, and the remainder will be submitted as soon as meetings are held to complete the same; we are however, forwarding a list of reserves belonging to these bands and would kindly ask the Department to be guided by this statement as we know the reserves as listed therein are correct and are not in dispute by the bands.
"I have carefully perused Mr. Halliday's letter referred to, and his statements as to the ownership of the reserves in question, and I find them to be correct."
[134]
A declaration was signed by the chief and principal men of the Wewayakay on November 23, 1936 [document 1994] stating: "We the Chiefs and Principal Men of the Cape Mudge Band, do hereby state under oath that the Reserves shown below are the only reserves belonging to this band and this list is complete". What followed is a list of reserves, acreage and location:
"a) Reserve No. 7, Village Bay, 11 acres located on the west shore of Village Bay, Suttil Channel;
"b) Reserve No. 8, Open Bay, 9 acres located on the North-west shore of Open Bay, Valdez Island;
"c) Reserve No. 9, Drew Harbour, 240.5 acres located on Drew Harbour, Valdez Island;
"d) Reserve No. 10, Cape Mudge, 1,117.5 acres located on Cape Mudge, Valdez Island;
"e) Reserve No. 12, Quinsam, 287.5 acres located on the right bank of Quinsam river about one mile from its confluence with Campbell River."
The declaration was signed by: Chief Johnny Chickit, Billy Assu, Johnny Dick, Dan Lewis, John Wilson, Dan Assu and sworn before Indian Agent Todd on November 23, 1936 at Cape Mudge.
[135]
A similar declaration was sworn by members of the Wewayakum Band indicating that "We the Chiefs and Principal Men of the Campbell River Band, do hereby state under oath that the reserves shown below are the only reserves belonging to this band and that this list is complete". The statement is then followed by a list of reserves, acreage and location:
"a) Reserve No. 2 Old, Homayno, 38 acres located at the head of Heydon Bay, Loughborough Inlet;
"b) Reserve No. 3 Old, Loughbourough, 21 acres located at the eastern shore of Loughborough Inlet opposite Williams Pat.
"c) Reserve No. 4 Old, Matlaten, 96 acres located on Cardero Channel opposite Greene Point;
"d) Reserve No. 11 Old, Campbell River, 350.5 - 269.61 less 90 acres sold, located at the mouth of Campbell River, Discovery Passage."
The declaration was signed by: Chief J. Quocksister, Francis Drake [his mark], J. Ferry, Lewis Gue [his mark], Peter Whale [his mark] and Dan Quatell [his mark]; and sworn before Indian Agent Todd on January 24, 1937 [document 1999]. There was some confusion regarding the dates on which this Declaration was sworn. Three copies of the Declaration were located, each with different dates. Document 2045, Campbell River's Declaration forwarded to the Department in Ottawa contains the following: dated the 24th day of NovEmber 193/7; document 2726 Campbell River's Declaration located in the Indian Commissioner's file contains the following: 24th dat of NoVember 193/6 and document 1999, Todd's copy of the Declaration is dated 24th day of January 193/7. I am satisfied that the most likely date for the Declaration was November 24, 1936.
[136]
Campbell River submits that the Statement of the Chiefs and principal men does not constitute a legal surrender, and that in this respect it should be given no weight. Campbell River also argues that the statement is of very little evidentiary value because of the absence of the names William Roberts, James Smith and Charlie Smith; who had been recognized as principal men of Campbell River. Charlie Smith and James Smith testified before the McKenna McBride Commission. In 1922, when Halliday took a surrender of a portion of Reserve No. 11, he had the surrender executed by, among others, William Roberts, Chief Charlie Smith and Jim Smith. In that case, William Roberts and Jim Smith signed their own names and Charlie Smith signed his mark. As such, according to Campbell River, Indian Agent Todd should have been aware that these men were considered principal men of the Campbell River band, and that a number of men (including I believe these men) disagreed with the claim by Cape Mudge to reserve No. 12 [documents 2636, 2646 and 1915]. Campbell River maintains that the statement appears to have been created by Todd as an expedient way to deal with the problem he saw in relation to Reserves No. 11 and 12. Campbell River contends that the statement was not fairly executed; that it was not a resolution of the general meeting of the Campbell River band and did not fairly represent the view of the Campbell River band. As such, Campbell River argues, it carries little or not evidentiary weight.
[137]
By letter dated May 16, 1938, D.M. MacKay, Indian Commissioner for B.C. forwarded to the Department of Indian Affairs the Declarations of the Wewayakay and Wewayakum bands and recommended that the Department's schedule be amended to conform with these declarations. The letter reads in part [document 2045]:
"With further reference to my letter of May 8th, 1936, File 33/6/44333, I beg to submit herewith resolutions of the following Indian Bands of the Kwawkewlth Agency covering ownership of their respective Reserves:-
Nahkwockto
Mahteelthpe
Kwe-ahkah
We-way-akay (Cape Mudge)
Wewayakum (Campbell River)
"A check has been made on the information contained in these Resolutions and, in some cases, it has been found necessary to change the spelling of the name of the Band to conform with the official Schedule spelling and to amend acreage to agree with that in our records, as supplied by the Surveys Branch of the Provincial Department of Lands ..."
[138]
The Department proceeded with the preparation of a new Schedule of Indian Reserves, which was to accord with the Indians' own opinions as to the correct subtribal allocation of individual Indian Reserves and hopefully errors in the previous schedules.
[139]
On September 29, 1939, Mr. Taggart of the Department of Mines and Resources wrote to Mr. Cathcart, Deputy Minister of Lands in Victoria [document 2107]:
"... I am sure it is gratifying to you, as it is to all concerned to know that the long outstanding differences have been wiped out, and that title to these Indian Reserves is now vested in the Crown Dominion, as was provided for by the Terms of Union.
"All of the information the undersigned was able to collect during the visit to Victoria, in an endeavour to harmonize the records, is now being co-related, and assembled in preparation of a New Schedule of Indian Reserves in British Columbia. This will list every parcel of Indian land within the boundaries of the Province, and will give a full and uptodate description of each parcel, a history, and record of all transactions which may have an effect on the lands ..."
[140]
By letter dated November 29, 1939, Taggart wrote to Mr. Morris the Assistant Surveyor, Department of Lands in Victoria [document 2110]:
"As you are no doubt aware I am presently engaged in correlating the information collected during my last visit to British Columbia concerning Indian reserves in your province and preparing a new schedule to list correctly all the Indian lands in the several agencies.
"In the course of these investigations I have run across many poor descriptions, some errors and some omissions, and when these come to light, before bringing them into official consideration, my desire is to take the liberty of referring to your fund of knowledge.
"I came across this one -- Nocola Agency, Lower Nicola No. 4 - Zoht No. 1, Kamloops District near the foot of Nicola Lake in Township 94, area 500 acres, reference map 6A.
. . . . .
"The evidence is that through an error or an oversight in the Indian Affairs Department this parcel of 10 acres was not included in the former schedule of reserves and consequently the area of Reserve Zoht No. 1, as listed in the schedule of lands conveyed by Order-in-Council No. 1036 dated 29th July, 1938, is for 500 acres only, whereas there should be included an additional area of 10 acres covering this smaller parcel ..."
[141]
On March 4, 1940, Mr. Allan, Superintendent, Reserves & Trusts, Department of Mines Resources, Indian Affairs Branch, wrote to Mr. MacKay, Indian Commissioner for B.C. regarding the new schedule of Indian Reserves in British Columbia [document 2114].
[142]
The entirely new and revised schedule of reserves was finally published in 1943 [document 2141]. It shows Reserve No. 11 Campbell River as allocated to the We-way-akum (Campbell River) Band and Reserve No. 12 Quinsam as allocated to the We-way-akay (Cape Mudge) Band.
[143]
In 1970 and 1971, both the Wewayakay and Wewayakum made further inquiries as to the status of Reserves No. 11 and 12.
[144]
It appears the Wewayakum initiated the inquiry by retaining solicitors who in turn contacted Thomas Barnett (the member of Parliament in 1970 for Comox-Alberni), who in turn wrote the Hon. Jean Chretien, the then Minister of Indian Affairs, to request a thorough inquiry be made as to the ownership of Reserve No. 12 [documents 2395 and 2402].
[145]
On September 24, 1971, Chief William Roberts of the Wewayakum attended at the office of Mr. J.V. Boys (senior liaison officer of the Department of Indian Affairs in Victoria) to make a similar inquiry. In response to these two inquiries, the Department of Indian Affairs prepared two virtually identical responses to both Mr. Barnett [document 2406] and Mr. Roberts [document 2416] advising that:
"The 1902 Schedule of Reserves shows a Reserve No. 11 and 12 as belonging to the Wewayakay Band not the Wewayakum as stated in your letter. However, on March 22nd, 1907, the Wewayakay Indians of Cape Mudge passed the resolution stating that they ceded 'all right to the Campbell River Indian Reserve to the Wewayakum Band' while reserving the right to fish the Campbell River in common with the Wewayakum Band. See copy of letter attached.
"In the 1902 Schedule, the word 'Wewayakay' was deleted opposite Reserve No. 11 and the word 'Wewayakum' substituted. However, the 'ditto' opposite Reserve No. 12 was not amended. As a result, when the 1913 Schedule of Reserves was printed, Reserve No. 12 was shown as belonging to the Wewayakum Band, and this is the way it was confirmed by the 1913 Royal Commission on Indian Affairs.
"On November 23rd, 1936, the Chief and principal men of Cape Mudge, (Wewayakay) Band signed a sworn statement declaring that Reserves Nos. 7, 8, 9, 10 and 12 belonged to them and on November 24, 1936, [sic] the Chief and principal men of the Campbell River (Wewayakum) Band [sic] a similar declaration listing Reserves Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 11. Copies of these declarations are attached.
"In view of the evidence available in our records, we have to state that the Quinsam Indian Reserve No. 12 is set apart for the use and benefit of the Cape Mudge Band of Indians."
[146]
Both the letter to Mr. Barnett and the letter to Mr. Roberts enclosed copies of the 1907 "ceding" resolution and copies of the 1936 and 1937 declaration sworn by both the Wewaikai and Wewaikum.
[147]
On October 18, 1971, Chief Laurence Lewis of the Wewaiakai received a letter, dated October 18, 1971, almost identical to the letter quoted above [document 2418]. Again copies of Halliday's letter of March 23, 1907, citing the 1907 ceding resolution, and copies of the statements of Chiefs and principal men of the Wewaiakai and Wewaiakum Bands were enclosed.
III. Statutory Limitations
[148]
For the reasons outlined below, it is my view the actions of the Campbell River Indian Band and the Cape Mudge Indian Band for declarations of ownership to Reserves No. 11 and 12, as well as their claims for equitable compensation are statued barred by the
B.C. Limitations Act
, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 236 as incorporated by the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 and should therefore be dismissed. However, given the number and complexity of the issues raised in the case before me, and of course, in the event that I am wrong on the issue of limitations, I will address the merits of various issues raised in this matter.
[149]
I allowed both plaintiff Indian Bands to amend their pleadings to include a constitutional challenge to the applicability of provincial limitation periods in the actions before me. Notice was duly served on the attorneys general in accordance with s. 57 of the
Federal Court Act
. No attorneys general applied for leave to intervene in this matter.
[150]
Although the plaintiffs amended their pleadings, Cape Mudge has pleaded in their defence to the action of the Campbell River plaintiffs, the application of the same limitation laws which they have challenged. On the other hand, in their reply to the Crown, Cape Mudge maintained that the provincial limitation laws have no application to the claim of the Cape Mudge Indian Band.
Applicability Of Provincial
Limitation Provisions And S. 39
Of The Federal Court Act -
Constitutional Argument
[151]
The position of both Campbell River and Cape Mudge is that for reasons of statutory interpretation and constitutional law, both plaintiff Indian Bands' claims are not affected by the
B.C. Limitations Act
. According to the plaintiffs, no limitation period applies because the issue of surrender of reserve land is expressly provided for in the
Indian Act
, therefore the
Federal Court Act
and the
B.C. Limitations Act
must be read down so that the provincial limitation periods do not prevent actions for possession of, or declarations of entitlement to, an Indian Reserve. As I understand the plaintiffs' argument, the broad and general provision in s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
directing this court to apply provincial limitation periods, in this case the
B.C. Limitation Act
, to proceedings in Federal Court ought not to be construed to defeat the express and specific
Indian Act
provisions that make any alienation of an Indian Band's interest in their reserve void unless done by way of lawful surrender.
[152]
Section 39(1) of the
Federal Court Act
provides:
"Except as expressly provided by any other Act, the laws relating to prescription and the limitation of actions in force in any province between subject and subject apply to any proceedings in the court in respect of any cause of action arising in that province."
As a matter of construction, the plaintiffs argue that the words "as expressly provided by any Act" would include a reference to the
Indian Act
. The
Indian Act
provides for the only method of divesting an Indian Band of its reserve, through a valid surrender process. Therefore, by applying the
Limitation Act
, by way of s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
, to an Indian Reserve, would in fact mean that the passage of time could divest an Indian Band of its right to possession of its reserve. Specifically, in the case before me, the plaintiffs maintain that an alleged void transaction, coupled with a passage of time, would in effect divest the Indian Bands of their right to possession of their reserves. However, as the
Indian Act
already provides for the only means by which an Indian Band can be dispossessed of right to its reserve, provincial limitation periods cannot apply.
[153]
At first blush, this is an intriguing argument. However, upon closer examination I am of the opinion that the argument suffers from a basic flaw. Section 39 of the
Federal Court Act
deals specifically with prescription and limitations in respect of proceedings in the Federal Court of Canada, while the
Indian Act
contains no provision dealing with limitation periods or prescription. In my view, the logical interpretation as well as a common sense reading of the words "except as expressly provided by any other Act" followed by a reference to laws in relation to prescription, contained in s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
refer to other Acts relating to prescription or limitation and not to methods of dispossessing an Indian Band of its reserve. Further, the very purpose of s. 39 is to incorporate by reference provincial laws of prescription or limitation. In my view, the words of s. 39 are clear and as such I have difficulty accepting the interpretation of the words "expressly provided for in any other Act" to mean the
Indian Act
and the means by which an Indian Band may be disposed of a right to possession of an Indian Reserve or any other act that does not deal with prescription or limitation periods. I simply cannot make that leap in logic to effect the interpretation asserted by Cape Mudge and adopted by Campbell River. Further, if one accepted the argument that the
Indian Act
prescribes a "complete scheme" with respect to reserve lands and that an application of the
B.C. Limitation Act
would cause conflict with the provisions of the
Indian Act
, and took it to its logical extension, it would mean that any litigation relating to reserve lands conducted pursuant to the Federal Court's statutory jurisdiction and the rules of civil procedure would be in conflict with the provisions of the
Indian Act
, if the remedy sought in such litigation related to the right of possession of an Indian reserve. In my view, this is an unreasonable interpretation of the
Indian Act
.
[154]
With respect to the constitutional challenge to the incorporation provision, the plaintiffs' position, as I understand, is not that the section does not incorporate by reference provincial prescription laws, but that the incorporation is limited to constitutionally applicable provincial law. Counsel for Cape Mudge described the issue in the following terms, it is not a question of incorporation by reference versus unlawful delegation, it is a question of what is being incorporated by reference. The plaintiffs maintain that there will be certain situations where, as a matter of the constitutional division of powers, the provincial limitation cannot be applied and that the Indian interest in reserve lands and the Crown's fiduciary obligation to administer reserve lands for the use and benefit of the Indian people are just such situations. In a nutshell, the plaintiffs' argument is that it is unconstitutional to have a provincial prescriptive period dealing with Indian lands, as Indian lands fall solely within the jurisdiction of the federal government.
[155]
Cape Mudge refers to Marceau, J.'s, comments in
Blueberry River Indian Band and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.) (referred to subsequently as " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ") regarding the purpose of s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
, as making applicable the same limitations legislation that would be applicable if the proceedings were brought in the Provincial court. Cape Mudge submits that the question becomes: whether the
B.C. Limitation Act
, if applied in Provincial Court, would apply as a matter of constitutional law to a claim by an Indian band to continuing ownership of a reserve allotted to, and according to Cape Mudge, never surrendered by the Band?
[156]
I agree that provincial legislation cannot encroach upon a matter which is within federal legislative jurisdiction under s. 91 of the
Constitution Act, 1982
. Cape Mudge notes that the constitutional limits on provincial legislative authority in respect of the Indian interest in reserve lands were reviewed by LeDain, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 522 (F.C.A.) at pp. 571-572:
"The right to possession of land that forms part of a reserve or surrendered lands within the meaning of the
Indian Act
falls in my opinion within exclusive federal legislative jurisdiction with respect to lands reserved for the Indians under s. 91(24) of the
British North America Act, 1867
. It is of the very essence of this jurisdiction.
. . . . .
"On this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the provincial law respecting the limitation of actions for the recovery of land could not constitutionally apply so as to give the respondent or his predecessors in occupation or a possessory title good against either the Indian rights of occupation or the right of the federal Crown to claim possession for the protection of the Indian interest.
"What is really involved is the existence of land as part of a reserve or surrendered lands within the meaning of the
Indian Act
. If provincial law respecting the limitation of actions could apply so as to have the effect of extinguishing the Indian title, or the right of the federal Crown to recover possession of land for the protection of the Indian interest, it could have a dismembering effect analogous to that which was held in the
Campbell-Bennett
case, supra, to be beyond the provincial legislative competence. It would have the effect of destroying or eliminating a part of the very subject-matter of federal jurisdiction. If provincial legislation of general application cannot constitutionally apply to restrict the use of land reserved for the Indians within the meaning of s. 91(24) of the
British North America Act, 1867
, as was held in the
Peace Arch
case, supra (a conclusion that appears to have been impliedly approved by the Supreme Court of Canada in the
Cardinal
case), then a fortiori must this be true of legislation that would have the effect of extinguishing the right to possession of such land.
"Such an effect would also be in conflict with or repugnant to the legislative scheme which has existed from the earliest federal enactment for the protection of the Indian interest."
Further, notes Cape Mudge, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Chouniard, J., held that the
B.C. Family Relations Act
did not apply on an Indian Reserve because it created a property regime which interfered with the federal government's exclusive jurisdiction to administer reserve lands for the use and benefit of the Indian people:
"The right to possession of lands on an Indian reserve is manifestly of the very essence of the federal exclusive legislative power under s. 91(24) of the Constitution Act, 1867. It follows that provincial legislation cannot apply to the right of possession of Indian reserve lands." (p. 296)
Cape Mudge asserts that this reasoning applies a fortiori in the present case where provincial law is being invoked to extinguish the respective Indian Bands' interests in the respective reserves. In further support of their proposition, the plaintiffs refer to the Supreme Court's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.B.R.(2d) 43; 232 A.P.R. 43; 53 D.L.R.(4th) 487 (S.C.C.), wherein the court indicated at p. 501 D.L.R. that:
"... it seems that as a constitutional matter provincial prescription legislation would not apply to Indian lands: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  agree that an argument could be made that the
Limitations Act
in force in British Columbia prior to 1975 which provided for a 20 year limitation period for actions for the possession of land could not extinguish rights of the plaintiff Indian band on the basis of
Paul
. However, in 1975 the
B.C. Limitations Act
was amended to specifically exempt a claim for possession of land from any limitation period, including the ultimate 30 year limitation period, set out in s. 8. Therefore, I am satisfied that in B.C., after 1975, no limitation period applies to a claim for possession of land. For the purposes of clarity, I allowed both plaintiff Indian Bands to amend their pleadings, specifically their prayer for relief, to include a claim for possession of Reserve No. 11 and Reserve No. 12. However, as I have determined that Campbell River has no entitlement to reserve No. 12 and that Cape Mudge has no entitlement to Reserve No. 11, the question of declaration for possession of the respective reserves would not arise. If in the event I am wrong, the only situation where the
Limitations Act
would not apply would be with respect to a declaration of possession of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12.
[158]
It is clear that s. 9 of the
B.C. Limitation Act
has the effect of extinguishing the right and title of a claimant whose claim is barred by the
Act
. According to Cape Mudge and Campbell River, the effect would be to extinguish the Bands' respective claims and their right to have the reserve administered for their use and benefit. Such an effect, namely extinguishment of reserve lands, argue the Bands, would be unconstitutional as being beyond the legislative competence of the provincial legislature.
[159]
Cape Mudge also quotes from the B.C. Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  W.A.C. 1; 104 D.L.R.(4th) 470 (C.A.) at paragraph [244]:
"The proposition that provincial laws could extinguish Indian title by incidental effect must be examined in light of an appropriate understanding of the federal immunity relating to Indians and of the aboriginal perspective. The traditional homelands of aboriginal people are integral to their traditional way of life and their self-concept. If the effect of provincial land legislation was to strip the aboriginal people of the use and occupation of their traditional homelands, it would be an impermissible intrusion into federal jurisdiction. Any provincial law purporting to extinguish aboriginal title would trench on the very core of the subject matter of s. 91(24).
. . . . .
"... the provincial legislatures have not, since Confederation, had the constitutional competence to extinguish common law aboriginal rights through the exercise of other jurisdiction ..."
Reference was also made to the comments of MacFarlane, J., at paragraph [255]:
"In my opinion, for s. 88 of the
Indian Act
to have the effect of giving provincial laws or acts of adverse dominion the authority to extinguish aboriginal right, it must show a clear and plain intention to do so. In my view, there is nothing in s. 88, or its accompanying provisions which evinces the clear and plain intention of Parliament to authorize the extinguishment of aboriginal rights. It has not been submitted that Canada itself exerted dominion adverse to aboriginal land interest in the territory and, consequently, I offer no opinion on that point."
Although Cape Mudge asserts that by the same reasoning, the province clearly lacks the constitutional competence to extinguish the Indian interest in reserve land through the exercise of its jurisdiction over property and civil rights, namely limitation of actions, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> clearly speaks of aboriginal interest as opposed to an interest in reserve lands.
[160]
Cape Mudge also claims that no limitation period applies to the Wewaikai's claim for a declaration of ownership of Reserve No. 11 because the declaration sought is of existing rights, not past conduct. This argument is premised on certain findings of fact, namely that Reserve No. 11 was allotted to the Wewaikai Band and that the Band never surrendered the reserve to the Crown. In other words, that the Wewaikai are and always have been entitled to use and benefit of this Reserve. Unfortunately, my findings of fact in this case, do not support such an argument.
[161]
As noted above, both Campbell River and Cape Mudge argue that the provisions of the
B.C. Limitations Act
are not applicable to their claims against the Crown, in that provincial limitation periods are constitutionally inapplicable to an Indian Band's claim in respect of reserve land or an alleged breach of fiduciary duty by the Federal Crown.
[162]
The Crown's position, which I accept, is that the limitation periods prescribed by the
B.C. Limitations Act
have been incorporated by reference
as federal law
pursuant to the provisions of s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
. As such, these limitation periods apply as
valid federal law
to bar and extinguish the claims of the plaintiff bands and there is no application of provincial law. In this regard, I note the comments of Urie, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 609 (F.C.A.) at 611 and 612 speaking for the majority regarding the distinction between valid incorporation and invalid delegation:
"Ever since the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  it has been deemed proper to incorporate in federal legislation the text or substance of the statutes of another jurisdiction. In that case, the
Criminal Code
provided that a person qualified and summoned as a grand or petit juror according to the laws in force at the time being in any province, would be qualified to serve as a juror in criminal cases in that province. E.A. Driedger in
The Interaction of Federal and Provincial Laws
, 54 Can. Bar Rev. 695 (1976), at p. 708, pointed out that:
'This is not delegation. The province has exclusive jurisdiction under s. 92 of the
British North America Act
to prescribe the qualifications of jurors in civil cases. Parliament has exclusive jurisdiction to prescribe the qualifications of jurors in criminal cases. The
Criminal Code
provision merely provided, in effect, that in criminal cases the rules are to be the same as in civil cases; it described the characteristics that qualify a person to be a juror in criminal cases, and to find those characteristics one must go to the provincial law.
Parliament could have repeated those very same rules in the
Criminal Code
in extenso
; instead; it had incorporated them by reference. That cannot be delegation for the simple reason that the power of the legislature to make its own rules is derived from s. 92 of the
British North America Act
and not Parliament.'" (Underlining mine)
After reviewing the authorities, Urie, J.A., summarized the law at pp. 613 and 614:
"To summarize, the position up to this point then is this: First,
adoption by Parliament by reference to provincial legislation to avoid its repetition in the exercise of a federal power is valid
:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
"Secondly, Parliament can, in the proper exercise of its powers under s. 91 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
, delegate to provincial administrative bodies charged with the regulation of intra-provincial industries, power to regulate the same industries insofar as inter provincial and export trade is concerned:
The P.E.I. Marketing Board
case, supra.
"Thirdly, the Governor in Council can, by regulation, validly adopt by reference contemporaneous provincial legislation enacted in respect of an endeavour in which the provinces are constitutionally competent:
R.v. Gliberry
, supra.
"Fourthly, Parliament is entitled to adopt, in the exercise of its exclusive legislative power, the legislation of another jurisdictional body,
as it may from time to time exist
:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  bringing of actions is within the legislative competence of the province of B.C. and would fall under s. 92(13) of the
Constitution Act, 1867
, property and civil rights, as well as s. 92(14), a matter of procedure. On the other hand, Parliament can in the exercise of its powers under s. 91 enact limitations which apply to matters, which for constitutional purposes, fall within the exclusive legislative competence of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.S.R.(2d) 116; 226 A.P.R. 116; 54 D.L.R.(4th) 679 (S.C.C.)). Therefore, there is nothing to stop Parliament from repeating in the
Federal Court Act
the same limitation provisions contained in any provincial Limitations Act, including the
B.C. Limitation Act
. The plaintiffs agree that if this had been done, then such a limitation provision would be applicable to the case at bar and would not be subject to a constitutional challenge. On the other hand, it is also equally within Parliament's competence to adopt by reference the provincial limitation legislation as it exits from time to time. The process of adoption by reference was approved by the Supreme Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.).
[164]
In my opinion, the specific purpose of s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
is to expand the application of provincial limitation laws by incorporating such laws by reference and directing this court to apply such limitation
not as provincial law, but as valid federal law
. In that way, the applicability of provincial limitation laws to matters, which for constitutional purposes fall within the exclusive legislative jurisdiction of Parliament, is resolved by reverential incorporation of such laws as federal law by virtue of s. 39.
[165]
Such an interpretation of s. 39 and its predecessor s. 38 has been most recently upheld by the Federal Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (currently under appeal in the Supreme Court of Canada). Stone, J.A., dealt with the issue of incorporation by reference of the
B.C. Limitation Act
pursuant to s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
at length from pp. 132 to 136, and at p. 136 he made the following comments:
"... It seems to me that given that the evident purpose of the subs. [s. 38(1) of the
Federal Court Act
] was to provide which limitations of actions regime would apply to future proceedings in the court, Parliament intended to incorporate provincial limitations laws in force from time to time. The acceptance of the contrary view would mean freezing the operation of s. 38(1) to those provincial laws which were 'in force' as of the date the
Federal Court Act
took effect. It would also render the subsection potentially obsolete from the outset, and necessitate its ongoing re-enactment to keep abreast of changes in provincial limitation laws. The inclusion of the phrase 'from time to time' would no doubt have had the effect which that phrase conveys but that effect is not, in my view, foreclosed by the formulation adopted in s. 38(1)."
[166]
Marceau, J.A.,, concurring with Stone, J.A.'s, reasons, also dealt with this issue at pp. 84 and 85:
"There is no question that the limitations laws applicable are those of the province of British Columbia since the cause of action is about land in British Columbia transferred to the Director, VLA by letters patent dated March 30, 1948 registered in the British Columbia Land Office. Section 39 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C., 1985, c. F-7 (which was, at the time of the Trial Division judgment, s. 38(1), R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10) does not allow any doubt in that respect ...
"... Mr. Justice Stone agrees with the Trial Judge that Parliament did not intend to freeze the operation of s. 39 to provincial laws 'in force' as of the date the
Federal Court Act
took effect.
"Not only do I agree with that position, but it seems to me that any other would have the effect of defeating the sole purpose of the provision, namely to make applicable to proceedings brought in the
Federal Court
the same limitations legislation that would be applicable if the proceedings were brought in the provincial court, an obvious requirement for all cases of concurrent jurisdiction, now including, pursuant to the new s. 17 [as am. by S.C. 1990, c. 8 s. 3], 'all cases where relief is claimed against the Crown'.
So, I have no doubt that the British Columbia
Limitations Act
of 1975 is incorporated by reference
." (Underlining mine)
[167]
In reaching this conclusion, the court relied on two decisions of the Exchequer Court which considered the predecessor of s. 39 in the
Exchequer Court Act
, namely
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 591 (F.C.A.). In that case, the Court of Appeal held that the limitation periods would be applicable to the claim of an Indian Band relating to the expropriation of an Indian Reserve as well as a claim for breach of fiduciary duty against the Crown.
[169]
More recently this court applied the
B.C. Limitation Act
pursuant to s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) and in
Lower Kootenay Indian Band and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the court applied the
B.C. Limitation Act
to strike a statement of claim filed by an Indian Band alleging a breach of fiduciary obligation by the Crown, and sought a declaration that the surrender was void. The Crown submits and I agree, that the claim for relief in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is indistinguishable from the case at bar.
[170]
In
Lower Kootenay
, the court also considered the application of the
B.C. Limitation Act
. In that case, the claim was against the Crown for a breach of fiduciary duty in respect of the surrender of two reserves. The court held that pursuant to s. 39, the
B.C. Limitation Act
was applicable to the claims of the plaintiff Indian Band.
[171]
The decisions of the Federal Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Kruger, Sterritt
and
Luke
all deal with the provisions of the
B.C. Limitation Act
as incorporated pursuant to s. 38 or 39 of the
Federal Court Act
. Further, these decisions also apply the incorporated limitation law to litigation relating to the Crown's fiduciary duty and to Indian reserve lands in British Columbia. As such, I have not been convinced by the plaintiffs that these cases are distinguishable or wrongly decided, barring any decision by the Supreme Court of Canada, on this issue.
[172]
Cape Mudge rely on the decisions in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.) to support the proposition that constitutional limits on provincial legislative authority would prevent the application of a provincial statute of limitations to an action for possession of an Indian Reserve. In my view these cases are distinguishable on the basis that they do not decide the issue of the effect of incorporation by reference of such provincial limitation laws pursuant to s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
. I note that in
Smith
, Le Dain, J., specifically commented at p. 566 that there was no reference in the argument to s. 38 of the
Federal Court Act
:
"I should also observe that there was no reference in argument to s. 38(2) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. 10 (2nd Supp), which provides that except as expressly provided by any other
Act
, the law relating to prescription and limitation of actions in force in any Province between subject and subject apply to any proceedings brought by the Crown. In effect, it is the contention of the respondent that the foundation of the appellant's action was removed by the application of the provincial law long before s. 38 of the
Federal Court Act
took effect on June 1, 1971."
However, on appeal to the Supreme Court, Estey, J., in his reasons did make specific reference to s. 38 noting that its effect might well be to incorporate by reference the applicable limitation statutes. At p. 581 Estey, J., made the following comments:
"It is therefore unnecessary to determine whether any prescriptive legislation, either federal or provincial, can operate against the usufructuary rights under s. 91(24). Unless the surrender document of 1895 is ineffective, the courts are not concerned with the operation of provincial statutes prescribing the rights of prescription and limitation periods for the bringing of actions. It may well be that s. 38 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.) c. 10 has incorporated by reference the applicable provincial limitation statutes, but again this need not be decided. It may of course be that the appellant has acquired prescriptive rights under the applicable New Brunswick statutes, but again this question must remain for decision in any action which might be brought against the Province, and/or others, under the appropriate legislation."
[173]
Further, the decisions in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and
Paul
may be distinguished on the basis that these cases were not brought in the Federal Court. As such, the issue of the incorporation by reference of provincial law pursuant to s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
never arose. This distinction was specifically noted by the Supreme Court in
Paul
at p. 501 (D.L.R.):
"Federal limitation provisions are inapplicable here. Section 38 of the
Federal Court Act
R.S.C. 1970, c. 10 (2nd Supp.) applies to actions in the Federal Court in proceedings brought by or against the Crown. For all these reasons, it is clear that CP cannot claim title by way of prescription or adverse possession."
It would appear that the decisions in
Paul
and
Smith
actually support the Crown's position that s. 39 incorporates as federal law the relevant provincial limitation periods with the effect that such limitation periods are applicable to the claims of the plaintiffs.
[174]
The plaintiffs also argued that s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
merely "directs" the Federal Court to apply provincial limitation periods where the provincial law would otherwise be applicable as a matter of the constitutional division of powers. If this interpretation is correct, it would in my view, effectively deprive s. 39 of any meaning or purpose. If s. 39 merely directed the court to apply provincial limitation periods, it would do nothing to assist in defining the question of the Federal Court's jurisdiction under the
Federal Court Act
. As noted by the Crown, such an interpretation would only be declaratory of the Federal Court's existing jurisdiction to apply, as necessary, valid provincial law where a case is otherwise within the court's statutory jurisdiction. Further, the fact that the Federal Court may apply provincial law to proceedings otherwise founded on federal law and within the court's jurisdiction was established in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 641, at pp. 781-782 S.C.R.
[175]
Contrary to the suggestion of Cape Mudge, it is my opinion that the application of a limitation law is not inconsistent with the provisions of the
Indian Act
. The
Indian Act
itself does not prohibit or prescribe the application of a limitation period to actions relating to an Indian Reserve or the Crown's fiduciary duty to Indians. Further, in the absence of any specific prohibition in the
Indian Act
, it is not inconsistent with the
Indian Act
to apply the Provincial limitation periods by way of federal incorporation pursuant to s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
and s. 88 of the
Indian Act
.
[176]
Therefore, for the reasons noted above, I am satisfied that the limitation periods prescribed by the British Columbia
Limitation Act
have been incorporated by reference as valid federal law pursuant to s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
, the effect of which is to bar and extinguish the claims of the plaintiff Bands in the actions before me.
Applicablity Of Limitation
Periods To Declaratory Relief
[177]
Cape Mudge has also argued that the limitation periods do not apply to declarations of "existing legal rights". My concern is that the facts which give rise to the declaration sought by Cape Mudge are alleged to have occurred in or about 1907, well outside any applicable limitation period. Further, if an action for a declaration may be brought any time after the occurrence of the events which originally gave rise to the declaratory relief sought, it would circumvent the object of any system of statutory limitation periods. In effect, defendants would potentially be exposed to liability for an indefinite period.
[178]
This court has already addressed the issue of the application of a limitation period to bar a claim for declaratory relief in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). In that case, Dube, J., struck out the plaintiff Indian Band's statement of claim which sought a declaration that a 1948 surrender of Reserve land was null and void. Dube, J., made the following comments at pp. 200-201 C.N.L.R.:
"As the law stands today, following the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision, it is plain and obvious to me that there is no cause of action relating to the 1948 surrender itself and no declaration at this stage could issue from this court that the 1948 surrender is null and void. There might possibly be a cause of action with reference to the lots that were sold within the thirty year period previous to the instant Statement of Claim. However, both the original Statement of Claim and the Amended version are so focused on the 1948 surrender that they cannot stand as presently drafted. Hence both will be struck out.
"However, leave is granted to the plaintiffs to draft a fresh Statement of Claim which may still include the 1948 surrender and following events as factual background but will address itself specifically to the claims that fall within the 30 year limitation period. The prayer may not seek declarations concerning the 1948 surrender; it must be limited to the transactions that took place within the 30 year limitation period."
Further, I note that the claims for relief in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 591 and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> included a declaration that the reserves in issue were taken from the Indian Bands in breach of the Crown's fiduciary duty. In both of these cases, the court, in my view, correctly applied the limitation defence to bar the plaintiffs' claim for declaratory relief.
[179]
In terms of the cases cited by the plaintiffs in support of their argument, namely
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), I note that both of these cases refer to the discretionary jurisdiction of a court to grant declaratory relief and did not address the effect of a limitation period on the granting of such declaratory relief.
[180]
And finally, as noted by the Crown, it is important to bear in mind the discretionary nature of any declaratory remedy and that it should not be exercised where the relief claimed would circumvent an otherwise applicable limitation defence or would in all the circumstances be inequitable to grant. In the case before me, the balance of convenience would favour preservation of the status quo and the granting of the declaratory relief could vest undue hardship on the members of the unsuccessful band which would be evicted and forced to relocate from their reserve.
Ongoing Or Continuous Actions
[181]
Cape Mudge also advanced the concept of an "on going" or continuous action, which means that the Band's claim against the Crown arises fresh each day and therefore according to Cape Mudge, its claim cannot be extinguished by a statutory limitation period.
[182]
Once again, the difficulty I have with Cape Mudge's proposition is that it implies an ongoing obligation for a fiduciary to rectify an initial breach and would effectively mean that no statutory limitation period would ever apply to a fiduciary. Moreover, in the province of British Columbia the concept of a "continuing duty" would result in actions being brought long after the occurrence of events upon which the cause of action was based and would clearly interfere with the operation of the 30 year ultimate limitation period outlined in s. 8 of the
Limitation Act, 1975
by purporting to indefinitely postpone the commencement of the 30 year period. The Crown has also argued that a continuing duty concept would conflict with s. 9 of the
B.C. Limitation Act, 1975
, the effect of which is to extinguish the right of an action on expiry of the applicable limitation period. The Crown points out, that the extinguishment of the cause of action, of necessity also implies an extinguishment of any alleged continuing duty to rectify a breach which gave rise to the original cause of action. Therefore, the continuing breach concept would circumvent the provisions of the
B.C. Limitations Act
as well as frustrate the legislative intent underlying that
Act
.
[183]
I note that the cases submitted by Cape Mudge to support their position, namely,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 410 (C.A.) are distinguishable on the basis that they do not interpret the provisions of the
British Columbia Limitation Act, 1975
. Further, none of these decisions interpret the effect of the 30 year ultimate limitation period contained in s. 8 of the
B.C. Limitation Act, 1975
. Indeed,
Toronto General Trust Corp.
and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> do not even raise the limitations issue.
[184]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the court held that an original cause of action for nuisance arose each day the nuisance remained unabated. The Crown submits, and I agree, that a cause of action in nuisance, represents an exception to the general rule that a cause of action arises, and may be sued upon only once. Moreover, I agree the damage alleged by Cape Mudge was sustained once and for all upon the allegedly wrongfully ceding (which I have found not to be a ceding or wrongful) of Reserve No. 11 to Campbell River. The fact that Cape Mudge may have suffered a loss (which in my view they did not) between 1907 and the present does not give rise in law to "continuing damages" or a "continuing cause of action".
[185]
The exception to this general rule are causes of action which arise where the legal injury is repeated and fresh damage arises on each occasion such as the tort of nuisance raised in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case. In addition, one must also ascertain what constitutes the alleged continuing wrong.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), the English Court of Appeal held that a continuing wrong and a continuing cause of action is not:
"constituted by repeated breaches of recurring obligations nor by intermittent breaches of a continuing obligation. There must be a quality of continuance both in the breach and in the obligation."
[186]
I also note that Dube, J., in
Lower Kootenay Indian Band and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) rejected the argument that a "continuing" cause of action can circumvent a limitation defence. In the
Luke
case the plaintiff Band claimed damages on a year by year basis for each year during which the Crown failed in its alleged fiduciary duty to terminate an improvident lease negotiated by the Crown on behalf of the Band. Dube, J., rejected the Band's argument that the accrual of damages for each year during which the Crown failed to terminate the Band's lease gave rise to a new cause of action unaffected by a limitation period. At p. 293 Dube, J., made the following comments:
"So there remains to be determined which limitation period applied to each breach and at what time. In my view, the original cause of action arose in 1934 at the outset of the 50 year lease. The mere fact that it is a lease does not automatically renew the cause of action every year and I know of no authority for such a proposition. But other causes of action may arise during that period. Applying the 30 year limitation to the instant case, as I feel I must follow the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision, I therefore go back to April 1, 1952, 30 years before the commencement of the first action, so as to determine what cause of action arose during that period.
"Clearly, that excludes the Crown's breach of fiduciary duty at the time of the 1934 surrender. But, in my view, it includes breaches committed since 1952, namely the repeated violations of the lease by Creston during that period and the Crown's failure to respond to the plaintiff's demands for cancellation of the lease.
"In 1974, Chief Chris Luke started to press the Department for cancellation of the lease. Shortly thereafter, he learned for the first time of the absence of an Order-in-Council. At that time Creston was violating covenants of the lease. A fresh cause of action accrued and new period of limitation commenced to run from that date."
[187]
In the case before me, Cape Mudge asserts that an alleged breach of fiduciary duty in 1907 (which I have determined on the facts did not occur) entitled the Band to compensation for loss of lease and other revenues from 1907 to the present. Even if I had determined there was a breach, I agree with the Crown's submission that Cape Mudge has not proven that any new or fresh cause of action arose at any time within the 30 year period prior to the commencement of their present action. In the
Luke
case, Dube, J., found that a new cause of action arose in 1974 when the Crown neglected to seize on the opportunity to cancel, on the Band's behalf, the improvident lease for a subsequent breach of covenant by the tenant. In that case, it was clear that the cause of action arose independently of the Crown's original and statute barred breach of fiduciary duty in 1934 for failing to obtain an Order-in-Council approving the surrender of the land for lease. Applying this reasoning to the case at bar, I am of the view that "no fresh cause of action" has arisen independently of the alleged original breach of fiduciary duty which occurred outside the 30 year limitation period.
[188]
I note the concept of a continuing breach was rejected by the Alberta Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 368, leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada refused on November 13, 1984. In that case it was argued by the plaintiff that a solicitor's failure to register a document to protect the plaintiff's interest gave rise to a new cause of action on each day he failed to register the document. The court rejected the argument and stated at p. 374:
"With respect, I do not find convincing this novel approach to the enforcement of limitation legislation. The same reasoning could be applied to a great many breaches of contract to the end that the statute would be ineffective in the role the legislature has assigned to it. For example, the limitation period applicable on the non-delivery of a chattel after sale could, in this way, be extended indefinitely day by day until the chattel had been destroyed or otherwise disposed of ... The cause of action is complete with breach and, on the plain wording of the statute, the limitation period commences to run at that point."
The same argument was also rejected by the Victoria Supreme Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , wherein the court stated at p. 701:
"It has been contended for the plaintiffs that this later branch of the charge opens an additional breach of trust for not suing the firm, giving a new cause of action against Ibbotson for continuing neglect, which prevents the statute [of limitation] running. I cannot accede to this argument. It seems to me to fritter away the protection which the Statute was intended to give the unfortunate class for whose benefit it was passed. Every breach of trust carries with it an obligation on the trustee to make it good, but a trustee could never avail himself of the Statute if, having committed a breach as to which the Statute runs, he is liable for a new breach every day after its commission for not attempting to repair it."
Purpose Of Limitation Periods
[189]
It may be appropriate at this juncture to comment on the very purpose of limitation periods, namely to ensure fairness in the litigation process and to ensure that parties are not unduly prejudiced by the passage of time. As noted by the Crown, both statutory and equitable limitation defences define a point in time at which defendants may no longer have a fair opportunity to collect evidence in support of their defence. Not only is it difficult for the defendants, but also for the court. Indeed, the case at bar is most illustrative of this difficulty. Evidence has the annoying ability to deteriorate over time, all the witnesses to the key events in issue in the actions died before the commencement of the plaintiffs' actions, documents have been lost, misplaced or are simply illegible. In effect, the court loses the opportunity to hear all the evidence, including the best evidence. As a result, the documentary evidence in the case before me became the best evidence. Unfortunately, documents are lost, misplaced or destroyed, which only serves to make the court's task more difficult. In other words, the quality of the evidence is such that coming to a fair and proper determination of the issues becomes more difficult.
[190]
Further, limitation periods also ensure fairness in the litigation process by recognizing that changes in standards of conduct occur over time. If a claim is not adjudicated until many decades after the events that gave rise to it, different values and standards from those prevailing at the time the events occurred may be used in determining fault. In this regard, I note the Law Reform Commission of British Columbia in its "Report on the Ultimate Limitation period:
Limitation Act
, s. 8", (published in 1990) which summarized this rationale for limitation periods at p. 17:
"Evolving legal and social standards give rise to another connection between procedural fairness and timeliness. If there are limitation periods, conduct which attracts legal consequences is more likely to be judged in light of the standards existing at the time of the conduct than if there are no restrictions on the plaintiffs' ability to litigate. This rationale for the limitation of actions is of increasing importance, given the rate at which attitudes and norms currently change. New areas of liability arise continually in response to evolving sensitivities."
[191]
As I indicated earlier in my reasons, I am of the view that the
B.C. Limitation Act
, S.B.C. 1975, c. 37 as amended, applies to the case at bar by virtue of s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
. Further, I am satisfied that the Court of Appeal's decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (subject to a decision of the Supreme Court of Canada to the contrary) confirms that the
B.C. Limitation Act
is applicable to disputes before the Federal Court of Canada respecting reserve lands in the province of British Columbia.
The British Columbia Limitations Act
[192]
As I understand, there are three basic limitation periods prescribed under s. 3 of the
B.C. Limitation Act
: 2, 6 and 10 years, based on the type of cause of action, followed by a 30 year ultimate limitation period. Under s. 3(1) a two year limitation period is prescribed for injury including economic loss arising from a breach of contractual, tort or statutory duty. In the case at bar, Campbell River claims for breach of statutory duty in relation to the Crown's alleged failure to ensure that Reserve No. 12 was not utilized for any purpose "incompatible" with the Campbell River's alleged interest in that reserve. Cape Mudge has alleged similar breaches of statutory duty against the Crown in respect of Reserve No. 11. The Crown submits that pursuant to s. 3(1)(a) any cause of action for loss of revenue based on a breach of statutory duty which arose either two years prior to the commencement of the Campbell River action on December 23, 1985, or two years prior to May 5, 1989 in the case of the Cape Mudge action, is statute barred.
[193]
Section 3(2) prescribes a 10 year limitation period for claims for breach of trust or actions to recover trust property. Section 3(2) represents a departure from the limitation legislation in other Canadian jurisdictions, in that trustees of every description (including constructive trustees defined in s. 1 of the
Act
) now have the protection of a 10 year limitation period irrespective of the nature of their breach. Further, by virtue of s. 14 the provisions of the
Limitation Act
are specifically made to apply retroactively to causes of action which arose before the enactment of the
Limitation Act
. This retrospective effect of the
Limitation Act
has been confirmed by the B.C. Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River has alleged, pursuant to Order-in-Council 1036, that legal title to Reserves No. 11 and 12 was conveyed by the Province to the Crown "in trust for the use and benefit" of Campbell River. Cape Mudge has also alleged a breach of trust. The Crown submits that any claim for breach of trust, be it express, implied and/or constructive trusts whether or not the trustee has a beneficial interest in the trust property and whether or not the trust arises only by reason of a transaction impeached is statue barred pursuant to s. 3(2), 10 years after the date on which the cause of action for breach of trust arose. In the case at bar, any claims for breach of trust alleged by Cape Mudge arising 10 years prior to May 5, 1989 are statute barred. In respect of the Campbell River action, any claims for breach of trust arising 10 years prior to December 23, 1985 are also statute barred.
[195]
Under s. 3(4) a six year limitation period is prescribed for any other cause of action not specifically enumerated in the
Limitation Act
. Stone, J.A., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> specially held at p. 138 that s. 3(4) of the
Act
would apply to a breach of fiduciary obligation relating to the alienation of reserve land:
"Section 3(4), applying as it does to '[a]ny other action' seems to contain the only provision that would include a right of action for breach of fiduciary obligation. As the sale of I.R. 172 was made on March 30, 1948, the appellants' right of action would have been extinguished on the anniversary date six years after unless the time for bringing the action was postponed."
Therefore, in light of s. 3(4) it appears that all causes of action alleged by Campbell River and Cape Mudge for breach of fiduciary duty or negligence became statute barred at the latest six years prior to the commencement of the Campbell River and Cape Mudge actions. With respect to the Campbell River action, the six year limitation period would apply to bar any cause of action for breach of fiduciary duty or negligence which arose six years prior to the date of commencement of the Campbell River action on December 23, 1985, ie. prior to December 23, 1979. With respect to the Cape Mudge action, any alleged breach of fiduciary duty or negligence which arose six years prior to May 5, 1989, ie. before May 5, 1983 would be statute barred.
[196]
The Crown maintains and I agree, that limitation periods under the
B.C. Limitations Act
commence to run "from the date on which the right to do so arose", in other words, the date on which a cause of action first accrues according to common law principles whether known or unknown to the plaintiffs at the time.
[197]
Therefore, the commencement of the limitation period for the various causes of action alleged by the plaintiffs arose either on the date of the alleged breach in the case of the allegations of breach of fiduciary duty and breach of trust, or in the case of claims based on negligence or breach of statutory duty on the date when actual damage occurred. In the case of declaratory relief, the cause of action arose as of the date of the event giving rise to the declaratory relief, ie. the date of the 1907 resolution in the case of Cape Mudge and in the case of Campbell River, the date of the relevant Orders-in-Council (the last of which was passed in 1938). As such, no new cause of action arose after 1938.
Postponement Of Limitation
Period And The Ultimate
Limitation Period Under The
B.C. Limitations Act
[198]
As I understand, under the
Limitation Act
there are two potentially applicable provisions which may operate to alter the running of time under the basic 2, 6 and 10 year limitation periods applicable to the plaintiffs' claim. Under s. 6 the running of time is postponed where the plaintiff is not aware of the factual basis of the claim or where a claim has been fraudulently or otherwise concealed from the plaintiff. Under s. 7 the running of time is postponed where a plaintiff is under a legal disability. Pursuant to ss. 6(5) and 7(9) the onus of proving either lack of knowledge of material facts, concealment of a cause of action, or legal disability rests with the plaintiff. After an extensive review of the facts, I am satisfied there is no evidence to support either Cape Mudge's or Campbell River's allegations that material facts were either deliberately misrepresented to, or willfully concealed from the plaintiffs. Further, the Crown argues that the plaintiffs have not satisfied their onus and notes that for much of the century members of both bands had first hand knowledge of the most important events which are the subject of the action before me. In addition to having knowledge, there is also evidence that members of both bands had available and sought out advice (including legal advice) as to their legal rights in 1932 and 1971. Therefore, in my view, even if the running of time was postponed for any reason, which I do not accept, there could still be no postponement of the limitation period beyond the 30 year ultimate limitation period prescribed by s. 8 of the
Limitation Act
. In this regard, I note the specific wording of s. 8(1) which provides in part:
"... notwithstanding a confirmation made under s. 5 or a postponement of the running time under ss. 6, 7 or 11(2), no action to which this
Act
applies shall be brought after the expiration of 30 years from the date on which the right to do so arose ..."
Further, Stone, J.A., summarized in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> his findings at p. 141:
"In summary, it seems to me that the
Limitation Act
of 1975 extends to a claim for breach of fiduciary obligation and that the six year limitation period provided for in s. 3(4) may be greater if the circumstances are such to be covered by s. 6,
but in no event can that period extend beyond the 30 year limitation set forth in s. 8(1)
." (Underlining mine)
[199]
Therefore, based on <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and the reference in that case to British Columbia decisions, I am satisfied that neither equitable fraud nor wilful concealment of material facts would be sufficient to postpone the running of time beyond the ultimate 30 year limitation period. In this regard, I also note the following passage from Stone, J.A.'s, reasons in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at pp. 139-140:
"The appellants say that the Crown committed equitable fraud by failing to furnish the appellants with all of the information surrounding the 1945 Surrender that they requested in 1948 and that was requested on their behalf in 1970. They submitted that it was not until the new district manager of the Fort St. John Indian Agency was appointed in 1975 that they became aware of their legal rights after which, in 1977, they sought legal advice with the assistance of the district manager. On the basis of this argument, the appellants contend that the action was commenced within time.
"The British Columbia Court of Appeal recently applied the provisions of the
Limitation Act
of 1975 in two medical malpractice suits:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the following views of Esson, J.A., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at p. 186:
'There are strong policy reasons for not construing the date as of which the right to bring an action arose in a manner different from that which has heretofore been given to them in the
Limitation Act
. To do so would be destructive of a balanced legislative scheme. Sections 6 and 8 are obviously designed to work together with s. 3(1) to provide relief against the injustice which can be created by hidden facts, and on the other hand, to provide reasonable protection against stale claims. All of that is premised upon the 'right to do so' meaning the date of accrual of the cause of action without reference to knowledge. If that premise is disturbed, s. 6 will be made more difficult of application and s. 8 will cease to provide any real protection against stale claims.'
"In the present case, the trial judge relied particularly on <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, in finding that the appellants' right of action was barred by s. 8(1), as it arose more than 30 years earlier "notwithstanding ... a postponement or suspension of the running of time under ss. 6, 7 ..." I too conclude that the appellants' right of action for breach of fiduciary duty was statute barred on March 30, 1978 pursuant to s. 8(1) of the
Limitation Act
of 1975.
"The appellants contend that the limitation provisions should not be given retrospective effect. Unless such effect is required by express provision or by necessary implication, limitations statutes are not to operate retrospectively when to do so would impair or destroy a right which a party to a dispute has already acquired. Thus, a defence available under earlier legislation will not be affected by subsequent legislation:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , per La Forest, J., at p. 266. The difficulty I see with the appellants' argument is that subs. 14(2) of the
Limitations Act
does expressly provide that the statute is to have retrospective effect. Consequently, in my view, the claim is statute barred by virtue of s. 8(1)."
[200]
Based on the above, I conclude that the 30 year limitation period in s. 8 operates notwithstanding any postponement of the running of a limitation period pursuant to s. 6 or 7. By applying my conclusion to the facts of the Campbell River and Cape Mudge actions, it becomes apparent that any cause of action which arose 30 years prior to either the commencement of the Campbell River action in 1985 or the Cape Mudge action in 1989, is statute barred. Neither lack of factual knowledge, nor disability, nor concealment by the Crown, of any cause of action, would be sufficient to postpone the running of a limitation period beyond 30 years from the date the original cause of action arose. Therefore, combined with s. 9, which provides that upon expiry of any limitation period under the
Act
the cause of action is extinguished, the plaintiffs' causes of action are barred and extinguished.
Declaratory Relief
[201]
Campbell River seeks a declaration that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were, as a result of Orders-in-Council 911, 1265 and 1036, set aside for the use and benefit of the Campbell River Band. Cape Mudge, on the other hand, seeks a declaration that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were set aside for the Cape Mudge Band.
[202]
Both bands allege that no limitation period should apply to bar this court from granting such declaratory relief. Campbell River relied on the following cases to support their claim:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). All these decisions are distinguishable on the basis that they do not interpret the provisions of the
B.C. Limitations Act
, more specifically none of the decisions interpret the effect of the 30 year limitation period in s. 8 of that
Act
. On the other hand, decisions of this court which dealt with the
B.C. Limitations Act
, namely
Sterritt, Lower Kootenay
(the
Luke
case) and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , have essentially held that the Federal Court could not issue a declaration relating to an allegedly void surrender which took place more than 30 years prior to the commencement of the plaintiffs' cause of action. Once again I refer to the comments of Dube, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at pp. 49 and 50:
"Section 38 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10 stipulates that the laws relating to prescription and limitation of actions in force in any province applied to proceedings in the Federal Court. Subsection 8(1) of the British Columbia
Limitation Act
, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 236, provides that no action shall be brought after the expiration of 30 years from which the right to do so arose. Subsection 9(1) provides that on the expiration of such a limitation period, the cause of action is extinguished.
"Before the hearing of this matter, the plaintiffs filed an Amended Statement of Claim seeking in addition to the declaration aforementioned, a declaration that the unsold surrendered lands are reserve lands, that any letters issued after June 5, 1968 are null and void and the lots in question revert to the plaintiffs as reserve lands.
"... As the law stands today, following the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision, it is plain and obvious to me there is no cause of action relating to the 1948 surrender itself and no declaration at this stage could issue from this court that the 1948 surrender is null and void.
. . . . .
"However, leave is granted to the plaintiffs to draft a fresh Statement of Claim which may still include the 1948 surrender and following events as factual background ... The prayer may not seek a declaration concerning the 1948 surrender; it must be limited to the transactions that took place within the 30 year limitation period."
[203]
In the alternative, the Crown also refers to s. 14 of the
B.C. Limitation Act
(1979), which states that the provisions of the new
Limitation Act
(which came into effect on July 1, 1975) are given explicit retroactive effect. The Crown's position, which I accept, is that under s. 14(1) actions which were statute barred prior to July 1, 1975 remain statute barred under the new
Act
. Further, s. 14(5) provides that the new
Limitations Act
does not interfere with "any right or title to land acquired by adverse possession before July 1, 1975".
[204]
Section 16 in Part II of the pre-1975
Statute of Limitations
prescribed a 20 year limitation period for an action to recover land. Under s. 17 of that same
Act
, the 20 year period was deemed to have commenced from the time of dispossession or discontinuance of possession of the land claimed. Neither Band had been in possession of the reserve claimed from the other band for at least 20 years prior to July 1, 1975. Further, the 20 year limitation period may apply to bar both the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Bands' causes of action for a declaration to title, since under s. 14 of the
Limitation Act
the Indian Bands' causes of action remain statute barred on enactment of the new
Limitation Act
.
[205]
In terms of the Campbell River claim to Reserve No. 12, the evidence establishes that the Campbell River Indians have not been in possession of Reserve No. 12 since 1932, when the Cape Mudge Indians fenced, cleared and partitioned portions of Reserve No. 12 for the use of individual Cape Mudge Indians. Alternatively, argues the Crown, the possession of the Cape Mudge Indians of Reserve No. 12 became adverse to the claim of Campbell River at the latest in 1938, when they commenced logging on Reserve No. 12. The sale of Reserve No. 12 timber in 1938 also coincides with the date of the passage of Order-in-Council 1036, the last Order-in-Council which the Campbell River plaintiffs rely on in asserting their claim to Reserve No. 12. It therefore follows that any cause of action for a declaration to Reserve No. 12 became statute barred by virtue of ss. 16 and 17 of the pre-1975
Statute of Limitations
either 20 years after 1932 or 1938. I also note s. 41 of the pre-1975
Act
, which provides that the expiry of the 20 year limitation period extinguished Campbell River's right of action.
[206]
In terms of Cape Mudge's claim to Reserve No. 11, the evidence establishes that the Campbell River Indians occupied Reserve No. 11 continuously from the beginning of this century to the present. I note that the 1921 sale of 80 acres of Reserve No. 11 to the International Timber Company for an amount in excess of $17,000 by the Campbell River Indians, at the very latest, constituted a clear denial of any superior claim to Reserve No. 11 by the Cape Mudge Band. Therefore, at the very latest, the Campbell River Band's possession of Reserve No. 11 became adverse to the interests of the Cape Mudge Indians in 1921. According to the Crown, it would follow that any cause of action for a declaration as to title to Reserve No. 11 became statute barred 20 years after 1921, in 1941. As with the Campbell River claim, pursuant to ss. 14(1) and (5) of the
Limitation Act
that cause of action remains statute barred today.
Equitable Limitation Defences
[207]
It is the Crown's position, and I agree, that both Bands are barred from seeking equitable relief from this court by the equitable defences of laches and acquiescence. The Crown is also of the view that these equitable defences apply to bar all other claims (if any) which are held by this court not to be statute barred under the applicable statutory limitation periods.
[208]
The law of laches and acquiescence was reviewed by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 321; 96 D.L.R.(4th) 289. LaForest, J., at p. 333 D.L.R. cited as a leading authority the decision of the Privy Council in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  doctrine of laches in courts of Equity is not an arbitrary or a technical doctrine. Where it would be practically unjust to give a remedy, either because the party has, by his conduct done that which might fairly be regarded as equivalent to a waiver of it, or where, by his conduct and neglect he has, though perhaps not waiving that remedy, yet put the other party in a situation in which it would not be reasonable to place him if the remedy were afterwards to be asserted, in either of these cases lapse of time and delay are most material. But in every case if an argument against relief, which otherwise would be just, not amounting to a bar by any statute of limitations, the validity of that defence must be tried upon principles substantially equitable. Two circumstances always important in such cases are the length of the delay and the nature of the acts done during the interval, which might affect either party and cause a balance of justice or injustice in taking the one course or the other, so far as relates to the remedy."
LaForest, J., also referred with approval, at p. 334, to the following discussion of the defence of laches and acquiescence in Meagher, Gummow and Lehane,
Equity Doctrines and Remedies
, (2nd Ed.) (Sydney: Butterworths, 1984):
"It is a defence which requires that a defendant can successfully resist an equitable (although not legal) claim made against him if he can demonstrate that the plaintiff, by delaying the institution or prosecution of his case, has either:
(a) acquiesced in the defendant's conduct, or
(b) caused the defendant to alter his position in reasonable reliance on the plaintiff's acceptance or the status quo, or otherwise permitted a situation to arise which would by unjust to disturb ..."
[209]
Cape Mudge, in support of its position that the equitable defences of laches, acquiescence and estoppel do not apply to the Band's claim, rely on the following cases:
St. Ann's  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[210]
These cases are distinguishable on the basis that they deal with the surrender of reserve land for lease to non-Native third parties. A more detailed discussion of my views are found in the section of these reasons dealing with the 1907 Resolution and the purpose of the surrender provision in the
Indian Act
.
[211]
The Crown submits, and I agree, that there has been an unreasonable delay by both Bands in the commencement of the present action. The Crown notes, and I agree, that both Bands have stood by for almost a century and watched the deprivation of their alleged legal rights without taking action to enforce those rights. The Crown also notes that both Bands have accepted the status quo for many decades after making inquires as to their legal rights to the reserves in question.
[212]
The Crown maintains that both Bands have explicitly and by their conduct and custom resolved to settle the reserve allocation issues between them. Each Band has waived at various times over the last century their alleged rights to the reserves claimed in the present proceedings. Further, in reliance on the other Band's waiver and inaction, each Band has altered its position by using, improving and developing the reserves now claimed by the other Band.
[213]
The Crown has summarized the key points which it submits makes it inequitable in the circumstances to enforce the claims of either of the two Bands. I can do no better than to reproduce these points:
Cape Mudge Indians
- The fact that the Cape Mudge Indians passed a unanimous resolution in 1907 to settle the allocation of Reserve No. 11;
- The absence of any reference to Reserve No. 11 in Billy Assu's testimony on behalf of Cape Mudge before the McKenna McBride Commission;
- The sale of the 80 acre portion of Reserve No. 11 to the International Timber Company in 1921 and the distribution of the sale of proceeds to the Campbell River Indians without objection from the Cape Mudge Indians;
- The absence of any claim by Cape Mudge to Reserve No. 11 in the Resolution recorded by Andrew Paull in 1922;
- The request by Chief Billy Assu for permission to build a house on Reserve No. 11 in 1922;
- The response by Chief Billy Assu at the 1932 meeting to "just leave it like that" on being informed by his sons, Harry and Dan, of their intention to take Reserve No. 11 back;
- Chief Billy Assu's telegram to Ditchburn on January 30, 1932 in which Assu confirms "I gave them [the Campbell River Indians] the right to settle  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River only not including Quinsam" [document 2627];
- Cape Mudge consulted with their lawyer McLelan in 1932 as to the ownership of Reserves No. 11 and 12;
- Chief Billy Assu's confirmation in his 1934 letter to Indian Agent Todd that the Campbell River Indians were given "permission to have Campbell River" and "all our people [Cape Mudge] agreed [document 1946];
- The absence of any mention of a claim by Cape Mudge to Reserve No. 11 in the "Proof of Ownership" document and the admission in that document that "Billy Assu spoke: you [the Campbell River Indians] can have Campbell River Reserve. But not Quinsam". [document 2513];
- In 1936 the Chief and five Principal men of the Cape Mudge Band signed a sworn declaration listing the reserves claimed by the Cape Mudge Indians which list did not include Reserve No. 11;
- The absence of any evidence of an objection by the Cape Mudge Indians to the use, occupation and commercial development of Reserve No. 11 by the Campbell River Indians in the interval between the execution of the 1936 Declaration and the commencement of their action in 1989;
- Cape Mudge Indians delayed in commencing their action for a further 18 years after receiving and discussing the 1970 and 1971 copies of relevant documents including the 1907 resolution, the 1902 Schedule and the 1936 Declarations;
- In the interval between 1907 and 1989 the Campbell River Indians have used and improved Reserve No. 11 and have entered into numerous commercial transactions for the benefit of the Campbell River Indians, all carried out in the belief that the Cape Mudge Indians claimed no interest in the Campbell River Reserve and without specific objection from the Cape Mudge Indians.
Campbell River Indians
- A delay of over 70 years between the date of the hearings of the McKenna-McBride Commission in 1914 and the commencement of the Campbell River action in 1985;
- Neither Charlie Smith nor James Smith as representatives of the Campbell River Indians made any mention of or claim to Reserve No. 12 in their evidence before the McKenna McBride Commission in 1914;
- The Cape Mudge Indians used and improved Reserve No. 12 in the 1920's and 30's without objection from the majority of the Campbell River Indians;
- A legal claim to Reserve No. 12 was not further pursued by Campbell River in 1932, notwithstanding full knowledge by members of the Campbell River Indians of the material facts underlying their claim and advice on their legal position;
- In 1936 the Chief and Principal Men of the Campbell River Band signed a sworn Declaration listing the reserves claimed by the Campbell River Band which did not include Reserve No. 12;
- After 1936 the Cape Mudge Indians logged and other wise developed for commercial and residential use Reserve No. 12 for 49 years without any evidence of specific objection to such activity by the majority of the Campbell River Indians;
- The Campbell River Band delayed for at least 14 more years in commencing its action, after obtaining legal advice in 1970 on the very documents relevant to the Campbell River Band's claim (including Order-in-Council 1036) as it is now asserted by the Band.
[214]
The Crown submits, and I agree, that in light of these circumstances, it would be inequitable for either band to enforce its claim against the other. The equitable defence of laches and acquiescence should accordingly apply to bar any claim for relief, which is not barred by the
Statute of Limitations
IV. Reserve Creation Process In British Columbia
[215]
At the outset it should be noted that not only was the reserve creation process in British Columbia considered unique and different from that of the rest of Canada, "Indian lands in British Columbia have an exceedingly complicated history", per Mr. Justice LaForest in
Natural Resources and Public Property Under the Canadian Constitution
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press: 1969) p. 131, the case before me serves as an excellent illustration of that complicated history, to which I add that I agree whole heartedly with Madame Justice Southin's comments that this is an "understatement" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.) at p. 181). However, the question of how and when reserves were created in British Columbia, I believe, lies at the very heart of disentangling the issue of the plaintiffs' entitlement to Reserves No. 11 and 12. Inevitably, there are varied and divergent views with respect to when the Indian interest and concomitant federal jurisdiction attached to lands identified by the Indian Reserve Commission and the Royal Commission on Indian Affairs for the Province of British Columbia as reserved for Indians. However, it is my task to make a determination on this very issue.
[216]
Cape Mudge takes the position that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were created in 1888, when they were surveyed and "allotted" by Green to the Wewaiakai Indian band as Wewaikai reserves.
[217]
Campbell River is of the view that federal legislative jurisdiction over reserve lands in British Columbia, including Reserves No. 11 and 12, did not attach to these lands until 1938 with the passage of British Columbia Order-in-Council (BCOC) 1036, dated July 29, 1938 or in the alternative in 1923 by virtue of the
Indian Affairs Settlement Act
, S.B.C. 1919, c. 32 and BCOC 911/1923 and that these Orders in Council confirmed allotment of Reserves No. 11 and 12 to the Wewaiakum Indian Band.
[218]
The Crown on the other hand submits that there are a number of steps involved in the reserve creation process and depending on what question is posed there may be a different answer as to when reserves were created. According to the Crown, the first step in the process began with the Reserve Commissioner defining reserves, in other words, the process of the Reserve Commissioner going out into the field and ascertaining what land was to be set aside for the Indians, keeping in mind the mandate and the objectives of the Reserve Commissioner. The second step was the survey of the land by the surveyors. The third step was the approval by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works for the province and the Indian Superintendent for the Dominion. At that stage, the land was defined on the Official Plan. The Crown notes that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were "approved" on the official plan in 1889 for the Lekwiltok. Also, as noted by Mr. Frey, a witness for Cape Mudge, these plans were tied into the root of title for lands in British Columbia, in other words, the plans show the areas surveyed as district lots or reserves on Crown land in the province and are the root of title for the Crown grant that finally transferred the land to the Dominion. Prior to the final conveyance in 1938, it was the role of the Department of Indian Affairs to take the necessary steps to ensure that reserves defined or ascertained were "allotted" or "assigned", whichever may be the better term, to the appropriate bands, in accordance with the views of the Indians themselves. The last step in the reserve creation process involved the final conveyance to the Dominion government and attachment of federal jurisdiction, which occurred in 1938 with the passage of relevant Orders in Council. As I understand, the Crown is of the view that the Orders in Council incorporated the "ditto mark" error or a clerical error with regard to the allotment of Reserves No. 11 and 12 and that based on this "ditto mark" error Reserve No. 12 was improperly allotted to the Wewaiakum Indian Band and should have been allotted to the Wewayakay Indian Band.
[219]
Although I tend to favour the Crown's position, I agree with the submissions of Campbell River as well as the comments in the jurisprudence submitted in support of their position regarding the reserve creation process and when
at law
reserves were created in British Columbia. In this regard, I note particularly Mr. Justice LaForest's comments that after Confederation there was a dispute between British Columbia and the Dominion with respect to the size of Indian reserves in the province: "... the dispute continued for many years; numerous agreements were entered into and several royal commissions were appointed, but it was not finally settled until the 1930's.",
Natural Resources
, p. 132. I also note the comments of Cumming, J. (as he then was), in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.) at p. 50 C.N.L.R. that:
"... Under s. 13 of the
Terms of Union, 1871
, the Dominion Government assumed responsibility for Indians in the province and the trusteeship and management of the lands reserved for their use and benefit. In turn, the Government of British Columbia undertook to convey further tracts of land to the Dominion government for the use and benefit of Indians.
and at p. 65:
"Thus far, and although title to the public lands comprising the Railway Belt had been transferred by the province to the Dominion some thirty years previously, nothing really definitive had been settled with regard to the reserves in them.
All rested in the realm of bureaucratic recommendation and political intention with nothing conclusive accomplished in any effective legal sense
. Positive steps, it had been agreed, would await the report of the Royal Commission on Indian Affairs for the Province of British Columbia, appointed as a consequence of the McKenna-McBride Agreement." (Underlining mine)
Cumming, J., concluded that reserves in British Columbia all have a single form of tenure created by OCPC 208/1930 of February 3, 1930 and BCOC 1036/1938 of July 29, 1938.
The Constitutional Process With Respect to the Creation of Indian Reserves in British Columbia
[220]
It should be noted that there is a difference with respect to pre and post Confederation reserves. Reserves created at law prior to Confederation remained Indian Reserves at law after Confederation, since at Confederation legislative jurisdiction over the lands, namely the Indian interest in the lands, automatically became vested in Canada by virtue of s. 91(24) of the
Constitution Act, 1867
. Therefore, underlying title to the lands remained with the province. As a result, provincial title to the lands, federal legislative jurisdiction over the lands and the Indian interest in the land all co-existed after Confederation (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (P.C.)). After Confederation the process becomes more complicated.
[221]
Under the Canadian Constitution there is a major distinction between proprietary rights and legislative jurisdiction. Section 92(5) of the
Constitution Act, 1867
gave to the provinces legislative jurisdiction over the "management and sale of public lands belonging to the Province and the timber and wood thereon" and s. 92(13) gave to the provinces legislative jurisdiction over "property and civil rights in the Province", while ss. 109 and 117 assigned to the provinces the proprietary interest in all property not specifically assigned to Canada. Therefore, at Confederation the provinces were assigned the proprietary interest in public lands as well as legislative jurisdiction with respect to these public lands. This was also the situation with respect to public lands in British Columbia at the time it joined Confederation in 1871.
[222]
In terms of Indian reserves, under s. 91(24) of the
Constitution Act, 1867
Canada was assigned legislative jurisdiction over "Indians and Lands reserved for the Indians". According to LaForest, J., in
Natural Resources
, p. 114, legislative jurisdiction includes the power of administration and control. However, as noted by Peter Hogg in
Constitutional Law of Canada
, (3rd ed. [Looseleaf] Toronto: Carswell, 1992), p. 28-5, legislative jurisdiction does not confer any proprietary interest in the subject matter.
[223]
Further, the jurisdiction of the Crown was also divided in that at Confederation the prerogative power to appropriate the public lands of a province was assigned to the Crown in right of the province and the prerogative power to establish Indian reserves was assigned to the Crown in right of Canada. This was so because, as noted above, the legislative jurisdiction for public lands was assigned to the province while the federal government was assigned legislative jurisdiction for "Indians and Lands reserved for the Indians" and under the Canadian Constitution executive authority followed legislative authority (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (P.C.) at pp. 579-580).
[224]
Therefore, the Crown in the right of Canada could not and cannot exercise legislative jurisdiction over the public lands of a province until such time as control and administration of those lands was or is formally transferred to it, because under s. 92(5) of the
Constitution Act, 1867
only the province has jurisdiction over the management of public lands belonging to the province. Similarly, the Crown in the right of a province could not by its own action create an Indian interest in public lands, since under s. 91(24) of the
Constitution Act, 1867
, only the federal Parliament has jurisdiction over "Indians, and Lands reserved for the Indians".
[225]
In other words, the prerogative power of the province is restricted to whatever powers the province has under the
British North America Act
and the prerogative power of the federal government is restricted to the power that the federal government has under the
British North America Act
. The general principle regarding the exercise of statutory or prerogative power is set out at p. 11 of Paul Lorden's,
Crown Law
, (Toronto: Butterworth's, 1991), namely that:
"Neither statutory nor prerogative authority can be invoked to support Crown or executive activities by either level of government unless these activities are within the legislative authority of that level of government."
In this regard, reference should also be made to the reasons of Mr. Justice Hall in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 196. This is also consistent with the British Columbia Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  W.A.C. 1; 104 D.L.R.(4th) 470, at pp. 533-535, in that, if the Crown in right of a province cannot extinguish an Indian interest in a reserve, it would follow that neither can it create one.
[226]
Further, in creating reserves out of the public lands of a province, the Crown in right of Canada was and is constrained not only by the lack of legislative jurisdiction regarding the public lands of a province, but also by its lack of any proprietary interest in the lands. Therefore, public lands could only be appropriated by the jurisdiction possessing the proprietary interest in the lands, namely the province. Thus, a unilateral attempt by Canada to establish an Indian reserve in the public lands of a province would be and has been found to be an infringement of the proprietary rights of the province (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  lands the Crown in right of a province first had to appropriate the lands, and then had to transfer administration and control of the said lands to Canada. Only then could the Crown in right of Canada exercise its prerogative and set apart lands for Indians.
[228]
British Columbia joined the Canadian federation on July 20, 1871. The terms of the unity and the authority therefor, were set out in an Imperial Order-in-Council dated May 16, 1871 (hereinafter the Terms of Union) and are part of the Constitution of Canada. Term 13 of the Terms of Union provided as follows:
"The charge of the Indians, and the trusteeship and management of lands reserved for their use and benefit, shall be assumed by the Dominion Government, and a policy as liberal as that hitherto pursued by the British Columbia Government shall be continued by the Dominion Government after the Union.
"To carry out such policy, tracts of land of such extent as it has hitherto been the practice of the British Columbia Government to appropriate for that purpose, shall from time to time be conveyed by the Local Government to the Dominion Government in trust for the use and benefit of the Indians on application of the Dominion Government; and in case of disagreement between the two Governments respecting the quantity of such tracts of land to be so granted, the matter shall be referred for the decision of the Secretary of State for the Colonies." (
British Columbia Terms of Union
, R.S.C. 1985, Appendices, No. 10, Term 13)
Therefore Term 13, as it relates to the creation of reserves in British Columbia after the union, specifically in this case Reserves No. 11 and 12, required the appropriation of public lands by the province and the conveyance of these lands to the Dominion in trust for the Indians. Without this appropriation and conveyance by the province, the Dominion would not be able to carry out its policy relating to the trusteeship and management of Indian lands. Only upon conveyance could the Crown in right of Canada exercise the prerogative and set apart the lands for a given band, tribe or nation of Indians.
[229]
After reviewing the jurisprudence, I am satisfied that the term "convey" means to transfer the administration and control of lands.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  considered as it was used in Term 11 of the Terms of Union. Under Term 11, British Columbia agreed "to convey to the Dominion Government, in trust" lands within 20 miles of the then proposed transcontinental railway (the Railway Belt). Lord Watson made the following comments at p. 303:
"... it seems clear that the only 'conveyance' contemplated was a transfer of the provincial right to manage and settle the lands, and to appropriate their revenues."
How is Conveyance Between Crowns Accomplished?
[230]
The question therefore becomes, how is this transfer of administration and control over public lands, namely the conveyance between Crowns, accomplished?
[231]
First, appropriation of provincial land by virtue of Crown prerogative can only be accomplished by the Crown in right of the province, under seal or under special instrument evidencing the intention of the Crown. As noted by Professor Hogg in
Constitutional Law of Canada
, pp. 1-12 and 1-13:
"... the prerogative could be abolished or limited by statute and, once a statute had occupied the ground formerly occupied by the prerogative, the Crown had to comply with the terms of the statute."
Further, as commented by Madame Justice Southin in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.) at p. 187:
"In the absence of legislation on the matter, i.e. where the disposition of Crown lands remains within the prerogative, the lands of the Crown can be dealt with only by some outward public manifestation of the will of the Crown such as a grant under the Great Seal, letters patent or an order-in-council. Where there is applicable legislation, the requirements of the legislation must be observed before dealing with Crown lands can be effective."
[232]
Therefore, in terms of the Crown prerogative, the jurisprudence is clear that if something which could be done by prerogative is dealt with by statute, the statute rules, per Lord Dunedin in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L) at 526 and Lord Atkinson at pp. 539 and 540:
"It is quite obvious that it would be useless and meaningless for the Legislature to impose restrictions and limitations upon, and to attach conditions to, the exercise by the Crown of the powers conferred by a statute, if the Crown were free at its pleasure to disregard these provisions, and by virtue of its prerogative do the very thing the statute empowered it to do. One cannot in the construction of a statute attribute to the Legislature (in the absence of compelling words) an intention so absurd.
"... I should prefer to say that when such a statute, expressing the will and intention of the King and of the three estates of the realm, is passed, it abridges the Royal Prerogative while it is in force to this extent: that the Crown can only do the particular thing under and in accordance with the statutory provisions, and that its prerogative power to do that thing is in abeyance. Whichever mode of expression be used, the result intended to be indicated is, I think, the same -- namely, that after the statute has been passed, and while it is in force, the thing it empowers the Crown to do can thenceforth only be done by and under the statute, and subject to all limitations, restrictions and conditions by it imposed, however unrestricted the Royal Prerogative may theretofore have been."
[233]
Therefore, the first step in the reserve creation process is the appropriation of the land, in other words, the reservation of the land by the Provincial Government. This must be accomplished by some overt act of the Crown, such as the issuance of letters patent or an order in council, which are exercises of the Royal Prerogative; or the passage of legislation.
[234]
On April 22, 1875, the
Land Act, 1875
, S.B.C. 1875, No. 5 was given Royal Assent. Section 60, the reserve section, provided:
"The Lieutenant-Governor in Council shall, at any time, by notice, signed by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works and published in the British Columbia Gazette, reserve lands not lawfully held by record, pre-emption, purchase, lease, or Crown grant, for the purpose of conveying the same to the Dominion Government, in trust, for the use and benefit of the Indians, or for railway purposes, as mentioned in Article 11 of the Terms of Union, or for such other purposes as may be deemed advisable."
This provision became s. 56 of the 1884 consolidation of provincial land legislation:
"The Lieutenant-Governor in Council shall, at any time, by notice, signed by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works, and published in the British Columbia Gazette, reserve any lands not lawfully held by pre-emption, purchase, lease or Crown grant, for the purpose of conveying the same to the Dominion Government, in trust, for the use and benefit of the Indians, or for railway purposes, as mentioned in Article 11 of the Terms of Union, or for such other purposes as may be deemed advisable." (
Land Act, 1884
, S.B.C. 1884, c. 16, s. 56)
Therefore, at the time Green surveyed Reserves No. 11 and 12, s. 56 of the
Land Act
was in force.
[235]
I am of the view, that the above noted reserve provisions had the effect of ousting the royal prerogative with respect to the reservation of lands for transfer to Canada for the purpose of Indian reserves. As such, and in keeping with the reasoning in
De Keyser's Royal Hotel
, the requirements of the
Act
had to be followed. Therefore, the appropriation of lands by the Provincial Government as reserves was to be performed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council in the manner outlined in the statute. This appropriation or reservation of lands was to be effected in order that the lands could be conveyed to the Federal Government in trust for the use and benefit of the Indians.
[236]
In this regard, I also note the conclusion of Madame Justice Southin in
Mount Currie
at p. 188:
"Counsel for the appellant argued that the lands were 'reserved' by the combined acts of Mr. O'Reilly and the Chief Commissioner and the deposit in 1884 of the survey of 1882.
"But the
Land Act
of 1875 (see Schedule) provided for the Lieutenant Governor in Council reserving lands 'by notice, signed by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works, and published in the British Columbia Gazette ... for the purpose of conveying the same to the Dominion Government, in trust, for the use and benefit of the Indians ...
"There being no argument that there remained any prerogative power to reserve lands in any other way and there being no evidence of any such notice or of its publication, I am of the opinion that nothing that was done by anybody up to the events I am about to recount, which began in 1912, caused any lands to be reserved for the Indians. Thus, I cannot on the evidence and argument before us find that the fourth proposition of counsel is made out. This is not, of course, a decision that it could not be made at trial."
The fourth proposition advanced by counsel in that case was that the interest of the Mount Currie Indian Band and the lands of the Nesuch Indian Reserve was irrevocably acknowledged and confirmed by British Columbia and by Canada in 1884 and thus the interest and lands passed to federal legislative and administrative control.
[237]
In the case at bar, it was agreed by all parties that no notice reserving the lands in issue was ever signed by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works and published in the British Columbia Gazette as directed by the
Land Act
.
[238]
It should be noted that the Railway Belt lands had been reserved prior to conveyance by notice of the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works in the British Columbia Gazette, as per the requirements of s. 60 of the
Land Act, 1875
(Term 11 lands were covered by the same reservation clause as Term 13 lands), and the conveyance itself was undertaken by an exchange of provincial and federal legislation. With respect to the question of when the Railway Belt lands passed to Canada, Ritchie, C.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , indicated the following at pp. 420-421:
"Therefore, so soon as the act of the Dominion adopting and confirming the legislation of the Province was passed, the line of the Canadian Pacific Railway thus selected by the Dominion Government and adopted by British Columbia passed out of the control of the executive government of British Columbia, and was held by the crown as represented by the Governor General of Canada, no necessity existing for, nor indeed could there be, any actual change of possession because the possession was always in the Crown, whether held for British Columbia or the Dominion." <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , however, involved a situation where the legislation providing for the transfer of administration and control of public lands between Crowns was clearly designated to operate as a present conveyance once the lands had been identified.
[239]
On the other hand, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (P.C.) the legislation considered by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council involved a conveyance in "futuro", similar to the legislation at issue in the case before me. In
AG Manitoba
, there was legislation passed which provided that swamp lands were to be transferred to the province. Identification of the lands to be transferred were dealt with by Order-in-Council, appointing surveyors to select the land and report to the Minister of the Interior and submit lists of the lands to be granted for the approval of the Governor-in-Council. However, another federal Order-in-Council, dated April 16, 1888, indicated the lands set out in the annexed list were to vest in Her Majesty for the purposes of the Province of Manitoba. The Judicial Committee after reviewing the federal legislation determined that administration and control of the lands had only been conveyed to Manitoba with the passage of the final order in council in 1888:
"Their Lordships observe that the very general terms of the statute making the grant rendered necessary a detailed survey, such as was actually made, to pick out of a very extensive territory those lands which might fairly be held to come within the description of swamp lands. The present claim of the appellant, when put in operative form, is that the province is entitled from the date of the statute to the profits of each parcel of land which has eventually, and after a process of selection, been transferred.
"The question is whether this is the meaning of the section, and their Lordships do not think that it is. The subject-matter of the enactment is not a vindication of property, and is not a change of property, but of administration. The enactment itself is expressed as relating to the future. There is, first, according to the scheme of the section, to be a showing to the satisfaction of the Government; and, after this has taken place, the lands 'shall be' transferred. On their being transferred they 'shall ... ensure wholly to its benefit and uses', i.e. the benefit and uses of Manitoba until they are transferred." (
AG Manitoba
, pp. 803-804)
It was neither suggested nor held that transfer of the lands had occurred upon the survey, identification or selection of the lands. Clearly, conveyance did not occur until passage of the necessary legal instrument purporting to convey. Therefore, according to
AG Manitoba
, when a transfer is contemplated in the future, the transfer does not occur by the mere fact of existence of legislation or as a result of the selection and survey of land by the surveyor under the authority of an order in council. Legislative jurisdiction only passed when the lands were expressly conveyed by order in council.
[240]
It would also follow that a reserve cannot be created out of provincial public lands by the actions or acquiescence of Government officials if those actions are not sanctioned by the passage of an appropriate legal instrument. Support for this proposition can be found in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  for Indians prior to Confederation. Therefore, on Confederation, legislative jurisdiction over these lands passed to Canada, although the Province (Ontario) retained underlying title to them. The Indian interest in the reserve land was surrendered by treaty in 1873. Therefore, federal legislative jurisdiction over the lands disappeared. At this point, the lands became provincial public lands and the Province again had legislative jurisdiction over them, in addition to its pre-existing proprietary interest therein. (Therefore, in my view, the lands were in the same position as the lands in the case before me, when it was argued that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were created.) Subsequent to the treaty, Canada purported to create an Indian reserve in the same lands. In 1886, the band surrendered some of lands in the reserve. As a result, Canada issued letters patent in respect of these lands in 1889 and 1890. The Ontario Mining Company became the successor in title to the lands covered by the letters patent. In 1889, the Government of Ontario issued Letters Patent to Mr. Seybold and others for a large portion of the same tract of lands covered by the Dominion Letters Patent. The Ontario Mining Company sued to have the Provincial patents declared void, while one of the defendants counterclaimed requesting that the Federal patents be declared invalid. The Judicial Committee held that because the province had both legislative jurisdiction and proprietary interest in the lands after 1873, the Indian Reserves were never properly created. In purporting to appropriate provincial public lands for Indian Reserves, Canada had acted ultra vires. Therefore, the federal patents were invalid. The Committee also addressed the argument that many years had passed and during those years the lands had been treated as an Indian reserve by both levels of government, in fact a portion of the reserve had been surrendered pursuant to the
Indian Act
. It was argued that by the acts and the conduct of provincial officials the province had concurred in and assented to the selection of the reserves. The Judicial Committee (in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> )) rejected this argument and held at p. 84:
"... the province cannot be bound by alleged acts of acquiescence on the part of various officers of the departments which are not brought home to or authorized by the proper executive or administrative organs of the Provincial Government, and are not manifested by any Order-in-Council or other authentic testimony."
Assignment of Reserves In British Columbia
[241]
In British Columbia the assignment of reserves was a result of a governmental process that began with the establishment of the McKenna McBride Commission in 1912. According to Southin, J., in
Mount Currie
, the McKenna-McBride Agreement was the first step in the process that led to the eventual transfer of administration and control and proprietary interest in the lands surveyed for Indian Reserves in B.C. to Canada. The Agreement, and in this regard I agree with Cumming, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  should be set up to make recommendations in that regard.
[242]
The aim of the McKenna McBride agreement was to settle all differences between the governments of the Dominion and the Province respecting the Indian lands and Indian affairs generally in the British Columbia. One such difference was the size of Indian reserves in the province. The determination of whether or not a reserve might or might not be too large, or need an addition, required a review of the lands already surveyed under the auspices of the Reserve Commission. Therefore, each reserve was a potential candidate for reduction or addition. According to Campbell River, reserves which were subsequently determined to require neither a reduction nor an addition were confirmed by the Commission, which I am not entirely certain was within the mandate of the Reserve Commission. (Issue of the competence of the McKenna-McBride Commission to confirm reserves without making additions or reductions will be dealt with later). In any event, Campbell River notes that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were confirmed and no recommendations were made to alter these reserves.
[243]
However, the governments of B.C. and Canada still had to take legislative steps to implement the recommendations of the 1916 Royal Commission on Indian Affairs. In 1919 British Columbia passed the
Indian Affairs Settlement Act
, S.B.C. 1919, c. 32. Clauses 2 and 3 provided:
"2. To the full extent to which the Lieutenant-Governor in Council may consider it reasonable and expedient, the Lieutenant-Governor in Council may do, execute, and fulfil every act, deed, matter, or thing necessary for the carrying-out of the said Agreement between the Governments and the Dominion and the Province according to the true intent, and for giving effect to the report of the said Commission, either in whole or in part, and for the full and final adjustment and settlement of all differences between the said Governments respecting Indian lands and Indian affairs in the Province.
"3. Without limiting the general powers by this Act conferred, the Lieutenant-Governor in Council may, for the purpose of adjusting, readjusting, or confirming the reductions, cut-offs, and additions in respect of Indian reserves proposed in the said report of the Commission, carry on such further negotiations and enter into such further agreements, whether with the Dominion Government or with the Indians, as may be found necessary for a full and final adjustment of the differences between the said Governments."
Therefore, the Lieutenant-Governor was empowered to carry on further negotiations and enter into further agreements.
[244]
Similarly on July 1, 1920, Parliament passed the
British Columbia Indian Lands Settlement Act
, S.C. 1920, c. 51, with almost identical wording:
"2. To the full extent to which the Governor in Council may consider it reasonable and expedient the Governor in Council may do, execute, and fulfil every act, deed, matter or thing necessary for the carrying out of the said Agreement between the Governments of the Dominion of Canada and the Province of British Columbia according to its true intent, and for giving effect to the report of the said Royal Commission, either in whole or in part, and for the full and final adjustment and settlement of all differences between the said Governments respecting Indian lands and Indian affairs in the Province.
"3. For the purpose of adjusting, readjusting or confirming the reduction or cutoffs from reserves in accordance with the recommendations of the Royal Commission, the Governor in Council may order such reductions or cutoffs to be effected without surrenders of the same by the Indians, notwithstanding any provisions of the Indian Act to the contrary, and may carry on such further negotiations and enter into such further agreements with the Government of the Province of British Columbia as may be found necessary for a full and final adjustment of the differences between the said Governments."
[245]
W.E Ditchburn and, J.W. Clark were appointed as "representatives of the two governments ... for the purpose of adjusting, readjusting, confirming and generally reviewing the report and recommendations of the Royal Commission", BCOC 911/1923 and OCPC 1265/1924 and document 1594.
[246]
In 1920-1923, Ditchburn and Clark, pursuant to the
Indian Affairs Settlement Act
and the
British Columbia Indian Lands Settlement Act
, reviewed the Report of the Commission and confirmed with a few amendments, additions and deductions to the reserves confirmed, cut-offs and new reserves. This in effect meant the reserves were confirmed to the Campbell River Band.
[247]
Accordingly, on July 26, 1923, the Lieutenant Governor in Council approved British Columbia Order-in-Council No. 911/1923. It read in part:
"THAT the Report of the Royal Commission of Indian Affairs as made under date of 30th day of June 1916, with the amendments thereto as made by the representatives of the two Governments, viz: Mr. W.E. Ditchburn, representing the Dominion Government and major J.W. Clark, representing the Province, insofar as it covers the adjustments, readjustments or confirmation of the Reductions, Cut-offs and additions in respect of Indian Reserves proposed in the said report of the Royal Commission, as set out in the annexed schedules, be approved and confirmed as constituting full and final adjustment and settlement of all differences in respect thereto between the Governments of the Dominion and the Province ..."
The federal Order-in-Council (OCPC 1265/1924) passed the following year was for the most part identical with the provincial order, with the exception of the addition of the following two paragraphs:
"The Minister further states that, to ensure uniformity, the Royal Commission was requested to extend to the Railway Belt their examination into the needs of the Indians for reserves in that portion of British Columbia, and to make recommendations; that the work was accordingly carried out and their report and recommendations are to be found in the general report on Indian Reserves throughout the Province.
"As the lands in the Railway Belt are under the sole jurisdiction of the Dominion, the Minister recommends that the findings of the Royal Commission with reference to reserves within the Railway Belt be confirmed, but that no reduction or cut-off be made in the areas of the reserves, as recommended by the said Royal Commission." (This was because these lands were included in the conveyance of the Term 11 lands referred to above)
Campbell River submits that the proper interpretation to be placed on the Order-in-Council is that stated by the court in the
Mount Currie
case, namely that the Order-in-Council constituted full and final adjustment and settlement of all differences between the Governments of the Dominion and the Province. Moreover, according to Campbell River, the reserves, as confirmed by the Ditchburn Clark review, were sanctioned by the Province under BCOC-911, confirming the McKenna-McBride Royal Commission report as a whole together with the amendments made by Ditchburn and Clark. Similarly, the Reserves, as confirmed by the Ditchburn and Clark review, were sanctioned by Canada under OCPC-1265. Campbell River maintains that with the passage of these latter two Orders in Council, the issue was decided and as such the reserves were confirmed for the Campbell River Band, in that the bulk of the report of the Commission dealt with reserve confirmations, the schedules reviewed by Ditchburn and Clark included reserve confirmations and the schedules attached to the Order-in-Council included reserve confirmations.
[248]
There was also the proposal that lands in the Railway Belt not required for railway purposes or for the purpose of establishing reserves for the use and benefit of Indians be transferred by the Dominion back to the province. Duncan Scott and Ditchburn, on behalf of the Dominion and Barry Cathcart and O.C. Bass, on behalf of the B.C., were designated by their respective governments:
"... to consider the interests of the Indians of British Columbia, the Department of Indian Affairs and the Province of British Columbia, arising out of the proposed transfer ... and to recommend conditions under which the transfer might be made with due regard to the interests affected ..."
[249]
The result was the Scott-Cathcart Agreement, dated March 22, 1929, which arose out of the negotiations relating to the retransfer of the Railway Belt to British Columbia, but in fact dealt with lands throughout the province. The one clause which actually dealt with reserves in the Railway Belt read as follows:
"Regarding Indian Reserves in the Railway Belt ... we have agreed that the Indian Reserves set apart by the Dominion Government in the Railway Belt ... shall be excepted from the reconveyance of the Railway Belt ... and shall be held in trust and administered by the Dominion under the terms and conditions set forth in the Agreement ... between Mr. J.A.J. McKenna and the Hon. Sir Richard McBride ... and in the form of conveyance marked 'A' of the Indian Reserves outside the Railway Belt ..."
I assume this was intended to harmonize federal administration and tenure of Indian reserves throughout British Columbia.
[250]
On February 3, 1930, the Governor in Council passed P.C. 208, approving the Scott-Cathcart Agreement and the form of conveyance which it recommended. Schedule 4 to OCPC 208 provided for the approved form of conveyance recommended by the Scott-Cathcart Agreement for the transfer of lands outside the Railway Belt by the province to the Dominion for Indian reserve purposes. It should be noted that the reserves in the belt were exempted from the Railway Belt Re-Transfer Agreement. However, under that agreement they were to be vested in Canada "... on the terms and conditions set out in a certain order of the Governor General of Canada in Council approved on the 3rd day of February, 1930 (P.C. 208),
Railway Belt Re-transfer Agreement
, 20 February, 1930, s. 13 in
Railway Belt Re-transfer Agreement Act
, S.B.C. 1930, c. 60. In addition to determining that all reserves in British Columbia would have the same form of tenure and dictating the terms of that tenure by establishing the form of conveyance for reserves outside the belt, federal Order-in-Council No. 208/1930 also confirmed that BCOC 911/1923 and OCPC 1265/1924 had confirmed the McKenna-McBride report. I would add that the significance of BCOC 208/1930 was that it established the form of tenure in British Columbia for reserves inside the railway belt, and according to the Order-in-Council that form of tenure for reserves inside the railway belt was to be the same as the reserves outside the railway belt. As a result, there would be one common form of tenure for all reserves in British Columbia. The form of tenure for the reserves outside the railway belt was the form of tenure outlined in BCOC 1036/1938.
[251]
The Railway Belt Retransfer Agreement was approved by federal and provincial legislation, The
Railway Belt and Peace River Block Act
, S.C. 1930, c. 37 and the
Railway Belt Re-transfer Agreement Act
, S.B.C. 1930, c. 60, respectively and by Parliament by the
British North America Act
, 1930 (20-21 Geo. V., c. 26, now the
Constitution Act, 1930
. Section 1 of the
Act
provided:
"1. The agreements set out in the Schedule to this Act [including the Railway Belt Retransfer Agreement and the Indian reserve clause therein] are hereby confirmed and shall have the force of law notwithstanding anything in the Constitution Act, 1867, or any Act amending the same, or any Act of the Parliament of Canada, or in any Order-in-Council or terms or conditions of union made or approved under any such Act as aforesaid." (
Constitution Act, 1930
in R.S.C. 1985, Appendices, No. 26)
[252]
Therefore, under the
Constitution Act, 1930
, reserves inside and outside the Railway Belt were to have the same tenure. Both were to be based on BCOC 911/1923 and OCPC 1265/1924, approval of the McKenna-McBride report, and on the transfer of the outside belt reserves in accordance with the form of conveyance and attached schedule set out in OCPC 208. As noted by Cumming, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  lands
outside
the Railway Belt; the agreement with respect to lands
within
the belt was that they would be held upon the
same
terms and conditions. With respect to lands within the belt, Schedule 4 to P.C. 208 (the form of conveyance) is not in truth, a conveyance at all, but is a document of tenure, much like a declaration of trust. It sets forth the agreed-upon commitment that the federal Crown would hold reserve lands within the belt on terms identical to those upon which it would receive a transfer of lands outside the belt. There is but one form of tenure for Indian reserves in British Columbia which were created under P.C. 208/1930 and P.C. 1036/1938. Their terms are identical." (Underlining in reasons)
Earlier at p. 81 he indicated that:
"I agree with the submission of Mr. Eddy that the operative instrument which created Tuckozap Indian Reserve No. 24 (and other Indian reserves in the Railway Belt) is P.C. 208/1930, [the Order-in-Council which dealt with the Railway reserves] which was incorporated by reference into the memorandum of agreement made February 20, 1930, between the two governments and was, in turn approved by statutes passed in Victoria, Ottawa and Westminster, that same year. P.C. 208 was recognized by Mr. Justice Andrews in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 485, as the 'culmination of many years of negotiations and agreements entered into between representatives of the government of the Dominion and the government of the province with respect to Indians lands within the province'. It marked the last step in the reserve-creation process in respect of lands lying within the Railway Belt and is analogue to the Order-in-Council 1036/1938, which relates to reserve lands outside the Railway Belt."
[253]
Therefore, I am satisfied that the transfer of administration and control of the land in Reserves No. 11 and No. 12, and the proprietary interest therein, occurred by virtue of BCOC 1036/1938 on July 29, 1938, under authority of the
Indian Affairs Settlement Act
, S.B.C. 1919, c. 32 and the
Constitution Act
, 1930 [20-21 George V. c. 26 (Imp.)]. It is clear from BCOC 1036/1938 that both administration and control, and the proprietary interest in the lands, were being transferred to Canada. If I accept, as Cape Mudge urged me to do, that administration and control had passed prior to 1938, the province would have been unable to preserve a right of resumption and the various other administrative reservations set out in the conveyance. These reservations are at the heart of administration and control, and legislative jurisdiction.
[254]
Further, in my view, federal pre-approval of the transfer of administration and control and the proprietary interest in the lands occurred on February 3, 1930 by virtue of OCPC 208/1930 under authority of The
British Columbia Indian Lands Settlement Act
, S.C. 1920, c. 51 and the
Constitution Act, 1930
. Accordingly, the lands achieved Indian reserve status upon provincial conveyance of administration and control. Moreover, to find that administration and control had already passed would be to find that there was no common federal administration and tenure of Indian reserves in the province. This would be expressly contrary to the intention and requirements of the
Constitution Act, 1930
.
[255]
As I understand, Campbell River is arguing that Order-in-Council 1036 was also a conveyance of all of the lands encompassed in the McKenna McBride Report and the Ditchburn Clarke Inquiry, by means of the attached Schedule of Reserves which Campbell River maintains designated the beneficiaries of all the reserves. I would add that in my opinion, the only government which could determine the beneficiaries of those reserves, was the Federal Government and not the provincial government. In this case, according to Campbell River, both levels of governments, by way of the McKenna McBride Commission designated the beneficiaries for the reserves and therefore the federal government had in fact designated the beneficiaries. The basis for this assertion comes from the wording of the Order-in-Council 1036:
"THAT under the authority of s. 93 of the 'Land Act ... and s. 2 of c. 32,' British Columbia Statutes 1919, being the 'Indian Affairs Settlement Act', the lands set out in the schedule attached hereto be conveyed to His Majesty the King in the right of the Dominion of Canada in trust for the use and benefit of the Indians of the Province of British Columbia, subject however to the right of the Dominion Government to deal with the said lands in such a manner as they may deem best suited for the purpose of the Indians including a right to sell the said lands and fund or use the proceeds for the benefit of the Indians subject to the condition that in the event of any Indian tribe or Band in British Columbia becoming extinct that hereby conveyed for such tribe or band ..."
In terms of the case at bar, the designated beneficiary of Reserves No. 11 and 12, per the attached Schedule, was the Wewaiakum Indian Band. I agree that the designated beneficiaries were outlined in the attached Schedule, but as I determined, there was a clerical error in the Schedule which incorrectly designated Reserve No. 12 as Wewayakum reserve. I am also of the opinion, that in the circumstances of this case, I have the jurisdiction to correct this error.
Cape Mudge's Position
[256]
Cape Mudge referred to a number of cases in support of their position that Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were created in 1888, however a majority of these cases dealt with the preconfederation period and involved a different constitutional regime. As such, their relevance to the case at bar is limited at best, if at all. The cases, namely,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , can be distinguished by the fact that during the colonial period legislative jurisdiction and proprietary interest were both vested in a single level of government and therefore it was not necessary to transfer administration and control of lands for Indians to the Federal Government because no such government existed. This is to be contrasted with the case before me where transfer of administration and control of land to the federal government was a requirement.
[257]
Cape Mudge argued that Green was authorized to exercise the Royal prerogative unrestricted by any rule of common law or statute. They further submitted that the issue of whether Green actually allotted a reserve is a question to be determined by the Crown's subsequent treatment of the reserve, not compliance with any formal requirement. With respect, I do not agree.
[258]
Green was a surveyor. His surveys were followed by a joint federal provincial Royal Commission on Indian affairs, legislation respecting Reserve lands in the province of B.C. and a formal conveyance from the provincial government to the federal government with a right of resumption. I agree with Campbell River's assertion that if Green, a surveyor, was authorized to do what Cape Mudge alleges he was authorized to do, the Royal Commission, the enabling legislation and the joint Orders in Council would all have been redundant. The only manner in which Green could be said to have been exercising the Royal Prerogative is through the Provincial and Federal Orders in Council appointing him. As I determined elsewhere in my reasons, these Orders in Council limited his authority to determining the extent and boundaries of the Indian Reserves  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. If I accepted Cape Mudge's argument, this would mean that the Provincial Order-in-Council appointing Green was an exercise of the Provincial Royal Prerogative to appropriate lands to be reserved for Indians and to convey administration and control over those lands to the Federal Government, and the Federal Order-in-Council appointing Green was acceptance of such conveyance of administration and control by the Federal Government. This could not be so for a number of reasons. At the time the Order-in-Council appointing Green and at the time of his actual survey of reserves No. 11 and 12, there was legislation in effect restricting the exercise of the Provincial Royal Prerogative for appropriation purposes to the manner required by s. 56 of the
Land Act
, that is by way of notice signed by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works published in the British Columbia Gazette. This was never done. It was not until 1889 that the wording of the
Land Act
was changed substituting the word "may" for the word "shall" in s. 56. Based on the
De Keyser's Royal Hotel
case, the Provincial Crown could not exercise its Royal Prerogative without complying with the legislation. After the amendment to the
Land Act
in 1889, substituting "may" for "shall", it may be that the Provincial Crown was not restricted to exercising the Royal Prerogative in the manner provided by the
Land Act
. However, it was still required to exercise the prerogative through some appropriate legal instrument. There was no such legal instrument until the passage of Order-in-Council BCOC-911 in 1923 authorized by the
Indian Affairs Settlement Act
, S.B.C. 1919 c. 32.
[259]
Further, based on the reasoning in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and
A.G. Manitoba
, the conveyance of administration and control over provincial lands to the Federal Government contemplated by the Terms of Union and the
Land Act
could not have taken place at the time of the Orders in Council appointing Green to survey the Reserves. Rather, the transfer of administration and control took place when the lands were vested in the Federal Crown by BCOC-1036 in 1938. Furthermore, in my view, federal acceptance of conveyance of administration and control of lands could not have occurred any earlier than 1924 by virtue of Federal OCPC 1265.
[260]
In response to the argument that the reserves were created de facto, or based on the actions of government officials, I note that in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the Privy Council refused to allow the Province to be bound by the actions of its officials unless such actions were sanctioned by an express legal instrument. The reserves, in my view, may have been set aside for the use of the Laichkwiltok tribe in 1888 and then subsequently reassigned to individual bands, namely No. 11 to the Campbell River Band and No. 12 to the Cape Mudge Band following the agreement in 1907, however, I agree with Campbell River,
that in law
, they could not have been created until federal legislative jurisdiction attached to the lands and this could not have occurred until there was appropriation of the lands by the Province for the purpose of establishing reserves and a transfer of administration and control to the Federal Government. This was accomplished by BCOC-1036 in 1938. Where I differ with Campbell River's position is that, although the Orders in Council indicate that the reserves No. 11 and 12 were created for the Campbell River Band, in my view there was a clerical error and Reserve No. 11 was to have been created for the Campbell River Band and Reserve No. 12 was to have been created for the Cape Mudge Band. However, I am satisfied that the reserves were created in law in 1938. As Campbell River correctly pointed out, if the theory of early reserve creation was accepted by this court, it would be difficult to reconcile such a finding with those instances where the finally allotted lands as reserves never passed to the Federal Government, or where configurations approved by the McKenna-McBride Commissioners were changed, without surrenders, by the confirmations of the McKenna-McBride Commission and by Orders in Council 911, 1265 and 1036.
[261]
Cape Mudge also argued that unless Green had the authority to set aside lands for a particular Indian Band, that land would not come under the protection of the
Indian Act
and be made safe from preemption by settlers. In my view, what was happening in the 1880's when O'Reilly was Reserve Commissioner was that lands were being surveyed for their eventual transfer to the Federal Government as Indian reserves. The very purpose of conducting these surveys was evidenced by the problems  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River between the Nunns brothers and the Indians, ie. to prevent pre-emption by white settlers. Therefore, although the reserves were not officially created prior to the appropriation of the land by the Province and conveyance of administration and control to the Federal Government, the delineations of the reserves by the Reserve Commissioners was the first step in the gradual process of Reserve creation. I am satisfied that this was sufficient to prevent the lands from being preempted and in this regard I note particularly the comments of Cumming, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at pp. 70 to 71:
"Prior to 1880, none of the plaintiffs had acquired any interest in the Tuckozap lands. Title to all public lands was vested in the Crown in the right of the province. The 'allotment' of the Tuckozap reserve by Commissioner Sproat on July 10, 1878, did not operate to grant any beneficial interest in land ...
"It is common ground that neither the allocation of land by the Reserve Commission or its successor individual commissioners, nor the approvals of such allocations by the Chief Commissioner of Land and Works, had any proprietary significance.
The process simply resulted in an administrative withdrawal of provincial Crown land from homestead pre-emptions or other resource dispositions. The Indians were protected administratively in their use of the allotted lands
. That protection could be, and in point of fact was, withdrawn, in the case of the so-called 'cut off lands'. The allocation process did lead to the preparation of legal surveys of lands allocated as such lands were candidates for reserve status. The Tuckozap reserve was surveyed and the survey plan (ex. 3) was endorsed with the approval of the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works on June 24, 1887, almost nine years later." (Underlining mine)
Therefore, the proprietary interest in Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 was not created until the conveyance of the Indian reserves to the Federal Government by Order-in-Council 1036. However, the Indians were protected administratively in the use of their allotted lands so as to prevent preemption by settlers.
[262]
Cape Mudge maintained that Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were de facto reserves set aside for their benefit. In support of this position, they referred to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . However, in
Paul
the Indian tribe relying on the creation of the de facto reserve actually occupied the reserve in question. In the case before me, the Wewaikum were and are still currently residing on the Campbell River Reserve. Further, in
Paul
there had been a conveyance to the Provincial Crown which imposed a term of trust on the Province that land would be held in trust for the Indians of the Meductic Maliseet tribe. This is not the situation in the case before me. Further, it would seem to me that the authorities cited by Cape Mudge tend to support the notion that if a de facto reserve was established in 1888, it would have been created in favour of the Indians who were occupying the lands reserved, namely the Wewaiakum at Reserve No. 11 and the Wewaiakai at Reserve No. 12.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.)
[263]
As I have made reference to a number of decisions of the B.C. Court, which I have found to be of considerable assistance with respect to the issue of the reserve creation process in B.C., a discussion of these cases may be appropriate. The
Mount Currie Indian Band
case dealt with an interlocutory injunction and therefore I note at the outset that it is not a decision on the merits of the case. However, I am still of the opinion that the case is of assistance because the reasoning in the case is applicable to the case before me.
Mount Currie
involved an application by the Attorney General of B.C. for an injunction to prevent members of the Mount Currie Indian Band from blockading a road which passed through their reserve. The province passed an Order-in-Council in 1990 pursuant to which they resumed part of the land within the Mount Currie Indian reserve to make road improvements, based on a right of resumption given to the province by Order-in-Council 1036 in 1938. The Band argued that Order-in-Council 1036 was ultra vires and that the Provincial Crown had no right to resume
any
portion of the reserve. The Band also argued, apart from their aboriginal interest, which in that case there was not sufficient evidence to establish such an aboriginal interest, that their reserve had been approved by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works for the British Columbia in June of 1887 and thereafter had been an Indian Reserve within the meaning of the
Indian Act
and administered by the Department of Indian Affairs for the use and benefit of the Mount Currie Indian Band. This argument is very similar to the argument advanced by Cape Mudge in the case before me. The Mount Currie Indian Band claimed that when this reserve was set aside for their use and benefit there was no reservation of any right of reversion or resumption or the other exceptions that were set out in Order-in-Council 1036 and therefore after June 1884, the right to use the occupation of the lands was a matter of federal jurisdiction. As such, the province did not have the right to create roads or other auxiliary matters given to the province in the conveyance of 1938 because the reserve was created in 1884 for the Band without any reservation of rights being given to the province. In the case before me, the argument was that Reserves 11 and 12 were created in 1888 as a result of Green's survey, for the use and benefit of the Wewaikai Band and it was created in such a way that the Wewaikai could not lose any right to the reserves except by way of surrender, pursuant to the terms of the
Indian Act
. The Band in
Mount Currie
also asserted there was an allotment of the reserve in question by O'Reilly in 1881 as well as approval by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works on June 4, 1888. This combined allotment and approval constituted a conveyance as contemplated by Article 13 of the Terms of Union. Once again, Cape Mudge made a similar argument before me.
[264]
The Crown in
Mount Currie
argued there was no conveyance by the provincial Crown of any beneficial interest in the reserve until 1938, essentially Campbell River's position. Unfortunately, the majority of the judges of the B.C. Court of Appeal refused to decide the case on the merits, although they did determine there was an arguable case that the reserves were created in 1938. Anderson, J., found that the reserves were not created in 1884. Madame Justice Southin was in the minority, minority in that she found that there was sufficient evidence before the court to allow her to decide the issue of when the reserve was created. There is no dispute that her reasons are in no way binding, however, I found them and the rational behind them of great assistance in coming to my determination. At p. 187 she set out a number of propositions relating to the question of "when and how lands become 'reserved for the Indians' within the administrative and legislative control of the Parliament of Canada and, thus, beyond the reach of the Legislature of British Columbia?" (p. 186):
"1. The control of public lands is within the provincial legislative and administrative purview and, therefore, only the Province can cause lands to be 'reserved for the Indians'. (See the Term of Union (Schedule, pp. 210-211) and ss. 108, 109 and 92(5) of the
Constitution Act, 1867
(p. 189, infra))
"2. In the absence of legislation on the matter, ie. where the disposition of Crown lands remains within the prerogative, the lands of the Crown can be dealt with only by some outward public manifestation of the will of the Crown such as a grant under the Great Seal, letters patent or an order-in-council. Where there is applicable legislation, the requirements of the legislation must be observed before any dealing with the Crown lands can be effective.
"I add to these propositions certain propositions which, in my opinion, are correct but for which there is no direct authority:
"3. As there is nothing in s. 91(24) as to how lands become 'reserved' nor requiring the assent of the Dominion to lands becoming 'reserved', lands become 'reserved' when the Province does some act or series of acts which, upon their true construction mean that the Province has 'reserved' the lands for the Indians.
"4. If, uno flatu, the Province both reserves and preserves a power to 'dereserve' (to coin a word) in whole or in part, the lands are subject to what is analogous to a condition of defeasance.
"5. But if it does not so preserve its power to 'dereserve' cancel or resume, at the time the lands are reserved, it cannot do so subsequently without the assent of the Dominion.
"6. Both the
Indian Act
as it was in 1938 and the
Indian Act
as it was in 1990 exclude, by necessary implication, any prerogative power in the Governor in Council to deal with 'Lands reserved for the Indians'. Thus, the assent of the Dominion can only be given in accordance with the
Indian Act
."
Madame Justice Southin went on to find the reserves were actually created with the passage of Orders in Council 911 and 1265 in 1923, on the basis that after this time there in essence was nothing more to do. In her opinion, "upon the true construction of these instruments of state [the Order-in-Council of 1923] no right of resumption was retained by the Province in 1923 and none was created in 1938". (p. 208). With respect, I do not agree. In my view, the conveyance outlined in Order-in-Council 1036 was still a requirement for the formal conveyance of administration and control of the lands to the federal government. As I understand, Southin, J., was of the view that by 1924 there was consensus between the federal and provincial governments because the Royal Commission had delineated all the reserves to be transferred and essentially all that was required to be done had been done, namely, the consents had been obtained from both levels of government and the Ditchburn Clarke Inquiry had completed its work. Therefore, the Orders in Council passed in 1923 and 1924 created lands reserved for Indians and the 1938 Order-in-Council was simply a formality.
[265]
On the other hand, I do agree with Southin, J.'s, basis for rejecting the argument that the reserves were created in 1888. At that time the
Land Act
provided that in order for lands to be conveyed to the federal government for reserves to be created, acceptance by the B.C. Commissioner of Lands and Works and publication in the B.C. Gazette was required. Publication in the B.C. Gazette never occurred. Southin, J., was of the view that since legislation was in place setting out the requirements for reserve creation, the royal prerogative to create a reserve was supplanted. Southin, J., also found that there was no need to gazette because, at p. 207, she noted that:
"Although the point was not made before us, I should say that since this Order-in-Council [911] was made pursuant to the special
Act
of 1919, there was, in my opinion, no necessity for the reserves to be gazetted pursuant to the
Land Act
. The special
Act
and the Order-in-Council thereunder overrode the
Land Act
."
The
Special Act
Southin, J., was referring to was the
British Columbia Act
, passed on March 29, 1919 and provided for the settlement of differences between the Governments of the Dominion and the Province respecting Indian lands and Indian affairs in British Columbia. In other words, there was new legislation in place which dealt with the way reserves were created, namely reserves were to be created as a result of a Royal Commission and the approval by the Royal Commission by the two levels of government and then a subsequent conveyance. As such, the
Land Act
no longer applied.
[266]
During oral argument, I posed the question how many reserves were "allotted" before s. 56 of the
Land Act
was amended substituting "may" for the word "shall", in 1889. Counsel for Cape Mudge returned with a response indicating that a number of reserves had been allotted thereby lending support for Cape Mudge's position that if the court accepted Campbell River's interpretation regarding s. 56 of the
Land Act
which was in force at the time Green surveyed Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 in 1888, then all of the Reserves allegedly allotted by Reserve Commissioners would be invalid. With respect, I do not think that would be the effect. It is my understanding that a majority of those reserves would still be Reserves today because they were conveyed by the Province to the Dominion and set aside as reserves in 1938. As the reserves were created at law in British Columbia after Confederation in 1938, it was no longer necessary to comply with the
Land Act
because the
British Columbia Indian Lands Settlement Act
and the
Indian Affairs Settlement Act
together with the Orders in Council passed thereunder, over-rode the provisions of the
Land Act
, per the comments of Southin, J., in
Mount Currie
.
The Royal Prerogative to Set Apart Crown Lands
[267]
Cape Mudge's position is that Green was authorized to allot Indian reserves by special delegation of the royal prerogative, unrestricted by any rule of common law. According to Cape Mudge, the royal prerogative includes a residual power to set apart or reserve Crown lands for a particular purpose, such as reserves for the use and benefit of a particular band of Indians. In support of this proposition, Cape Mudge referred to authorities relating to reserve creation during colonial British Columbia, post-Confederation British Columbia and contemporary British Columbia.
[268]
Cape Mudge maintained that in colonial British Columbia, based on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.P.C.) (the
Deadman's Island Case
), Indian lands were reserved from pre-emption by proclamation of the Governor, Sir James Douglas. The source of Douglas' authority was the royal prerogative and Douglas was free to delegate his prerogative to an authorized agent. That may be so, however, in the case before me, I am not dealing with a case of a pre-Confederation reserve.
[269]
In post Confederation British Columbia, Cape Mudge noted that the Royal Prerogative continued in the powers of the federal and provincial Crowns' acts on behalf of the state within their respective spheres of jurisdiction. As noted earlier, authority over lands reserved for Indians was bestowed upon the federal government by virtue of s. 91 of the
BNA Act
and authority over Crown lands in B.C was bestowed upon the provincial government by virtue of s. 109 of the
BNA Act
. The Crown's prerogative powers were exercised by the Governor in Council or the Lieutenant Governor in Council. Orders in Council were used to delegate the authority to exercise the prerogative to agents of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 469. In support of its assertion that authority to allot lands for Indian reserves (after Confederation) was vested in the Executive, unfettered by legislation, in other words the
Land Act
, Cape Mudge relies on the Supreme Court of Canada decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.). This, according to Cape Mudge, was the state of the law in 1888 when Green was appointed by Order-in-Council. Specifically, Cape Mudge quotes from a passage from the reasons of Rinfret, C.J., wherein he indicated that Orders in Council of the Provincial and Federal government designating Coal Harbour as a public harbour were valid because both governments were exercising powers which were part of the residual prerogative of the Crown, in that the transfer from one government to another was not appropriately effected by ordinary conveyance. Counsel for Cape Mudge also cited a passage from the reasons wherein Rinfret, C.J., noted at p. 21:
"We do not agree with the contention of counsel for the respondents that the Royal prerogative is vested in the Legislature and we think it is vested in the Executive. Crown lands are vested in His Majesty the King; and there is no difference in quality between the Crown acting under its prerogative, or under a modern statute. It must be so a fortiori when the exercise of the prerogative is not in respect of an alienation of lands, but merely in respect of a transfer of the administration to the best available use."
Cape Mudge maintains that the same must hold true for the allotment of an Indian reserve, as there is no transfer of title to the Indians in the allotment process (title remains vested in the Crown), only recognition of the Indians' pre-existing rights.
[270]
Upon a careful reading of the
Western Higbie
decision, it is clear that the issue in that case was whether the foreshore of Coal Harbour in Vancouver had become vested in Canada by virtue of reciprocal Orders in Council of the governments of B.C. and Canada, passed in 1924 to settle outstanding differences as to what lands covered with water were public harbours which passed to the Dominion by virtue of s. 108 of the
Constitution Act 1867
. The majority of the court found that the Provincial Order-in-Council amounted to an admission that the foreshore had become the property of Canada in 1871, in the sense of passing from the administrative control of the Province to that of the Dominion, while remaining vested in the Crown. I agree with Campbell River's submission that what was upheld by the Supreme Court was the validity of the Order-in-Council as an admission by the governments (and particularly by the Province) that the foreshore had passed to the Federal Government in 1871, when British Columbia entered into Confederation. In this regard, I note the following passage at pp. 13 to 14:
"It cannot be said that the Orders in Council, either from the Province or from the Dominion, are lacking legislative authority, or ratification. Counsel, both for the appellant and for the Province of British Columbia (Intervenor), were able to point to some statutes giving more or less legislative authority, or ratification, to what was being done through those Orders in Council by both the Province and the Dominion. But, even if the argument on that point might be said not to be altogether convincing, there remains that these Orders in Council were Acts of the highest authority and they were acted upon by both parties to them for more than 17 years when the present action was instituted. They constitute an unequivocal admission that these harbours, including the spot now under discussion, became the property of the Dominion, not only at the time when the Orders in Council were adopted respectively by the interested parties, but also in 1871 at the time when British Columbia entered Confederation.
"Of course, it was urged by counsel for the respondents that the Government of British Columbia had no power to make admissions as are contained in the Order-in-Council which it passed; but I must confess my inability to accept the argument made on behalf of the respondents on that point."
As I read the decision, Rinfret, C.J., was speaking for himself and Taschereau, J., and in two separate sets of reasons, Kerwin, J., spoke for himself and Hudson, J., and Rand, J., spoke for himself. In my view, neither of the other two sets of reasons stand for the proposition advanced by Cape Mudge. Rand, J., stated at p. 41:
"With a specific allocation of public lands to the Province and a like investment of legislative jurisdiction to make laws in relation to them, can it be said that there remains any residual prerogative right in the Provincial Crown to transfer any part of that property to the dominion? In the absence of legislation, such a residue may remain in relation to dealings with them in a provincial aspect. But a transfer effects a change not only in beneficial interest but also in legislative jurisdiction. By this means the Provincial Crown would bring about a redistribution of assets and legislative authority over them contrary to the allocation by the statute. Certainly it is not contemplated that particular property may not pass between two jurisdictions but the distribution made by the
Act
can be altered, only in accordance with the powers, express or implied, which the
Act
itself provides; and here I find no means except legislative."
Further, Kerwin, J., appears to have been purposely narrow, when he made the following comments at p. 35:
"These considerations indicate that in a case of this character, the court should not go beyond what is necessary for the determination of the points in issue. Nothing therefore is said upon the broad question raised by these arguments and their applicability to Canada. It is sufficient to refer to para. 4 of the Provincial Order-in-Council. That is an admission by the executive authority of British Columbia that the harbours mentioned were 'Public Harbours' within the meaning of Item 2 of Schedule 3 of the
B.N.A. Act
, 1867, and that by virtue of s. 108 of the
Act
they became, as of July 20, 1871, the 'property' of Canada."
Therefore, the Orders in Council were admissions that the lands were the property of Canada. Campbell River argues, that it has the same approach, in that OCPC-1265/1924 is an unequivocal admission by Canada that the lands in Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were set aside for the Campbell River Band not just when the Order-in-Council was passed, but also when the reserves were surveyed in 1888.
[271]
Cape Mudge also made reference to the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 321, particularly the following passage at pp. 336-337 D.L.R.:
"Their interest in their lands is a pre-existing legal right not created by the Royal Proclamation, by s. 18(1) of the
Indian Act
, or by any other executive order or legislative provision.
"It does not matter, in my opinion, that the present case is concerned with the interest of an Indian band in a reserve rather than with unrecognized aboriginal title in traditional tribal lands. The Indian interest in the land is the same in both cases ..."
I have some concerns regarding the applicability of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> to the case at bar because there is no question of any pre-existing aboriginal interest in the lands. However, if Cape Mudge is simply asserting that there can be an Indian reserve where the legal title is in the Crown in the right of the Province, I believe there is no dispute on this point. This, in my view is what was intended in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . However, the question for me to determine is how is such a reserve created out of provincial public lands, given the divided jurisdiction existing after Confederation?
[272]
In terms of the requirements of s. 56 of the
Land Act
, I cannot see how, given the clear language of the section, the Crown can simply ignore a provision to which it is bound, by exercising its royal Prerogative.
[273]
I also note that in
Western Higbie
the respondents argued that the Orders in Council were invalid because, among other things, they lacked statutory sanction. In the case at bar, it was not argued that the transfer of administration and control from the Province to the Federal Government through an Order-in-Council would be invalid because there was a failure of statutory sanction. As I understand, based on the comments by Southin, J., in
Mount Currie
, the Royal Prerogative is subject to the following conditions:
1) it must be exercised in some overt manner, such as by Order-in-Council or letters patent; and
2) where there is legislation in the field, it must be exercised in accordance with such legislation.
As I read
Western Higbie
, the case does not refute either of these propositions.
[274]
Cape Mudge also relies on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) to support the proposition that it was not necessary for the Crown, in exercising the Royal Prerogative, to comply with the provisions of the
Land Act
and that it was the Royal Prerogative which was the source of Green's authority. As I indicated earlier, the source of Green's authority in the case at bar were the Orders in Council appointing him and in my opinion, these Orders in Council did not give him the authority to create Indian reserves at law, nor did these Orders in Council purport to transfer administration and control of the reserve lands from the province to the federal government.
[275]
In
Hay River
the Federal Court considered the legality of the creation of an Indian reserve in the Northwest Territories by federal Order-in-Council. Cape Mudge relied on the following passage at p. 103:
"The
Indian Act
defines 'reserves' but nowhere deals with the creation of a reserve. Notwithstanding the words 'pursuant to the
Indian Act
', in para. (2) of the Order-in-Council, the authority to set apart Crown lands for an Indian reserve in the Northwest Territories appears to remain based entirely on the Royal Prerogative, not subject to any statutory limitation."
However, in my opinion, the
Hay River
case is limited in its application to the Northwest Territories where administration and control of the lands was already within the power of the Federal Government. In this regard, I agree with the court's finding that there was no statutory limitation to the authority of the Federal Crown to set apart its own lands for an Indian reserve. As such, I have no difficulty accepting Cape Mudge's submission that the
Hay River
case is authority for the proposition that Reserve creation is within the Royal prerogative and not subject to any statutory limitation, subject to two significant qualifications. First, the decision applies to a post-Confederation reserve within provincial territory
after
the lands were placed under the administration or control of Canada and second there was no statute in place restricting the exercise of that prerogative. The lands had to first be conveyed to Canada for that purpose and in the case at bar, the prerogative of the Crown in the right of B.C. to appropriate and convey land was constrained by s. 56 of the
Land Act
of 1884. In line with the reasoning in
Hay River
, s. 56 was the authority to create a land bank for the purpose of conveyance of the lands to Canada. In my view, to the extent that s. 56 set conditions relating to the creation of the landbank and to the conveyance of the lands to Canada, it supplanted the prerogative of the Crown in the right of B.C. with respect to such appropriation and conveyance. Moreover, in
Hay River
, the trial judge found that the plaintiff had no standing to raise this issue, and therefore did not address the issue.
[276]
Further, the Royal Prerogative must still be exercised by some express legal instrument, such an order in council or letters patent. The orders in council appointing Green did not constitute a conveyance of the land from the province to the federal government, nor as I have already determined, did they authorize Green to allocate the reserves to any particular band. Therefore, the
Hay River
case is distinguishable from the case before me, in that administration and control over the lands in question did not have to be conveyed from any province to the Federal government since the lands were, at the time the Order-in-Council was passed, Federal government lands.
[277]
There was also some discussion regarding the fact that American jurisprudence had been accepted by the Supreme Court of Canada on the issue of reserve creation. I note that the following Supreme Court of Canada decisions referred to American jurisprudence:
Calder, Guerin
and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 280; 56 C.C.C.(3d) 225; 70 D.L.R.(4th) 427. However, these cases all dealt with the issue of aboriginal title and are therefore distinguishable from the case at bar. I agree with Campbell River's submission that American jurisprudence is not relevant with respect to the issue of post confederation reserve creation in British Columbia where the very unique features of Canadian constitution law are most relevant and applicable.
V. Reserves Set Aside For The Use Of The Members Of The Laich-Kwil-Tach Indians
[278]
Once again I wish to state there is no magic to the terms "set aside", "allotted", "assigned" with respect to reserves and when the terms are used it does not mean that the lands were established as reserves until such a determination is made by this court.
[279]
I am satisfied after reviewing the oral, documentary and opinion evidence that the subtribal divisions of the Laichkwiltach in existence at the time of O'Reilly's and Green's surveys of the Laichkwiltach reserves were "complex, confusing and ephemeral". However, I am satisfied on the evidence that one could say that to non-native observers in the late 19th century one group was identifiable as a distinctive and cohesive tribal entity, the Laichkwiltach. On the other hand, distinctiveness of the subgroups was not as clear to the non-native population.
[280]
Pioneer anthropologist Franz Boas stated in 1887 that he found it difficult to distinguish any of the Laichkwiltach subtribes or to demarcate any individual tribal territories [document 377]. Anthropologist George Dawson in his report to the Royal Society of Canada, identified in 1887, the following:
"Wa'-lit-sum, Wi-We-Eke. Kwi-Ha, Wi'-We-Ekum and A-Wa-hoo. These tribes are closely allied, their central place being at Cape Mudge. They are together known to the whites as the Li-Kwil-Tah or Uculta Indians." [document 387 at p. 74]
[281]
The local non-native population also made reference to the "Laichkwiltach" or "Uculta" tribe. The Nunn affidavit, sworn in support of their pre-emption claim  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River on December 29, 1887 stated that:
"An Indian of the 'Eucultaw' Tribe named Quacksister has done and continues to interfere with our rights and privileges extended to us under the Land Laws of the Province by constantly trespassing upon our pre-emptional Land ... and we ask that out rights be protected from the interference of this Indian or any others of his Tribe ..." [document 415]
[282]
Reports of Indian Agents, DeBeck and Halliday illustrate the difficulty that existed in identifying the individual subgroups of the Laichkwiltach [documents 848, 1060]. In 1911 Halliday in his Annual Report for the Kwawkewlth Agency [document 1060] still identified the Wawlitsun, Wewaiaikaum, Wewaiaikai and Kwiahkah Bands as subgroups belonging to the Laichkwiltach nation. In this report under the heading "population" Halliday wrote:
"The population of this Band is 86, which shows a great decrease from last year; but the reason for this is that formerly some of the people who were half Cape Mudge and half Campbell River were being counted in both places under different names. Also, the Kwiahkah band was enumerated with the Cape Mudge band."
[283]
In terms of the expert opinions, Dr. Suttles (Suttles), as editor of vol. 7 of the Smithsonian
Handbook of North American Indians
, included an article on the North Coast Salish by anthropologists Kennedy and Bouchard which identified at p. 441 the 19th century Laichkwiltach as a tribe (Exhibit C-83, Suttles cross-exam, vol. 23, pp. 4929-4931).
[284]
Dr. Pritchard (Pritchard) on cross-examination also agreed that the tribal divisions of the Laichkwiltach prior to the turn of the century were "numerous" and "perplexing to whites" (vol. 23, p. 3095).
[285]
Moreover, I note that the evidence of the Cape Mudge Band members also identified their tribe as the Laichkwiltach. Harry Assu in his book (CR-54) at pp. 16 and 18 (C-91), acknowledges that his tribe was the Ligwilds'xw (Laichkwiltach) and that twelve reserves were set aside for the Lekwiltok. Pritchard also confirmed that Harry Assu believed that the Laichkwiltach was his tribe (Pritchard, cross exam, vol. 16, p. 3530).
[286]
June Johnson also testified that her father, Charlie Peters, (a Cape Mudge elder born some time in 1897) identified himself as a "Laichkwiltach" when he was speaking about people as a whole in the band (Johnson cross-exam, vol. 45, p. 6246).
[287]
The Crown cited a decision of Saunders, J., and reference to evidence provided by Ralph Dick in the B.C. Fisheries case (currently under appeal). In that case, Ralph Dick asserted
for the Laichkwiltach tribe
the right, based on aboriginal activity to participate in the modern commercial salmon fishery with priority over all commercial and sports fisheries (excerpt found in exhibit C-50). Extracts from Pritchard's report on that case was filed in this action as exhibits C-50A and C-50B. Pritchard's evidence is replete with references to the Laichkwiltach as a cohesive and identifiable tribal entity in the 19th century. The Crown in its submission refers to numerous passages from Pritchard's report in the Right to Fish in Eastern Johnstone Strait (exhibit C-50B) which supports the Crown's assertion that Pritchard considered the Laichkwiltach as a cohesive entity. I note the following comments made by Pritchard in this report at p. 31:
"... In spite of the confusion, however, observers throughout the historical period have consistently seen and designated the Lekwiltok as a distinctive entity within the overall category of the Kwakiutl."
At p. 37:
"The interconnections were so extensive that pioneer anthropologist, Franz Boas, wrote that he found it difficult to distinguish the Lekwiltok tribes or to demarcate individual tribal territories."
At pp. 45 and 46:
"... This speaks of a cohesion and unity of a fundamental kind ... A major factor for cohesion among the Lekwiltok was the practice of individuals holding titles - and thus membership - in more than one Numayn or tribe ... this type of cross cutting affiliation resulted in a wide spread overlapping of identity and interest among tribes, further solidifying their sense of unity."
At p. 50:
"The distinctive character of the Lekwiltok derives from their forming a separate ritual congregation apart from that of the other Kwak'wala-speaking tribes; customary and prolonged co-residence; close military co-operation and mutual support; and cross cutting tribal membership.
"On this evidence, I believe it reasonable to characterize the Lekwiltok as a nation."
And at p. 61:
"Irrespective of the ostensible 'tribal territories', members of all of the Lekwiltok divisions appear to have enjoyed access to wide areas for purposes of resource exploitation by reason of the cohesive factors discussed in Chapter III. Consequently, it would be inappropriate and essentially meaningless to construe that areas labelled as the 'tribal territory' of any particular unit of the Lekwiltok would have been effectively off limits to individuals from the other tribes.
Pritchard concluded at p. 93:
"In this report, evidence was adduced that indicates the following:
'The group known as the Lekwiltok comprised a "nation" in the aboriginal context: A tribe or group of related tribes sharing a common language and cultural forms.
. . . . .
'Frequent intermarriage, and the practice of multiple Numaym and tribal membership served to enhance this cohesion, and bound the units together in an intricate social and economic web.'"
[288]
The above comments serve to explain the difficulty in ascertaining, for example, the tribal affiliation of Captain John. Further, it would also allow for the fact that members of one subgroup or band were allowed to live on the land of another subgroup for periods of time. For example, members of the Laichwiltok wintered together at various villages and potlatched together at other villages.
[289]
Cape Mudge argued that there was no difficulty in differentiating between band or subgroups of the Laichkwiltok and pointed to documents where the subgroups were clearly identified. To some degree Cape Mudge is correct, in the sense that the names were no doubt clear to non-natives. However, in my view, after examining the evidence as a whole, the difficulty was not in the name but in identifying who was in what subgroup, numayn or band. Men and women passed from one group to another and clearly a person could be a member of more than one subgroup. The attempt to categorize Captain John's tribal affiliation epitomized this difficulty and he was appropriately known as "Smoke All Around".
[290]
Further, during cross-examination at the Ralph Dick Fisheries trial Pritchard acknowledged that historically the Lekwiltok were a distinctive unit within the Kwakiutl speaking group (exhibit C-50A, p. 46). The Crown also made reference to the fact that in the Fisheries trial Pritchard characterized the Matlaten Reserve No. 4 as having been designated for the Laichkwiltach by Commissioner O'Reilly (Exhibit C-50A, p. 73).
[291]
Suttles in a draft of his report filed in the present proceedings described Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 as allocated to the Lekwiltok. At p. 3 of Exhibit CR-79, Suttles originally stated that:
"These resources were described by Ashdown Green, who surveyed the Lekwiltok reserves in glowing terms:
'The Campbell River is one of the principal fishing resorts on this tribe [the Lekwiltok] and the sea affords an unlimited supply of fish of various kinds ...'"
In the copy of the draft report filed as exhibit CR-79, the term "[the Lekwiltok]" was crossed out and the reference was omitted in the final draft of this report filed by Cape Mudge as Exhibit CM-77 in the action before me. Suttles' evidence with respect to this omission was that the earlier draft was discussed at a meeting with counsel for the Cape Mudge Band and Pritchard, following which the decision was made by Suttles to delete the reference to the "Lekwiltok" (Suttles, cross-examination, vol. 35, p. 4774). In light of this "amendment" or "deletion", I have difficulty attributing much weight, if any, to his report.
[292]
A great deal of evidence, much of it opinion evidence, was led as to which Indian group or groups the reserves were set aside for. The matter was further complicated by varying and interchangeable terms used by the experts. The following terms were used by Pritchard, Suttles and Tennant: nation, ceremonial congregation, local community groups, tribes, sub-tribes, bands and sub-bands. In the context of this varying terminology, there are numerous Orders in Council, correspondence and documents all of which use the terms with no real consistency. For example, in an Order-in-Council nation was defined as all Indian tribes speaking the same language. In that situation did the term nation include a band, tribe or was the term used to mean nation? Band is a statutory term, defined in s. 3 of the 1876
Indian Act
in the following terms:
"The term 'band' means any tribe, band or body of Indians who own or are interested in a reserve or in Indian lands in common, of which the legal title is vested in the Crown, or who share alike in the distribution of any annuities or interest moneys for which the Government of Canada is responsible; the term 'the band' means the band to which the context relates; and the term 'band', when action is being taken by the band as such, means the band in council."
[293]
Pritchard attempted to explain the various terms in his Unit of Allotment Report, however, I believe these terms are artificial and are not determinative of allocation or reserve creation. What is clear is that land had to be set aside for the Indians because of the continuing influx of non-native peoples into British Columbia. This, in my view, was the underlying reason for the entire process of reserve creation or at least the need to define boundaries so that settlement could take place in the balance of British Columbia (see documents 230, 234, 194).
[294]
Commissioner Sproat in his correspondence with the Dominion Government also emphasized the urgency of completing the Reserve Commission's work. Sproat wrote on September 4, 1879 to Ottawa [document 184], stating that:
"Immediately north of these Klahoose, Sliammon and Homalthko tribes is the large and somewhat determined tribe of the Euclataws. They already have sent me to arrange for visits. These Indians claim, among other places, Salmon River, Valley, respecting which there are conflicting accounts, but which some say is the best agricultural valley in Vancouver Island. The Indians will not allow anyone to settle there. It appears to me to be highly necessary that the land question of the Euclataws should, if possible, be adjusted in good time, because, if any developments took place, as is possible, in this country, the Cowichan difficulty would be reproduced (with the Euclataws), and the Department involved in endless trouble."
Mandate of the Reserve Commission to Set Aside Land For Indian Tribal Groups
[295]
The terms of reference and mandate of the Reserve Commission, established in 1875, provided that reserves were to be defined for "each Indian Nation" [document 57]. Federal Order-in-Council PC 1088 passed by the Dominion Government on November 10, 1875, defined the terms of reference to be followed by the Reserve Commissioner in recommending reserves for the Indians of British Columbia and provided in part:
"... the said Commissioners shall as soon as practicable after their appointment meet at Victoria and make arrangements to visit, with all convenient speed in such order as may be found desirable, each Indian Nation (meaning by Nation - all Indian tribes speaking the same language) in British Columbia and after full enquiry on the spot, into all matters affecting the question, to fix and determine for each Nation separately the number, extent and a locality of the reserve or reserves to be allowed to it."
British Columbia accepted the terms of reference as set out by the Dominion by passing its own Order-in-Council, with essentially the identical wording on January 6, 1876 [document 61].
[296]
It appears that no Order-in-Council was ever passed amending the terms of reference, nor has Cape Mudge established that the Reserve Commissioners when appointed were ever specifically instructed to deviate from their terms of reference.
[297]
In response to Pritchard's suggestion, in his "Unit of Allotment" report (Exhibit CM-37), that a policy of defining reserves for Indian nations or large tribal groups was "practically unworkable" as it would have necessitated the relocation of Indians unto one central reserve, the Crown maintains that neither the terms of reference, nor the instructions to the Reserve Commissioners contemplate such a single or "central" reserve concept. The Crown submits, and I agree, that any uneasiness which may have existed in the minds of departmental officials as to the possible relocation of bands or tribes to one large "national" reserve was directly addressed by the instructions issued to the Reserve Commissioner quoted above. These instructions specified that an allocation of several smaller reserves suiting the needs of the local population of a nation, could and should be made. Such a process, would not in any way be inconsistent with the establishment of a group of reserves in the name of the larger tribal group or nation of Indians, thereby achieving the Dominion's objective of quickly securing land for Indians. The procedure mandated by the terms of reference and Commissioners' instructions was intended to achieve the dual objectives of:
1) quickly securing land for Indians before white settlement alienated all the desired locations, and
2) avoiding the necessity of a long and complex inquiry by the Commissioners into the individual subtribal allocation of such reserves.
The Commissioners were therefore instructed to determine the number of reserves to be assigned to any particular "Indian Nation" while at the same time ensuring that in defining the location of such reserves they did not "do any needless violence to existing tribal arrangements, and especially not to disturb the Indians in possession of any village's fishing stations ..." [document 72]. The Commissioners could therefore concentrate on determining the needs of the Indians by selecting their village sites, etc. to be defined as reserves for the larger tribal group or Indian nation, and leave the more time consuming task of effecting the individual allocation of such reserves to subtribal groups to be carried out at a later date by Indian Agents.
[298]
Pritchard in his "Unit of Allotment" report (CM-37) also rejected the idea that Reserve Commissioners could have set aside a number of local reserves for the use of nations or tribal groups as a whole, suggesting that such a procedure would have "invited trouble as numerous tribes comprising each nation vigorously guarded their individual territorial prerogative" and that such a procedure would have conflicted with the "native's highly developed sense of property rights" (p. 33 of CM-37). In response, the Crown submits, and I agree, that it was because of the complexity of the natives' own concepts of territory and property rights that it was necessary to set aside reserves for larger, rather than smaller groups. If the objective was to expeditiously "reserve" such land from encroachment by white settlers, an investigation by the Commissioners of the often complex nature of native subtribal property rights, involving multiple access rights, numaym ownership, and multiple numaym memberships would have resulted in delay and increased cost in sorting out correct individual allocation of each reserve.
[299]
The wording of the Orders in Council constituting the Reserve Commission stressed that work was to begin almost immediately after the appointment of the Commissioners. Commissioner Sproat, in his correspondence to the Dominion Government, emphasized the urgency of the Commission's work. With respect to the Laichkwiltok, I note once again, the letter Sproat wrote on September 4, 1878, to Ottawa [document 184] as well as the fact that Pritchard's interpretation of Commissioner Sproat's reference to defining reserves for the "tribe of the Euclataws" ( Pritchard cross-exam. vol. 23, pp. 3044-3050).
[300]
Pritchard also made no reference to document 184 in his "Unit of Allotment" report, nor did Pritchard make any reference in his report to the Minutes of Decision of Commissioner Sproat respecting the Laichkwiltok. During cross-examination, Pritchard admitted that this was an omission of a relevant document (Pritchard, cross-exam, vol. 23, p. 3040).
[301]
In his report, Pritchard argued that the principle of allocating reserves to "nations" or larger tribal groups was never followed "in practice" by the Reserve Commission (CM-37, p. 35). However, during cross-examination examples were put to Pritchard of a number of reserve allocations which were made to different coastal native tribes or nations, including the Squamish, Cowichan, Comox and Chemainus groups, which Pritchard conceded were "combinations of local tribal units" or "a tribal group", though he could not recall any instances where they allotted reserves for nations, nations being the language group, (Pritchard cross-exam, vol. 22, pp. 3014-3015). In my view, Pritchard conceded an important point when he agreed that reserves were defined for "tribal groups" since the Laichkwiltok easily fall within Pritchard's definition of "tribal group", namely combinations of local tribal units.
[302]
As such, there is some serious doubt as to Pritchard's singling out the Laichkwiltach as a native group which did not fit into the general pattern for coastal reserve allocations made by the Reserve Commission.
Practice Of Reserve Commissioners - Sproat
[303]
As noted earlier, Sproat's work covered the period from 1876 to 1880. During the first two years from 1876 to 1878, Commissioner Sproat acted as a Joint Commissioner appointed by both the Dominion and Provincial Government, along with Commissioners McKinley and Anderson [Document 154]. From 1878 to the date of Sproat's resignation in March of 1880, Sproat acted as the sole Reserve Commissioner [document 226].
[304]
Cape Mudge relies on the opinion of Pritchard to support the proposition that "in practice during all three phases (1876 to 1879) the Reserve Commissioners had allotted to local tribal groups" (CM-37, p. 71). With respect, upon a review of all the evidence relating to the reserves recommended and defined by the Sproat Commission, there is little support for this proposition.
[305]
In my opinion, a review of reserve allocations by Sproat for coastal native groups tends to support a practice of defining such reserves for large tribal groups or nations in accordance with the Orders in Council creating the Reserve Commission.
Squamish Reserves - 1876
[306]
In the case of the Squamish, Sproat recommended that reserves be defined for the tribe as far north as Howe Sound, which lies approximately 70 miles to the north of the reserves at Burrard Inlet. Sproat in his report to the Dominion Government, dated November 27, 1876, [document 85] described the Squamish people as "split up into sections" (p. 29) between Howe Sound and Burrard Inlet each under the authority of a separate Chief. The Crown maintains that notwithstanding such a division of the Squamish into various sections or subgroups, Sproat, after recommending a number of reserves, stated at p. 32:
"The Commissioners were careful to explain to the Indians that all the lands confirmed by them, or given by them as reserves, were for the people generally, not for any
particular Chiefs
or individuals." (Emphasis in original)
Comox Reserves - 1876
[307]
Reserves for the Comox tribal group or nation were defined by Commissioner Sproat in December of 1876. Sproat's report of December 12, 1876 to the Dominion [document 89] identified the Comox tribal group as composed of the Punt-Lahtch, the Comox and the A-Elk-Son tribes. Notwithstanding that these three subgroups according to Sproat originated from three different geographical areas, Sproat decided "to regard the three tribes as one people" (document 89, p. 1).
[308]
However, when confronted with this example, Pritchard commented that the Puntlahch and the Aelksun were virtually extinct coastal Salish groups that were caught up in intertribal warfare and had become absorbed by the Comox, and therefore they were essentially one tribe (Pritchard cross-exam, vol. 22, p. 3003). However, such an explanation was proven to be without foundation, when at p. 3005 of vol. 22 of the transcript, Pritchard conceded that the Reserve Commissioners were able to clearly identify the members of the various subjects and still decided to regard the three tribes as one people and that the reserves were set aside for the larger entity, known as the Comox. Although these Comox reserves are located on the coast of B.C., fairly close to the Laichkwiltach reserves, Pritchard made no reference to the Comox reserves in his "Unit of Allotment" report.
Chemainus Reserves - 1877
[309]
The Chemainus reserves were cited by Pritchard as an example of the Reserve Commission's "alleged" practice of defining reserves for "local community groups" (CM-37, p. 41). The Crown refers to Sproat's correspondence [document 92] to support its view that the Commission was treating the various subgroups or tribes of the Chemainus as one group for the purpose of defining their reserves. In a letter dated January 8, 1877, to the Dominion, Sproat writes:
"The many tribes and places belonging to or claimed by, the 'Chamainus' Indians. (sic) This general name is convenient for these Indians and is derived from the selection of the word 'Chemainus' by the Colonial Government as the name of the District. The Chemainus Indians in fact are a single tribe which live at Chemainus Bay. In lumping the different tribes together as Chemainus Indians. I mean the Chemainus, the Sickamin, the Li-Ick-sun, the Halalt, the Pa-Nel-A-Kut, with sub-tribes of the Pa-Nel-A-Kut, namely the Ga-Kwa-Lass and the Lamatcha." [document 92, pp. 85-86]
Cape Mudge points out that in a letter written 6 days later [document 93] Sproat stated:
"... I write on the subject of the Land Reserves laid out by the Commissioners for the Chemainus Indians
proper
. These Indians, as already stated, are only one tribe of various tribes living in the Chemainus district, which various tribes have distinctive names, though spoken of generally by the white people as 'Chemainus Indians'.
"The Chemainus Indians proper live at Chemainus Bay, and the district being an unsurveyed district, the Commissioners found on their arrival, that these Indians had no reserves except a small fishing reserve on the Chemainus river, which river is about 10 miles distant from the Bay" (Emphasis in original)
I am satisfied that Sproat was aware of the existence of separate tribes, despite the fact that this group of tribes were spoken of, generally by non-natives as the Chemainus Indians.
Cowichan Reserves
[310]
There is no doubt that the Commissioners defined the reserves of the Cowichan Indians for the benefit of a larger tribal group rather than any subgroups or bands (CM-37, p. 42). Such an allocation was made to the "Cowichan" nation or tribal group notwithstanding the fact that the Cowichan were composed of at least eight identifiable subgroups (CM-38, p. 42). No individual allocation of the numerous Cowichan reserves was made to any of these subgroups (see document 60, pp. 10-11 and the 1902 Schedule of Reserves, document 836).
Laichkwiltach Reserves
[311]
Pritchard entirely omitted any reference in his "Unit of Allotment" report (CM-37) to the practice followed by Sproat in recommending reserves for the Laichkwiltach (Pritchard cross-exam, vol. 23, pp. 3039-3040). If Sproat's "practice" is to be of any assistance in interpreting the "unit" for whom the reserves of the Laichkwiltach were defined, then some reference should surely have been made to these Minutes of Decision. Sproat's Minutes of Decision forwarded to Indian Superintendent Powell are found at document 249.
[312]
The Minutes of Decision recommending the reserves at Salmon River, Campbell River, Discovery Passage, the South Fork of the Campbell River (Quinsam) and on the Cape Mudge Peninsula are all captioned "Laich-kwil-tach Indians" with no designation of any subgroup or "band". The two other copies of Sproat's Laichkwiltach Minutes of Decision, documents 161 and 187, contain the footnote "The Comox also the subgroups called We-wai-akay and We-wai-akum of the Laich-kwil-tach are to have land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River.
[313]
In my opinion, Sproat's practice was to designate, if necessary, in the actual Minutes of Decision the name of the subgroup where such a subgroup was identified by the Commissioner. Such a notation is found, for example, in the Minutes below the designation "Laich-kwil-tach Indians" for a number of the reserves at pp. 2 to 6 of the Minutes of Decision [document 249]. This in my view reveals that the Commissioner did not adhere to any practice of designating subtribal groups on a sketch map in accordance with Pritchard's theory. Further, the sketch map included with Sproat's Minutes illustrating the location of the reserves at Quinsam and Campbell River (found between pp. 50 and 51 of handwritten copy of document 249) contains no notation as to the subgroup or band for whom these reserves were recommended. The significance of the Minutes of Decision, as opposed to the sketch map was recorded by Sproat in a letter dated February 25, 1879, to the Dominion Government [document 167] wherein he stated at p. 758:
"The actual written decision of the Commissioner is the important document - the survey sketch being merely explanatory ..."
What could be termed the Commission's practice of "temporarily"or "provisionally" allocating reserves is also illustrated by the Laichkwiltach Minutes of Decision, for example, the 10 acre reserve at Sydney Bay [document 249] was described as "temporarily reserved until the Indians have finally decided whether they will abandon this old winter residence or not".
[314]
The Crown submits, and I agree, that the Commission itself was of the opinion that its recommendations might only be of a provisional nature and subject to review and subsequent approval by the Dominion and Provincial governments, in accordance with the actual needs of the Indians. Such flexibility in the interpretation of the Minutes would, maintains the Crown, also extend to permitting subsequent amendment of the Department's administrative records so as to more accurately reflect the Indians' own opinions as to the correct subtribal allocation of such reserves as more details of such arrangements amongst the Indians became known to the Department.
[315]
Therefore, based on the evidence, I am satisfied that Sproat in assigning reserves, did not designate any particular band but designated reserves for the Laichkwiltach. Pritchard's evidence on this subject is of little or no use.
Practice Of Reserve Commissioners -
Commissioner O'Reilly
[316]
O'Reilly succeeded Sproat as Reserve Commissioner in 1880. As the Crown noted the "practice" of O'Reilly and the format he adopted in recommending reserves for the approval of the Provincial and Dominion Governments was the subject of a significant amount of documentary and opinion evidence.
[317]
O'Reilly was to a large degree the foundation for Pritchard's Unit of Allotment theory, namely that Reserve Commissioners designated the group for which the reserve was beneficially entitled to on the accompanying sketch map. Cape Mudge attempted to prove through Pritchard that O'Reilly maintained a consistent format of designating subtribal groups by way of a parenthetical notation made on a sketch map submitted with his Minutes of Decision. With respect to Pritchard and Cape Mudge, in my view, the evidence falls far short of establishing such a format or practice. Indeed, Pritchard while being cross-examined by Counsel for the Crown conceded that the majority of the Minutes of Decision and sketches prepared under O'Reilly's direction failed to conform with this "alleged practice or format". The Crown noted that a summary of all of the Minutes of Decision and sketches prepared under O'Reilly's direction between 1881 and 1897 was put to Pritchard on cross-examination as exhibit C-52 (see Pritchard cross-exam, vol. 24, p. 3264). On reviewing exhibit C-52, Pritchard conceded that of a total of 120 or more Minutes of Decision and sketches,
only about seven exceptions
bore any resemblance to his theory of O'Reilly's format of designating a tribal subgroup by way of a notation on a sketch map (see Pritchard cross-exam, vol. 24, p. 3271-3272). Given the omissions in Pritchard's report together with his concessions regarding his theory, I am of the view that his evidence should be given little or no weight.
[318]
I would go so far as to state, and this based on Pritchard 's entire evidence in this case, that I have serious reservations as to his credibility.
[319]
An examination of O'Reilly's own statements as recorded in the documents, as well as a review of a number of Minutes of Decisions prepared under his direction, further supports the Crown's submission that O'Reilly recommended that any reserve not be designated exclusively for a subtribal group. Such a division was left to be determined by the local Indian Agent. This practice coincided with the establishment of Indian Agencies in British Columbia, with each district being administered by an Indian Agent who lived among the Indians and was accessible to them (see document 220 and CM-37, p. 75).
[320]
In this regard, I note O'Reilly's statements which are consistent with his practice of leaving subtribal allocation to the local Indian Agent in the following:
1) The Nass River Conference of 1887, document 382 at pp. 257, 268-269; documents 270 and 263 are O'Reilly's Minutes of Decision and sketches wherein he stated:
"... In the event of their wishing to have the land divided, I told them it must be done by the local Agent; as with my indifferent knowledge of their distinctions, it was impossible for me to decide such matters."
and then at p. 268:
"The lands were set aside by me for the use of the tribes as a whole. I never undertook to subdivide the lands. That was done afterwards.
"You settle inter-tribal questions, but not domestic questions. Is that it? (question from Mr. Robson)
"Certainly."
2) Cornwall-Planta Commission, 1888 [document 539] and O'Reilly's response, in Green's presence regarding the division of Stony Point Reserve, at p. 3:
"I cannot say more about Stony Point, Mr. Todd must settle that matter. I looked on all the Naas river Indians as one tribe as I stated in my report to the Government the detail of allotment would rest with the Indian Agent."
3) Kitwangar/Tsimpsean Dispute - 1894, O'Reilly indicated at p. 181 [document 655] of his letter of transmittal recommending the allocation of reserves for the Kitwanger Indians:
"... [Reserve No. 8] is claimed both by the Kitwangar, and Tsimpsean tribes. Both bands were represented at my interview with them, and both strongly urged their respective rights to the land. As I had not sufficient evidence to warrant me in coming to a conclusion, I left this question in abeyance; the ownership to be decided by their respective Agents, Mr. Todd representing the Tsimpseans and Mr. Loring, Kitwangers."
[321]
Although there was no direct evidence from O'Reilly regarding his dealings with the Lekwiltach, the evidence from the Nass River Conference, the Cornwall-Planta Commission and the Kitwangar/Tsimpsean Dispute reveals a pattern of consistency in O'Reilly's dealings with the allotment of lands being for
entire groups
as opposed to bands or subgroups and further supports the view that allotment of reserves would have initially been for the Laichkwiltok. Moreover, if any inference is to be drawn from the evidence, it should be that the tribe for whom O'Reilly recommended a particular reserve was designated in the Minute of Decision.
[322]
The documents should also be looked at in the context of Green's statement regarding the Lachkiltach allotments in document 1177, Green's note to the Royal Commission in 1914 wherein he stated:
"The Laich-kwil-tach (Euclataw) reserves were realloted by Mr. O'Reilly in 1886.
No allotments were made to separate bands. The division into bands were made by the agents
." (Underlining in document)
[323]
The Crown further submits that the location of reserves was left to the draftsman (reference to exhibit C-135A, Cape Mudge Answers to Interrogatories, Tab A, p. 6, Q. 29(a)). The Crown notes that such a practice was confirmed by the plaintiff's witness, Mr. Borthwick (see Borthwick cross-exam, vol. 65, pp. 8461-62, 8465-66, 8481-82) wherein Borthwick indicated that the sketch maps would have been done by a draftsman, that the letter of transmittal, the Minutes of Decision, sketch map or tracing would have been done by a person other than O'Reilly or Green, such as a clerk. Borthwick added that to his knowledge, Green was a surveyor and not a clerk. In light of this testimony, the Crown asserts and I agree, that little or no weight should be given to any notations which may appear on sketch maps prepared in connection with O'Reilly's or Green's Minutes of Decision.
[324]
The 1891 Minutes of Decision for the Kiselas reserves also serve as an example that contrary to Pritchard's theory, O'Reilly would designate in his Minutes of Decision a particular subgroup where it was his specific intention to recommend a particular reserve for a particular subgroup or band. In O'Reilly's letter of transmittal [document 623], O'Reilly was aware that the Kitselas Indians were a "branch of the Tsimpsean tribe". Following Pritchard's theory, one would expect that the Minute of Decision would read "Tsimpsean Tribe and the sketch designating the subgroup or band would read "Tsimpsean Tribe - Kitselas Band". However, in O'Reilly's Minutes of Decision, only the name "Kit-Se-Las Indians" appears. The sketch on the other hand, is labelled in small type, Tsimpsean tribe and the large block letters "KIT-SE-LAS INDIANS". A fair explanation would be that the notation on the sketch map was an indication of the Band associated or connected with that reserve. In other words, that there is an association or a relationship between the Kitselas Indians and the Tsimpsean Tribe.
[325]
In response to Pritchard's reliance on the example of the Clayoquot reserves [document 577 and 564], I agree that while the sketches for the Clayoquot reserves do refer to the names of individual subtribal groups, O'Reilly in his letter of transmittal makes it clear that his intention was to recommend these reserves for the Clayoquot Indians as a whole [document 577, p. 303].
[326]
Once again I note that, on cross-examination Pritchard was not able to provide an explanation for O'Reilly's failure to follow his theory as outlined in the Unit of Allotment report (see Pritchard cross-exam, vol. 25, p. 3334). In light of these omissions, inconsistencies and lack of explanations I must, disregard Pritchard's Unit of Allotment theory upon which a portion of the Cape Mudge claim is based.
[327]
In light of this evidence, I am satisfied that it would have been virtually impossible for a reserve Commissioner to define accurately in the short period of time available to him, the precise allocation of individual reserves to the individual subtribal groups of the Laichkwiltok. Furthermore, an attempt at such an allocation would have flown in the face of O'Reilly's established practice and the mandate of the Reserve Commission. O'Reilly stated at p. 296 of document 382:
"Mr. O'Reilly: The lands were set aside by me for the use of the tribes as a whole. I never undertook to subdivide the lands. That was done afterwards.
"Honourable Mr. Robson: You settle inter-tribal questions but not domestic questions. Is that it?
"Mr. O'Reilly: Certainly."
[328]
I am also satisfied that the general practice of the Reserve Commissioner, particularly O'Reilly, was to recommend that reserves be set aside for larger Indian nations or tribal groups, such as the Lekwiltach.
[329]
The next area of controversy appears to revolve around the question of whether the Laichkwiltach were a nation, tribe or band. After hearing the various submissions, the only thing I can safely conclude is that there is no magic to what term is used with respect to which group a reserve was being set aside for. Orders-in-Council refer specifically to "nation" as an identifiable group, while at other times, the terms "tribe" and "band" are used.
Mandate of the Reserve Commissioners
[330]
Although I have already determined that the reserves in British Columbia, including Reserves No. 11 and No. 12, were created in law in 1938 when title to reserve lands were transferred from the province to the Dominion, I think it is incumbent upon me to examine the various steps of the reserve creation process so that a determination can be made regarding which plaintiff Indian Band Reserves No. 11 and 12 were eventually set aside for. I also note that part of the process, as far as the Department of Indian Affairs was concerned, was to take the necessary steps to ensure the reserves were allocated to the appropriate bands, in accordance with the views of the Indians themselves. Once again, I stress the fact that the situation in the province of British Columbia, at least when it came to the creation of reserves, was different than in the rest of Canada. This difference is most significant, at least in regards to applying the jurisprudence cited by all counsel in the action before me, because in British Columbia the province had underlying title to reserve lands until 1938. This was not necessarily the situation in other provinces.
[331]
On July 19, 1880, Dominion Order-in-Council 1334 [document 248] appointed "Patrick" [sic Peter] O'Reilly as Indian Reserve Commissioner. Portions of the Order-in-Council read as follows:
"... on the 3rd of March last, Mr. Gilbert M. Sproat tendered his resignation as Indian Reserve Commissioner for the province of British Columbia. That consequently it becomes necessary to procure the services of a suitable person to fill the position rendered vacant by Mr. Sproat's resignation; the responsible duties connected which, consists mainly in ascertaining accurately the requirements of the Indian Bands in that Province, to whom lands have not been assigned by the late Commissioner, and allotting suitable lands for them for tillage and grazing purposes.
"... And in the joint recommendation of these gentlemen, he the Minister, expresses his concurrence; and he submits Mr. O'Reilly's appointment to the position for Your Excellency's approval.
"That Mr. Trutch suggests that the Reserve Commissioner instead of being placed, as at present under the direction of the Indian Superintendent for British Columbia, should act on his own discretion, in furtherance of the joint suggestion of the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works, representing the Provincial Government, and the Indian Superintendent, representing the Dominion Government, as to the particular points to be visited, and Reserves to be established; and that the action of the Reserve Commissioner should in all cases be subject to confirmation by those Officers; and that failing their agreement, any and every question at issue between them should be referred for settlement to the Lieutenant Governor, whose decision should be final and binding."
Therefore, the Order-in-Council appointing O'Reilly clearly limited the Commissioner's authority to making recommendations for the allocation of certain reserves which recommendations would be in "in all cases subject to confirmation" by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works and the Indian Superintendent. Such approval was not obtained for the Lachkwiltach Reserves No. 11 and 12 until a copy of the official plan, TBC-185 [document 553] was signed as "approved" by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works on May 18, 1889. What is significant is that Plan TBS-184 did not specifically identify individual subgroups or bands of the Laichkwiltach with reference to any individual reserves. Moreover, no reference was made to Cape Mudge or the Wewaiakai Band in connection with Reserves No. 11 and 12.
1876 Proclamation
[332]
To facilitate the progress of the Reserve Commission, the Dominion Minister of Justice issued under the authority of s. 97 of the
Indian Act
, S.C. 1876, c. 18, a Proclamation in December of 1876 excluding and exempting all Indian lands and reserves in British Columbia from the operation of the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
[document 90]. This Proclamation, published in the
Canada Gazette
on December 30, 1876 stated in part:
"... Whereas we deem it advisable that all the reserves and Indian lands in the Province of British Columbia should be exempt from the operation of sections twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven and twenty-eight of the said
Act
-
"Now Know Ye, that by and with the advice of Our Privy Council for Canada, We by virtue of the authority vested in Us by the said
Act
, proclaim, order and declare that all the Reserves and Indian lands in the Province of British Columbia are by this Our Royal Proclamation, exempted from the operation of sections twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven and twenty-eight of the Act of Parliament of Canada passed in the thirty-ninth year of Our reign, chapter eighteen and entitled: 'An Act to amend and consolidated the Laws respecting Indians'; and We do hereby exempt all the Reserves and Indian Lands in the Province of British Columbia from the operation of sections twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven and twenty eight of the said Act accordingly.
"Of all which Our loving subjects and all others whom these presents may concern are hereby required to take notice and govern themselves accordingly."
[333]
The effect of the above cited Proclamation was to explicitly exempt all reserves and Indians lands in British Columbia from the operation of the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
. The purpose of the enactment of this Proclamation was to facilitate the work of the Reserve Commissioners in adjusting reserve allocations [see Documents 78, 82, 83 and 94]. However, according to the Crown, the Proclamation was neither repealed nor amended prior to 1907.
[334]
Consistent with this purpose, the instructions to O'Reilly on his appointment as Reserve Commissioner [document 250] specifically refer the Reserve Commissioner to the jurisdiction under the Proclamation to adjust reserves without the necessity of obtaining compliance with the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
:
"I likewise enclose a copy of the
Indian Act
1880 and beg to inform you that ss. 25, 26, 27 and 28 of that
Act
correspond with ss. 37, 38, 39 and 40 of the
Indian Act
1876 which were rendered inoperative by the Proclamation of His ex. the Governor General as regards Indian Reserves and the Bands in British Columbia the same having been found to conflict with the powers conferred on your predecessors and now delegated to you."
There would seem to be no reason why this jurisdiction would not have devolved onto reserve Commissioner Vowell on his appointment to that position in 1898 [document 753].
[335]
Further, it would appear that the Reserve Commissioner's jurisdiction under the 1876 Proclamation may be significant to the determination of the issues in this action, in that the suspension of the operation of the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
in British Columbia would remove any alleged technical obstacle to the Department of Indian Affairs' administrative authority to adjust its records as to the subtribal allocation of reserves in accordance with the expressed desires of the Indians. It would seem that without such jurisdiction, the work of the Reserve Commission and the efficient administration of the reserves in British Columbia would have been virtually impossible during the early years of reserve establishment in British Columbia.
Reserves No. 11 And No. 12 Were Set Aside For The Laich-Kwil-Tach Indians
[336]
An examination of the historical record, together with what I found to be the cohesiveness of the Laichkwiltok as a group and the mandate of the Reserve Commissioner as well as the practice followed by the Reserve Commissioner in recommending the allocation of reserves, establishes, in my view, that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were originally defined and approved for the Lekwiltok Indians. In order to avoid any misunderstanding or misconception as to my finding, I am in no way stating that the reserves were assigned or allotted to the four bands of the Laichkwiltach in common. I accept that these reserves were originally recommended and approved without any initial designation of an individual sub-group with respect to each reserve. The reserves may have been subsequently allocated or assigned to the Campbell River and Cape Mudge subgroups, however I will now deal with the reasons as to why I determined that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were originally defined for the Laichkwiltach.
Green's Minutes Of Decision
[337]
The Minutes of Decision prepared under Green's direction for Reserves No. 11 and 12 must be considered in light of Green's knowledge of the practice of the Reserve Commission and the Orders-in-Council which specifically authorized Green's appointment to define these reserves.
[338]
As noted earlier, Green commenced his work as O'Reilly's assistant and surveyor in May 1880 [document 2678] and would no doubt have been familiar with O'Reilly's practice of setting aside reserves for larger tribal groups and leaving the Indian Agent to make the decisions necessary to individually allocate or assign reserves to subtribal groups. In fact I note, that Green was present when O'Reilly gave testimony to this effect before the Cornwall Commission.
[339]
Green's jurisdiction and instructions to define the Reserves  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River came from two Orders-in-Council passed by the Dominion and Provincial Governments in 1888. The Provincial Order-in-Council, passed on April 6, 1888 [document 484] provided in part:
"And recommending that the Dominion Government be requested to sanction the appointment of Ashdown H. Green Esq. C.E., to proceed without delay to Campbell River with authority to determine the extent and boundaries of the Indian Reserve at that place."
The corresponding Dominion Order-in-Council passed on May 29, 1888 [document 520] also provided that Green was to "determine the extent and boundaries of the Indian Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River".
Authority Of Ashdown Green
[340]
Cape Mudge maintains that Reserve No. 11 and Reserve No. 12 were finally and irrevocably granted to the Wewaikai by Green in 1888. As I stated earlier in my reasons, I am of the view that Green's authority was limited by the Orders-in-Council appointing him to "determine the extent and boundaries of the reserve"  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. As such, the authority conferred by the clear and plain language of the Orders-in-Council providing for Green's appointment was consistent with the fact that Green was simply a surveyor. While there is no dispute that he was a most competent surveyor, I am satisfied that on the evidence he was directed to go to Campbell River and determine the extent and boundaries of the reserves there. The purpose of which was to resolve the dispute between the white settlers, namely the Nunns brothers and the Indians living  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River, namely Captain John and his family, and other persons. Therefore, the boundaries of the reserves  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River had to be determined to avoid any encroachment from the white settlers and to settle the dispute between Captain John and the Nunns. This appears to have been the concern of Vowell as expressed in his letter, dated December 20, 1887 [document 405], to the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works. I note the comments in this letter are consistent with the comments of Cumming, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at p. 71 in reference to the work of the early Indian Reserve Commission:
"It is common ground that neither the allocation of land by the Indian Reserve Commission or its successor individual Commissioners nor the approval of such allotments by the Chief Commissioner of Land and Works, had any proprietary significance. That process simply resulted in an administrative withdrawal of Provincial land from homestead pre-emptions or other resource disposition. The Indians were protected administratively in their use of the allotted lands. The protection could be, and in point of fact was, withdrawn in the case of the so-called 'cut off lands'."
Therefore, Vowell was expressing concern that the Indian reserves had to be surveyed in order to prevent further encroachment from white settlers. The setting aside of reserves by the early Indian Reserves Commission did not, in the words of Cumming, J., to which I am in full agreement, carry any proprietary significance. In my opinion, the proprietary interest in these reserves was not created until the conveyance of the Indian reserves to the Dominion by Order-in-Council 1036.
[341]
Further, for Green to go to Campbell River for the purpose of determining the extent and boundaries of the reserves and in that way assist in resolving the dispute between Captain John and the Nunns brothers, and then, as Cape Mudge alleges, to irrevocably grant the reserves to any Indian people other than the Indians resident there would have defeated the very purpose for which Green was sent to survey the reserves. In this regard, I note that according to the terms of the Order-in-Council Green was not appointed to be a Reserve Commissioner. O'Reilly was still the Reserve Commissioner and Green was simply appointed pursuant to the Order-in-Council for a specific purpose, to determine the extent and boundaries of the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. Further, the Order-in-Council appointing Green did not require any approval of reserves, even if one accepted that Green could allot reserves. This is consistent with Green not having the power to allot as well as not being the Reserve Commissioner. Moreover, in my view, if the Indian Reserve Commissioner had the power to allot Reserves No. 11 and 12, the allotment would have been to the Laichkwiltok.
[342]
I also note that Cape Mudge in its submission, refers to a letter dated February 8, 1888 from Pidcock wherein he reports that there may be trouble between the Indians "of that tribe and some white men who had pre-empted land claimed by the Indians on the Campbell River Reserve". There is no dispute that the white men were the Nunns brothers. In my opinion, the reference to the word tribe is a reference to the Laichkwiltok. This is consistent with the reports of the Indian Commissioner O'Reilly as well as the witness Suttles. In this regard, I have noted that Suttles deleted references to the Laichkwiltok as a tribe from his final report submitted in the case before me. On the other hand, Pritchard consistently referred to the Laichkwiltok as a tribe in his draft reports, and as pointed out by the Crown and Campbell River, in his final report submitted on behalf of the Wewaikai in the B.C. Fisheries case.
[343]
Further, it would seem illogical that the intention of the Reserve Commissioner would be to grant a reserve to the Wewaikai if that grant would have the effect of disposing the Indians who were resident on the land, namely Captain John and his family. Such an action would be contrary to the mandate of the Reserve Commissioner. Moreover, Captain John made it clear that he would protect the lands comprising what he considered to be his reserve [document 1362]. As such it would be difficult to imagine that a resolution of the dispute would have been achieved  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River had Captain John been told that the reserves were allotted to another Band and that he and his family were no longer entitled to remain on the reserve.
Presumption Of "Omnia Praesumuntur
Rite Esse Acta"
[344]
Cape Mudge also argued that the presumption of regularity or "omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta" applies with respect to the actions of Green. In my view, what Cape Mudge is attempting to do is to confer upon Green's jurisdiction which he never had. Green's jurisdiction is set out in plain and clear language in the Order-in-Council providing for his appointment. Once again, I am satisfied that there is nothing in the Order-in-Council providing for Green's appointment which grants any wider authority than the authority to determine the extent and boundaries of the reserves  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. Clearly, the presumption of regularity cannot apply to grant jurisdiction where none exists. In support of their submission Cape Mudge relied on the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.). The
Murphy
decision stands for the proposition that when a decision requires an administrative officer to perform a certain duty, there is a presumption that he or she has performed that duty. In the case before me, Green's duties were to determine the extent and boundaries of the reserves  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. There is nothing in his appointment to suggest that he had the authority or duty to allocate reserves. As such, the presumption of "omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta" and the authorities relied upon by Cape Mudge to support their claim that Green had the authority to allocate reserves, do not apply since Green did not have the authority to make such a decision.
[345]
Cape Mudge relies on a number of administrative law decisions to suggest that I have the authority to review what they purport to be Green's decision. With respect, these decisions have no relevance to the case at bar as all of the decisions are based on the assumption that the administrative body was acting within its jurisdiction. Even if Green had made the allocation, which in my view he did not, the decision to allocate to an individual subgroup was beyond his jurisdiction, as outlined in the Order-in-Council appointing him.
[346]
Cape Mudge also relies upon the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 289; 84 C.C.L.C. 14,070; 14 Admin. L.R. 133 and
Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 963 v. New Brunswick Liquor Corp.
, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 227; 26 N.R. 341; 25 N.B.R.(2d) 237; 51 A.P.R. 237; 97 D.L.R.(3d) 417; 79 C.L.L.C. 14,209, which in my view are distinguishable because both dealt with privative clauses contained in labour relations legislation. Further, the threshold question in both cases was whether or not the administrative body was acting within its jurisdiction.
[347]
As I have stated elsewhere in my reasons, clearly Green was not appointed to act as a Reserve Commissioner and did not have the powers of a Reserve Commissioner. I repeat, once again, Green was appointed solely for the purpose of determining the extent and boundaries of the Indian reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River.
[348]
Pursuant to these Orders-in-Council Green proceeded to Campbell River in May of 1888. The only first hand accounts of Green's activities  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River are contained in Green's Minutes of Decision [document 517], letter of transmittal [document 521], survey notes [document 512] and the diary of Frederick Nunns [document 507]. These documents show that Green met principally with an Indian named Quacksister or "Captain John", "six young men" and the Nunns, who apparently were the only persons interested in the land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River at that time. Green's report to the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs on his visit to Campbell River bears repeating [document 517]:
"... I proceeded to Campbell River on the 25th ultimo to determine the extent and boundaries of the Indian reserves at that place.
"The reserves for the Laich-kwil-tach Indians were defined by Mr. Sproat in 1879, but were disapproved by the Provincial Government.
"Subsequently in 1886, Mr. O'Reilly allotted 10 reserves at the tribe, and also visited Campbell River, the Indians however being absent, he deemed it advisable to delay making reserves until they were present to point out the places they wished to have (see report October 30, 1886).
"Although the Indians had been previously informed of the date of my intended visit, I found on my arrival that the Head Chief, 'Waw Mish', and almost all his Band, had left the day before for Alberni. The sub chief, Quacksister, or Capt. John, and six young men, being the most interested parties in the settlement of these reserves, were however present, and begged me to give my decision at once, so that they could leave.
"... during my stay  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River I met, at different times, members of some of the four bands belonging to the 'Laich-kwil-tach' tribe. Every place they mentioned to me had already been reserved for them by Mr. O'Reilly and all expressed themselves satisfied with their allotments."
[349]
In terms of Green's reference to Wamish as the head chief and Quacksister as the subchief, I agree with the Crown's interpretation that Wamish would have been the head chief of the Laichkwiltach and Quacksister a subchief of the Lachkwiltach. Once again this is consistent with a definition of the reserves for the Lachkwiltach, as opposed to the Wewaikai or Wewaikum. Document 297, the 1884 census, identifying Wamish as a chief and Quacksister as a subchief also supports such an explanation.
[350]
Green's Minutes of Decision, dated May 7, 1888 [document 510] enclosed with his report of May 28, 1888, refer only to the Laich-kwil-tach (Euclataw) Indians and make no mention of the allocation of either Reserves No. 11 or 12 to any subgroup of the Laichkwiltach. Indeed, none of the documents prepared by Green in connection with his visit to Campbell River specifically refer to either the Wewaikai or Wewaikum.
[351]
I agree with the Crown's submission that if any inference can be drawn from the last paragraph cited in document 517 it is that Green's intention was to recommend Reserves No. 11 and 12 be defined for all of the Laichkwiltach tribe. Also, at the time of Green's last visit to Campbell River with O'Reilly in 1886, O'Reilly had been unable to define the reserves  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River because the Indians were absent. O'Reilly in his letter of October 30, 1886 [document 367] recorded:
"In addition to the allotments already referred to, I visited the Campbell River, where I was informed the Eu-cla-taus are desirous of possessing land: Here there is valuable fishery ... I proceeded some miles up the river, but as the Indians were all absent, I deemed it advisable to delay making reserves until they are present to point out the places they wish to have ..."
It would seem to me that had there been any intention to define the reserves  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River for the Cape Mudge subgroup as submitted by Cape Mudge, O'Reilly or Green would have consulted with the Indians at Cape Mudge for that purpose. I agree that a reasonable inference can be drawn from Green's and O'Reilly's reference to the need to consult with the Laichkwiltach or Euclataw prior to defining reserves  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River is that it was their intention to recommend these reserves for the Laichkwiltach as a whole.
[352]
Further, Green's field notes and survey sketches [document 512] only refer to the Laich-kwil-tach Indian Reserve No. 11 Campbell River and No. 12 Quinsam. In addition, the sketches of the Campbell River and Quinsam reserves included with the survey notes do not refer to Cape Mudge or any other subgroup of the Laichkwiltach. The sketch depicting the Campbell River reserve is preceded by a page entitled "Traverse of Reserve 11, Laich-kwil-tach Indians  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River" and the sketch for Quinsam Reserve No. 12 is preceded by the caption "Quinsam Reserve No. 12 Laich-kwil-tach Indians" [document 512].
[353]
Two documents which followed the survey of Reserves No. 11 and 12 further support the assertion that the intention was to define these reserves for the Laichkwiltach. First, in his letter of May 29, 1888 to the Hon. Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works enclosing his Minute of Decision, document 521, Green stated:
"Enclosed I beg to forward for your approval, a sketch and Minute of Decision of the reserves so defined by me for the use of the 'Laich-kwil-tach' tribe."
The second document, Green's report found in the files of the McKenna McBride Royal Commission provides [document 1171]:
"The Laich-kwil-tach (Euclataw) reserves were re-alloted by Mr. O'Reilly in 1886.
No allotments were made to separate bands. The division into bands were made by the agents.
" (Underlining in document)
[354]
Cape Mudge's argument of an "irrevocable allotment" to the Cape Mudge Band is largely premised on the sketch [document 517] and Vowell's December 1, 1905 letter [document 917]. As I understand, Cape Mudge maintains that the sketch and the designation "Laich-kwil-tach (Eu-Cla-Taw) Indians, We-Way-A-Kay Band" is conclusive. The reason for the recommendation, argues Cape Mudge is that Vowell, over 17 years later, in a letter to DeBeck [document 918] noted that the "six young men" identified as having met with Green were of the "We-Way-A-Kay Band".
[355]
Cape Mudge in its argument made reference to the fact that while Green was  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River he met with and had long talks with the Indians, to support the claim that Green's objective in doing so was to ascertain the subtribal distinctions between the subgroups and therefore make an allocation of the reserves to these subgroups. With respect to counsel, the evidence does not support such an assertion. The only reference to talks with Indians is found in the Nunns diary, document 2591. The reference at Monday April 30th, is that "went upriver with Mr. Green to show him some surveyor's lines and helped him to chain river". He continues: "Tuesday, June 1st, Green out surveying this morning. He intended surveying the land round that has been taken up for the reserve, so it will probably be over a week before we know anything ...." Under Friday 4th of May, "Green still surveying ... In the evening went down to Mr. Green's. Had a meeting and a long talk with Indians. Mr. Green finishing boundary lines ...". As I read that entry, there appears to have been a meeting at which the Nunns went to visit Green and there was a long talk with the Indians during that one evening. According to the diary entries, on May 5th Green went to Quinsam to survey some Indian land and then for May 7th, that Green expects to leave about 8:00 a.m.
[356]
I am not convinced that Cape Mudge's arguments regarding the allotment to the Wewaikay can succeed. With respect to the notation on the sketch, Mr Borthwick was of the opinion that such a sketch would not have been prepared by Green (Borthwick cross-exam, vol. 65, pp. 8465, 8481-82). Further, the sketch identified by Borthwick is undated and its whereabouts were unknown until located by Borthwick in 1975 (Borthwick, direct, vol. 65, p. 8433).
[357]
Even if Cape Mudge were successful in establishing that the Wewayakay notation was made by or under the direction of Green, such a finding, in my opinion, would be insufficient to establish an "irrevocable allotment" of Reserve Nos. 11 and 12 to the Cape Mudge band because, as I have said many times, Green's authority was limited by the Orders-in-Council appointing him [documents 484 and 520] to determine the "extent and boundaries of the Indian Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River".
Approval of Reserves
[358]
On May 18, 1889, the official plan TCB-184 showing the relative locations of Reserves 1 through 12 of the Laichkwiltach, entitled "Plan of the Laich-Kwil-tach Indian Reserves, Sayward and Coast District, British Columbia" was signed as "approved" by F.G. Vernon, the Commissioner of Lands and Works and Peter O'Reilly, Indian Reserve Commissioner. Once again, what is noteworthy, is that this Plan did not in any way specifically identify the Cape Mudge subgroup or any other Laichkwiltach subgroup with respect to Reserves 1 through 12. Even if Green had recommended that Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 be defined for the Cape Mudge (which I say he did not), such a recommendation was not confirmed by the Provincial or Dominion Governments as was required by the limited authority granted to the Reserve Commissioners [document 248]. Order-in-Council 1334, passed on July 19, 1880, provided that the recommendations of the Reserve Commission "should in all cases be subject to confirmation" by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works and the Indian Superintendent.
[359]
I am satisfied that the documentary evidence clearly establishes that the requisite approval for Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 was not obtained until May of 1889 and that this approval was limited to confirming the allocation of these reserves to the Laichkwiltach Indians.
[360]
What could be termed the "conditional" status of the Laichkwiltach reserves after the survey and Minutes of Decision but prior to receiving the requisite final approval is supported by the fact that there were changes made to the Reserve boundaries
after
the date of the Commissioner's Minutes of Decision and
before
the date of their final approval. For example, Laichkwiltach Reserve No. 10, was originally recommended by O'Reilly as a reserve of 946 acres [document 367, p. 4, and document 362, p. 6]. During the survey of this reserve by surveyor Skinner in July 1888 an alteration to Reserve No. 10 was recommended so as to extend reserve No. 10 to include the "garden and open land" at Cape Mudge [Skinner's letter to the Reserve Commissioner, dated July 18, 1888, documents 535 and 534].
[361]
A comparison of the sketch map for Reserve No. 10 (Cape Mudge) and No. 5 (Matsayno at Phillips Arm, referred to in Skinner's letter), document 349, and the map of these reserves as finally approved on the Official Plan [document 535] clearly shows the alterations which were made by Skinner which subsequently received final approval. In the case of Reserve No. 10, the eastern boundary of the reserve was altered and the acreage increased by over 171 acres from 946 to a total of 1117.5 acres. Matsayno Reserve No. 5 was reduced by 10 acres from 128 acres [document 362] to 118.5 acres on the official plan. Similar changes to the acreage and configuration of the reserves are evident for Reserves Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11 and 12. Pritchard, during cross-examination admitted that such alterations by Skinner to the reserves were alterations to O'Reilly's allotments (vol. 25, pp. 3393 to 3394).
[362]
As such, the approval of the Laichkwiltach Reserves followed these changes in 1889. On May 13, 1889, O'Reilly sent the plans of various reserves, including the Laichkwiltach reserves, to the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works for his approval and signature [document 550]. The approval was given on the 5th of November and is found at document 371. Two facts distinguish this earlier approval:
1) the approval predated the subsequent alterations to the Laichkwiltach Reserves and could therefore not be the final approval;
2) the 1886 approval did not include the approval of Laichkwiltach Reserves No. 11 and 12 which were not recommended for approval until 1888.
The documents submitted by Commissioner O'Reilly to the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works for his final approval of the Laichkwiltach Reserves on May 13, 1889 was the original of the Plan found at document 553. The final approval of this plan, was signified by the signature of the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works on May 18, 1889 thereby constituting the "Official Plan" of these Reserves. The Provincial copy of the Official Plan for the Laichkwiltach reserves filed at the Surveyor General's Department was identified by Cape Mudge's witness Mr. Fry (Fry) as the Official Plan "VI45" (Fry cross-exam, vol. 65, pp. 8495 -8496 and Exhibit "B"). On re-examination by Counsel for Cape Mudge, Fry confirmed that the function of the Official Plan, after approval, was to establish the "root of title" to these Reserves (vol. 65, p. 8501). As I understand, this is the root of title that allowed provincial conveyance to the Dominion of underlying title to the Dominion.
[363]
The Indian Superintendent's approval of the Reserves recommended for the Laichkwiltach was obtained between May 21, 1889 and May 27, 1889 [documents 561 and 562]. Acting Superintendent Moffatt wrote O'Reilly on May 27, 1889 acknowledging receipt of plans "of the reserves alloted to the use of the several tribes at - ... Laich-kwil-tach" [document 562]. Pritchard on cross-examination by both counsel for the Crown and Campbell River, confirmed that this sequence of documentation, namely documents 550, 553, 560, 561 and 562 constituted the
first
approval of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 (vol. 25, p. 3407 and vol. 27, p. 3713).
[364]
Tracings of the Official Plan, as approved, were then forwarded by O'Reilly to the Deputy Superintendent General in Ottawa on June 7, 1889 [document 563] and to Vowell on March 13, 1891 [document 586] for transmission to the local Indian Agents.
[365]
I note that none of the documentation relating to the approval of the Laichkwiltach Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 makes any reference to an approval of these Reserves for the subgroups of the Laichkwiltach nor do any of the approval documents refer in any way to the Laichkwiltach subgroups (documents 534, 535, 550, 553, 560, 561, 562, 563, 586 and 587), which only further detracts from the Cape Mudge assertion that the reserves were irrevocably allocated to the Cape Mudge Band by Green.
[366]
The approval of the Laichkwiltach Reserves can be distinguished from the example of the Esparanza Inlet Reserves relied upon by Pritchard. In that case, the Official Plan of those reserves were approved of in two parts, as Plan No. 1 and Plan No. 2. Plan No. 1 contained the approval of the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works and O'Reilly of Reserves Nos. 10-13 for the Ehat-is-aht Band, while a separate Plan No. 2 also signed by the Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works and O'Reilly was approved depicting Reserves No. 1-9 for the Nuchat-litz Band. From this, it can be inferred that where it was intended to give final approval to the individual allocation of Reserves to subgroups of a tribe, such an approval was signified on a separate Official Plan (see Pritchard, cross-exam, vol. 27, pp. 3720-3721).
[367]
I accept that with respect to the Laichkwiltach, the reserves received their approval on May 18, 1889. I do not think one can say that the approval was final as the reserves were not created in law until the passage of the requisite Orders in Council conveying title to the lands from the Province to the Dominion in 1938. However, I believe that, after 1889, the reserves were designated to the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Bands, in accordance with the desires of the Indians at the meeting recorded by Halliday in his letter of March 23, 1907 [document 944]. This, in my view, was in accordance with the established mandate and practice of the Reserve Commission and the Proclamation of 1876 and did not constitute a breach of either the
Indian Act
or the Crown's fiduciary duty.
[368]
Correspondence and other documentation prior to the publication of the schedule of reserves in the 1901 Annual Report further supports the proposition that in 1889 approval of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were for the Laichkwiltok. In this regard, I note the following documents: 467, 505, 614, 744, 762, 764, 768, 801, 804 and 814.
[369]
Document 467, a letter from Lomas to Superintendent General of Indian Affairs dated March 19, 1888 reads in part:
"I explained to them that
when a Reservation was laid off for them it would be for the use of all the Euclataw Indians
and not for one man alone, and that they were mistaken if they thought that Mr. Sproat had allotted to them all the lands on the south of the Campbell River up as far as the Quincham River ...
At present, at least one-half of the Euclatwa Band care nothing about the land on the Campbell River,
but wish a large reserve between their village and Cape Mudge, and should Kwawksista still wish to have the land preempted by Messrs. Nunns, I think they might be induced to exchange their claim for some of the meadow land lower down the river and which as it will require dyking is never likely to be used by the Euclataw Band none of whom have cultivated land for years ..." (Underlining mine)
A fair interpretation of the reference to one-half of the Euclatwa Band, in my view would be that Lomas was referring to the Wewaikai not caring about the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and were more interested in the reserve near Cape Mudge.
[370]
Document 505, a letter from Green to Skinner (surveyor) dated April 21, 1888, advising:
"... it is desirable that you should take the field with as little delay as possible, and that the unsurveyed reserves for the Nahwitti tribe should first engage your attention. On the completion of this work,
you will proceed to Salmon river, and define the boundaries of the Euclataw reserves
." (Underlining mine)
[371]
Page 3 of the 1892 Schedule of Reserves [document 614], prepared in the Kwawkewlth Indian Agent's office at Alert Bay, lists all 12 of the Laichkwiltach reserves under the heading "Lieu-Kwil-Tach Indian Reserves" with no division or individual allocation of reserves to subgroups of the Laichwiltach.
[372]
A letter dated June 28, 1898 [document 762] from the Indian Reserve Commissioner Vowell to the Secretary of the Department of Indian Affairs refers to "field notes of survey of Cape Mudge Reserve No. 10 Laich-Kwil-Tach Indians". The 1898 schedule of reserves published in the Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs [document 764] lists under the heading "Kwakewlth Agency" only the "Laich-Kwil-Tach as having reserves with a total area of 2,032 acres. This schedule does not identify any individual subgroups of the Laichkwitach with respect to individual reserves.
[373]
Document 768, a letter from Pidcock to Vowell, dated July 1898, indicating that:
"Mr. Andrew Haslam of Nanaimo has requested permission to make use of a portion of the Indian Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River, Lieukwiltah Reserve No. 11 he owning a large timber limit adjoining the Reserve."
[374]
An Order-in-Council of the Provincial Government dated September 23, 1899 [document 801] consenting to the:
"... elimination of a parcel of land, containing two acres more or less, from the Laich-Kevil-Tach Indian Reserve No. 10, situated on Valdes Island; and that the said parcel of land be, and is hereby set apart for the use of the Department of Marine and Fisheries for Lighthouse purposes;"
Kwawkewlth Indian Agent's Annual Report for the year ending June 30, 1899 describes at p. 255 the "Tribe or Nation" of the Kwawkewlth agency as "These Indians belong to the Kwawkewlth nation, excepting three bands which are known as Lieukwilth Indians, but all speak the same language".
[375]
Dominion Order-in-Council, dated January 6, 1900, [document 814] authorizing the transfer of "an area of two acres at Cape Mudge, on Valdez Island, forming part of the Laich-Kivil-Tach Indian Reserve, No. 10" to the Department of Marine and Fisheries for lighthouse purposes. Similar reference to "Laich-Kvil-Tach Indian Reserve No. 10" are made in other correspondence relating to the transfer of the two acre lighthouse parcel (documents 816, 817 and 819).
[376]
Cape Mudge have referred to a number of documents (see Cape Mudge to the Crown, pp. 6-14) which they maintain reveal an individual allocation of the Laichkwiltach reserves to the various subgroups of the Laichkwiltach. However, it appears that many of these documents are dated after 1900 and after the publication of the 1900 schedule of reserves. Cape Mudge referred to a letter from Green to DeBeck, dated May 27, 1904 [document 2569] wherein Green referred to reserves 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Laichkwiltok as being alloted to the Kwiah Kah and Wewayakum bands conjointly, to illustrate it was consistent for Green to refer to the 12 reserves as Laichkwiltach reserves while in the same letter indicating the particular Laichkwiltach band or bands to which these reserves had been alloted. However, in this letter Green also stated that: "On reference to the Schedule of Indian Reserves, I find that numbers 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the Laich-Kwil-Tach reserves, were allotted to the Kwaih kah and We Way Kum bands cojointly ..." Therefore, it is clear that Green was not referring to the sketch map, his minutes of decision or even his own recollection of events, but the Schedule as published after 1900.
[377]
Three letters prepared by Vowell in 1892 [document 610], in 1896 [document 706] and in 1899 [document 781] indicate that Vowell considered the reserves to have been initially defined for the Laichkwiltach Indians. These letters are contrasted with the letter relied on by Cape Mudge, written six years later [document 917] referring to the six young men of the Wewayakay Band and that the reserve was assigned to that Band. This exemplifies the inconsistencies between what Vowell stated in 1899 and 1905.
[378]
The Crown maintains that consistent with such a collective right by subgroups of the Laichkwiltach approved for them, Vowell in 1896 expressed no concern about the suggestion that some members of the Campbell River obtain locations on Reserve No. 11. Document 706 is a letter from Vowell to Pidcock, dated September 24, 1896, wherein he indicated that Pidcock by all means should encourage the Indians of the Wewaikum Band to take up locations in severalty on their Reserve, with the proviso that all land tenure was to be made in accordance with the provisions of the
Indian Act
. I note that this is what Cape Mudge termed the genesis for all the trouble. Vowell's letter seems to me to indicate that he considered the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River to be a reserve on which the Wewaikum had as much right to "take up locations" or settle "as their reserve" as any other Laichkwiltach Indian. Vowell's only concern in encouraging such settlement was that the rights of other individual Indians with locations on that reserve, presumably Captain John and his family, be respected.
[379]
Further, Vowell, in his letter to Pidcock in 1899, could not have been more specific in addressing the issue of allocation of the Laichkwiltach Reserves (document 781). The sale of the reserve at Village Bay (No. 7) had been proposed by some of the Indians who had previously fished there [document 780]. Vowell responded to this proposal by advising Pidcock that:
"... it does not appear wise on your part to leave the settlement of this important question as between the company and the Indians. It is not expedient that the Indians' rights be surrendered as in the case of their being in want they would come to the Department for relief. The reserve in question was alloted to the Euclataw or the Liew-Kwil-tah tribe in common and until their lands be subdivided every Indian of the tribe has a right to interest himself or herself in the disposal of their lands. If the Indians were competent to arrange their own affairs there would be no necessity for the appointment of Indian Agents to act for them. You will please discourage the idea amongst them of surrendering this Reserve. The question is one which would have to be submitted to the whole tribe ..." [document 781]
To me the above document represents an unequivocal statement that reserves were designated to the Laichkwiltach. I note that Pritchard also omitted reference to this document in his "Unit of Allotment" report [CM-37], (see cross-exam of Pritchard, vol. 25, pp. 3464-3466).
[380]
Cape Mudge has placed significant emphasis on Vowell's 1905 letter [document 917] referred to by Pritchard at p. 100 of his report (CM-37), wherein Vowell stated:
"At that time the only resident on the ground where the Sub Chief Quacksister, or Capt. John, and six young men, (of the We-Way-A-Kay band) [in handwritten addition] the Head Chief Waw-Wish having left the day previous to Mr. Green's arrival.
"These Indians stated that they were from the We-Way-A-Kay village on Cape Mudge (Reserve No. 10) and the reserve was therefore assigned to that band."
In my opinion, there are a number of factors that should be considered which may diminish the weight accorded to this document. The letter was written after the publication of the 1901 and 1902 schedule of Indian Reserves and illustrates, what the Crown refers to as the change in the Department's practice after the publication of these schedules. Commencing with the 1901 Schedule [document 810], employees of the Department began to list separate subgroups of the 12 Laichkwiltach with reference to each of the 12 Laichkwiltach reserves. The Crown submits that the Department maintained schedules for administrative purposes within the Department. The Crown suggests, and I agree, that there is no evidence that these schedules were intended to conclusively record or register an Indian band's or tribe's interest in, or entitlement to, a particular reserve. After 1901, employees of the Department developed a practice of referring to these schedules (rather than referring to the Official Plan) as a ready and convenient reference source in connection with reserves issues. For example, in 1906 Vowell indicated in document 928 that:
"It seems from a perusal of the records at this office that the We-Wai-Kum band have the following reserves of their own, viz, - Homayno, 38 acres; Loughborough, 21 acres; Matlaten, 96 acres; Matsayno, 118 1/2 acres; Sa-ai-yonck, 51 1/2 acres."
The acreage described by Vowell in this letter corresponds directly to the acreage given in the 1902 Schedule of reserves [document 836, p. 67] for these reserves but did not correspond to the acreage or even spelling set out in the O'Reilly Minutes of Decision, which described the reserves in the following terms: "Ho-May-No", 37 acres; "Loughboro", 40 acres; "Mat-La-Ten", 108 acres; "Ma-Tsay-No", 128 acres; and "Sa-Ai-Youck", 27 acres.
[381]
I also note that in 1901 the Department began to list on its schedule of reserves under the general heading "Laichkwiltach", four separate subgroups. Specifically, the "We-Way-AKay band" was noted on the schedule of reserves published in the 1901 and 1902 Annual Reports with reference to Reserve No. 11 and a ditto mark was noted below the name "We-Way-Akay Band" on the same schedule with respect to Reserve No. 12. The Crown notes there was no evidence of any statutory or regulatory duty to publish such schedules.
[382]
Vowell's source of information in making the handwritten "We-Way-A-Kay Band" notation on document 917 is unknown. The information that the "six young men" were of the Wewaikai band was not included in any of the first hand accounts of Green's visit to Campbell River in 1888 (documents 517, 521, 512 and 507). Further, the notation was made over 17 years after Green's visit to Campbell River by a person (Vowell according to Blueschke) who had no first hand knowledge of Green's visit to Campbell River in 1888. As such, I have difficulty attributing any weight to a speculative notation. It appears Vowell's only source of information as to the Wewaikai's alleged connection with Reserve No. 11 (in addition to the 1902 schedule) may have been Pidcock's Annual Report of August 27, 1889 [document 569] referred to in his letter. The report in my view is ambiguous in that it states:
"In June I visited the Lien-Kwil-Ta Indians and stayed some time at the We-Wai-Ai-Kai village. These Indians have a splendid reserve on Campbell River, just opposite their village."
[383]
Cape Mudge also made the suggestion, that the information that the six young men were of the Wewayakay Band, came from Green himself, whom they allege worked "across the hall" from Vowell. With respect, there is no evidence that Green was actually present at the time Vowell wrote the letter. The documents relied on by Cape Mudge [documents 882, 964 and 2569] simply establish that Green was an employee of the Department.
[384]
Cape Mudge has also referred to document 740, a letter from Pidcock dated December 30, 1897, as an indication that an allocation of the Village Bay reserve was made to the Cape Mudge Indians rather than to the Laichkwiltach. However, it should be noted that this reserve was the subject of Vowell's subsequent letter to Pidcock [document 781], wherein Vowell writes:
"The reserve in question [the Village Bay Reserve] was allotted to the Euclataw or Liew-Kwil-Tah tribe in common and until their lands be subdivided every Indian of the Tribe has a right to interest himself or herself in the disposal of their lands."
[385]
The publication of the Schedule of Indian Reserves in 1902 [document 836] becomes significant in interpreting the documents and correspondence that followed. I am satisfied that there is evidence which supports the assertion that officials within the Department of Indian Affairs were referring to the Schedule of Reserves as opposed to referring back to the Minutes of Decision or the Official Plan.
[386]
Another factor which made it necessary to deal with specific entitlement of reserves as opposed to just dealing with them as Lekwiltok reserves, is that some of these reserves began to generate revenue and from the Department's perspective it became necessary to establish trust accounts for the depositing of revenues that were received with regard to the specific reserves. Documents 1567 and 1576 illustrate the change regarding designations with respect to accounts from the Lekwiltok to the specific subgroup claiming the reserve. Document 1576, a letter dated May 10, 1920 from the Indian Agent to the Secretary of the Department of Indian Affairs reads:
"I have to thank you for your letter of April 29, 1930, in which you asked me for information or suggestions regarding accounts and reserves in this Agency. In looking carefully over the list of reserves as contained in the supplement of the annual report for the year ended March 31, 1913, I noticed several places where the information is somewhat misleading ...
"With regard to the reserves credited to the Lekwiltok, Hahamatsis, Wewaikum, Wewaikai and Kwiakah Bands, they claim their reserves as follows ...
"With these exceptions as noted, the reserves are correct according to the Indians own ideas of the same, and there is no dispute amongst them ... I consider it very essential that these reserves should be properly classified amongst the various subbands so that when the time comes for the reserves to be subdivided and given to the Indians individually instead of collectively, it will avoid any friction or hard feeling."
Document 1577, indicates that the funds at the credit of Account Number 291 Green Point and the funds at the credit of Account Number 2556 Campbell River were being transferred to the Wewaikum account. Although there is no Green Point Band there is a Green Point Reserve, which according to the 1902 Schedule is probably Reserve No. 4, Matlaten. It would therefore appear that up to this point, the Department maintained an account not according to the tribe or band but simply by reserve, in this case account number 291, Green Point. In 1920 that was adjusted so that funds were transferred to the Wewaikum account. Green Point is one of the reserves shown as being Wewaikum Band and Kwiakah Band reserve. However, it appears from the documentation, that Campbell River and the Kwiakah Band agreed that some of those joint reserves belonged to one Band as opposed to being owned jointly.
VI. 1907 Resolution
Background
[387]
As with most issues in the proceedings before me, an analysis of the 1907 resolution must also include a review of the events surrounding the passage of the resolution.
[388]
As I noted earlier, there is evidence which shows that the Campbell River Reserve was occupied by the Ahwahoo or Wewaikum and the family of Captain John also known as Quocksistala. However, I am not convinced from the evidence that the members of the Cape Mudge Band made use of the Campbell River area other than for fishing purposes. As noted by Suttles, it would have been unlikely that a rich fishery resource like the Campbell River area would have been used exclusively by any one sub-group of the Laichkwiltok (Suttles, cross exam, vol. 36, pp. 4977-4978).
[389]
I agree that the evidence establishes that the Laichkwiltach, including the Cape Mudge Indians used the Campbell River for fishing purposes and that the waters of the Campbell River was considered an important fishery. Any land occupied by the Indians for the purpose of carrying out such a fishery appears to have fallen outside of the boundaries of the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River as it was defined by Sproat and Green [document 249]. Pidcock also confirmed in his letter of February 8, 1888 [document 440] that the area used by the Indians for fishing on the Campbell River was not within the boundaries of the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. Further, the fact that the Cape Mudge Indians only made use of the Campbell River for fishing purposes was confirmed in the text of the resolution passed by the Cape Mudge Band on March 20, 1907, which is set out in part below:
"The object of the Wewaiaikai Band in asking for this land for a reserve was to have the use of the river for fishing purposes, therefore, the members of the Wewaikai Band in council here assembled, do cede all right to the Campbell River Reserve to the Wewaiaikum Band forever, with the proviso that at any and all times the Wewaiaikai band shall have the undisputed right to catch any and all fish in the waters of Campbell River, this right to be in common with the Wewaiaikum Band." (document 946)
Clearly the concern to the Wewaikai was to maintain their right to fish in the Campbell River.
[390]
Other than the evidence of the use of Campbell River for fishing, there is no evidence of any exclusive occupation of the land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River (and in particular the land subsequently defined as a reserve) by the members of the Cape Mudge Indian Band. What evidence does exist, would suggest that the land actually defined as a reserve was not used for such fishing purposes but was occupied by Captain John and his family.
[391]
The Crown argues that while there is no cogent evidence of any exclusive occupation of the land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River by members of the Cape Mudge band, there are a number of documents which indicate that the Cape Mudge Indians repudiated any claim to the land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and acknowledged the presence and better interest of the members of the Campbell River Band to that land. The letter, which the Crown claims most specifically records the renunciation of any claim to the land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River by the Cape Mudge Indians, is Pidcock's letter of March 24, 1896 to Vowell [document 685] which reads in part:
"I am requested by the Indians who claim the Reserve on Campbell River and who are only five in number, to ask if you would obtain permission for them to cut the timber on the Reserve for saw logs. At a meeting in the house of the chief yesterday, the Indians of the We-Wai-Ai-Kai band who reside on the Reserve at Cape Mudge, said they had always considered the Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River to belong to Chief Kwaksista, and they did not claim any of it.
"They respectfully ask that some assistance might be granted them in the shape of a loan of $150.00 to be repaid when the logs are sold, the money to be expended in the purchase of a yoke of work oxen as they have sufficient tools to prosecute the work if permission is given them ..."
The Crown submits that Pidcock's letter is clear: the Wewaiaki are residing at Cape Mudge and do not claim the Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. On the other hand, as with many of the documents in this case before, this document is also subject to interpretation. Cape Mudge asserts that document 685 supports their modified position that while they claimed the land as a Wewaikai reserve they acknowledged Quocksistala's tribal rights to the land.
[392]
The Crown further maintains that the documents prior to 1896 and after 1896 support the submission that the Cape Mudge Indians laid no claim to the Campbell River Reserve. Lomas after visiting both Campbell River and Cape Mudge reported in a letter of March 1888 [document 467] that the land dispute between the Nunns and Kwawksistala could be satisfactorily arranged if taken in hand. He noted:
"... At present at least one-half of the Euclataw Band care nothing about the land on the Campbell River, but wish a larger reserve between their village and Cape Mudge, and should Kwawksistah still wish to have the land preempted by Messrs. Nunns I think they might be induced to exchange their claim for some of the meadow land lower down the River and which as it will require dyking is never likely to be used by the Euclataw Band none of whom have cultivated land for years."
[393]
Of course, the Crown and Cape Mudge have different interpretations of the above passage. The Crown asserts that the reference to "one-half of the Euclataw Band" is a reference to the Wewaikai. Cape Mudge asserts that Euclataw Band should be exchanged for Wewaiakai, meaning one-half of the Wewaikai Indian Band. As I have determined earlier, in my view the most logical interpretation of this document is that the reference to one-half of the Euclataw Band is a reference to the Wewaikai.
[394]
Lomas wrote a second letter on the same day [document 468] in which he identified Kwaksistala as Wewayakum. According to the Crown, this letter shows that Lomas was aware of the division of the Laichkwiltach  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and at Cape Mudge.
[395]
In a letter dated May 7, 1900 [document 822], Pidcock wrote that there was a fire and that four dwellings of the Wi-Wai-Ai-Kum on the Campbell River Reserve were destroyed. Pidcock also indicated that Captain John lost everything he had and requested assistance to rebuild their houses, which he described as "fairly good houses". This indicates that these Indians were well established on Reserve No. 11. Also there appears to be no indication of an objection by the Cape Mudge Indians to the Indians  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River rebuilding their houses. Documents 824, 829 and 832, reveal that lumber and other materials were supplied in 1900 to the Indians  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River to assist them in rebuilding their houses.
[396]
Pidcock's report for September of 1900 [document 833] records the payment by the Cape Mudge Indians to Captain John to permit them to camp on the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and provides that:
"The Indians at Cape Mudge have been engaged catching salmon for one of the Canneries on the Fraser, here in the vicinity of Campbell River, steamers taking the fish to the Fraser. Nearly all have done very well, more than half of the fish taken, being caught with trolling with a spoon bait, some of them making as high as $7.00 a day, at 10 cents per fish. There was some little difficulty at first, the old Chief Capt. John objecting to the men camping on his reserve, but I went over and persuaded him to accept a small payment, and they agreed to give him and his sons work all the time they were fishing and also to replace the Japanese with Indians, with which he was perfectly satisfied."
[397]
This no doubt was the lead into the fishing dispute that arose a few years later. Suttles, after having each of these documents referred to him, agreed that up to 1900 there was no "paradox" as he described between Cape Mudge's earlier interest and later interest and that these documents indicated an acknowledgement by the Wewaikai to the right of Captain John (Suttles, cross-exam, vol. 36, pp. 5008-5010).
[398]
Shortly after the turn of the century a dispute arose between the Indians  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and Cape Mudge regarding the right to fish in the waters at the mouth of the Campbell River. Early attempts to resolve this fishery dispute, including the payments to Captain John [document 833] appear only to have temporarily resolved the dispute.
[399]
In 1902, Captain John died [document 848] and by 1905 the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indians were again disputing the right to fish in the waters of the Campbell River (documents 912, 915, 916).
[400]
The Crown maintains, and I agree, that the evidence relating to the fishery dispute and ultimately the 1907 resolution must be considered in the context of two influences on the actions of the Department and the Lekwiltok Indians. The first factor was the publication of the schedule of reserves in 1901 and 1902 [documents 810 and 836] and the practice after 1901 of Department employees referring to these schedules rather than the official plan. The other influence was that of Edward Rendle (Rendle), the school master and missionary, over the Wewaikai, especially Chief Jim Chickite. In particular, Rendle after being unsuccessful in his attempts to amalgamate the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indians on the reserve at Cape Mudge, pursued a policy of removing the Campbell River people from the reserve. Rendle's motive for the relocation is set out in his letter to Vowell, dated June 23, 1906 [document 923]. According to Rendle, the Campbell River Indians were a bad influence on his congregation at Cape Mudge and his solution was to remove the Campbell River Indians from their reserve and close up the reserve.
[401]
In November of 1905, the fishing dispute between Cape Mudge and Campbell River arose once again. Chief George Kwaksistala wrote two letters, dated November 4, 1905 [documents 912 and 913] to Indian Agent DeBeck. These letters show Rendle's influence over the Indians and according to Kwaksistala, Rendle was making trouble by advising the Cape Mudge Indians that Campbell River "belongs to Cape Mudge" [document 912].
[402]
It would appear that Rendle's source of information regarding ownership of the reserves was Agent DeBeck. DeBeck was appointed the Indian Agent for the Kwawkelth Agency, replacing Pidcock, in 1902. As the new Indian Agent, DeBeck would not have had any first hand knowledge as to the history of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 and would no doubt have referred only to the new schedule of reserves, namely the 1901 and 1902 schedules, when he advised Rendle that Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 "belonged to Cape Mudge". Based on this information, Rendle appears to have instilled, for the first time, in the minds of Cape Mudge Indians that Reserve No. 11 belonged to them. The Cape Mudge Indians in turn, angered by the Campbell River Indians refusal to share the fishery  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River, took advantage of the information provided them by Rendle and demanded that the Campbell River Indians leave Reserve No. 11.
[403]
The Crown also notes that Suttles, during cross-examination by the Crown, when showed Rendle's letter of June 23, 1906 [document 923] agreed that Rendle's influence on the Cape Mudge Indians might have been a factor in explaining the "paradox" which Suttles found in Cape Mudge's position and their claim to Campbell River Reserve (Suttles cross-exam, vol. 36, pp. 5033-5034).
[404]
In any event, by November 1905, the Indians at Cape Mudge and Campbell River reached an impasse in their dispute as to the right to fish in the Campbell River and requested the assistance of the Indian Agent to resolve their dispute. By letter dated November 4, 1905 [document 915], Rendle advised DeBeck that:
"A dispute has arisen between our Indians and those of Campbell River, as to the ownership and right to fish  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. Cape Mudge Chief and people claim that Campbell River belongs to them exclusively; and that the Campbell River people are those that should remain at Loughborough Inlet.
"Trouble has been brewing some time past, but has now reached its climax.
"This year the Cape Mudge people are short of fish owing partly to the Campbell River Indians allowing the Japs to fish with seines in that river. A few weeks ago, Geo. Quocksister, their chief's net was seized by the Fisheries Inspector.
"Now both parties are willing to abide by your decision of the matter as to the ownership of Campbell River. Hoping to receiving [sic] your reply as early as possible."
DeBeck in turn, wrote to Vowell on November 18, 1905 [document 916] stating that:
"The trouble began by the We-wai-ai-kum people trying to prevent the others from fishing for salmon in the Campbell River, and the We-wai-ai-kai people retaliate by ordering them to leave that reserve, claiming that it belongs to themselves."
[405]
Vowell's reply to DeBeck, dated December 1, 1905 [document 917] has been the subject of much discussion in the proceedings before me. This is the "infamous" letter wherein Vowell indicated by means of a bracket that Captain John and the six young men were Wewayakay and advised that the Campbell River reserve was allotted to the Wewayakay Band by Ashdown Green under special authority from the Dominion and Provincial Governments on May 7, 1888. As I noted earlier, a contrary opinion was expressed by Vowell some six years earlier. I am satisfied that Vowell's source of information in making these statements in 1905 was the schedule published in the 1901 or 1902 Annual report. Further, from a review of the schedules it appears that Vowell merely quoted from the Schedule when he indicated that this reserve was allotted to the Wewayakay Band by Ashdown Green under special authority from the Dominion and provincial governments on May 7, 1888. Therefore, as far as Vowell was concerned, in 1899 the reserve was allotted for the Lekwiltok and then in 1905 he wrote it was allotted to the Wewaikai by Green. As such, I am satisfied that Vowell incorrectly advised that Reserve No. 11 was "allotted to the We-way-a-kay band by Ashdown Green ..."
[406]
The schedule of reserves was an administrative document used by Department officials as a tool or handy reference. Unfortunately, the schedule contained errors which required correction. However, as is often the case in dealing with the Crown, the process of correcting the reserve schedule to accord with the views of the Indians no doubt took longer than anticipated.
[407]
It is not known whether any further action was taken by DeBeck to resolve the fishing dispute. Six months later, in June of 1906, William Halliday was appointed Indian Agent for the Kwawkewlth Agency [document 922]. Within six months of his appointment, Halliday wrote two reports to the Department setting out details of the Campbell River Indians' occupation of Reserve No. 11. Both of Halliday's reports noted that, according to Indian custom, the land was acknowledged as belonging to the Campbell River Indians and their Chief, Kwaksistala. However, this information did not accord with the Department's records for Reserve No. 11 [document 926]. Specifically, Halliday reported on August 29, 1906:
"Mind however that the Reserve which they are occupying at present  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River is not their own reserve at all, but belongs to the We-wai-kai band, many of whom resent the intrusion of the We-wai-kum tribe on their reserve. It seems that by an old tribal custom that certain hunting grounds were set apart for certain families and the portion round Campbell River belonged to the family of the man who is now chief of the We-wai-kum band and he has called his people from Greene Point to live with him. I enclose a copy of the chief's letter to me so that the Department may be in full possession of all details." (Note: this letter was never located)
[408]
Halliday's second report, dated November 10, 1906, was filed after a joint meeting of the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indians, called for the very purpose of obtaining information on the Campbell River reserve situation. This report contains the most detailed account of the Indians own views on the resolution. The full report is reproduced below:
"With further reference to your letter No. 32 A-5 [T-928] and my letter of August 29th No. 118/5 [T-926] having reference to the occupation of the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River, I have the honour to report that I have just returned from a visit to the tribes  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and Cape Mudge. They were all  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and I called them together to gather information with regard to the occupation of the reserve by the We-wai-kum band. From the evidence given there it seems that originally before any white settlers came the reserve was inhabited by the Comox Indians. They had a fierce fight with another tribe and were almost extinguished. For many years the only family living thereon was that of 'Captain' George [sic] Quacksista who afterwards became chief of the We-wai-kum band as his mother was a Comox and his father a We-wai-kum. He had a large lodge house there the remains of which are still visible. He handed over his position as chief to his son, George, the present chief.
"At the time it was surveyed, the Quacksista family were the only ones living there. The only way the We-wai-kum band can understand the fact that it is put on the records of the office that the reserve belongs to the We-wai-kai band who live at Cape Mudge is the similarity of the names.
"On the other hand, the We-wai-kai state that although the land according to the Indian Custom belongs to the Quacksista family that the We-wai-kai people asked for it as a reserve while the other parties did not.
"I questioned them very carefully on the matter and said I would report the evidence given and leave it to the Department to decide which had prior or rather the better claim to the reserve.
"I gathered from remarks made by both that they planned uniting in the near future so that they might have enough children to keep the school open.
"The We-wai-kum band claims also that when they lived at Green Point there was very little chance for them to earn any money as they were so far away that they were out of touch with all the outside world.
"I should be very pleased if you will advise me what to do in the matter as the We-wai-kum people have torn down all their buildings at Green Point and have re-erected some of them  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River besides having built a number of good frame buildings."
Halliday's report is significant for a number of reasons. The report is the last and most comprehensive document prepared dealing with the Campbell River Reserve issue prior to the March 20, 1907 resolution. Halliday's purpose in preparing the document was to "report the evidence given" by the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indians, and as such it records, in my view, some of the best evidence of the Indians' own views on the issue of who had the right to occupy the Campbell River Reserve.
[409]
Clearly from the wording of the report, both the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indians were in agreement that historically Reserve No. 11 had been occupied by Captain John and his family, who were affiliated with both the Wewaikum and Comox Indians. Such an affiliation is consistent with other documentary and oral evidence on Kwaksistala's ancestry (see also the evidence of Lucy Hovell, CR-22). Captain John's occupation of the reserve in 1888 at the time of Green's survey is also confirmed by the Indians in this report. It would seem that the Cape Mudge Indians at this point, did not dispute Kwaksistala's tribal affiliation, nor his and his family's right to occupy the land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River.
[410]
The only issue as to the correct allocation of Reserve No. 11 appears to have been raised by the "fact that it is put on the records of the office that the Reserve belongs to the We-wai-kai band". I agree that the reference to the records of the office is a reference to the Schedule of Reserves. Further, it would also seem that both bands were aware of the existence of the Department's administrative records (the 1901 and 1902 schedules) regarding the allocation of the reserves. The Crown also maintains, in response to Cape Mudge's claim that these records were withheld, that it can be inferred from earlier correspondence between DeBeck and Rendle that the Indians had been advised that the 1901 and 1902 Schedules listed the Cape Mudge band with reference to the Campbell River Reserve. On the other hand, the Crown claims that Cape Mudge exploited the Department's record of Reserve No. 11 by alleging they asked for the Reserve and at the same time acknowledged that according to Indian custom it belonged to the Kwaksistala family, who were the only ones to occupy the land at the time of its survey. The Crown also maintains, and I agree, that Cape Mudge's assertion that they asked for the reserve is unsupported by any of the first hand accounts of Green's visit to Campbell River in 1888 (see documents 517, 521, 507 and pp. 56-59 of the Crown's argument) and should be read in conjunction with the 1907 Resolution [document 944] which indicates that the "object of the Wewaiaikai Band in asking for this land for a reserve was to have the use of the river for fishing purposes". In other words, the Wewaikum are saying that they were the only ones living  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River at the relevant time, while the Wewaikai are saying that they acknowledged, according to Indian custom, that the reserve belonged to Kwaksistala and his family, who were the only ones living on the reserve, but they, the Wewaikai, asked for it while the others did not. The Wewaikai, as I read the report, did not say that they had a hereditary right to the reserve or that it was theirs according to Indian custom, just that they asked for the reserve and others did not.
[411]
A reply to Halliday's letter of November 10, 1906 was never found. As such the next significant document is the 1907 Resolution itself.
[412]
On March 20, 1907, the Cape Mudge Indians passed a resolution, the purpose of which, I am satisfied, was to settle the difference of opinion between the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indians with respect to the right to fish in the Campbell River, which appears to have given rise to the dispute in the first place and to settle the question of ownership of Reserve No. 11  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. The terms of the resolution were recorded by Halliday in a letter dated March 23, 1907 [document 944], the full text is reproduced below:
"I have the honour to inform you that in addition to the resolution passed at a general meeting of the Cape Mudge or We-waiaikai Band of Indians as contained in my letter to you of even date No. 375/5, the following resolution was unanimously passed: -
'Resolved - that whereas there is a difference of opinion as to the Campbell River Reserve, this reserve being claimed by both the Wewaikai and Wewaiaikum Bands, and as the reserve is gazetted in the office of the Indian Department as belonging to the Wewaiaikai Band, and as the reserve is at present occupied by the Wewaiaikum Band, and as the object of the Wewaiaikai Band in asking for this land for a reserve was to have the use of the river for fishing purposes, therefore the members of the Wewaiaikai Band in council here assembled, do cede all right to the Campbell River Reserve to the Wewaiaikum Band forever with the proviso that at any and all times the Wewaiaikai Band shall have the undisputed right to catch any and all fish in the waters of the Campbell River, this right to be in common with the Wewaiaikum Band.
'Resolved further that the Indian Agent who is presiding at this meeting is hereby authorized to take what steps are necessary to have this resolution made official and properly carried out.'
"In view of the fact that very shortly a proposition from the International Lumber Company [sic] will be submitted to the Department in which they will ask for permission to build a railroad for logging purposes across the Campbell River Reserve.
"I deemed it necessary to get an expression of opinion from the Indians regarding the ownership of this reserve. In my letter of Nov. 10, No. 208/5 [document 934] the merits of the rival claims are dealt with.
"At the meeting at Cape Mudge held on the evening of the 20 inst. most of the male members of the tribe were present and there was not one dissenting voice to the resolution. My correspondence with regard to this matter with the Department was told to them fully and they fully understand the exact position of affairs.
"I would suggest therefore that on the strength of the resolution that the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River be gazetted as belonging to the Wewaiaikum Band otherwise known as the Campbell River Band. They have been in possession of this reserve for upwards of ten years."
[413]
From the wording of the resolution, it is evident that the Cape Mudge Indians emphasized there was a "difference of opinion" as to the ownership of Reserve No. 11, as this reserve was being claimed by both the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Bands. As such, it would seem that the purpose of the resolution, was not to "transfer", "sell" or "alienate" the reserve from Cape Mudge to the Campbell River but to settle or resolve the "difference of opinion" between the two bands.
[414]
The Resolution recites the fact that the "first Indians to live on this Reserve were of the Wewaiaikum Band". In my view, this recital is important because it confirms that the prior occupation of the land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River was by the Wewaikum and is consistent with the Cape Mudge Indians' previous acknowledgement of the rights of the Wewaikum  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. Further, the proviso that Cape Mudge "asked for" the Reserve in order to secure their right to fish in the river is consistent with the history of the use made of this area by the Cape Mudge Indians.
[415]
The following clause makes it clear that the object of the resolution was to resolve as between subgroups of the Laichkwiltach the issue of allocation of Reserve No. 11 and to secure for the Cape Mudge Indians the continued right to fish in the waters of Campbell River:
"Therefore the members of the Wewaiaikai band in council here assembled, do cede all right to the Campbell River Reserve to the Wewaiaikai Band forever with the proviso that at any and all times the Wewaiaikai Band shall have the undisputed right to catch any and all fish in the waters of the Campbell River, this right to be in common with the Wewaiaikum Band."
[416]
In addition, argues the Crown, and I agree, the purpose of the Resolution was also to inform the Department of the views held by the Indians on these issues. For this purpose it was "necessary to get an expression of opinion from the Indians regarding the ownership of this Reserve" so that the Department could accordingly amend its records, and "on the strength of the resolution of the Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River [could] be gazetted as belonging to the Wewaiaikum band".
[417]
Cape Mudge maintains that the Resolution passed by Cape Mudge in 1907 was "void" because it did not comply with the technical requirements of the surrender provisions as set out in the
Indian Act
of 1906. Cape Mudge also alleges that the problems of communication between the Indians and Halliday made it unlikely that the Resolution was passed by the Cape Mudge with a full understanding of its terms and effects.
[418]
In response, the Crown submits, and I agree, that the 1907 Resolution was unanimously passed by Cape Mudge with a full understanding of its terms and effect. In my view, the best evidence of the terms of the resolution is contained in Halliday's letter of March 23, 1907, quoting the actual text of the resolution, and therefore more weight should be given to the terms of the resolution as recorded in Halliday's letter because Halliday was an observer and recorded contemporaneously the terms of the Resolution in course of his duty as an Indian Agent.
[419]
The Crown submits that the onus rests with the Cape Mudge Indians to prove the allegation that the Indians were not fully informed, or failed to fully comprehend the terms and effects of the 1907 Resolution. The Crown argues that Cape Mudge has not fulfilled this onus. I am satisfied that from the documents prepared by Halliday, a strong inference can be drawn that the Indians were provided with sufficient notice of the meeting and that they were fully informed by Halliday of all his correspondence on the Campbell river issue (this is in response to Cape Mudge's allegation that the Crown failed to make full disclosure of all relevant facts prior to the passage of the Resolution). After being so informed, Cape Mudge passed the 1907 Resolution to effect a settlement of the fishery dispute and confirm the allocation of Reserve No. 11 to the Campbell River Indians.
[420]
In regard to the allegation of nondisclosure by Halliday, there are a number of documents from which this court can draw an inference that Halliday fairly appraised and advised the Cape Mudge Indians of their position prior to the passage of the resolution. First, Halliday indicated in his letter of March 23, 1907 [document 944]:
"...
"At the meeting at Cape Mudge held on the evening at the 20 inst. most of the male members of the tribe were present and there was not one dissenting voice to the Resolution. My correspondence with regard to this matter with the Department was told to them fully and they fully understood the exact position of affairs."
Halliday's second letter of March 23, 1907 [document 951], regarding the application to haul timber across the Drew Harbour Reserves contains the following statement:
"Two of the resolutions were passed but as they had reference [to] other matters will be dealt with in a separate report. Before passing the first resolution I explained to them exactly the condition of affairs in regard to this matter, I read a copy of Mr. Bull's letter to me and my report thereon to the Department and they came to the conclusion that as the road was already in use that the best thing to so was accept the terms I had suggested."
[421]
In light of the above, I am also satisfied that an inference can be drawn that Halliday disclosed and read to the Cape Mudge Indians, at a minimum, the correspondence which he exchanged with the Department on the subject of Reserve No. 11 since his appointment in June 1906. That would include his letter of November 10, 1906 [document 934], which was referred to in his March 23, 1907 letter, as well as earlier letters of August 29, 1906 [document 926], October 4, 1906 [document 929] and Vowell's reply of September 19, 1906 [document 928]. These documents set out the information which Halliday had regarding the allocation of Reserve No. 11. The authority for finding such an inference can be found in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 591 (F.C.A.).
[422]
Three documents, written by the Cape Mudge Indians also tend to corroborate Halliday's recording of the 1907 Resolution. The most specific is a letter from Chief Billy Assu, dated May 21, 1934 to the new Indian Agent Todd, who was appointed the Indian Agent after Halliday's retirement, [document 1957] in which Assu talks of the investment he and the Cape Mudge have made in improving Reserve No. 12 and relates the circumstances under which the allocation of Reserve No. 11 and Reserve No. 12 was determined:
"The time we had a meeting in our school house at Cape Mudge Mr. Halliday [sic] & Mr. George Quacksister came in the meeting to have [sic] permission to have Campbell River, and I was the one to stood up and said it would be alright, & all our people agreed. And I asked my people to let me have Quinsam [sic]. And Mr. Jim Chickite soot up and said that it was alright for me to take Quinsam because I have a lot of children. Mr. Halliday asked my people and they said fine.
"I never did think to take Quinsam all to myself. I've been always telling the boys to help themselves on the land. I asked them many times to go up there and work on the land. I think there were only five men I didn't ask & they didn't want to work.
"... You can tell Mr. Halliday the things I've said. He was my best friend. I hope you'll be like him and be my friend too some day ..."
A similar account of the meeting is contained in the "Proofs of Ownership" document [document 2513] identified by June Johnson as having been written by her father, Charlie Peters, a Cape Mudge elder. In this document Peters states:
"Indian Agent Halliday called a meeting, regarding the C.R. Reserve. Only four persons from Campbell River were present. Namely, George Quacksister, Frank Dixon, Dan Quatell, Happy Jack.
"Billy Assu spoke. you can have Campbell River Reserve but not Quinsam.
"Then old Jim Chickite spoke. To give the Cape Mudge Indians freedom to catch & cure salmon  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. They reply, It's O.K. with Campbell River Indians as we are brothers, we are one & always were friends."
Billy Assu, in a telegram to Commissioner Ditchburn dated January 30, 1932, document 2627, confirmed that:
"I gave them the right to settle  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River only not including Quinsam."
[423]
The above should be contrasted with the evidence relied on by Cape Mudge of Harry Assu given at his deposition that "Pitjail" or Tom Fitzgerald "was smart" because as a spokesman for the Cape Mudge he stated at the 1907 meeting that: "You can stay  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River in the spit but don't touch nothing because we own Campbell River" (Assu deposition, February 14, 1990, vol. 1 p. 31). This position is reflected in the Cape Mudge pleadings.
[424]
Suttles also relied on Harry Assu's hearsay evidence regarding the terms of the 1907 Resolution (see CM-77, pp. 58-59). However, during cross-examination by counsel for the Crown, Suttles admitted that there were a number of problems in relying on such hearsay evidence or "oral tradition". For example, translations may not be accurate and as a story is repeated over the years it may be subject to change depending on the purpose of retelling the story (Suttles cross-exam, vol. 37, pp. 5093-5095). As such, I agree that oral traditions such as Assu's interpretation of the 1907 meeting can not "be simply accepted at face value" without corroboration (Suttles, cross-exam, vol. 36, pp. 5055-5057). Moreover, the opinion that "oral tradition" cannot be accepted without corroboration from other sources is important in determining what weight if any, should be given to Harry Assu's understanding of the 1907 Resolution. In this regard, I note that Suttles conceded that a number of documents failed to corroborate Assu's evidence and were inconsistent with oral tradition. Such a document is the 1922 letter from Billy Assu asking the Campbell River Indians for permission to build a house on the Campbell River Reserve (document 1656 and Suttles cross-exam, vol. 37, pp. 5114-5115).
[425]
Suttles also agreed that three other documents failed to corroborate Assu's interpretation of the 1907 Resolution: Assu's May 21, 1934 letter to Halliday [document 1946]; the 1936 Declaration of the Cape Mudge Chief and Principal Men [document 1994] and Charlie Peters' Proof of Ownership" document (document 2513 and Suttles cross-exam, vol. 37, pp. 5115-5120.
[426]
Harry Assu's recollection of the Wilson and Brady timber sales illustrates the difficulty in relying on hearsay oral evidence. Harry Assu gave evidence that Halliday was instrumental in arranging for the sale of timber on the Cape Mudge Reserve against the wishes of his father, Billy, and a majority of the Cape Mudge Indians and that Billy Assu and most of the Cape Mudge Indians were away when the timber sale was arranged (Assu's deposition in chief, February 14, 1990, vol. 1 pp. 36 and 27). However, the documents filed as exhibit C-89 reveal that a majority of the Cape Mudge Indians were in favour of a sale of their timber to Wilson and Brady and that contrary to what Assu asserted, Halliday advised against the sale. The resolution of May 25, 1919 (part of the documents contained in Exhibit C-89) shows that Billy Assu was present but refused to vote, which directly contradicts Harry Assu's version of the events, namely that Halliday sold their timber while his father was away fishing (see also Halliday's letter of May 28, 1919 [Exhibit C-89]). According to the documentation, the $5,000 payment for the timber was "divided equally amongst all members in our Band following the usual custom of such distribution [Exhibit C-89, May 25, 1919 Resolution].
[427]
Therefore, in light of the above, I am satisfied that little, if any weight, should be given to Harry Assu's recollection of the 1907 Resolution as it is quite possible that Assu's recollection 83 years after the meeting could easily have changed and it is quite obvious that his recollection is inconsistent with documents recording the statements of the Cape Mudge Indians after the 1907 meeting.
Ability to Communicate
[428]
Cape Mudge have suggested in their argument that langauge barriers and lack of education contributed to Halliday's "misunderstanding" of the 1907 Resolution. In this regard, Suttles was asked to provide an opinion in his report regarding the problem of communication between natives and non-natives based on the assumption that such communication would have been conducted in "Chinook Jargon" (CM-77, p. 59). Suttles was assisted in his research on this issue by Pritchard, who appears not to have provided Suttles with all the documents which would have been relevant to Suttle's opinion. Further, Suttles conceded that a number of documents which contradicted the evidence which he had been provided with, were unknown to him at the time he wrote his report [CM-77] (see Suttles cross-exam, vol. 36, pp. 5072, 5074, 5064-65, 5054, 5076-77 and documents 106, 178, 740, 936, 943, 953, 951, 1214). In this regard, I refer to Pidcock's report of December 30, 1897 [document 740] wherein he indicated that:
"... I held a meeting of the members of the We-wai-ai-kai band at their village at Cape Mudge, and explained to them the application made by the B.C. Mills timber and Trading Co. for the purchase of their reserve in Village Bay, Valdes Island. All of them expressed themselves as being very unwilling to surrender any portion of their reserve in Village Bay, as it was there that they obtained a large portion of their supply of salmon for winter use."
Suttles, who had not seen a copy of the above noted document prior to preparing his report agreed that the Cape Mudge Indians were capable of understanding and communicating concepts regarding the giving up of a reserve (Suttles, cross-exam, vol. 36, pp. 5064-50650). By way of further example, I note that the third resolution passed at the 1907 meeting regarding the application to haul timber across the Drew Harbour Reserve also makes it clear that communication between the Indian Agent and Cape Mudge was not a problem in 1907 [document 951]. I also note that Suttles once again was not provided with a copy of this document before completing his report. Upon being presented with document 951 during cross-examination by the Crown, Suttles agreed that there were no difficulties in communication between the Indian Agent and the Cape Mudge Indians at the 1907 meeting (Suttles cross-exam, vol. 36, pp. 5054-5055).
[429]
The Crown also noted that the practice of translating at band meetings between English and the native language by band members who were capable of understanding both languages was confirmed by June Johnson (Johnson, cross-exam, vol. 45, p. 6228-6230) and evidence of Mr. Roberts (vol. 7, pp. 897-898).
[430]
Therefore, I am satisfied that based on the documentary and oral evidence the Cape Mudge Indians were capable of communicating in English by March 1907. Further, the documents indicate that schooling was provided to the Cape Mudge for 14 years prior to the 1907 meeting and that the Cape Mudge were capable of communicating with the Indian Agent regarding reserve issues. In addition, when necessary, translation was provided to those members of the Band who did not fully understand the English language.
The Legal Effect of the 1907 Resolution
[431]
Cape Mudge asserts that the 1907 Resolution was void for failure to comply with the technical requirements of surrender as outlined in the 1906
Indian Act
. Therefore they are still "entitled" to and are beneficial owners of Reserve No. 11 and that the Crown in the process breached its obligations or duty to one or both Indian Bands. The Crown, on the other hand, maintains that the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
have no application to the circumstances of the 1907 Resolution.
[432]
As I have indicated previously in these reasons, based on my reading of the text of the 1907 Resolution [document 944] as well as the background leading up to its passage, the resolution emphasized as its objective
the resolution of a difference of opinion
between two subgroups of the Laichkwiltach as to the allocation, for lack of a better term, of Reserve No. 11 as well as the disputed right to fish in the Campbell River. For this purpose, it was "deemed necessary to get an expression of opinion from the Indians".
[433]
Before proceeding with an analysis of the applicability of the surrender provisions, a review of the jurisprudence and legal writing dealing with surrenders may be of assistance in this analysis.
[434]
It would seem that there is no dispute among the parties that the origin of the surrender provisions in the
Indian Act
was the Royal Proclamation of 1763. Dickson, J. (as he then was), made the following comments in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 321 (S.C.C.) at 340 D.L.R.:
"
The Royal Proclamation of 1763 provided that no private person could purchase from the Indians any lands
that the Proclamation had reserved to them, and provided further that all purchases had to be by and in the name of the Crown, in a public assembly of the Indians held by the governor or commander-in-chief of the colony in which the lands in question lay. As Lord Watson pointed out in
St. Catherine's Milling
, supra, at p. 54, this policy with respect to the sale or transfer of the Indians' interest in land has been continuously maintained by the British Crown, by the governments of the colonies when they became responsible for the administration of Indian affairs, and after 1867, by the federal government of Canada. Successive federal statutes, predecessors to the present
Indian Act
, have all provided for the general inalienability of Indian reserve land except upon surrender to the Crown, the relevant provisions in the
Act
being ss. 37-41.
"
The purpose of this surrender requirement is clearly to interpose the Crown between the Indians and prospective purchasers or lessees of their land, so as to prevent the Indians from being exploited. This is made clear in the Royal Proclamation itself
, which prefaces the provision making the Crown an intermediary with a declaration that [at p. 128]:
'great Frauds and Abuses have been committed in purchasing Lands of the Indians to the great Prejudice of our Interests, and to the great Dissatisfaction of the said Indians ...'
"Through the confirmation of the
Indian Act
of the historical responsibility which the Crown has undertaken, to act on behalf of the Indians so as to protect their interests in transactions with third parties
, Parliament has conferred upon the Crown a discretion to decide for itself where the Indians' best interests really lie." (Underlining mine)
Professor Slattery in his article
Understanding Aboriginal Rights
(1987), 66 Can. Bar Rev. 727 deals at some length with the policy of restricting the transfer of native land. It would seem that according to Professor Slattery the policy of restricting the transfer of native land would not affect the capacity of natives to resolve land issues amongst themselves. At p. 742 he writes:
"For most practical purposes, the Crown's underlying title to the Indian Territories did not affect native property right, which were viewed as burdens on that title. Neither did it affect customary native systems of land use and tenure, which remained in force within the native communities and governed relations of their members inter se. Its main consequence was that native peoples could not cede their territories to European states other than Britain, for to do so would have involved a denial of the Crown's sovereign rights.
Nevertheless, native peoples were not barred from transferring lands among themselves
(where native custom allowed this), and their ability to gain rights to new lands within the Indian Territories by simple appropriation was unimpaired.
"Further restrictions on transfers of native lands arose from another source. When colonies of Europeans were established in America, European-derived land systems were introduced among the settlers. These systems were based on the premise that title to the land in the colony, so far as the settlers were concerned, could only be derived from Crown grant. Title to land was thus in principle derivative. It followed that private settlers could not acquire title to land simply by taking possession of it; neither could they gain title by purchase from the Indians. This principle served several important purposes. It ensured that the Crown and its deputies retained control over the pace and manner in which land was settled, and that they benefited from revenues flowing from land grants. It also helped to avoid friction between settlers and Indians caused by fraudulent practices that often tainted private purchases of Indian lands.
"The ban on cessation of native lands to outside European states, coupled with the incapacity of settlers to gain title by Indian purchases, resulted in the characterization of native title as inalienable except to the Crown.
It can be seen, however, that the inalienability of native title applied only to dealings between Indians and non-Indians; it did not prevent Indians from transferring land among themselves. Moreover, it did not reflect any inherent infirmity in native title. The doctrine of inalienability was more the product of the derivity system of title governing the settlers than any characteristic native tenure
." (Underlining mine)
Professor Slattery continues at p. 763:
"From the early stages of English settlement, private individuals often purchased lands from the Indians and claimed to have obtained title that was valid within the general land system of the colony. Such transactions were repeatedly forbidden by legislation passed in most of the English colonies, and were generally outlawed by royal decree in the Royal Proclamation of 1763. Official practice coupled with strong policy considerations gave rise to a common law rule that aboriginal title cannot be transferred to private persons but only to the Crown. As noted earlier,
this rule seemingly did not affect the capacity of native peoples to deal in lands among themselves
, assuming that native custom permitted transactions of this kind." (Underlining mine)
I also note that Professor Slattery's article
Understanding Aboriginal Rights
and the proposition that the inalienability of native property under the
Indian Act
only applied to protect Indians from exploitation by non-natives were both expressly adopted by Mr. Justice LaForest in
Mitchell and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 81; [1990] 3 C.N.L.R. 46; [1990] 5 W.W.R. 97; 71 D.L.R.(4th) 193.
Mitchell
dealt with the interpretation of ss. 87, 89 and 90 of the
Indian Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. I-6 which confer protection from taxation and civil execution on certain categories of property held by Indians. The narrow issue decided by the Supreme Court was whether the proceeds of the settlement received by the Indian Band from the province of Manitoba was protected from garnishment by these sections. LaForest, J., reviewed the historical origin of these and other sections of the
Indian Act
including the surrender provisions protecting Indian property from alienation to non-natives. At p. 255 D.L.R., LaForest, J. (speaking for the majority), interprets the sections of the
Indian Act
in their historical context and writes:
"The above-noted sections [ss. 87 and 89 of the 1970
Indian Act
, and their predecessors] should be read alongside other provisions in the early
Indian Acts
which set important constraints on the alienability of lands that had been set aside for the use of Indians. Section 25 et seq. of the
Indian Act, 1876
, for example, provide for the surrender of lands set aside for the 'use of Indians' under conditions that are essentially the same as those set out in ss. 37 and 39 of the present day
Act
. By these terms, the alienation, lease or other disposal of lands set aside for Indians is conditional on the transfer first being made to 'Her Majesty' and on approval being accorded by the Governor in Council.
"As is clear, the comments of the Chief Justice in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 59 B.C.L.R. 301, these legislative restraints on the alienability of Indian lands are but the continuation of a policy that has shaped the dealings between the Indians and the European settlers since the time of the Royal Proclamation of 1763. The historical record leaves no doubt that native people acknowledged the ultimate sovereignty of the British Crown, and agreed to cede their traditional home lands on the understanding that the Crown would thereafter protect them in the possession and use of such lands as were reserved for their use; see the comments of Professor Slattery in his article
Understanding Aboriginal Rights
... The sections of the
Indian Act
relating to the inalienability of Indian lands seek to give effect to this protection by interposing the Crown between the Indians and the market forces, which, if left unchecked, had the potential to erode Indian ownership of these reserve lands. This court, in its recent decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ... alluded to this point when it noted at p. 504 that the future of inalienability was adopted as a protective measure for the Indian population lest it be persuaded into improvident transactions.
"I take it to be obvious that the protections afforded against taxation and attachment by ss. 87 and 89 of the
Indian Act
go hand in hand with these restraints on the alienability of land ... Secondly, the protection against attachment ensures that the enforcement of civil judgments by non-natives will not be allowed to hinder Indians in the untrammelled enjoyment of such advantages as they had retained or might acquire pursuant to the fulfilment by the Crown of its treaty obligations. In effect, these sections shield Indians from the imposition of civil liabilities that could lead albeit through an indirect route to the alienation of the Indian land base through the medium of foreclosure sales and the like ...
"In summary, the historical record makes it clear that ss. 87 and 89 of the
Indian Act
, the sections to which the deeming provision of section 90 applies, constitute part of a legislative 'package' which bears the impress of an obligation to native people's which the Crown has recognized at least since 1763. From that time on, the Crown has always acknowledged that it is honour-bound to shield Indians from any efforts by non-natives to dispossess Indians of the property which they hold qua Indians, i.e. their land base and chattels on that land base."
At pp. 228-229, LaForest, J., also indicates that this "legislative package" of the
Indian Act
, which includes the restraints on the alienability of reserve land would not restrict Indians from dealing with such property among themselves:
"I draw attention to these decisions by way of emphasizing once again that one must guard against ascribing an overly broad purpose to ss. 87 and 89. These provisions are not intended to confer privileges on Indians in respect of any property they may acquire and possess, wherever situated. Rather their purpose is simply to insulate the property interests of Indians in their reserve lands from the intrusions and interference of the larger society so as to ensure that Indians are not dispossessed of their entitlements. The Alberta Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ... captures the essence of the matter when it states, at p. 452, in reference to s. 87, that:
'In its terms the section is intended to prevent interference with Indian property on a reserve.'
"... There could be no clearer illustration of the fact that s. 89 is not meant to arm Indians with privileges they can exercise in acquiring and dealing with property in the general marketplace, but rather, is simply limited in its purpose to preventing non-natives from interfering with the ability of Indians to enjoy such duly acquired property as they hold on their reserve lands. That, of course, is why s. 89 places no constraints on the ability of Indians to charge, pledge, or mortgage property among themselves."
He continues at p. 234:
"A reading of the
Indian Act
shows that this provision [
Indian Act 1970
, s. 90(2)] is but one of a number of sections which seek to protect property to which Indians may be said to have an entitlement by virtue of their right to occupy the lands reserved for their use. In addition to the protection relating to Indian lands to which I have already drawn attention, the range of property protected runs from crops raised on reserve lands to deposits of minerals: see ss. 32, 91, 92 and 93. These sections restrict the ability of non-natives to acquire the particular property concerned by requiring that the Minister approve all transactions in respect of it.
As is the case with the restrictions in alienability to which I drew attention earlier, the intent of these sections is to guard against the possibility that Indians will be victimized by 'sharp dealings' on the part of non-natives and dispossessed of their entitlement
." (Underlining mine)
In light of the above comments I am satisfied that restraints on the alienability of reserve land contained in the
Indian Act
were never intended to restrict the resolution of reserve allocation issues among Indians of the same band or tribe. As such, the surrender provisions applied only to transactions between natives and non-natives. This would also be consistent with the policy considerations of protecting Indians from exploitation by non-native settlers. Therefore, in my view, the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
would have no application to a transaction between natives, especially of the same group, such as the Laichkwiltach, in order to resolve a dispute.
[435]
Further support for the proposition that the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
were only intended to apply to dealings between Natives and Non-Natives is found in s. 50 of the 1906
Indian Act
which provided:
"50. Nothing in this part shall confirm any release or surrender which, but for this Part, would have been invalid; and no release or surrender of any reserve or portion of a reserve, to any person other than His Majesty, shall be valid."
The interpretation section of the 1906
Act
defines "person" as meaning: "An individual other than an Indian". The use of the defined term person in s. 50 is significant in that it supports the interpretation that the surrender provisions contained in ss. 48 and 49 of the
Act
were only intended to have application to transactions involving individuals "other than an Indian". Once again, this in my view is consistent with the scheme followed in other sections of the
Act
which differentiates between "Indians" and non-Indians by using the defined term "person".
[436]
The Crown also made reference to some common law authorities which support the proposition that native peoples are free to resolve land issues among themselves. In particular I note the following passage from the New Zealand Supreme Court decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 391:
"The legal doctrine as to the exclusive right of The Queen to extinguish the Native title, though it operates only as a restraint upon the purchasing capacity of The Queen's European subjects, leaving the Natives to deal among themselves, as freely as before the commencement of our intercourse with them, is no doubt incompatible with that full and absolute dominion over the lands which they occupy, which we call an estate in fee. But this necessarily arises out of peculiar relations with the Native race, and out of our obvious duty of protecting them, to as great an extent as possible, from the evil consequences of the intercourse which we have introduced to them, or have imposed upon them. To let in all purchasers, and to protect and enforce every private purchase would be virtually to confiscate the lands of natives in very short time. The rule laid down is, under the actual circumstances, the only one calculated to give equal security to both races."
More recently in what can be described as a land mark decision on the state of aboriginal title in Australia, Brennan, J., writing for the majority of the Australian High Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 52 held that:
"Native title over any parcel of land can be surrendered to the Crown voluntarily by all those clans or groups who, by the traditional laws and customs of the indigenous people, have a relevant connection with the land but the rights and privileges conferred by native title are otherwise inalienable to persons who are not members of the indigenous people to whom alienation is permitted by the traditional laws and customs."
As such, Brennan, J., was also of the view that any restriction on the alienability of Indian land applies only to transactions with persons who are not members of the indigenous people.
[437]
The Crown also adds that even if the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
were to have any application to the resolution of reserve issues between Indian subgroups of the same band or tribe, then an interpretation of the
Act
consonant with the original purpose of these provisions would require that the present allocation of Reserves No. 11 and 12 be protected. The purpose, asserts the Crown, of these provisions was to protect the Indians from transactions which would exploit or unconscionably deprive the Indians of their interest in a reserve.
Applicability Of The Surrender
Provisions Of The Indian Act
[438]
In the event I am wrong regarding the applicability of the surrender provisions to transactions between Indians of the same group or tribe, and as Cape Mudge spent a considerable amount of time in their argument asserting that the 1907 Resolution was void for failure to comply with the technical requirement of surrender as set out in the 1906
Indian Act
, I will deal with the issue of whether the surrender provisions are applicable to the 1907 Resolution.
[439]
The relevant surrender provisions, namely ss. 48 and 49 of the
Indian Act
, R.S. 1906. c. 43 are set out below:
"48 Except as in this Part otherwise provided, no reserve or portion of a reserve shall be sold, alienated or leased until it has been released or surrendered to the Crown for the purpose of this Part: Provided that the Superintendent General may lease, for the benefit of any Indian, upon his application for that purpose, the land to which he is entitled without such land being released or surrendered, and may, without surrender, dispose to the best advantage, in the interests of the Indians, of wild grass and dead or fallen timber.
"49. Except as in this Part otherwise provided, no release or surrender of a reserve or a portion of a reserve, held for the use of the Indians of any band, or of any individual Indian, shall be valid or binding, unless the release or surrender shall be assented to by a majority of the male members of the band of the full age of twenty-one years, at a meeting or council thereof summoned for that purpose, according to the rules of the band, and held in the presence of the Superintendent General, or of any officer duly authorized to attend such council, by the Governor-in-Council or by the Superintendent General."
It is my understanding, based on a reading of the above noted sections that the necessity of obtaining a surrender of a reserve under s. 49 only arises in circumstances where, pursuant to s. 48 a "reserve shall be sold, alienated or leased". As such, s. 48 specifically enumerates and limits the category of reserve transactions which require as a precondition the surrender of the reserve to the Crown in compliance with s. 49.
[440]
In my view, "sale" and "lease" are unambiguous terms and do not apply to the 1907 Resolution as the resolution effected neither a sale nor a lease.
[441]
Therefore, the only other category of reserve transaction that requires as a condition surrender of the reserve is, circumscribed by the term "alienated" as used in s. 48. In terms of interpreting the term "alienated", I agree that by applying the "noscitur a sociis" doctrine to the words "sold, alienated or leased", alienated must be interpreted with reference to the meaning of the more specific words "sold" and "leased". Therefore, read in this context, the word "alienated" must be interpreted narrowly to contemplate a positive act of conveying title in a reserve to a third party. In my view, the 1907 Resolution does not contemplate such a positive act of conveying title to a third party, nor does Cape Mudge purport to physically part with possession of the reserve pursuant to the Resolution. As I noted earlier, the text of the Resolution emphasized as its objective the settlement, as between the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indians, the issue of the allocation of the Campbell River Reserve and to record the expression of opinion from the Indians regarding ownership of this reserve.
[442]
A narrow interpretation of the word "alienated" is also supported by the Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 591 (F.C.A.). Urie, J.A., writing for the majority, limited the interpretation of the words "sold, alienated or leased" as they are used in the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
to mean a sale or lease of reserve land to a third party. At p. 641 Urie, J., writes:
"I am further of the view that, contrary to what was submitted by counsel for the appellants, s. 50 [of the
Indian Act
, R.S.C. 1927, c. 98] does not require in all cases in which the Crown is to be the transferee of Indian reserve lands that a release or surrender to the Crown be obtained from the Indians. Section 50 clearly applies to cases where reserve lands are to be 'sold, alienated or leased'. As I see it, a release or surrender by the Indians to the Crown must be obtained if it is proposed to sell or lease such lands to a third party. This enables the Crown to ensure that its obligations to the Indians are protected. That may be so, counsel agreed, but the use of the word 'alienated' would encompass an expropriation or reserve lands by the Crown.
"I do not agree. In its context, the word 'alienated' is neither used in its technical sense nor does it apply on the facts of this case. In that sense Armour, C.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , quoting from
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  technical legal meaning and any transfer of real estate, short of a conveyance of the title, is not an alienation of the estate. No matter in what form the sale may be made, unless the title is conveyed to the purchaser, the land is not alienated ...'
"That being so, while it might have been argued otherwise had the facts been different, in the circumstances of this case, because of the opening words of s. 50, viz. 'Except as in this Part, otherwise provided' an alienation (if an expropriation does create an alienation in the technical sense) resulting from an expropriation pursuant to s. 48 (which is included 'in this part') was excluded from the requirements of release or surrender which might otherwise prevail. In my opinion, therefore compliance with s. 50 is not required where reserve lands are expropriated pursuant to s. 48 of the
Indian Act
."
The word alienation as it is used in the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
was also interpreted restrictively by the B.C. Supreme Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.) at p. 490 where Andrew, J., indicated that:
"In my view, the sections of the
Indian Act
then in force regarding taking of lands for public purposes and alienating lands have no application to the provisions of Privy Council O. 208. The draft form of conveyance approved by Privy Council O. 208 established the terms on which Indian lands in the province were to be held by the Dominion and in this regard provided for a reservation to the province of a right to resume possession of a portion of each reserve for purposes of public works. The reservation of such a right to the province did not constitute a taking of lands or an alienation of lands as provided for in the
Indian Act
(R.S.C. 1927, c. 98, ss. 48 and 50)."
Thus, Andrews, J., held that the right of the province to resume possession of a portion of an Indian reserve for the purpose of constructing a highway did not constitute an alienation of land requiring a surrender under the
Indian Act
.
[443]
Therefore, I am satisfied Cape Mudge Indians neither "sold, alienated or leased" to a non-native third party an interest previously held by them to the exclusion of any other members of the Laichkwiltach. Instead, the Cape Mudge Indians acknowledged by way of the 1907 Resolution the fact that the Campbell River Indians had historically been in possession of the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River and as such had the better right to continue in possession of that reserve. Sections 48 and 49 of the
Indian Act
relied on by the Cape Mudge Indians only applies in the event of a transaction involving a "sale, alienation or lease" of reserve lands. The 1907 Resolution and the so-called "ceding" of any claim to the Campbell River Reserve by the Cape Mudge band in favour of the Campbell River Indians effected neither a transfer or conveyance of the Campbell River Reserve and therefore cannot be construed to be in furtherance of the "sale, alienation or lease" of that reserve. As such, no "release or surrender" to the Crown in accordance with s. 49 was required in 1907.
[444]
Cape Mudge has argued that the 1907 Resolution was void for failure to comply with the surrender provisions of the 1906
Indian Act
.
[445]
As I understand the purpose of obtaining a surrender, where it is proposed to sell or lease reserve land to non-native third parties, the native interest must be released to the Crown. Upon release of the native interest, the Crown could then in turn grant an unencumbered interest to the non-native third party. Dickson, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> made it clear that the effect of a surrender was to disencumber land of the native interest so as to vest the entire beneficial interest in such land in the Crown. The Crown following the surrender would then be in a position to grant an unencumbered freehold or leasehold interest to a non-native third party. Dickson, J., emphasized this point in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> when he stated at p. 338 (D.L.R.):
"When the land in question in
St. Catherine's Milling
was subsequently disencumbered of the native title upon its surrender to the federal government by the Indian occupants in 1873, the entire beneficial interest in the land was held to have passed, because of the personal and usufructuary nature of the Indians' right, to the Province of Ontario under s. 109 rather than to Canada. The same constitutional issue arose recently in this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  transferred to a grantee, whether an individual or the Crown. Upon surrender, the right disappeared 'in the process of release'."
The surrender process was therefore necessary to merge the Crown's underlying or ultimate title and the native interest into one title which could then in turn be granted to a non-native third party. It would seem to follow that these considerations would not apply to the 1907 Resolution, the objective of which was to maintain the reserve status in the land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. In other words, these considerations would not apply to situations where the intention was to confirm a reserve interest in other Indians, particularly where all such Indians were members of the same band or tribe. It would also seem to me that to surrender and disencumber the land of its native interest would be counter productive to the objective of retaining the status of such land as a reserve.
Possible Results From A Surrender of Reserve No. 11
[446]
I agree with the Crown's assertion that it is instructive to consider the possible result of the surrender procedure advocated by Cape Mudge. Upon such a surrender, any Indian interest in the land comprising the Reserve No. 11 would have, in the words of Dickson, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "disappeared in the process of release". The Campbell River land would therefore have become disencumbered of the native interest and have vested either in the Provincial or Federal Crown. At the time, the province took a very strong position that any land surrendered reverted to the provincial Crown. Therefore, if what Cape Mudge is asserting is correct, there was a strong possibility that the province would have taken the land back and neither Band would have been entitled to the reserve. Further, as per the definition in the
Indian Act
, the land surrendered would no longer have been a "reserve". Even assuming that the federal government would have had the jurisdiction to regrant this land to the Campbell River Indians, which in my view was doubtful in view of the province's position with regard to the reversionary interest, there is no clear mechanism by which the Indian interest or even the land's prior reserve status could have been restored to the Campbell River Indians. At best, the Crown could have issued to the Campbell River Indians a freehold estate in the land  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. It would seem that the sui generis native interest as Lekwiltok Indians in what was formerly reserve land would have been irretrievably lost. Therefore, one is left with the situation that if the surrender had taken place in 1907 there may not have been a reserve that could have been reconveyed to the Campbell River Indians. Cape Mudge no doubt would claim that this meant they still were entitled to the reserve. However, there is still the problem of the province's reversionary interest and in my view, the reserve lands would have reverted to the provincial Crown and therefore neither Band would have been entitled to the reserve.
[447]
In this regard, I think it is important to note that the cases cited by Cape Mudge, namely
St. Ann's  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  respect to the lease of reserve land to non-native third parties and as such the comments in these cases must be viewed in light of what I perceive to be a very significant distinction. Another distinction, is that the premise of those cases is that upon a surrender the native interest in the land surrendered is basically extinguished or gone, so that the Crown can convey that unencumbered interest to a third party. From my reading of the cases, in each of the cases the objective of the transaction was to effect a true conveyance of a lease hold interest to a non-native third party. To properly grant such an unencumbered leasehold interest to a non-native third party, it was necessary to first disencumber the land of its native interest by way of surrender. I also note that each of these cases dealt with a surrender for lease. The
Indian Act
specifically enumerates a "lease" as a category of transaction which requires a surrender (see s. 48 of the 1906
Indian Act
). Therefore, the scope and possible application of the surrender provisions to transactions or resolutions other than leases to non-native third parties were never considered or decided in these cases. Moreover, none of the cases dealt with the interpretation of the scope of the term "alienation" as it is used in s. 48 of the 1906
Indian Act
. For those reasons, I am of the opinion that these cases cannot be determinative of the issues in the case before me.
[448]
It should also be noted that each of the cases cited by Cape Mudge involved a declaration that the surrender for lease was void for failure to comply with the provisions of the
Indian Act
and would therefore have entitled the Indian Band to resume possession of the reserve. This result flows from the fact that the Crown is holding the land for the use and benefit of the band as landlord, and thereby retained a reversionary interest in the reserve property. Thus, on termination of the lease (as a result of the lease being declared void), the band would automatically be entitled to recover possession of the reserve from its former tenant. Further, in all four of the cases, the leases in question were still in existence when the court declared them to be void for noncompliance with the statutory requirements. I am not certain whether the same result would follow as a consequence of a finding that a surrender for sale or alienation was invalid.
[449]
The difference between a surrender for lease and a surrender for sale or alienation, is not without distinction. A surrender for sale or alienation has the effect of permanently disposing of the band's entire interest in the reserve. This unburdened interest could then be transferred by the Crown to a third party, without any reversionary interest remaining in the band, as is the case with a surrender for lease. Consequently, a subsequent determination by the court that a surrender for sale or alienation was void does not necessarily result in a declaration entitling the Indians to an Order for recovery of possession of the former reserve, as against any third party who has in the interim acquired possession of that land.
Surrender of the Dead Point Reserve - Documents related to Order-in-Council P.C. 1357
[450]
After the completion of the Cape Mudge case but prior to argument, I allowed Cape Mudge to tender into evidence an Order-in-Council P.C. 1357, dated July 5, 1934, relating to the Dead Point Reserve. All parties were allowed to make submissions regarding the documents tendered into evidence by Cape Mudge with respect to the surrender of the Dead Point Reserve by the Mamilillikula Band to the Crown for the purpose of transferring it to the Tanakteuk Band.
[451]
Cape Mudge argued that the documents related to the Order-in-Council show that a surrender was required to effect a transfer of a reserve between Indian Bands. In addition, Cape Mudge asserted that the surrender of the Dead Point Reserve by the Mamalillikulla Band to the Crown and the subsequent transfer to the Tanekteuk Band by the Crown is evidence inconsistent with Campbell River's position the provincial Order-in-Council 1036 of 1938 determined which Indian Band in British Columbia was entitled to which reserve(s).
[452]
After reviewing the arguments I am satisfied that there are a number of facts which distinguish the circumstances under which the Dead Point and Tzeachen Reserve surrenders were made from those surrounding the resolution passed by Cape Mudge on March 20, 1907. At the outset it should be noted that these surrenders occurred many years after the 1907 Resolution, specifically the Dead Point Reserve was surrendered in 1934 and the Tzeachten Reserve was surrendered in 1964. As such, the
Indian Act
and in particular the surrender provisions of the
Act
underwent significant revisions in the period between 1907 and 1964. In fact, the
Act
was completely revised in 1951. Section 37 of the 1951
Indian Act
provided that lands in a reserve shall not be sold, alienated, leased or otherwise disposed of until they have been surrendered to His Majesty and s. 39 specifically provided that a surrender was "void" unless the requirements of s. 37 were fulfilled. Neither s. 39 nor any other of the surrender provisions contain a provision analogous to s. 50 of the 1906
Indian Act
, which declared invalid only those transactions between Indians and "person" defined as individuals "other than an Indian", ie. between Indians and non-Indians.
[453]
Moreover, the purpose of the Dead Point surrender was to confirm an earlier
sale
of that reserve by the Mamalillikulla Indians to the Tanakteuk Indians. The wording of the
Indian Act
, R.S. 1927, c. 81, s. 50 in force at the time of this surrender, provided that a surrender was required where a "reserve shall be sold, alienated or leased". Therefore, the sale of the Dead Point Reserve fell into one of the specifically enumerated and limited categories of reserve transactions which require as a pre-condition the surrender of the reserve in compliance with the provisions of the
Indian Act
. This in my view, distinguishes this transaction from that of the 1907 Resolution which did not contemplate any conveyance of title. Further, the Dead Point surrender should also be contrasted with the text of the 1907 resolution which emphasized as its prime objective the settlement of the issue of the allocation of the Campbell River Reserve as between the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indians, ie. to record "an expression of opinion from the Indians regarding the ownership of this reserve".
[454]
I also note that both of these surrenders took place after the publication of the McKenna McBride Commission report in 1916, and the passing of Order-in-Council 911 (July 26, 1923) and Order-in-Council 1265 (passed on July 19, 1924) confirming the acreage and allocation of these reserves. The passing of these Orders-in-Council also resolved the issue of the provincial "reversionary interest" in reserve lands, which had been thought to fetter the Federal Government's ability to implement any transaction involving the surrender of reserve land in British Columbia. It was therefore possible, after a resolution of the provincial reversionary interest, to transfer reserve land by way of surrender without risk that the land or Indian interest would be lost in the process of a surrender to the Provincial government.
[455]
Another point which distinguishes the Dead Point Surrender from the 1907 Resolution is the fact that the Indians involved in the Dead Point transaction were descendants of two distinct and different tribes.
[456]
In my opinion, the question of whether or not a surrender was required pursuant to the 1906
Indian Act
to confirm the terms of the 1907 Resolution is a legal issue that this court has to determine in light of the wording of the 1906
Act
as well as the relevant legal authorities. Accordingly, whether or not a surrender was obtained from the Dead Point and Tzeachten Reserve should not, 30 and 60 years later, be determinative of the issue before me.
[457]
In the alternative, the Crown has argued that if I decide that the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
applied to a transfer from one Indian Band to another, then the 1876 Proclamation would apply. As I have already determined that the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
did not apply to the 1907 Resolution I will only comment briefly on the 1876 Proclamation. As noted earlier in my reasons, by proclamation issued under the authority of s. 97 of the 1876
Indian Act
and published in the
Canada Gazette
on December 30, 1876, all reserves and Indian Bands in British Columbia were explicitly exempt from the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
. The Proclamation is contained in document 90. It should be made clear, that the Proclamation applied only to British Columbia. After reviewing the history of the Proclamation and the authority to enact the Proclamation, I am satisfied that the object and purpose of the 1876 Proclamation was to facilitate the work of the reserve commissioners in adjusting reserve allocation issues in British Columbia [documents 78, 82, 83 and 94].
[458]
It would seem to me that to apply the Proclamation to authorize the 1907 Resolution would be consonant with the original purpose of its enactment, namely to vest in the Reserve Commissioner the jurisdiction to adjust the allocation of Reserves in B.C.. In this regard, I note that Vowell approved the 1907 Resolution in his capacity as Reserve Commissioner, in that after receiving the resolution he amended the Department's administrative schedule of Indian reserves [document 842]. The Reserve Commissioner's approval of the 1907 Resolution and his amendment to the schedule are recorded in Vowell's letter of April 3, 1907 [document 955] to Halliday indicating:
"I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 23rd ultimo number 378-5 [document 944] in reference to the surrender of the Laichkwiltch Reserve No. 11, Campbell River, by the We-Way-A-Kay band to the We-Way-A-Kums and to inform you that a note to that effect has been made in the Schedule of Indian Reserves.
"Quinsam Reserve No. 12 was defined at the same time as Reserve No. 11, and the same Indians accompanied Mr. Green when he visited it. Is this reserve still claimed by the We-Way-A-Kays?"
Halliday's reply to Vowell is dated April 25, 1907 [document 962] wherein Halliday states that:
"... the reserve at Quinsam is not included in the transfer as the matter was specifically brought up at the meeting and it was decided only to allow the Wewaiaikum band to have the one Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River."
It would seem at this point in time that the allocation of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 was resolved at the 1907 meeting. Unfortunately, the events that followed only served to complicate matters.
VII. The "Ditto Mark" Error
[459]
As noted earlier, upon receipt and approval of the 1907 Resolution by Vowell, a handwritten notation was made to a copy of the schedule of reserves in Victoria. Unfortunately, the notation and the ditto marks below made it appear that Reserve No. 12 was allocated to the Campbell River Indians. I am satisfied that this listing occurred as a result of a clerical error or "ditto mark" and was never intended to have any legal effect and that there never was an intention to confirm the allocation of Reserve No. 12 to the Campbell River Indians. Further, the documents show that the schedule did not accord with the opinion of the Indians as to the allocation (see documents 1476, 1555, 1576, 1781, 1804, 1825, 1854, 1872, 1877, 1873, 2404, 2416 and 2418). In my view, the error was corrected after obtaining the sworn declarations of the Chiefs and Principal Men of both the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Bands in 1936. As a result of these declarations, the Department subsequently published an amended schedule of reserves in 1943 which recorded the allocation of all the Laichkwiltach reserves [document 2141].
[460]
It seems that in March of 1907 Halliday assumed that the Department did not require a written resolution confirming the allocation of the Quinsam Reserve to the Cape Mudge Band as this reserve was already listed beside the name of Cape Mudge in Halliday's current 1902 Schedule. It should be noted that the revised schedule incorporating the ditto mark error was published after 1902 but before 1913. As such, Halliday did not initially report in his letter to the Department [document 944] the concerns of the Indians regarding the issue of Reserve No. 12.
[461]
Statements and actions of both bands in the years following 1907 are consistent with the view that Reserve No. 11 was to be a Campbell River Reserve and Reserve No. 12 was to be a Cape Mudge Reserve. As noted above, Halliday, in his letter of April 15, 1907 [document 962] indicated that the allocation of Reserve No. 12 was "specifically brought up at the meeting and it was decided to allow the Wewaiaikum to have the one Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River". On March 21, 1919, Halliday wrote to the Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, Duncan Scott, pointing out the error in the McKenna McBride's confirmation of Reserve No. 12 and advised he had gone into the history of the ownership of the reserves and noted that the Cape Mudge Indians made a gift to the Campbell River Indians of Reserve No. 11, but that it was understood at the time that Quinsam was not included in the gift [document 1476].
[462]
Halliday wrote to Ditchburn on numerous occasions regarding the Quinsam Reserve, indicating that the reserve was not included in the gift to Campbell River and that Cape Mudge retained ownership of Quinsam [documents 1790, 1822 and 1872]. On December 15, 1927 Halliday wrote to Ditchburn [document 1790] advising that:
"... in the resolution which was passed by the Cape Mudge Indians to whom the [Quinsam] Reserve was formerly allotted, no mention whatever was made of Quinsam Reserve being ceded to the Campbell River Indians. It was distinctly understood at the time that Quinsam belonged to the Wewaiaikai and, that Billy Assu's family were intending to go there and live, and perform farming operations in addition to fishing, etc. At that particular time no strong claim was put up by the Campbell River Band, and I am enclosing you a copy of the letter which was sent to the Superintendent for British Columbia, Mr. A.W. Vowell, after the resolution had been passed."
[463]
I also note that documents prepared by Billy Assu and Charlie Peters confirmed the resolution of the Quinsam issue in 1907 (see documents 2627, 1946 and 2513).
[464]
Unfortunately, sometime between 1902 and the publication of the 1913 Schedule of reserves the hand written notation made opposite Reserve No. 11 was published in the 1913 Schedule as being typed opposite Reserve No. 11 as opposed to a handwritten entry. Therefore by 1913 the Schedule showed opposite Reserve No. 11 "Wewaiaikum" and ditto marks underneath that showed Reserve No. 12 as Wewaiaikum. The subsequent Orders in Council simply adopted or incorporated that 1913 Schedule.
[465]
More specifically, portions of the report of the McKenna McBride Commission, as modified by the Ditchburn/Clark Commission, were attached to the Dominion and Provincial Orders in Council passed in 1923, 1924 and 1938. Provincial Order-in-Council 911 [document 1733] passed on July 26, 1923, federal Order-in-Council 1265 [document 1743] passed on July 26, 1923 and provincial Order-in-Council 1036 [document 2058] passed in 1938 conveyed legal title to Indian reserves in British Columbia to the Dominion government. These three Orders in Council had attached as a Schedule a list of reserves that were "confirmed" by the McKenna McBride Commission in their report. The "confirmations of reserves" portion of the schedule for the Kwawkewlth Agency attached to Orders in Council 911, 1265 and 1036 indicate by way of ditto marks the Wewayakum Band next to the Reserve No. 12. As such, Campbell River argued that these schedules, as legislative instruments, confirmed the allocation of Reserve No. 12 to the Wewayakum Indian Band.
[466]
The Crown, in turn, argued that these Orders in Council did not have the legal effect of confirming the clerical error which gave rise to the listing of Reserve No. 12 as a Wewayakum reserve. In this regard I agree with the Crown's submission. In my view, the McKenna McBride Commission did not have the jurisdiction to reallocate reserves. Its jurisdiction was limited to confirming the allocation and size of the reserves in British Columbia. Therefore, the confirmation of a clerical error, which had the effect of reallocating Reserve No. 12 to the Wewayakum Indian Band could have no legal effect. I am also of the opinion that the orders in council confirming the report of the McKenna McBride Commission should not be construed as confirming actions which were beyond the Commission's mandate or jurisdiction.
Mckenna McBride Commission Hearings
[467]
The transcripts of the testimony of both the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indians before the Commission in 1914 constituted the first explicit confirmation of the status quo after 1907. The Campbell River Indians made no claim to the Quinsam Reserve, but affirmed their claim to Campbell River. Conversely, the Cape Mudge Indians made no mention of, or claim to, the Campbell River Reserve, while affirming their claim to Quinsam. The mystery becomes why no one did anything for some 30 years with regard to correcting the error that was brought to the attention of various officials. The records of the Commission indicate that Halliday on at least two occasions brought to the Commission's attention the clerical error respecting Quinsam in the 1913 schedule. In his itinerary for the Commission, Halliday indicated with respect to Reserve No. 12 that:
"This reserve though mentioned in the schedule as belonging to the Wewaiaikum band really belongs to the Wewaiaikai band." [document 1171]
A similar comment is found in document 1174.
[468]
It is also clear the Commission was aware of the error with respect to the Quinsam Reserve. In the "Analysis of Evidence" portion contained in the Commission's Final Report of June 30, 1916 [document 1350] at p. A7, "Analysis of Evidence - Table A" for the Kwawkewlth Agency", the Commission recorded its finding:
"This reserve [Quinsam] appears in the Schedule as one of the Wewayakum Band. It is not so regarded by that Band and is claimed by the Wewayakay Band with right according to Agent Halliday. It has been counted as in Schedule in estimating their per capita acreage."
And at p. A6:
"This Band [the Cape Mudge] claims also the Quinsam or Quinsam reserve No. 12, assigned in the Schedule to the Wewayakum Band and this claim is endorsed by Agent Halliday."
An annotated copy of the 1913 Schedule signed by N.W. White (presumably Commissioner Nathaniel W. White) [document 1177] contains the handwritten word "Wewayakay" written in beside the Quinsam Reserve to correct the "ditto" mark error.
[469]
However, contrary to the above evidence, the Commission in its Minutes of Decision, confirmed Reserve No. 12 in compliance with the 1913 Schedule [document 1350]. The question becomes, why was this matter not dealt with by the Commission when the allocation of Reserve No. 12 was brought to their attention. I believe the answer lies with a review of the authority of the McKenna McBride Commission.
[470]
In my opinion of the mandate and authority of the Commission makes it clear that:
1) the function of the Commission was to resolve as between the Province and Dominion Governments the size and number of Indian reserves in British Columbia. Once the number and size of these reserves was confirmed, the legal title to these reserves could be conveyed by the Province to the Federal Government so as to resolve the issue of provincial "reversionary interest" [document 1090];
2) the Commission had the authority to confirm the acreage and allocation of individual reserves; and
3) the Commission had no authority to reallocate reserves.
[471]
The mandate and jurisdiction of the Commission are set out in a number of documents, beginning with the "McKenna McBride Agreement", signed on September 24, 1912 [document 1090]. The preamble provided:
"Whereas it is desirable to settle all differences between the Government of the Dominion and the Province respecting Indian lands and Indian Affairs generally in the Province of British Columbia, therefore the parties above named have, subject to the approval of the Government of the Dominion and of the Province agreed upon the following proposals as a final adjustment of all matters relating to Indian Affairs in the Province of British Columbia."
[472]
I agree with the Crown that the Agreement did not purport to vest in the Commissioners any specific authority to readjust the allocation of reserves, and limited their authority to fixing and confirming the allocation of reserves. Clause one of the Agreement provided for the appointment of five Commissioners, clause two outlined the powers of the Commissioners to "adjust the acreage" of Indian Reserves in British Columbia, including the power to increase or reduce the size of any reserve. Paragraph 7 provided for the conveyance by the Province to the Dominion "lands comprised in the reserves as finally fixed by the Commissioners". Following their appointment, the Commissioners requested clarification of their jurisdiction (see resolution of the Commission dated May 20, 1913 [document 1074]). In reply to the Commission's request, an Order-in-Council was passed on June 10, 1913 [document 1074]) indicating that:
"The Minister observes that it is clear that the agreement between the representatives of the Province of British Columbia and the Dominion does not contemplate an investigation and settlement of matters appertaining to general Indian policy in British Columbia. It is confined in matters affecting Indian lands which require adjustment between the parties.
"The Minister is of the opinion that it would be inadvisable to burden the Commission with the investigation of all matters that might be brought to their attention by Indians, many of which would be slight importance not affecting the relations of the two Governments. Unless great care were taken misconception might arise in the minds of the Indians as to the action of the Commission if authorized to make a general investigation; the Commission having power to deal finally with all matters mentioned in the agreement subject to the approval of the two governments, but having only instructions to report and make suggestions as to other matters.
"The Minister submits that the Commission would, however, during its sitting in different districts of the Province obtain valuable information as to Indian conditions and progress and would probably form distinct opinions on these points and on the future policy which should be adopted by the Dominion Government towards the Indians of British Columbia.
"The Minister, therefore recommends that the Commission be restricted in action to the terms of the agreement but that the Commission be informed that this Government would be prepared to receive a general report on the condition of the Indians with suggestions as to the future policy and administration of Indian Affairs in the Province of British Columbia, the Indians being distinctly advised concerning the scope of the inquiry under the agreement and that the Commission will merely convey to the Government the views of the Indians respecting any matters extraneous to the agreement brought to their attention."
In my view, the above noted Order-in-Council made it clear that the jurisdiction of the Commission was limited to settling the issues in dispute between the Provincial and Dominion Governments, ie. fixing the size and location of individual reserves. Their jurisdiction did not extend to "any matters extraneous to the agreement", ie reallocation of reserves.
[473]
The Commission's own interpretation of its jurisdiction is contained in a letter from the Chairman of the Commission to the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, dated September 25, 1913 [document 1150]. In this letter the Chairman writes:
"Upon reading these documents [the McKenna McBride Agreement, the May 20, 1913 Resolution and the June 10, 1913 Order-in-Council], I am, with all deference and respect, constrained to state that the Commissioners are not empowered 'to deal with
all matters affected
by the Agreement between the Province and the Dominion' as you state in your letter of the 12th. August, if by that you mean that the Commissioners are empowered to deal with
all matters affecting Indian Reserves
.
. . . . .
"You [the Superintendent General] also referred in your letter to the matter of the settlement of the boundaries of Reserves. Very few instances of questions of this sort have been brought under the notice of the Commission.
"Have you fully considered what is involved in dealing with a question of this nature, that it involves questions of boundary lines? Whether the survey is correct? ...
"That the taking up of these matters involves our turning ourselves into a court without the slightest authority for it, and deciding a matter possibly against some whitemen who are not in any possible sense a part to or governed by the Commission or any of its provisions?" (Underlining in document)
Therefore, in my view, the Commission in its practice was of the opinion that its authority was limited to confirmation of reserve size and allocations. The reallocation of reserves to other Indian groups was not within its jurisdiction and was left to the Department to deal with as an administrative matter. In this regard I note Commissioner McDowell's evidence:
"We have to take these reserves as they appear in the government list and we are dealing with the land and not with the distribution of the Tribe at all - That is a matter for the Department to settle." (document 1165 - transcript of the McKenna McBride Commission, p. 191, see also document 1305, letter for acting Secretary of the McKenna McBride Commission and document 350, New Westminister Agency Lands Application)
[474]
Therefore, I am satisfied that the approach taken by the Department and the McKenna McBride Commission was everything that was brought to their attention was not necessarily within their jurisdiction. Issues raised as between the Bands themselves was a matter for Departmental action and did not involve the relationship between the federal and the provincial governments. In terms of the Schedule of Reserves, as altered by Vowell when he wrote Wewaiakum opposite Reserve No. 11 leaving ditto marks under "Campbell River" for Reserve No. 12, I am satisfied that although this error was brought to the attention of the McKenna McBride Commission, there were no action or steps taken at the time to adjust or correct the schedule because it was not within the Commission's mandate to do so. This was a matter for the Department. Unfortunately what followed was the actual conveyance of land from the provincial government to the federal government by means of the Order-in-Council, with the attached schedule of reserves (which incorporated the error) as part of the Order-in-Council indicating what lands were being conveyed to the federal government.
[475]
It would seem therefore that the confirmation of the Campbell River Reserve to the Campbell River Indians was in accordance with the status quo, the evidence of both Bands, the statements of Halliday and the 1913 Schedule. As such, the Commission had jurisdiction to fix and confirm the allocation of this reserve to the Campbell River Indians, thereby affecting a settlement of any issue relating to the allocation of this reserve. However, the Commission's purported confirmation of the Quinsam Reserve to the Campbell River Indian Band, neither accorded with the opinions of the Indians nor their Agent. Therefore, in my view, no legal effect should be given to the Commission's "confirmation" as the "confirmation" was in excess of the Commission's jurisdiction. The Commission's jurisdiction did not include the power to reallocate reserves from one Indian group to another, which in the words of the Commission was "a matter for departmental consideration" [document 1350].
Judicial Authority to Correct Clerical Errors
[476]
In the event I am wrong in my opinion regarding the jurisdiction of the McKenna McBride Commission I am satisfied that I have the jurisdiction or legal authority to correct the clerical error which Orders in Council 911, 1265 and 1036 purported to confirm and to confirm the correct allocation of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12, namely Reserve No. 11 as allocated to the Campbell River Indians and Reserve No. 12 allocated to the Cape Mudge Indians. In this regard I note the comments of E.A. Driedger in
Construction of Statutes
(2nd ed. Toronto: Butterworths, 1983) at p. 128:
"Although a legislature must be presumed to be an ideal person that does not make mistakes, printers, draftsmen, and parliamentarians do make mistakes. The courts have no hesitation in correcting an obvious typographical error or a slip of the draftsmen's pen."
After referring to a number of authorities in support of this proposition, Driedger concludes at p. 129 that:
"These corrections are justified on the ground that they are obvious mistakes and that the context makes it clear that the legislature did not mean what it said and that what is substituted is what the legislature did mean."
[477]
Additional support for the view that a court can exercise its jurisdiction to correct an obvious clerical error can be found in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.). In that case Cumming, J., exercised the court's jurisdiction to correct an obvious clerical error in circumstances very similar to the case before me. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Cumming, J., reviewed the history of the legislation relating to the creation of reserves in British Columbia, including the McKenna McBride Agreement, in order to resolve the issue as to whether a road crossing on an Indian reserve was confirmed as part of that reserve or remained a public highway. After reviewing the legislative history, Cumming, J., turned to the interpretation of Order-in-Council 205, passed in 1913. This Order-in-Council attached a schedule of reserves which contained a clerical error in the description of the subject reserve. Cumming, J., made the following comments at pp. 64 and 65:
"That next step disclosed in the material before me occurred on January 5, 1913, when the Governor in Council passed P.C. 205, purporting to withdraw from the operation of the regulations for the administration and disposal of lands within the Railway Belt certain lands which had been reserved for Indians, described in the schedule attached, which had been surveyed and shown on official plans of various townships. Under the headings 'Indian Reserve, Official Plan on which Shown' and 'Date of Confirmation', the following appeared with respect to Tuckozap [the reserve in issue]:
Indian
Official Plan	Date of Con-
Reserve	on which
firmation
Shown
Lytton	S.W. 1/4	15th April,
No. 24	Tp.15, R.26	1911
West 6 Mer.
(Tuckozap)	N.E. 1/4	16th Sept.,
Tp. 15, R.27	1907
West 6 Mer
"An examination of the recorded surveys and official plans makes it more than abundantly clear that the reference to the 1/4 Tp. 15, R.27, in the schedule to P.C. 205, is simply a clerical typographical error. This case cannot in any way turn upon such a trifling little mistake. I have no hesitation in concluding that the reference should be to the S.E. 1/4 of the referenced parcel of land."
I also note the comments of Gould, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.), at p. 104:
"There is ample authority in the court to correct a statute, where the mistake is obvious, and the ends of justice would be frustrated by allowing the mistake to stand, and be interpreted as the true intent of the legislation: see the decision of Riley, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Alta.) particularly pp. 145-148."
[478]
Therefore, I am satisfied, based on the evidence, that clearly an error was made by Vowell and officials of the Department when the hand written annotation was incorporated into the Schedule and the corresponding ditto mark made it appear that Reserve No. 12 was allocated to the Campbell River Indian Band. I would like to make it perfectly clear, that my jurisdiction is limited to amending the clerical error in the Schedules attached to the Orders in Council and that this determination in no way invalidates or purports to invalidate the Orders in Council.
VIII. Crown Duty
[479]
Both plaintiff bands have alleged in their pleadings fraud, equitable fraud, deceit and breach of fiduciary and trust against the Crown. I note however, that no evidence was led at trial to support the allegations of actual fraud and deceit, nor were these allegations made in argument before me.
[480]
On the other hand, the plaintiffs have alleged that the Crown in its conduct over the last century has failed to act in the best interests of each respective Indian Band and as such has breached its fiduciary obligation to both bands.
[481]
Cape Mudge maintains that a fiduciary obligation is owed to the Cape Mudge Band as advisor and guardian of the Cape Mudge people in respect of their interest in the Campbell River and Quinsam reserves. Cape Mudge also alleges that the Crown breached its fiduciary duty by encouraging the migration of the Campbell River Indians to Reserve No. 11 prior to 1907 and by failing to ensure that the 1907 Resolution was in the interest of the Cape Mudge Indians.
[482]
Campbell River submits that they are entitled to damages for breach of the Crown's general fiduciary duties with respect to Campbell River's entitlement to Reserve No. 12 and duty of the Crown to protect Campbell River's rights to that reserve.
[483]
After reviewing the evidence, I am satisfied that there is no evidence to support either Cape Mudge's or Campbell River's allegations that the Crown deliberately misrepresented material facts to the plaintiffs or failed to prudently advise the plaintiffs. In my view, the documents show that the plaintiff Bands were informed and were aware of the Department's position with respect to the allocation of Reserves No. 11 and 12 throughout the century.
[484]
In terms of the Wewaiakum's migration to Campbell River, the evidence does not support the allegation that the Crown somehow participated or encouraged this migration.
[485]
First, as I have determined that Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were originally recommended for the Laichkwiltach, even if Cape Mudge was successful in establishing that some Campbell River Indians relocated to the Laickwiltach reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River such a migration would not have been a breach of the Crown duty to the Laichkwiltach since the Campbell River Indians were part of the larger group known as the Laichkwiltach.
[486]
Vowell's 1896 correspondence [documents 706 and 707] indicates that Vowell considered Reserve No. 11 as a reserve on which the Campbell River Indians have as much right to "take up locations" [document 706] or settle on "their reserve" [document 706] as any other Laichkwiltach Indian. As noted earlier, Vowell's only concern in encouraging settlement was the rights of individual Indians with locations on that reserve, namely Captain John. However, at no point in his correspondence did Vowell imply that the Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River was set aside exclusively for the benefit of the Cape Mudge Indians.
[487]
Moreover, although Vowell may have favoured the concept of granting individual locations to individual Laichkwiltach Indians on Campbell River, there is no evidence that Pidcock or any other Crown agent participated in the relocation of Indians to Reserve No. 11. Vowell's letter of September 24, 1890 [document 706] directed Pidcock to "take action in this matter as soon as possible and report in duplicate to me the results thereof". A review of the correspondence disclosed Pidcock never reported taking any action to grant such locations or to relocate any Indian to Reserve No. 11. Therefore, in the absence of any positive report by Pidcock informing the Department of a "relocation" of Indians to Reserve No. 11, I am satisfied an inference can be drawn that the Department did not participate in relocating any Indians to the Campbell River Reserve.
[488]
Further, in my view, if the Laichkwiltach Indians were actively encouraged to locate at Reserve No. 11, such encouragement appeared to have come from Captain John [document 467]. In this regard, both Pritchard and Suttles confirmed that Captain John was an ambitious man whose intention was to recruit followers to reside with him  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River (see Pritchard, vol. 20, pp. 2708, 2710 and Suttles, cross-exam vol. 37, pp. 5124-5125).
[489]
Also, it would seem that Campbell River's position on this issue conflicts with that of Cape Mudge. Campbell River alleges that Reserve No. 11 was in fact already occupied prior to 1896 by the Campbell River Indians and denies that any migration at the instance of the Crown took place.
[490]
In terms of the 1907 Resolution, I have indicated a number of times in these reasons that the 1907 resolution was passed in consideration of the settlement of a dispute between Indians of the same tribe and the right to fish in the waters of the Campbell River. From the evidence, I believe it cannot be said that the Indians did not consent to the terms of the Resolution as recorded by Halliday. I am satisfied that in the absence of a conflict of interest, the burden rests on Cape Mudge to prove 80 years later that this resolution was not in their best interest.
[491]
In this regard, I note that a similar allegation of a breach of duty by the Crown was made against the Crown by the Lower Kootenay Indian Band, and rejected by this court, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). Dube, J., held that an onus shifts to the Crown to prove that it was acting in the best interest of the Indians where a true conflict of interest has been proven against the Crown and made the following comments at p. 280:
"The learned Judge found that there was such a conflict of interest in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case. There is no allegation of such a conflict in the instant case. In the case of the conflict of interest, the onus is that of a trustee, which is more onerous, to show that the Crown is acting in the best interest of the cestui que trust. In the absence of that conflict of interest, there is no prima facie case, and it is for the plaintiffs to show that the Crown did not act in their best interest ...
"Addy, J., when dealing with other breaches not involving a conflict of interest, said at p. 79 that:
'Unlike the issue of sufficiency of the sale price of I.R. 172, the onus of proof of these allegations rests upon the plaintiffs.'
"Therefore, the defendant submits that the onus is clearly on the plaintiffs to show that the Crown did not act prudently and reasonably under the circumstances in the negotiations leading up to the lease and in the years that followed. So long as the Crown's discretion is exercised honestly, prudently and for the benefit of the Indians, there is no breach of their fiduciary duty. Whether the Crown obtained the best possible price is not the test in this case. It would have been the test had there been a conflict of interest."
[492]
After reviewing the documents, I am satsfied there is no compelling evidence to support the allegation that the Crown "arranged" the 1907 meeting for the sole purpose of "regularizing and concealing" its own actions. As such, the cases dealing with conflict of interest relied on by the plaintiffs are distinguishable in that these cases relate to situations where the Crown was seeking surrender of Indian land for the purpose of transferring such land to itself, or to another Crown Department, for the benefit of the Crown. In these cases, the Crown's interest in obtaining the surrendered land for a lower price was clearly adverse to that of the Band's interest in obtaining the highest price. This is not the situation in the case before me.
[493]
The dispute in the case before me is in essence between two Indian Bands, each claiming possession of each other's reserve. It would seem to me that the Crown has a duty to balance and reconcile the interests of both the Cape Mudge Indians and the Campbell River Indians and to resolve their conflict regarding the use and occupation of the Laichkwiltach reserves. In resolving this conflict, the Crown's duty would be not to favour the interests of one band over the interest of the other. In my view, the Crown owes a duty to both bands.
[494]
The notion of balancing various interests in administering aboriginal rights was recognized by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(3d) 263; 70 D.L.R.(4th) 385. The Supreme Court indicated that native rights and the Crown's fiduciary obligation are "not absolute". The court also recognized that in exercising its responsibilities to native people, the Crown must continuously balance native rights against the rights of other Canadians.
[495]
The Crown's duty in the case before me was to balance the interests of the two bands and avoid taking sides in their dispute. While the Crown was required to put the interests of the Indians ahead of its own interests, it could not put the interest on one band ahead of the other. In this regard, I note the comments of Marceau, J.A., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at pp. 79-80 (F.C.):
"I am not disturbed by the fact that, at the moment of the 1945 surrender, the transfer of the land to the Director of the Veterans Land Act (Director, VLA) was already contemplated. The appellants' suggestion was obviously that the Crown had its own interest in mind, thereby breaching the most fundamental obligation of a fiduciary, that of avoiding any self interested dealings while acting in a fiduciary capacity. The suggestion, in my view, is unwarranted. It would be wrong, I think, to treat the Crown like a private individual in this respect. The fact that surrendered land could help satisfy the needs of veterans does not imply that the Crown was dealing in its own interest. Very exceptional circumstances would be required to place the Crown in a real conflict of interest, since the essence of the Crown is to serve the public and satisfy various public interests, not to acquire for itself. There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the surrender could not be advantageous to the Band and to some veterans simultaneously, or that the interests of the latter prevailed, in the minds of the officers of the Crown, over that of the Band at the time of the surrender."
Marceau, J.A., continued at p. 80 with comments relating to the allegation that the Crown breached its duty by not complying with the statutory requirements of the
Indian Act
:
"Nor am I prepared to accept the submissions of the appellants that the Crown must be seen as having breached its fiduciary duty by the sole fact that all the statutory requirements for surrendering reserve lands set forth in s. 51 of the
Indian Act
had not been complied with. It is true that the requirement of s. 51(3), i.e. that the surrender assented to by the band at a special meeting held for that purpose be certified on oath by the officer authorized by the superintendent general to attend the meeting and 'by some of the chiefs and principal men present thereat', had not been strictly observed, but I do not attach to the irregularity the effect suggested by the appellants. I admit that the position adopted by the Trial Judge that the requirement of s. 51(3) was sufficiently complied with and that, in any event, the provision was directory and not mandatory is not totally satisfactory since, even if only directory, a failure to respect the requirement could be seen as some obligation of prudence or care. My position is different."
In my view, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the resolution of the reserve allocation and fishing issues as settled by the 1907 Resolution favoured the interests of one band over that of another.
[496]
I am satisfied that the Crown's duty in the case before me was to balance and reconcile the interests of the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indians and to resolve their conflict relating to the use and occupation of the Laichkwiltok reserves. In resolving the conflict, the Crown's duty was not to favour the interests of one Indian subgroup or band over the interests of the other. Urie, J.A. (Stone, J.A., concurring), in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 17 D.L.R.(4th) 591, at 654, indicated that the Crown in balancing the interests of natives against the interests of a third party to reach a settlement of a conflict between these parties was not in breach of the Crown's fiduciary duty:
"Did the fact that the competing considerations were resolved in respect of both parcels 'A' and 'B' with the concurrence of the Indians, on terms which clearly were compromises not entirely satisfactory to either of the branches of the Crown involved, result in a breach of the Crown's fiduciary duty to the Indians entitling them to remedies sought in this action? I think not for the reasons which I have already given and for those which follow ...
"If the submissions advanced by the appellants were to prevail, the only way that the Crown would successfully escape a charge of breach of fiduciary duty in such circumstances would have been in each case, to have acceded in full to their demands or to withdraw from the transactions entirely. The competing obligation on the Crown would not permit such a result. The Crown was in the position that it was obliged to ensure that the best interests of all for whom its officials had responsibility were protected. The Governor-in-Council became the final arbitrator. In the final analysis, however, if the appellants were so dissatisfied with the expropriations and the Crown's offers, they could have utilized the Exchequer Court to determine the issues. For whatever reason, they elected not to make these choices ...
"I fail to see, then, how they could now successfully attack, after so many years, the settlement to which they agree."
The above comments support the view that competing obligations on the Crown are not conflicts of interest. The argument relating to the process of balancing interests between the Indians and other government departments would seem to me to apply even more so to a situation where the Crown's duty was to reconcile the interests of two Indian Bands.
[497]
After reviewing the evidence, I am satisfied that the Crown acted in good faith in responding to the inquiries by both bands with respect to Reserves No. 11 and No. 12. I also note that both bands sought and received independent legal advise on the issue of the allocation of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12.
[498]
I agree that any technical failure by the Crown to correctly interpret the requirements of the
Indian Act
, or to advise the Bands of their legal claim to Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 does not necessarily amount to a breach of a fiduciary duty. Indeed, the issue of whether a surrender was necessary in order to amend the Department's schedule to reflect the 1907 resolution for the allocation of the two reserves was central to the dispute in the case before me and is a matter to be determined by the court. However, even if I am wrong in my determination that a surrender was not required, I am of the opinion that a breach of the Crown's duty to use reasonable care in advising the plaintiffs on these issues cannot be construed as a breach of fiduciary duty. In this regard, I note the comments of Sopinka, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 57; 61 D.L.R.(4th) 14; 69 O.R.(2d) 287; 35 E.T.R. 1; 44 B.L.R. 1, at p. 61 D.L.R.:
"Furthermore, not all obligations existing between the parties to a well recognized fiduciary relationship will be fiduciary in nature. Southin, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.), observed that the obligation of a solicitor to use care and skill is the same obligation as that of any person who undertakes to carry out a task for reward. Failure to do so does not necessarily result in a breach of fiduciary duty but simply a breach of contract or negligence. She issued this strong caveat against the overuse of claims for breach of fiduciary duty (at p. 362):
'Counsel for the plaintiff spoke of this case in his opening as one of breach of fiduciary duty and negligence. It became clear during his opening that no breach of fiduciary is in issue. What is in issue is whether the defendant was negligent in advising on the settlement of a claim for injuries suffered in an accident. The word 'fiduciary' is flung around now as if it applied to all breaches of duty by solicitors, directors of companies and so forth. But 'fiduciary' comes from the Latin 'fiducia' meaning 'trust'. Thus, the adjective, 'fiduciary' means of or pertaining to a trustee or trusteeship. That a lawyer can commit a breach of the special duty of a trustee, e.g., by stealing his client's money, by entering into a contract with the client without full disclosure, by sending a client a bill claiming disbursements never made and so forth is clear. But to say that simple carelessness in giving advise is such a breach is a perversion of words. The obligation of a solicitor of care and skill is the same obligation of any person who undertakes for reward to carry out a task. One would not assert of an engineer or physician who had given bad advice and from whom common law damages were sought that he was guilty of a breach of fiduciary duty. Why should it be said of a solicitor? I make this point because an allocation of breach of fiduciary duty carries with it the stench of dishonesty - if not deceit, then of constructive fraud ...'
"When the court is dealing with one of the traditional relationships, the characteristics or criteria for a fiduciary relationship are assumed to exist. In special circumstances, if they are shown to be absent, the relationship itself will not suffice."
I also note the following cases:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 13 W.A.C. 1; 85 D.L.R.(4th) 129; [1992] 1 W.W.R. 245; 61 B.C.L.R.(2d) 1 at p. 27 B.C.L.R.
[499]
Therefore, I am satisfied that there is no evidence to support Cape Mudge's or Campbell River's allegations that the Crown deliberately misrepresented material facts to the plaintiffs or failed to prudently advise the plaintiffs. The Crown's duty in the case before me was to balance and reconcile the interests of the Cape Mudge Indian Band and Campbell River Indian Band and to resolve their conflict with respect to the use and occupation of the Laichkwiltok reserves. In resolving the conflict, the Crown owed a duty to both bands and was not to favour one band over the other.
[500]
Further, on the evidence, I am satisfied that the Crown acted in good faith in responding to the inquiries by both bands with respect to the allocation of Reserve No. 11 and Reserve No. 12. As I have already stated in these reasons, both Indian bands sought and received independent legal advise on these issues. The decision not to pursue legal action against each other and the Crown could only have been made by each Band on an individual basis.
[501]
Finally, any technical failure by the Crown to correctly interpret the requirements of the
Indian Act
or to advise the Indians as to their legal claim to these reserves cannot be construed as a breach of fiduciary duty. This issue is to be determined by the court. Even, if I am wrong in my finding that the surrender provisions did not apply to the 1907 Resolution, in my view, a breach of the Crown's duty to use reasonable care in advising the plaintiffs on these issues cannot be construed as a breach of fiduciary duty, as per
Lac Minerals
, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
IX. Conduct Of The Cape Mudge And Campbell River Indian Bands
Post McKenna McBride Commission
Conduct Of Cape Mudge Indians
Inconsistent With Present Claim
To Ownership Of The Campbell
River Reserve
[502]
Over the last century the Campbell River Indians have made significant use of the reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River. Houses were constructed on the reserve by the Campbell River Indians before the turn of the century [documents 822, 824, 829 and 832]. In 1914, James Smith gave evidence before the Commission that the "chief village" of the Campbell River Indians was located on the Campbell River Reserve; that 25 houses were built on the reserve; that four Campbell River Indians had fenced gardens on the reserve [document 1255]. During his testimony before the Commission Halliday referred to the installation of a $1,300 water system, the sale of timber and the rental of a right of way by International Timber, all on the Campbell River Reserve and all for the benefit of the Campbell River Indians. The Campbell River Indians engaged in a number of commercial transactions with the International Timber Company during the early 1900's without any apparent objection to these transactions by Cape Mudge. A summary of the early land agreements between the Campbell River Indians and the International Timber Company is found in Mr. Trebett's report, Exhibit C-118. I note his comments at p. 13:
"The application for land use within I.R. 11 by ITC [International Timber Company] and its corporate associates was accepted in 1907 by the Campbell River Band (Ref: Appendix II). The relevant corporate agreements between ITC and NPLC [North Pacific Lumber Company] are contained in Folio A of the Seafor report and are not repeated in this document.
"It is not clear when log handling began through the reserve, but records show that the first annual rental cheque of $100.00 was delivered in June 1907 [973]. Rent was paid regularly until 1921 [documents 1007, 1044, 1084, 1146, 1245, 1271, 1306, 1347, 1391, 1446, 1544 and 1578] when ITC purchased approximately 90 acres of the property known as subdivision 'A'. The lease of two acres of I.R. 11, additional to the rail right-of-way was agreed upon between the parties in 1918 and rents of $50.00 per year for the addition continued to be paid until Subdivision 'A' was purchased by ITC.
"Negotiations for the purchase of Subdivision 'A' commenced between the Indian Band and ITC in 1920. They were finalized in February of 1921, when the Committee of the Privy Council granted approval of the agreement. The documents detailing the final price and the approvals are attached to this report in Appendix VI [documents 1610, 1607, 1608, 1609, 1566 and 1749]. The purchase price of $13,500.00 was based on an estimated 90 acre area for the subject property and at the agreed rate of $150.00 per acre. The actual area after survey in 1921 was determined to be 80.89 acres and ITC was refunded $1,366.50 so that the final cost of the property was $12,133.50. The value of the gifted donkey engine and lumber was estimated at $5,620.00, so that the total cost of the property in 1921 is placed at $17, 753.50 or $219.00 per acre [document 1607].
. . . . .
"During this period, ITC continued to haul logs on the railroad and to dump and boom the logs in the Campbell River. Very little change occurred in the use of the property until the operation was converted to truck haul in 1953. The estimates of the annual log volume presented in Table 1 of the Seafor report show the level of logging activity over the review period. The peak production occurred during the 1920's when average production was about 124 million feet, board measure, (FBM) per year."
Further, the Campbell River Indians received a per capita cash distribution of the sale of the proceeds received from ITC [document 1566] as well as lumber to reconstruct their houses and a donkey engine [document 1566]. There is no evidence to show that the Cape Mudge Indians objected to the sale of Subdivision "A" and the distribution of the proceeds of sale to the Campbell River Indians. Once again, this to me seems inconsistent with any claim to ownership of Reserve No. 11.
[503]
Other evidence of fencing and logging of the Campbell River Reserve by the Campbell River Indians is contained in documents 2602, 2603 and 1440.
[504]
Andrew Paull (Paull), a Native Indian, legally trained and a major figure in the Allied Tribes, was retained in 1922 by the Department to visit the Indians of the Kwawkewlth Agency and to consult with the Indians regarding their views on the recommendations of the McKenna McBride Commission. In his report [document 1682] Paull indicated that:
"In the matter of the Cape Mudge, Campbell River and Salmon Arm [sic] Indians, they do not make any application for additional lands as in my opinion they consider [sic] to have at present sufficient areas of land for their use and the nature of the country in which they are situated does not encourage them to desire additional lands."
The Department also received a resolution passed by the Indians [document 1684] requesting settlement of the land question in the British Columbia as well as financial compensation for the loss of native title. This resolution made no reference to any dissatisfaction with the allocation of the Laichkwiltach reserves. Further, neither the report nor the resolution showed any dissatisfaction with the occupation or use of Reserve No. 11 by the Campbell River Indians. It would seem to me that had Cape Mudge been dissatisfied they would have voiced their concerns to Andrew Paull.
[505]
I also note that in 1922 Billy Assu wrote to the Indian Agent requesting permission to build a house on Reserve No. 11 [document 1656]. The Campbell River Indians, by unanimous resolution, were willing to give this permission and asked that their decision be approved by the Department [document 1660]. On cross-examination, Suttles conceded that Billy Assu's request for Campbell River's permission to build a house on Reserve No. 11 was inconsistent with the Cape Mudge claim to any continued ownership of this reserve (see transcript vol. 37, p. 5115).
1932 Meeting and Subsequent Cape Mudge Statements
[506]
Harry Assu, both in his book and in his deposition evidence sets out a recollection of a joint meeting of the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indian Bands in 1932. It appears that the issue of ownership of Reserve No. 12 was brought up once again and resolved (see Assu deposition, vol. 1, pp. 61, 62 and 63 and C-91, pp. 20-21) in that Chief Billy Assu's position was essentially to "just leave it like that" on being informed that his sons, Harry and Dan wished to take Reserve No. 11 back. Once again, such action is inconsistent with any claim by Cape Mudge to a continuing right of ownership to Reserve No. 11.
[507]
Further, Harry Assu's recollection of the 1932 meeting appears to be corroborated by Billy Assu's telegram to Ditchburn, dated January 30, 1932, in which Billy Assu confirmed that he gave the Campbell River Indians the right to settle  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River only, not Quinsam [document 2627]. In 1934, Billy Assu again confirmed in his letter to Todd that the Campbell River Indians were given permission to have Campbell River and the Cape Mudge agreed [document 1946]. The "Proof of Ownership" document makes no mention of the claim of the Cape Mudge Indians to the Campbell River Reserve, but confirmed that Billy Assu indicated that the Campbell River Indians could have Reserve No. 11 but not Quinsam (document 2513).
1936 Sworn Declaration of the Cape Mudge Band
[508]
On November 23, 1936, the Chief and five Principal Men of the Cape Mudge Band swore a Declaration setting out the reserves claimed by their band, which included Quinsam but not Reserve No. 11 [document 1994]. The Declaration was signed by Indian Agent Todd, Chief Johnny Chickite, Billy Assu, Johnny Dick, Oscar Lewis, John Wilson and Dan Assu. I am satisfied from the evidence that all six of the Cape Mudge Indians were sufficiently literate to sign their names. Unfortunately as all the signatories of the Declaration are dead today, there is no first hand evidence before this court as to the execution of this document. Although interrogatories were directed to the Cape Mudge Band regarding the circumstances under which the Declaration was signed, the only real information provided by the Cape Mudge answers was an admission that all of the men signing the declaration had at least some ability to read and write English (Naknakim Interrogatories, Ex. C-135A, pp. 111-112).
[509]
I am of the view that in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, the only inference that can be drawn is that all of the Cape Mudge Indians who signed the Declaration did so with full knowledge of its contents and effect. The Declaration also contradicts the claim to continued ownership of Reserve No. 11 made by Cape Mudge in this action.
Post McKenna McBride Commission Conduct of Campbell River Indians Inconsistent with Present Claim of Ownership of Quinsam Reserve
[510]
It appears, from a review of the documentary record that no Campbell River Indian asserted a claim to Reserve No. 12 until after that reserve was listed beside the Campbell River Indians in the 1913 Schedule of Reserves. In fact, after the printing of the 1913 Schedule, Chief Charlie Smith and James Smith representing the Campbell River Indians before the McKenna McBride Commission in 1914 made no mention of, or claim to, the Quinsam Reserve in their testimony [document 1255].
[511]
Indeed, based on the documentary evidence, it would seem that the error reproduced regarding the confirmation of Reserve No. 12 to the Campbell River Indians in the Orders in Council, that the Cape Mudge Indians continued to use and improve Quinsam for much of this century without interference from the Campbell River Indians. The only objection during this period came from James Smith, Bill Roberts and Johnny Galogumie who sought legal advice on their "alleged" entitlement to Reserve No. 12 in the 1930's. However, it appears that no action to enforce their claim was ever taken. Further, the evidence would suggest that Bill Roberts and James Smith's opinion as to the ownership of Reserve No. 12 was not shared by the majority of the Campbell River Indians or the Chief (see documents 1821, 2627 and 2085).
Cape Mudge Use and Occupation of the Quinsam Reserve
[512]
Use of Reserve No. 12 by the Cape Mudge Indians for activities other than hunting or fishing appears to have started in 1919.
[513]
I note the actions of Billy Assu and other Cape Mudge Indians in improving the Quinsam Reserve through road construction, fencing, clearing, surveying and farming are all inconsistent with the Campbell River claim to ownership of that reserve (see documents 1456, 1489, 1476, 1790, 1797, 1832, 1845, 1847, 1848, 1849, 1879, 1884, 1886, 1888, 1891, 1902, 1904, 1912, 1927, 1928 and 1946).
[514]
In 1937, the Cape Mudge Indians accepted the surrender of their timber on the Quinsam Reserve [documents 2001, 2002, 2004, 2008]. The sale of timber was advertized for tender and subsequently sold to Mr. Zanatta [document 2029]. The Cape Mudge Indians were given preference to others by Zanatta in logging the Quinsam Reserve. Logging of the Quinsam Timber was completed in 1938. The amount of $2,916.53, representing one-half of the total received from the logging of Reserve No. 12 was then distributed among the Cape Mudge Indians [document 2028]. I also note that after 1938 there were a number of other commercial transactions relating to land on the Quinsam Reserve (see Trebett Report, C-120).
[515]
It appears that the only objection to the logging activity on the Quinsam Reserve came from James Smith and Bill Roberts [documents 2016 and 2022]. In a letter dated May 8, 1937, Roberts objected to the advertisement of the sale of the timber on Reserve No. 12 on the basis that this reserve was confirmed to the Campbell River Indians "in the report of the Royal Commission on Indian Affairs in 1913" [document 2016]. On May 20, 1937, James Smith wrote to the Department claiming Reserve No. 12 on the basis of the McKenna McBride Commission's report [document 2022]. Both Roberts and Smith placed reliance on the McKenna McBride Commission report in support of their claim to Reserve No. 12. Smith indicated he acted as spokesman for the Campbell River Band before the Commission, however a review of the transcript of the Commission shows that he did not list Reserve No. 12 as a reserve claimed by Campbell River, nor did he mention the name of the Quinsam Reserve in his evidence before the Commission (see document 1255). On the other hand, from other documents it would appear that the majority of the Campbell River Indians did not agree with Roberts' and Smith's claim to Reserve No. 12 (see documents 1822, 2627 and 2085). Document 2085 reveals an error with respect to the sale of timber, specifically:
"1937-38 - Advertising Timber $42.00. The Band could not understand this item as the only timber they have sold recently was on Loughborough Reserve No. 3, and as it was logged by the band it was not advertised. They are wondering whether the advertising for Quinsam Reserve timber has been charged to their account in error instead of the Cape Mudge account."
It would seem to me that if the majority of the Campbell River Indians objected to the sale of the timber on Reserve No. 12, their concern would not have been simply for the incorrect expenditure of funds from their account for the advertising, but for the entire timber sale and the distribution of the sale of the proceeds to the Cape Mudge Indians.
1936 Sworn Declaration by the Campbell River Band
[516]
As with the Cape Mudge Band, the Chief and Principal Men on the Campbell River Band swore a declaration in 1936 (document 1999, as noted earlier, three copies of the declaration were located, each with different dates), confirming a list of reserves belonging to the Campbell River Indian Band. The list included Reserve No. 11 (Campbell River) but not Reserve No. 12 (Quinsam). Chief Quocksister and, J. Ferry signed the declaration in their own handwriting, while Francis Drake, Lewis Gue, Peter Whale and Dan Quatell signed with an "X".
[517]
Once again, as with the Cape Mudge Declaration, this declaration is evidence which contradicts the position taken by Campbell River in this action. I am satisfied there is no evidence to impeach the significance of this declaration, or that the individuals who swore this declaration did so other than with full knowledge of its contents and of their own free will.
[518]
In response to the Campbell River submission that little weight should be given to this document as influential members of the Campbell River Indian Band did not sign the Declaration, namely James Smith, William Roberts Sr. and Charlie Smith, it could be that these individuals may have simply not been in the village at the time. Moreover, James Smith and William Roberts were substantially younger than the other Indians who swore the Declaration, other than Chief Quocksister. Also, the opinion held by Roberts and Smith as to ownership of Reserve No. 12 was not shared by the majority of the Campbell River Indian Band (documents 1821, 2627 and 2085). I also note that William Roberts Jr. gave evidence that there had been an ongoing dispute between the Roberts and the Quocksister families and that decisions were often made by the band over their objections (see Roberts, cross-exam. vol. 7 pp. 890-891).
[519]
With respect to James Smith, Charles Drake gave evidence that Smith was never "Chief" of the Campbell River Band and only called himself Chief (see Drake cross-exam, vol. 5, p. 697). It seems that Smith left the reserve for the east coast, where the Crown notes that he embarked on a letter writing campaign to defame the Indians of the Campbell River Band (see documents 2191, 2228 and 2232).
Cape Mudge and Campbell River Bands' Knowledge of Material Facts
[520]
It would seem that both plaintiff bands are asserting that they delayed in bringing their actions to trial on the grounds that they did not have knowledge of material facts and documents respecting their claims. After reviewing the evidence, I agree with the Crown that for much of the century, members of both bands had first hand knowledge of the important events which are the subject of these actions. Unfortunately, within the last 30 years, those band members as well as the Indian Agents, have died and many of their documents have been lost or destroyed.
[521]
Other than the deposition evidence of Harry Assu, Cape Mudge elected to call no other band member to give evidence or explain the delay in bringing the action. Cape Mudge indicated in its opening that it would call Dan Assu to give evidence relating to the level of education, information and resources of the Cape Mudge during various periods, however no such evidence was called. The Crown submits that an adverse inference can and should be drawn against Cape Mudge in these circumstances. In support of their submission the Crown refers to comments by the trial judge in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C.) at pp. 336-337:
"Indian oral history is admissible in aboriginal land-claim cases where their history was never recorded in writing. However, this does not detract from the basic principle that the court should always be given the best evidence. The court has an obligation, first, to weigh the evidence and consider what evidence is the best evidence and second, if such best evidence is not introduced, to consider making an adverse finding against the person who has failed to produce it.
. . . . .
"I feel obliged to comment on how disappointed I was that there was little evidence given by the Indians themselves. Chief Potts was the principal Indian witness to give oral history ... unlike many other Indian land-claim cases, the present case has not been presented through a concurrence of many voices with respect to the oral tradition of the band. There has really been only one voice, that of Chief Potts. Obviously, even in the context of oral history, the best evidence rule permits the court to seriously consider the weight to be given to the evidence of Chief Potts under these circumstances.
. . . . .
"Where the fact relating to the current social organization, language and general way of life of a band, the antiquity and lineal descendent of the claimants to membership in a band, and the definition of the present boundaries of occupation of a band are in dispute, then the findings of fact must be based on weighty evidence from a number of Indians who can speak to these matters from their own knowledge and experience. The facts concerning these matters should be supported by historical, anthropological or other expert evidence, but the defendants should not rely entirely on non-Indian historical, anthological or other evidence when Indian evidence is available."
Steel, J., concluded at p. 340:
"In summary, I believe that a small - dedicated and well meaning group of white people, in order to meet the aspirations of the current Indian defendants, has pieced together a history from written documents, archeological and analogy to other bands, and then added to that history a study of physical features and other items, together with limited pieces of oral tradition. Even the name Teme-agama Anishnabay was not used in any printed form or record of the band or registered band until 1976. This leads me to doubt the credibility of the oral evidence introduced, and affects the weight to be given to the evidence of non-Indian witnesses."
Notwithstanding the above and the fact Cape Mudge did not call persons who may have knowledge of material facts, I am not prepared to make an adverse finding.
[522]
Similarly on the Campbell River side, key witnesses with knowledge of facts material to this action have also passed away. Bill Roberts Sr., described as an astute businessman, consulted with Magistrate Bates in 1932 and reviewed the Department's records in Victoria, other Campbell River Indians such a Johnny Quocksister, James Smith, Francis Drake and Dan Quatell, who were present at various meetings, signed the 1936 Declaration or gave evidence before the McKenna McBride Commission, have all died prior to the commencement of this action. All of these individuals had first hand knowledge of the events material to the actions before me. I can find no suggestion in the documentary evidence that the knowledge of these individuals was incomplete or that they failed to understand their legal position. It is interesting to note that they all died without commencing an action against the Cape Mudge Indians to claim Reserve No. 12.
[523]
In terms of the sophistication of these Indians, I note the following comments by Tennant:
"By the turn of the century in every tribal group, there were those, mostly younger people, who attended local mission schools who were fluent in both spoken and written English. Included in this new generation were young men now inheriting or otherwise acquiring traditional leadership positions within clans and communities. In contrast to their predecessors, they were more knowledgeable about white society and government, and so they could communicate readily with government officials and other whites." (Tennant, cross-exam, vol. 9, p. 1373)
[524]
It would appear that the Indians of both bands, through their political connections and participation in native organizations such as the Allied Tribes and North American Brotherhood had from the 1920's onward access to advice on Indian land matters through their connections with Andrew Paull (who was legally trained), Arthur O'Merara or lawyers retained by the Indians to act in defending their potlatch charges.
Legal Advice In The 1930's Regarding The Allocation Of Campbell River And Quinsam Reserves
[525]
A number of inquires as to the allocation of the Quinsam Reserves were made and responded to in the late 1920's (see documents 2615, 1797, 2618 and 2619). Ditchburn's reply to Missionary Ridlands's letter, written on Billy Assu's instruction, dated May 3, 1928, explained the "ditto mark" error [document 2619]:
"I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 24th ultimo written on behalf of Chief Billy Assu with regard to Quinsam Reserve.
"In reply I beg to say that I am of the opinion that the Quinsam Reserve belongs to the We-way-akay (Cape Mudge) Indians and that the only reason for it appearing in the Official Schedule as belonging to the Wewayakums is on account of a typographical error and a misunderstanding in connection with the decision made in 1907 that the Campbell River Reserve belonged to the Wewayakums. I may explain that up to 1907 the Campbell River Reserve had been shown in the Official Schedule as belonging to the We-way-akays, but upon representations made by Mr. Indian Agent Halliday this Reserve was decided upon as belonging to the Wewayakums and the word Wewayakum was written in on the Schedule opposite the Campbell River Reserve. The ditto marks opposite Quinsam Reserve No. 12 were not, however, struck out and the word Wewaykay written in. The consequence has been that the later Official Schedule published in 1913 showed Quinsam Reserve as belonging to the Campbell River Indians which, to my mind, is not the case and the matter has been brought to the attention of the Department and is now receiving consideration. I however, have not the slightest doubt that my views on this matter will be concurred in and you may explain to Billy Assu that he has no occasion to worry on the subject."
[526]
Based on Ditchburn's letter, it would appear that as far back as 1928, the Cape Mudge Indians were accurately informed by the Department of the status of the reserve schedule prior to and after 1907, in that the Schedule listed the Cape Mudge Indians with respect to both the Quinsam and Campbell River Reserves, and that a change was made to the schedule in 1907 to reflect the 1907 resolution. Ditchburn in turn wrote to the Department on May 4, 1928 to draw the ditto mark error to the attention of the Department and to recommend the Quinsam Reserve "be officially decided as belonging to the We-way-akay Indians and a notation made in the schedule accordingly" [document 1804]. It appears that more information on the Quinsam Reserve was sought in 1931 and 1932 (see documents 1822, 1825, 1828). It also appears that some Campbell River Indians engaged the assistance of S.J. Isaac to make inquiries on their behalf as to the status of the Quinsam Reserve (see document 1836). Halliday's response to Isaac sets out the history of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12, including the 1907 Resolution and the meetings of the McKenna McBride Commission [document 1838].
1932 Consultation with Bates and McLelan
[527]
Interest in Reserve No. 12 clearly intensified in early 1932. A great deal of activity seems to have been set in motion after Bill Roberts and James Smith (Campbell River) accompanied by Magistrate Bates of Comox, visited with Ditchburn in Victoria on February 1 and 2, 1932. Bates was retained by Smith and Roberts to put forward a claim on behalf of the Campbell River Indians to Reserve No. 12 [document 2631]. During the visit to Victoria, Bates, Smith and Roberts were given an opportunity to review the Department's files on Reserve No. 12 (see documents 2631, 2632 and 1856).
[528]
This activity was known to Billy Assu, who telegraphed Ditchburn to advise Ditchburn of Cape Mudge's claim to Quinsam and that the majority of the men did not agree with Smith and Roberts, nor did the Chief. The following week Billy Assu travelled to Vancouver to meet with Agent Ball, who wrote to Ditchburn and advised him of Cape Mudge's claim to Quinsam. Ball's letter indicates that he had recently been contacted by a lawyer, engaged by the Indians regarding Quinsam [document 2633]. It would seem that the lawyer referred to in this letter, was Thomas McLelan [document 1875], who was later retained by the Cape Mudge Indians to make inquires to the Department regarding title to Reserves No. 11 and 12.
[529]
On February 8, 1932, Ditchburn wrote to Bates a comprehensive letter setting out in detail the entire history of the survey and allocation of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 [document 2634]. I believe Ditchburn's letter is significant because it informed Bates and the Campbell River Indian Band of the Department's position regarding the allocation of Reserve No. 12. The letter makes full disclosure of the relevant facts including the standing of the Reserves as shown in the 1902 Schedule, a quotation of the full text of the 1907 Resolution and the Department's explanation of the ditto mark error. Ditchburn's letter also summarized the evidence before the McKenna McBride Commission in 1914, including reference to specific file and page numbers of the Commission's report. Ditchburn also enclosed a copy of this May 4, 1928 letter to Ottawa recommending a correction to the Schedule with respect to Quinsam [document 1804]. The letter is also significant because Ditchburn emphasized that the Department's records regarding these reserves were available for inspection by Bates if necessary.
[530]
As such, I am satisfied that the Campbell River Indians were accurately informed in 1932 of the Department's position respecting the allocation of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 and had an opportunity to inspect the documents and to consult with Bates as to the possibility of any legal claim to Reserve No. 12.
[531]
A copy of Ditchburn's letter to Bates was forwarded to Halliday [document 1866]. Halliday in turn forwarded to Chief Billy Assu a copy of Ditchburn's letter including a copy of the 1907 Resolution [document 1854]. Three weeks after Halliday forwarded a copy of Ditchburn's letter, McLelan wrote to the Department in Ottawa requesting further information regarding the title to Reserves No. 11 and No. 12. His first letter, dated March 2, 1932, indicated he was consulted by a delegation of Cape Mudge Indians and instructed to ascertain the standing of title to both reserves [document 1875]. This delegation, composed of Billy Assu, Charlie Peterson and Charlie Wilson would have had first hand knowledge of the relevant events, including the 1907 Resolution and the McKenna McBride Commission hearings.
[532]
Cape Mudge suggested that the Crown either misrepresented or failed to fully disclose to McLelan the facts material regarding their claim to Reserve No. 11. In response, the Crown submits, and I agree, that this claim is unsupported by the evidence. The Department's first reply to McLelan's letter was dated March 16, 1932 [document 1877]:
"... I have to advise you that after the 1913 Schedule, to which you refer, was published the Indian Agent called the attention of the Department to the error in listing Quinsam Indian Reserve No. 12 as belonging to the Weewayakaum band. This reserve is listed in the official schedule of the Department as belonging to the Weewayakay band. According to the departmental record the Campbell River Indian Reserve No. 11 belongs to the Weewayakum band."
McLelan wrote a second letter, dated April 4, 1932, indicating that he had been instructed by his clients, Cape Mudge, to ascertain their legal title to Reserve No. 11 and that he had been advised by them that they were given title to Reserve No. 11 in 1888 and held title until the 1913 Schedule allotted the reserve to Campbell River [document 1883].
[533]
The Department's reply was dated April 14, 1932 and indicated:
"... I have to advise you that owing to conflicting claims as to the ownership of the Campbell River Indian Reserve No. 11, on the 20th March, 1907, at a general meeting of the Wewayakay or Cape Mudge band of Indians, a resolution was passed by that band ceding all claims that they had to that reserve to the Wewayakum (or Campbell River) band. The band stipulated, however, that it would have the same rights to fish in the waters of the Campbell River as the Wewayakum.
"At this meeting of the band Council, held at Cape Mudge on the evening of the 20th March, 1907, a majority of the male members of the tribe were present and the Indian Agent who presided at the meeting stated that there was not one dissenting voice to the resolution.
"In the resolution of the Wewayakay band it was stated that the reserve was then occupied by the Wewayakum band and also that the Wewayakum band were the first Indians to live at that reserve." [document 1885]
[534]
I am satisfied that neither of the Department's replies to McLelan misrepresented facts material to the Cape Mudge claim.
[535]
Therefore in my view, in 1932 McLelan was aware of the following:
1) that prior to 1907 the schedule of reserve had listed the Wewaikai with respect to both Reserve No. 11 and No. 12;
2) that the Department amended its schedule in 1907 as a result of the 1907 Resolution, a full text was available to McLelan as contained in Ditchburn's letter to Bates (document 1854);
3) that his clients had first hand recollection of the 1907 meeting and the events that transpired between 1907 and 1932;
4) of the invitation by Ditchburn to review the Department's records, reports, memos etc.;
5) the Department's position with respect to the Schedules, the 1907 Resolution, the ditto mark error and the McKenna McBride Commission, as contained in Ditchburn's letters [documents 1854 and 2619] and the two letters from Ottawa [documents 1877 and 1885].
[536]
In light of the above, I am satisfied that an inference can be drawn that the decision of Cape Mudge not to pursue a claim to Reserve No. 11 on or after 1932, was taken with full knowledge of the material facts and on receiving legal advise on these facts from their solicitor, McLelan.
[537]
Even if the Crown had failed to disclose some information to the Band, I agree the lawyer retained by Cape Mudge must be presumed to have made the necessary inquiries and to have advised the Indians of their legal rights. This knowledge coupled with the lack of legal action at the time indicates an acceptance of the status quo. Such an assumption, in my view, is supported by the reason for decision of Urie, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). That case also included a similar claim for nondisclosure. Urie, J.A., writing for the majority, held that the onus of proving the alleged lack of communication "must lie with those who alleged it" (p. 653). Urie, J.A., also found it significant that the band had obtained independent legal advice, chose to settle and then brought an action some 33 years later. Urie, J.A., made the following comments at p. 656:
"In addition, it is important to note that there is considerable documentary evidence in the record which discloses that, well before the Crown's legal opinion became known, at least some of the band, including probably all of the locatees, had obtained advice from independent legal counsel as to their rights. It is inconceivable to me that such counsel would have failed to consider the legality of the expropriation of the reserve lands even had he been consulted initially only with respect to the quantum of compensation desired. If he did that then he would obviously have had to consider the possibility that only a properly executed surrender would suffice. If such is the case, the Indians were not taken by surprise by the disclosure in early 1946 that a surrender was required by the Crown to effectuate the transfer of the lands. If that is correct, the action of the Exchequer Court which was clearly within contemplation of both the locatees and the Indian Affairs Branch officials could have, and perhaps ought to have, been proceeded with. Instead, the Indians, however, reluctantly, chose to settle. Then some 33 years later, they sought to set aside the settlement alleging equitable fraud as to basis for the inapplicability of the
Limitation Act
. As I have said, I do not believe there was actual or equitable fraud in the circumstances of this case. Therefore, since the action was not brought within the time limited by the applicable statute, it could have been dismissed on that ground."
[538]
Based on a review of the above noted documents, I am satisfied that both Indian Bands sought and obtained legal advice on their legal rights to Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 in 1932. Notwithstanding that knowledge and advice, neither band chose to pursue their claim at that time or for 50 years thereafter. On the contrary, the Chief and Principal Men of both bands swore Declarations in 1936 which contradict their claims today.
The Schedule of Indian Reserves
[539]
Errors in the subtribal allocation of reserves for the Kwaklweth Agency were discovered after publication of the 1913 Schedule. Unfortunately, a revised schedule of Indian Reserves for British Columbia was not published between 1913 and 1943. Halliday reported errors as early as 1918 [document 1417]. Two years later Halliday wrote a comprehensive letter to the Department in Ottawa noting a number of errors in the 1913 Schedule [document 1576]. He indicated in this letter that:
"With the exceptions as noted the reserves are correct, according to the Indians own ideas of the same and there is no dispute amongst them if located as mentioned above in my letter.
"I consider it very essential that these reserves should be properly classified amongst the various sub-bands so that when the time comes for the reserves to be sub-divided and given to the Indians individually instead of collectively it will avoid any friction or hard feeling."
Generally the errors noted by Halliday related to the individual allocation of reserves to subgroups of a larger tribe such as the Gilford Indians, the Knights Inlet Indians and the Laichkwiltach Indians. Halliday then set out the amendments required for the schedule to conform to the opinion of the Indians as to correct subtribal allocation of their reserves. Halliday continued to draw the Department's attention to errors in the Schedule and in 1925 wrote Ottawa to request instructions on how to deal with the problem [document 1781]:
"I would be very glad if you would advise me what is best to do with regard to the allocation of the Reserves in the Kwawkewlth Agency, as made by the Royal Commission on Indian Affairs, which in several instances is absolutely wrong and not in accordance with the desires expressed by the Indians at the various meetings which were held.
. . . . .
"The Indians themselves have brought to my attention the fact that I am getting on in years and while they know that their rights will be well protected as long as I remain Indian Agent but I might be transferred or retired in which case someone else who probably knew nothing of these matters would be in office and it might make more trouble for them while if this was settled now it would be more satisfactory. I would be glad if you would advise me what steps should be taken to have these changes put on the Department's files so that the minds of the Indians might be set at rest."
Halliday's letter was passed on to the B.C. Indian Commissioner Ditchburn, who filed a report on March 3, 1927 [document 1782]. Ditchburn's report recommended that where the opinions of the Indians appeared to conflict, the issue of the correct subtribal allocation of their reserves should be put before the bands at a meeting and the matter straightened out by way of resolutions passed by the bands and signed by the chiefs in order for the Department to be able "to rearrange the Schedule of Reserves to suit the Indians concerned". If on the other hand, there was no disagreement, Ditchburn was of the opinion that the "matter can be straightened out easily without any vote being taken" [document 1788].
[540]
It appears Ditchburn's procedure for effecting amendments to the schedule was put into practice with the appointment of Indian Agent Todd to the Kwawkewkth Agency in 1934 [document 1957]. Todd was instructed to resolve the outstanding reserve allocation issues in anticipation of the publication of a revised schedule of reserves for British Columbia [document 1981]. Over the next eight years Todd held band meetings, conducted inquiries, took evidence from band elders and obtained declarations of the Chief and Principal Men of a number of bands in the Kwawkewlth Agency in an effort to place before the Department an accurate record of the Indians' own opinion as to the correct subtribal allocation of reserves in the Agency. The procedure followed by Todd was summarized in his letter of April 14, 1936 [document 1987]:
"... and I am very pleased that this matter has definitely come to a head so that the exact ownership of these reserves may be settled.
"When I first came to the Agency there were several reserves in dispute amongst various bands, and we have slowly been getting all the information possible with a view to placing a complete list of all the reserves in the Agency before the Department as agreed upon by the Indians of the different bands. With this in mind, we have prepared a sworn statement and at meetings held at various times, explained to each band the reserves allotted to them as shown by the Schedule of Reserves and asked the bands if there were any dispute over the ownership of any of the reserves belonging to their tribe and whether the list as shown was a complete list of all the reserves belonging to them. When this was agreed upon I had the Declaration signed by the Chief and principal men of the tribe, in triplicate, one copy to be forwarded to Ottawa, one to the Commissioner's office in Victoria, and one to be retained here.
. . . . .
"It is very important before a new Schedule of Reserves is printed, that each separate band owning separate and distinct reserves should be shown under its proper name with the reserves belonging to that band listed together. We have gone to alot of trouble and work to get these matters straightened out for the Department, and not have them completed, and for their information we are forwarding sworn statements which show the name of the band, the number and name of each reserve belonging to that band together with the acreage and location of each reserve."
[541]
Upon a review of the documents, I am of the view that there is no evidence to suggest this procedure was not followed by Todd in investigating the issue of the allocation of the Laickwiltach reserves in 1936. Based on the above noted letter, I believe it can be inferred that Todd's practice in obtaining the Declarations of the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indians would have been to:
1) call a separate meeting of the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indians;
2) explain to each band at the meeting the allocation of reserves as shown on the 1913 schedule;
3) determine whether the schedule was "complete and correct", or whether any dispute existed between subgroups as to the allocation of the reserves;
4) where there was a dispute between the subgroups, to prepare a Declaration in accordance with the opinion of the Indians which was sworn by the Chief and Principal Men of each subgroup.
It would seem to me that if there had been any dispute between the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indians as to the allocation of their reserves in 1936, they would not have sworn the Declarations as prepared by Todd. The Crown submits that where legitimate disputes between subgroups was evident, the Department made an effort to investigate these disputes. As an example the Crown refers to the procedure followed to resolve the dispute with respect to the Meetup, Ahta and Kakweken Reserves (see documents 1972, 2652, 2724, 2658, 2653, 2660, 2664 and 2659). It would appear that Todd's investigation of the dispute between the Mamalillikulla and Kwicksitaineuk bands makes it unlikely that a similar dispute between the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Bands in 1936 would have gone unnoticed. Further, there is no evidence to suggest that the majority of the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indians were dissatisfied with the allocation of their reserves as set out in the 1936 Declarations.
Final Preparation of the 1943 Schedule of Indian Reserves
[542]
The collection of information for the purpose of preparing the 1943 schedule of reserves in British Columbia continued over the period from 1939 to 1943 [documents 2110, 2738, 2114, 2740]. Copies of the schedule were circulated to the Indian Agents between 1940 and 1943 and the revisions were then made by the Agents. With respect to the Kwawkewlth Agency, Todd enclosed a list of reserves showing the correct subtribal allocation of each reserve [document 2750] and recommended changes to conform to his list. Todd's revisions were noted by the Director of Indian Affairs [document 2748] and approved by the Department in July of 1943 [document 2730]. The final published draft of the new 1943 schedule incorporated these revisions, including what I feel was the "correct" listing of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12.
Campbell River and Cape Mudge Inquiries 1970-1971
[543]
As noted earlier, in 1970 and 1971 both Bands made further inquires as to the status of Reserves No. 11 and No. 12.
[544]
Campbell River engaged both their local member of Parliament, Mr. Barnett, and a firm of solicitors to make inquires about the status of the Quinsam Reserve [document 2395]. In the spring of 1970, the Campbell River Indian Band received two copies of Provincial Order-in-Council 1036 as well as copies of Plan 184 and field notes for both reserves [document 2398]. Upon receipt of these documents, further inquiries were made as to the status of Reserve No. 12. On December 24, 1970, Barnett wrote to the Minister of Indian Affairs setting out Campbell River's claim to Reserve No. 12 through Order-in-Council 1036 [document 2402]. Barnett's letter, in my view, indicates that over 15 years prior to the commencement of this action, the Campbell River Indians and their solicitors were aware of the claim to Reserve No. 12 on the basis of the Order-in-Council, however no explanation was provided by Campbell River for the 15 year delay in commencing their action.
[545]
In response to Barnett's letter, the Department on January 29, 1971 set out its position regarding the allocation of both reserves as follows [document 2406]:
"... According to our records, the 1902 Schedule of Reserves shows Reserve No. 12 as belonging to the Wewayakay Band. However, on March 22, 1907, the Wewayakay Indians of Cape Mudge passed a resolution stating that they ceded
'all right to the Campbell River Indian Reserve to the Wewayakum Band while reserving the right to fish the Campbell River in common with the Wewayakum Band.'
"In the 1902 Schedule, the word 'Wewayakay' was deleted opposite Reserve No. 11 and the word 'Wewayakum' substituted. However, the 'ditto' opposite Reserve No. 12 was not amended. As a result, when the 1913 Schedule of Reserves was printed, Reserve No. 12 was shown as belonging to the Wewayakum Band, and this is the way it was confirmed by the 1913 Royal Commission on Indian Affairs.
"On November 23, 1936, the Chief and Principal Men of the Cape Mudge (Wewayakay) Band signed a sworn statement declaring that Reserve Nos. 7, 8, 9, 10 and 12 belonged to them and on November 24, 1936, the Chief and Principal Men of the Campbell River (Wewayakum) Band signed a similar declaration listing Reserves Nos. 2, 3, 4, and 11. Copies of these declarations are attached. In view of the evidence available in our records we have to state that the Quinsam Indian Reserve No. 12 is set apart for the use and benefit of the Cape Mudge Band of Indians ..."
William Roberts Sr. met with J.V. Boys in Victoria to discuss the ownership of Reserve No. 12 and Boys reply, letter dated October 18, 1971 [document 2416], repeated the information contained in the above noted letter and included a copy of the 1907 Resolution and copies of the 1936 declarations of the Campbell River and Cape Mudge Indian Bands.
[546]
Once again, in 1971, the issue of Campbell River's claim to ownership to Reserve No. 12 was before the Band and no legal action was taken until almost 15 years later.
[547]
With respect to the Cape Mudge Indian Band, key documents and information respecting Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were also made available to the Cape Mudge Indians in 1970 and 1971. A memorandum dated January 21, 1971 indicates that copies of the 1907 Resolution were delivered to Chief Lewis of the Cape Mudge Band [document 2405]. Further, both before and after Chief Lewis' visit to Ottawa, the issue of the ownership of Quinsam Reserve had been discussed at a number of Cape Mudge Band meetings (see documents 2674, 2675 and 2676]. It appears from Barnett's letter dated December 24, 1970 [document 2402] that it was the intention of both bands at that time to resolve the matter between themselves. In light of the fact that no further action was taken at that time by either band to enforce their claims, I am satisfied that it could be inferred that the matter of the reserves had been resolved.
[548]
Boys wrote to Chief Lewis on October 18, 1971, to advise him of the Department's position on the allocation of the two reserves [document 2418]. This letter was almost identical to the letter sent to William Roberts, and included copies of the 1907 ceding resolution and copies of the 1936 Declarations sworn by the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indians.
[549]
In reviewing the evidence regarding the actions of both plaintiff Bands, the evidence reveals what appears to me to be a pattern of each generation raising the question of entitlement to Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 followed by attempts, generally successful, to resolve the matter between the two Bands. Until of course, the issue of reserve entitlement was pursued by way of court action.
X. Matters Raised During The Course Of The Trial
Admissibility of Superseded or Amended Pleadings
[550]
After hearing submissions from the parties, I ruled the pleadings the plaintiff Cape Mudge sought to enter into evidence were not admissible. I also stated that based on the evidence before me, I was satisfied that Cape Mudge consented to the amendment of the statement of defence. At the time of my ruling I indicated I would provide written reasons for my decision, which would form part of my judgment in this case. The following are my reasons.
[551]
It was the plaintiff Cape Mudge's view that the portion of the Crown's statement of defence as it read prior to the amendment of February 14, 1992, contained an admission on the part of the defendant Crown. The plaintiff Cape Mudge wished to have the pleadings, including the pre-amended portion of the statement of defence, entered into evidence. The defendant Crown and the plaintiff Campbell River objected to the pre-amended statement of defence being tendered as evidence.
[552]
Therefore, the question before me centred on whether a pleading, namely the statement of defence, which had been amended, could be placed before the court as evidence.
[553]
For the purposes of this issue, I shall only deal with the proceedings in the case where the Cape Mudge Indian Band is the plaintiff. These reasons apply to both the case of the Campbell River Band and the Cape Mudge Indian Band.
[554]
I believe that to better understand the issue, it is necessary to recount the facts leading up to the tendering of the pleading at the close of the plaintiff Cape Mudge's case.
[555]
On or about May 5, 1989, the plaintiff Cape Mudge filed a statement of claim into the Federal Court Registry naming the Crown as defendant. On or about October 10, 1989, some five months after the issuance of the plaintiff's statement of claim, the Crown filed its statement of defence.
[556]
On or about December 20, 1989, the plaintiff served and filed a reply to the statement of defence filed by the Crown.
[557]
The pleadings remained in this state for approximately one year. On November 28, 1990 the plaintiff filed an amended statement of claim. In the amended statement of claim the plaintiff added certain allegations, such as the ones found in the last paragraph of para. 14.
[558]
To this amended statement of claim, the Crown filed an amended statement of defence in which the defendant, in paragraph 5, no longer stated that "Mr. Ashdown Green confirmed in his Report that the lands comprising said Reserves (11 and 12) had been set aside for the use and benefit of the members of the plaintiff band" but read Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were set aside "for the use of members of the Laich-kwil-tack Indians (also known as the Lekwiltok or Euclawtaw Indians or Tribe)". This amended statement of defence was filed at the Court Registry on February 14, 1992. However, before the defendant filed its amended statement of defence, the defendant filed an application together with an affidavit, on October 30, 1991, requesting an Order allowing the defendant, pursuant to rule 420 of the
Federal Court Rules
, to amend its statement of defence. This application was allowed, on terms, by the Associate Chief Justice on January 20, 1992. I also note that the Order of the Associate Chief Justice did not specify that it was granted on consent of the parties.
[559]
I would add that there was some discussion before me as to whether or not the application to amend was granted on consent. However, after hearing submissions from counsel for the Crown and counsel for Cape Mudge, I will say no more than I am satisfied that the Cape Mudge Indian Band through their counsel consented, on terms, to the Crown's application to amend the statement of defence. Therefore, what is before me now is the amended statement of claim, the amended statement of defence and the reply filed by the plaintiff on September 22, 1992.
[560]
Prior to Cape Mudge closing its case, counsel for Cape Mudge attempted to file as an exhibit the original statement of defence, filed with the court on or about October 6, 1989.
[561]
Counsel for Cape Mudge attempted to submit the pre-amended statement of defence as evidence of the fact that the Crown, in the said document, had made an admission that Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 had been set aside by Green for the use and benefit of the members of the Cape Mudge Indian Band. Cape Mudge argued that the pleadings as they stood prior to the amendment of February 14, 1992 are admissible and form part of the totality of the evidence to be considered by the court. However, it is always open to the party pleading, in this case the defendant, to provide an explanation for the statements found in the pleadings prior to amendment.
[562]
Counsel for the Crown, along with counsel for Campbell River, objected to the tendering into evidence of the original statement of defence arguing that the original statement of defence had been superseded by the filing of the amended statement of defence, which filing had been consented to, albeit with conditions, and was allowed by the Court by Order dated January 20, 1992.
[563]
In support of its position, Cape Mudge submitted various excerpts from John Henry Wigmore,
Evidence in Trials at Common Law
, vol. 4 (Toronto: Little, Brown and Company, 1972), Sopinka, Lederman and Bryant,
The Law of Evidence in Canada
, (4th ed. Toronto: Butterworths, 1992), Byrne and Heydon,
Cross on Evidence
, (3d Australian ed. Sydney: Butterworths, 1986), Cleary,
McCormick on Evidence
, (3d. ed. St. Paul: West Publishing Co., 1984) as well as an unreported decision of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 321; 75 C.C.C.(3d) 257; 94 D.L.R.(4th) 590 (S.C.C.) and the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.).
[564]
Cape Mudge brought the following passage from Wigmore,
Evidence in Trials at Common Law
, s. 1067, p. 88 to my attention:
"When a pleading is amended or withdrawn, the superseded portion disappears from the record as a judicial admission limiting the issues and putting certain facts beyond dispute. Nevertheless, it exists as an utterance once deliberately made by the party. While thus denied all further effect as a pleading, may it not still be used as a quasi admission, like any other utterance of the party?"
Wigmore then refers to a decision by Devens, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  above reasons, it may be said that, so far as the argument from hurry and inadvertence is concerned, it would be equally valid against many extrajudicial utterances of the party. Yet no one has ever supposed that it afforded any reason for their rejection. The party is always at liberty to show the circumstances in explanation, to detract from the significance of his utterance.
. . . . .
"So there seems to be no valid reason why a retraction, based (perhaps) on better information, should effect the exclusion of this pleading rather than any other sort of statement, once made by the party and now offered against him."
[565]
These comments are followed by Ross, J.,'s comments in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 949 (1937):
"When a pleading is abandoned or superseded, it functions no longer as a pleading. The issues are to be found in the substituted pleading. It may, however, depending upon the circumstances, become material and relevant evidence in the case. The question as to when such a pleading may be used as evidence against the pleader is a new one in this jurisdiction. Although it has been decided frequently in other jurisdictions, there is no uniformity in the decisions. The rock that has divided the courts, as we read the cases, is whether the superseded or abandoned pleading, when signed only by the attorney should be accepted by the courts as emanating from the client, or should the party offering such pleading as evidence be required to make a showing that the client inspired, adopted, or approved of the utterances in such pleading ... We believe the courts of the country are in general agreement that, if abandoned or superseded pleading is signed or verified by the party, or if it appears that the utterances therein could have come from no one else than the party, it is competent evidence and should be admitted without further showing. But, if signed only by the party's attorney, as in this case, the courts do not agree that the superseded pleading is admissible."
Ross, J., continued:
"The correct rule, we believe, should place the onus on the party offering as evidence abandoned or superseded pleadings, signed by the attorney only, to satisfactorily show that the pleadings offered are those of the party or that he approved them, rather than on the party against whom they are offered to show he was not personally responsible for such superseded pleadings."
[566]
What follows at p. 90 of s. 1067 is what appears to be Wigmore's comment "Such is the view generally accepted (although the rulings are by no means uniform) for
civil
cases [footnote omitted]". Wigmore then proceeds to cite a number of American cases where in some circumstances superseded pleadings were not admissible, while in other circumstances superseded pleadings were admissible. In my view, the only definitive conclusion that one can draw from the jurisprudence cited by Wigmore is that there appears to be no uniformity in terms of when such superseded pleadings may be considered by the courts, if at all. Although Wigmore believes that superseded pleadings can be used as evidence of admission, his conclusions relate only to American jurisprudence, which is divided at best.
[567]
I agree that pleadings in prior or concurrent actions may be admissible for the purpose of, for example impeachment. This is also in accordance with Allan, J.,'s conclusion in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at p. 262: "I conclude that an admission of liability in a proceeding is admissible in separate proceedings but not conclusive; the weight to be given to such admission must be determined in the particular circumstances in which it was made". However, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> there was an admission of liability by the defendant in one action arising out of a motor vehicle accident as well as a denial of liability of the same defendant in another action arising from the same motor vehicle accident. Therefore, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> dealt with admissions in two separate pleadings, where both pleadings were still standing. This is not the situation in the case at bar. Here, we are dealing with one set of pleadings, a part of which was amended by the consent of one of the parties, namely, the plaintiff Cape Mudge. On that basis, I am satisfied that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is clearly distinguishable and is not applicable to the case before me.
[568]
With regard to the decision of Walker, J., in
Harvey
, I note that case involved an action for damages for wrongful dismissal and loss of permanent employment against the defendant Board of Education and its four Superintendents of Facilities. After hearing the matter, Walker, J., became aware of pleadings that had subsequently been struck by consent, because they were still contained in the record placed before him. In attempting to deal with the fact that the pre-amended pleading had come to his attention, Walker, J., made the following observations at p. 4:
"Ordinarily, the fact of paras. 16 and 17 having been pleaded and later struck by consent might be of some significance for the decision of the case. I began to
wonder
[my underlining] what, if any, consideration I was to give to this situation. There had been no mention, by counsel or in evidence, of the order or the matters raised in former paras. 16 and 17 of the statement of claim. There was no mention in argument of these matters. The appearance and disappearance of these very serious allegations seemed to cast some light on, inter alia, the relation between the defendant Board, its members, the plaintiff and other employees of the defendant Board at material times.
"The answer lies in the fact that the evidence of abandoned pleadings (and presumably pleadings struck by consent) or superseded or withdrawn pleadings may be 'admissible' in evidence. 'Admissible'? It is well accepted that, when an abandoned, struck, superseded or withdrawn pleading is sought [to] be used in the manner now being considered by me, it must always be tendered in evidence at the trial, at the proper time, like all other matters of evidence. As the abandoned, struck, superseded or withdrawn pleading is offered as an item, in the general mass of evidence against the party, it must be put in evidence at the proper time. It cannot be commented on in argument unless 'it has been thus formally offered in due season', and introduced in evidence at the trial with some chance of explanation or showing of why changing of horses in mid-season was necessary. The 'struck' pleading may represent, inter alia, (1) the lawyer speaking not the plaintiff, (2) a tactic rather than a representation of truth or (3) an error. The plaintiff must have a chance of explanation before the 'struck' pleading takes on a significance as an admission or otherwise howsoever. That was not done here. I put former paras. 16 and 17 out of my considerations and deliberations. I instruct myself accordingly."
[569]
In light of these comments, counsel for the plaintiff Cape Mudge urged that in the case before me, the defendant has the "onus" of explanation before the struck pleading can take on any significance as an admission.
[570]
With respect to both the trial judge in
Harvey
and counsel for Cape Mudge, although the comments of the trial judge may be of assistance in examining the admissibility of superseded pleadings, the very issue of the admissibility of such pleadings was never formally before the trial judge, there was no objection to admissibility of the pleadings and there was no argument made on behalf of either party. These comments are simply judicial musings and I feel in no way bound by the comments as they relate to the case at bar. Further, it appears that similar comments are found  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's
Evidence
at p. 91 ((in terms of American jurisprudence contained in the footnote):
"It may be pointed out that the rule in the
Meyer
case does not represent prevailing authority. (4 Wigmore,
Evidence
(3rd Ed. 1940), s. 1067, pp. 61-65; McCormick,
Evidence
(1954), s. 242, p. 510; Witkin, op. cit.) The reasons for the rule, and the Massachusetts case (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  eviscerated  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's discussion. The policy of liberality in permitting amendments to pleadings enables the litigant to change horses in the middle of the stream, but it should not relieve him of the burden of showing why it was necessary to do so ..."
However, the case commentary under footnote one also continues:
"The adoption of the
Evidence Code
(see
Evid. Code
, s. 2) and the fact that
Meyer
, as an alternative ground of decision, noted that there was not, as in this case, an attempt to introduce the superseded pleading in evidence ..., offer an opportunity to review the probity of the rule of
Meyer
and its effect on the ascertainment of the truth. The Law Revision Commission Comment ... and the application of the rule of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  defendant in his application to amend has, in essence, the burden of showing why the court should allow the amendment. Once the court allowed the amendment, whether on consent or not, the defendant has in effect satisfied his onus and should no longer bear the burden of showing why it was necessary to do so.
[572]
In support of its position, counsel for the defendant in his submission referred to comments in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.) at pp. 321 and 322:
"Once pleadings are amended, what stood before the amendment is no longer material before the court and no longer defines the issues to be tried. Here the defendant has obtained leave to amend, and there has been no appeal against that order; and, whatever may have taken place at the hearing of the application to amend, the court must, I conceive, regard the pleadings as they stand, the purpose of amendment being to determine the real question in controversy between the parties: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  'It appears to me that the writ as amended becomes for this purpose the original commencement of the action'."
[573]
Counsel also referred me to the decision of Grotsky, J., of the Saskatchewan Court of Queen's Bench in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  related to amended pleadings, in which allegations were withdrawn from the statement of claim. Grotsky, J., was confronted with arguments similar to those before me and refused to allow the defendant to rely on the plaintiff's withdrawn pleading as an informal admission. In reaching his conclusion, Grotsky, J., indicated at p. 131:
"I have reviewed the facts in some detail to demonstrate that the allegations in the original statement of claim were not withdrawn out of hand. They were allowed to be withdrawn, only after notice to the defendants, and due consideration by the court. Mr. Justice Halvorson was obviously satisfied from the materials filed and by the submissions of counsel to permit the amendments as sought 'in order to determine the real questions in issue between the parties'.
"In
Daniell, Chancery Practice
(7th Ed.), p. 490, the following is stated:
'The right of one party to read the pleading of another party as evidence against the latter is confined to the pleading as it stands, so that if the pleading has been amended, the original pleading cannot be read as such evidence.'
"I have also read and considered
Parno and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Sask. C.A.).
"Applying the principles enunciated in the authorities above referred to, and therein cited, to the facts of this case, and taking into consideration as well the provisions of Queen's Bench Rule 169 ...
"I am satisfied that the issues between the parties should be determined on the statement of claim, as amended, and the statement of defence as filed."
[574]
The Saskatchewan Court of Queen's Bench allowed the plaintiff's action against the personal defendant, but dismissed the action against the corporate defendant. The defendants in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> appealed and the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal. The question of the amended statement of claim did not appear to be in issue before the Court of Appeal, however, the court did make the following comments at p. 185:
"The order made by Mr. Justice Halvorson was not appealed. The trial judge, in my opinion, after referring to the principles on which admissions of fact can be withdrawn in a pleading, as set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , correctly held that the right to read the pleading of another party as evidence against him is confined to the pleadings as amended. The admissions in the pleadings can only be changed by reason of error or inadvertence and after an order is made changing them such admission made in error or by inadvertence cannot be used as evidence against that party. The party may be cross-examined on the pleadings and such evidence will form part of the totality of the evidence which the trial judge must consider."
[575]
As I understood the trial judge, he decided that once the pleadings were amended or superseded, these pleadings no longer bound the party making them and cannot be read as evidence. He also decided that the issues between the parties should be determined on the basis of the amended statement of claim and the statement of defence. The Court of Appeal's decision does not appear to disagree with the trial judge. Further as I read the Court of Appeal's comment, the party may be cross-examined on the amended pleadings, and it is this cross-examination that will form part of the totality of the evidence. With this, I am in complete agreement.
[576]
After canvassing the jurisprudence of this court I could not find any cases directly on point with the case before me. The issue of admissibility of a superseded or amended pleading, where there is an allegation of an admission and where that amendment was granted by the court and related to one ongoing action, together with an objection by the party who was allowed to amend its pleadings appears not to have been dealt with by this court. For that reason, I believe a review of some of the facts, not just the jurisprudence submitted, may be of assistance in understanding my ruling.
[577]
In the case at bar, for reasons known only to Cape Mudge, it chose to consent to the defendant's application to amend the statement of defence. This consent was given subject to certain conditions. The amendment of the statement of defence was allowed by the court, by Order dated January 20, 1992. Therefore, the allegation or statement contained in the statement of defence which was subsequently amended, with the consent of the parties, is nothing more, in my view, than a statement made by the defendant. The purpose of an amendment to the pleadings, in this case the statement of defence, is to correct an allegation or statement made therein. In my view, once that amendment is allowed by the court, the original statement or allegation outlined in the statement of defence is of no value. In this regard I note once again the following passage from
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the following is stated: --
'The right of one party to read the pleading of another party as evidence against the latter is confined to the pleading as it stands, so that if the pleading has been amended,
the original pleading cannot be read as such evidence
.' (Emphasis mine)
"This principle is stated to be the law in
Annual Practice
, 1914, at p. 581. That is also my memory of the practice in the past.
"It seems the utmost use that the defendant can make of the original statement of claim is that the plaintiffs, by their solicitor, at the institution of this suit claimed that the contract was still in force and did not assert or claim that it had been abandoned."
[578]
Similarly, in the case before me, at the very utmost, the only use Cape Mudge can make of the statement of defence is that the defendant by its solicitor claimed Reserve No. 11 was given to the Wewaikai Band. This information was available to the court as it formed part of the history of the pleadings. However, it seems clear to me, on the facts, that the defendant abandoned that allegation and that Cape Mudge acquiesced to that abandonment, for whatever reason, by not contesting the application to amend.
[579]
Moreover, if Cape Mudge wished to rely on what it alleges was an admission contained in the statement of defence, it was for the plaintiff to contest the defendant's application to amend that portion of the statement of defence advising the court that the statement of defence contained an admission that the plaintiff wished to rely upon at the trial of the action and therefore its withdrawal would be prejudicial to the plaintiff's case. As noted by the defendant, pursuant to rule 420 of the
Federal Court Rules
the court is given the discretion to determine whether the proposed amendment is in fact necessary for the purpose of determining the real issues in controversy between the parties, provided this does no injustice which cannot be compensated by an award of costs. As this was not done, the plaintiff can not now attempt to introduce the statement as it read prior to the amendment.
[580]
This, I understand is also consistent with the practice in British Columbia. In this regard I note Allan, J.'s, comment at p. 261 of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"... In British Columbia, an admission made in a pleading is a judicial admission which is solemn and conclusive against the party making it in that proceeding. Such an admission can only be withdrawn by consent or with leave of the court: R. 31(5). The test applied by the court in considering an application for leave is whether the proposed withdrawal of an admission is in the interests of justice ... Where the opposite party had relied on the admission, and its withdrawal would prejudice that party, the court may not permit its withdrawal."
[581]
I am satisfied from the evidence that the Crown abandoned the claim in the statement of defence regarding the admission. An application was made to amend the pleadings, which was consented to by both parties and allowed by the court. Once that amendment was allowed by the court, the statement of defence as it read prior to the amendment is not admissible.
[582]
I am also of view that this is consonant with the purpose of pleadings in our jurisdiction, namely to define the issues to be addressed at trial. It is also consistent with the fundamental rule that pleadings only contain a precise statement of the material facts on which the party pleading relies on for his or her claim or defence but not the evidence by which those facts must be proven. Further, amendments to a party's pleadings are frequently allowed. The purpose of permitting such latitude in allowing amendments is to ensure that the purpose of determining the real issues in controversy between the parties are addressed before the court, provided this does no injustice which cannot be compensated by an award of costs. Moreover, I agree with the defendant's submission that the proposed use of the amended or superseded pleadings by Cape Mudge, in the circumstances of this case, would frustrate the pleading process, as it would serve as a disincentive to any party contemplating an amendment of its original pleadings "for the purpose of determining the real question or questions in controversy between the parties", rule 420(1).
Amendment to subpara. (k) of para. 14 of plaintiff Cape Mudge's Statement of Claim Against the defendant Crown
[583]
Cape Mudge wished to amend subpara. (k) of para. 14 of their statement of claim against the Crown to reflect what Cape Mudge alleged was the Crown's failure to provide any assistance to the Wewaiakai Band in its attempt to repurchase the Campbell River Spit, which is a portion of the Campbell River Reserve. I denied Cape Mudge's request for the amendment based on rule 420 of the
Federal Court Rules
, because in my view this was not an issue when the Cape Mudge commenced its action. Cape Mudge was attempting to raise a new issue in its pleadings.
Amendment by the Crown to its Pleadings Regarding the 1936 Declarations of Chiefs and Principal Men
[584]
The Crown brought a motion to amend its pleadings with respect to the 1936 Declarations of the Chiefs and Principal Men of the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indian Bands, the purpose of which was to clarify the Crown's position with respect to these Declarations. I allowed the amendment as I was satisfied that the proposed amendments were simply clarifications and did not create new allegations. As such, the plaintiff Indian Bands were not placed in a position where they could not properly and fully complete and present their cases.
Rulings With Respect to the Witness Mr. Geddes
Mr. Geddes is an employee of an adverse party and therefore is subject to cross-examination by the party who called him as a witness
[585]
Cape Mudge called as their witness Mr. Geddes (Geddes), an employee of the defendant Crown, and then desired to cross-examine him pursuant to rules 40(17) and 40(20) of the British Columbia
Rules of Court
.
[586]
After hearing the submissions of the parties, I am satisfied that rule 40 of the British Columbia
Rules of Court
apply to the proceedings before me by way of s. 40 of the
Canada Evidence Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-5, subject to the limitation included in s. 9 of that
Act
, and by virtue of the Court of Appeal's comments in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). In this regard, I note the comments of Pratte, J., at p. 316:
"If we had to deal with the merits of this appeal we would not have referred to rule 5 of the
Federal Court Rules
, but, rather, to s. 37 of the
Canada Evidence Act
pursuant to which the rules of evidence applicable in British Columbia, including those contained in the Rules of the Supreme Court of that province were applicable to the trial of this action, subject to the
Canada Evidence Act
and other Acts of Canada. As rule 40 of the
British Columbia Rules
is certainly not entirely compatible with s. 9 of the
Canada Evidence Act
, we would have said that the rules of evidence contained in rule 40 applied to the trial of this action to the extent to which they do not conflict with s. 9 of the
Canada Evidence Act
."
I also note that s. 37 which dealt with the applicable provincial rules of evidence is now found at s. 40 of the
Canada Evidence Act
in the same form.
[587]
Generally, a witness called by a party cannot be cross-examined by that party without an initial finding by the trial judge that the witness is hostile. Rules 40(17) and 40(20) of the
British Columbia Supreme Court Rules
create an exception to the requirement that the witness must be proved to be hostile when the witness who is being called is an adverse party in the litigation or is a director, officer, partner, employee or agent of the adverse party. Rules 40(17), (18) and (20) are set out below:
"(17) A party who desires to call as a witness at the trial an adverse party, or any director, officer, partner, employee or agent of an adverse party, may either subpoena the person or give the person or his solicitor at least seven days' notice in Form 40 of the intention to call him or her as a witness, tendering at the same time the proper fees. A party may call as a witness a person referred to in this subrule without payment of fees or previous notice if the person is in attendance at the trial.
"(18) For the purpose of subrule (17), 'adverse party' means a party who is adverse in interest.
"(20) A party calling a witness under subrule (17) is entitled to treat the witness as hostile. Cross-examination of the witness by counsel for the adverse party shall be confined to explanation of matters brought out in the examination-in-chief. Cross-examination of the witness by other parties may be general or limited, as the court may direct. Re-examination shall be confined to new matters brought out in cross-examination."
Therefore, as I understand the
British Columbia Rules
, where an adverse party, namely a party who is adverse in interest is called as a witness or a director, officer, partner, employee or agent of a party who is adverse in interest is called as a witness, the party calling the witness is entitled to treat the witness as hostile. The entitlement is not based on any court ruling but is based on calling a witness who falls within the particular category.
[588]
In light of the above, I am satisfied that Geddes, as an employee of the defendant Crown, falls within rule 40(17) in that he is an employee of an adverse party and therefore counsel for Cape Mudge was entitled to conduct an examination in the nature of leading questions and/or cross-examination. I would add that counsel for Campbell River was also entitled to full cross-examination of Geddes and counsel for the Crown's examination will be limited to matters brought out in the examination in chief.
Opinion Evidence
[589]
There was some discussion regarding Geddes' ability to give expert or opinion evidence. Geddes was not before me as an expert witness nor was he ever qualified as an expert and therefore he was not entitled to give an expert opinion. However, Geddes as an historian, can give answers to specific questions that he feels capable of answering whether calling for an opinion or not and providing the answer or answers will be helpful to the court in ultimately determining the issues that are to be decided. In this regard, I note the comments of Sopinka, J., at p. 528 of
The Law of Evidence
:
"Courts now have greater freedom to receive lay witnesses' opinions; but as such evidence approaches the central issue that the court must decide, one can still expect an insistence that the witnesses stick to the primary facts and refrain from giving their inferences. It is always a matter of degree. As the testimony shades to a legal conclusion resistance develops."
Therefore, I allowed questions calling for an opinion provided that Geddes felt capable of answering the questions, that the answers would be helpful to the court and that the opinion does not lead towards a legal conclusion of an issue that I as the Judge must decide. I also wish to emphasize that I will and have accorded the answers elicited the weight I believe the answers deserve taking into account that the opinion evidence is from a lay witness.
XI. REMEDIES
Declaratory and Injunctive Relief
[590]
Although I have dismissed the Campbell River and Cape Mudge actions as against each other and the Crown, I will address the issue of declaratory relief and damages in the event that I am found to be in error in my determination.
[591]
In the actions before me, the Campbell River Indian Band and the Cape Mudge Indian Band seek declarations that each is entitled to the other's reserve. Both Indian Bands also seek an injunction restraining the other Indian Band from using the reserves which it claims. As an alternative to the declaratory and injunctive relief sought, Campbell River and Cape Mudge requests monetary compensation, namely damages, from the Crown in an amount equivalent to the present value of Reserve No. 11 and Reserve No. 12. Both Bands also claim, as against the Crown, monetary compensation for the potential revenues and actual revenues lost (together with compound interest) from the use of Reserve No. 11 and Reserve No. 12. Only Cape Mudge seeks punitive damages as against the Crown, as counsel for Campbell River indicated during argument that it would not be pursuing punitive damages against the Crown.
[592]
As I have stated, Campbell River's claim to possession and declaration of beneficial ownership is based on Order-in-Council 1036 dated 1938. As such, any damage award would be calculated commencing in 1938, at the time that Reserves No. 11 and 12 were created. On the other hand, Cape Mudge alleges a breach of fiduciary duty in failing to advise the Cape Mudge Band of its entitlement to compensation in 1907 when the Crown recorded the invalid transfer of Reserve No. 11 without payment of consideration to Cape Mudge.
[593]
With respect to the declaratory and injunctive relief sought by both Campbell River and Cape Mudge, based on my earlier comments regarding the evidence and declaratory relief, I am not prepared to exercise my discretion and grant the declaratory and injunctive relief claimed by the plaintiff Indian Bands. I am satisfied that this is not an appropriate case for this court to exercise its discretion, especially in the light of the comments of the Privy Council in
Russian Commercial and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (P.C.), that the jurisdiction of the court to make binding declarations of right was a discretionary remedy only to be exercised with the "utmost caution".
Damages
[594]
I now turn to the unenviable task of attempting to assess monetary compensation by attempting to determine a fair and reasonable value for Reserve No. 11 and for Reserve No. 12.
[595]
Before commencing this task, I wish to make it clear, and I repeat, that I am satisfied on the evidence that there was no breach of fiduciary duty by the Crown to either plaintiff Indian Band. Not every failure of the Crown to take all reasonable steps to protect one or the other of the plaintiff Indian Bands for monetary loss should necessarily result in a finding of a breach of fiduciary duty. I am satisfied that in the circumstances of this case, if a fiduciary duty arises on the part of the Crown, it is a duty that relates to an obligation to act honestly and impartially in its dealings with both the Campbell River Indian Band and the Cape Mudge Indian Band.
[596]
There was much discussion and argument presented by all three parties regarding the appropriate test or standard for calculating compensation for breach of a fiduciary duty and whether the standard includes an interest or an investment return component in the compensation or whether the court is bound by statute to award only the nominal dollar value at the time the breach occurred. The plaintiff Indian Bands, citing the Supreme Court decisions in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.), argued that the court is not bound to award simply the nominal dollar value in the year of breach, but should include in the equitable compensation a component to reflect the time value of money, namely the "investment return on the money". According to the plaintiffs, the jurisprudence makes it clear that compensation in cases of breach of fiduciary duty, is to be assessed at the date of judgment, calculated with full benefit of hindsight and based on the best rate of return that the fiduciary could reasonably and lawfully have achieved. As noted by Wilson, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , after drawing an analogy from the law of trusts, compensation is to be assessed by reference to the value of the assets at the date of restoration and not the date of deprivation. I do note that the Supreme Court of Canada split on the issue of whether <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> applied to the facts of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and that Laforest, J., writing for the majority, concluded it did not.
[597]
The Crown argued that the case before me is not a case where <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> should be followed and referred me to LaForest, J.'s, comments in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> regarding the sharp distinction between calculation of compensation in a situation where a person has control of property, which in the view of the courts belongs to another, and one where the person is under a fiduciary duty to perform an obligation. In a situation where the party has control of the property, trust remedies may be appropriate. On the other hand, in a situation where there is a fiduciary duty to perform an obligation, the duty is to be performed honestly and in accordance with the undertaking that the fiduciary has taken on. Of course, the Cape Mudge Indian Band is of the view that the case before me falls into the first category and the Crown is of the view that the case falls within the second category. I tend to favour the view that this case falls within the second category noted by LaForest, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[598]
The Crown's position is that if it acted in breach of its duty of care to the Cape Mudge Band, the Band is entitled to compensation equal to the Band's interest in Reserve No. 11 as of the date of breach, namely in 1907. In other words, "but for" the Crown's negligence in failing to advise Cape Mudge of its right to compensation in 1907, Cape Mudge would have been entitled to a payment equal to the fair market value of the Campbell River Reserve in 1907, per <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[599]
All of which, I believe only serves to confuse. From my reading of Laforest, J.'s, reasons in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , what does appear clear is that one must look through this categorization of the wrong as "a breach of fiduciary duty" to the true nature of the wrong and from there determine the appropriate remedy. As such, it is necessary to examine each fiduciary relationship on its facts and determine on a common sense and reasonable view what compensation should follow from that particular breach. This is what I have endeavoured to do in the case at bar.
[600]
As I indicated earlier, I am satisfied that if there was a fiduciary duty on the part of the Crown, it was a duty to act honestly and impartially in its dealings with the plaintiff Indian Bands. I must therefore determine what reasonable compensation should flow from this breach of duty. After extensive review of the jurisprudence, I am satisfied that the best approach in determining reasonable compensation is that taken by Collier, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). The Supreme Court of Canada adopted the quantum of damages as awarded by Collier, J., and found that he made no error in principle. Collier, J., noted that when dealing with an action based on a breach of trust, it is appropriate to consider a number of factors and contingencies in assessing a global compensation award. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Collier, J., rejected the Crown's expert's calculated loss at $1.6 million as unrealistically low and noted that this expert failed to take into account the investment return or monies received for prepaid leases. He also rejected some of the plaintiff's expert evidence although it seems he did accept some of the evidence on damages (the range being a minimum of $45,000,000 to a maximum of $71,000,000). Collier, J., assessed damages at $10,000,000. This I believe is consistent with the court's overall discretion to vary amounts and figures presented by experts. As noted by Dickson, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 708-709:
"Third, the award of damages is not simply an exercise in mathematics which a judge indulges in, leading to a 'correct' global figure. The evidence of actuaries and economists is of value in arriving at a fair and just result. That evidence is of increasing importance as the niggardly approach sometimes noted in the past is abandoned, and greater amounts are awarded, in my view properly, in cases of severe personal injury or death. If the courts are to apply basic principles of the law of damages and seek to achieve a reasonable approximation to pecuniary 'restitutio in integrum' expert assistance is vital. But the trial judge who is required to make the decision, must be accorded a large measure of freedom in dealing with the evidence presented by the experts. If the figures lead to an award which in all the circumstances seems to the judge to be inordinately high it is his duty, as I conceive it to adjust those figures downward; and in a like manner to adjust them upwards if they lead to what seems to be an unusually low award."
[601]
In terms of how compensation is calculated, I believe some allowance must be made for unrealized investment income and that the best reasonable lawful price would be achieved by the Crown taking the monies from the rents of the Reserves and placing them in the Band's trust account. This, in my view, would be a conservative approach in dealing with the monies received. Moreover, the experts are in agreement in this regard. Mr. Bowden (Bowden), an economist called by the Cape Mudge Band, indicated that the rates in the trust accounts were not out of line with the market rates at the time. I note Bowden was not cross-examined on this point. Mr. Miller (Miller), a qualified real estate appraiser called by the Crown to give evidence as to the present value of Reserve No. 11, agreed that a compound interest rate reflects a return on investment that is readily available to a prudent investor. Mr. Trebett (Trebett), called as an expert for the Crown in logging management, forest engineering and forest land valuation, also made use of compound interest in his report in a way that he believed was appropriate when attempting to obtain a present value of a stream of money.
[602]
I also wish to note that in
Luke
, Dube, J., calculated the compensation owed by the Crown to the Indian Band by adopting the approach taken by Mr. Nilsen (also an expert in the case before me), who assumed that the difference between the market rent net deductions and the rent received under the lease could have been invested and would have accumulated compound interest. Dube, J., was of the opinion, and so am I, that this is a fair and realistic approach to the calculation of compensation.
Present Market Value of Reserve No. 11
[603]
Three witnesses presented evidence regarding the present value of Reserve No. 11 as originally constituted, that is including the 80 acre Subdivision A which was sold to the International Timber Company in 1921. The Tyee Spit was part of the 80 acre parcel of land known as Subdivision A. Miller, a real estate appraiser called by the Crown to give evidence as to the present value of Reserve No. 11, valued the reserve as of January 1993 at $10,720,000 (see C-140). According to Miller, the "Development Lands" portion of the property, excluding the Tyee Spit, was valued at $7,420,000 and the Tyee Spit lands were valued at $3,300,000, for a total of $10,720,000.
[604]
Mr. Conroy (Conroy), a real estate appraiser called by Cape Mudge, appraised the entire parcel of land comprising the original reserve, including Subdivision A, in his report (CM-61) as of January, 1993 at $14,750,000.
[605]
Mr. Nilsen (Nilsen), a real estate appraiser also called by Cape Mudge, appraised the market value of the Development Lands (that is excluding the Tyee Spit) as of January, 1993 at $8,950,000. Nilsen also appraised the Tyee Spit lands at $3,300,000, for a total of $12,250,000.
[606]
The Crown in its argument analyzed the various appraised amounts and after taking into account a number of contingencies and assumptions discounted Cape Mudge's claim of $12,250,000 to $14,750,000 by $4,500,000 to $6,000,000 for a net sum of $7,500,00 to $8,750,000.
[607]
The first contingency, which I accept, is a deduction for the value of the Tyee Spit and the dryland sort portions of the reserve, valued at $3,300,000. Cape Mudge alleged that as a matter of law, the calculation of equitable compensation directs highest and best use to be determined with the full benefit of hindsight and that with the benefit of hindsight Cape Mudge would have kept subdivision A and simply rented it out. Although this may be true as a matter of law, I have no evidence upon which I can draw any kind of inference that had Cape Mudge been in possession of Reserve No. 11 they would not have made the subdivision or sold Subdivision A to International Timber in 1921. Further, there is no evidence to suggest the total consideration of about $17,500.50 paid by International Timber was less than fair market value at that time.
[608]
Therefore, I am satisfied that a reasonable approach to the calculation of compensation for the loss of the present value of Reserve No. 11 must take into account the fact that Subdivision A was sold in 1921 and that the Band would be left with the reserve as it is presently constituted, excluding subdivision A (the dryland sort and Tyee Spit). Nilsen's and Miller's evidence was that these lands alone have a value of $3,300,000. Bowden, an economist called by Cape Mudge, noted in his report (CM-97) that two offers were made to purchase the entire subdivision land in 1992 for $3,500,000 and $4,000,000.
[609]
The Crown noted that land values in the Campbell River area appear to have escalated at an unforeseen rate over the course of this century and that this must be taken into account in determining a reasonable valuation, per the comments of Collier, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[610]
The Crown also referred to a contingency or error factor inherent in the development approach to real estate valuation used by the three experts in appraising the market value or present value of Reserve No. 11 as a consideration in ascertaining value. In my view, it was common ground to all three experts in their assessment that there are contingencies that must be provided for, and that Miller, the Crown's appraiser, made the best estimate of present value based on these contingencies, such as soil conditions and time for obtaining development permits. I believe that Miller included these factors in arriving at his estimated amount of $10.7 million.
[611]
Therefore, I am satisfied that an amount of $3,300,000 should be deducted from the appraised value of Reserve No. 11, which I find to be $10.75 million. Therefore, I accept Miller's valuation of $7,420,000 as of January, 1993 as the present value of Reserve No. 11. This amount will have to be adjusted accordingly to date of judgment.
Loss Of Use Of Reserve No. 11
[612]
The evidence of the rental income that could have reasonably been received from Reserve No. 11 was addressed in the expert reports in two parts:
a) potential revenue from the property excluding the dryland sort; and
b) potential revenue from the dryland sort.
The dryland sort was the 60 acre portion of the 80.89 acre Subdivision A sold to the International Timber Company in 1921.
Potential Reserve Revenues Excluding
The Dryland Sort
[613]
I am of the view, that any claim for historical loss of revenue should be restricted to the actual revenue generated by Reserve No. 11. In particular, any claim for lost revenue must take into account the fact that Subdivision A was sold to International Timber in 1921. As such, I must deal with the reality of the situation, namely that Subdivision A was no longer part of the reserve in 1921 and not the potentiality of the situation.
[614]
In his initial report and update (CM-72 and CM-73), Nilsen examined four categories of Cape Mudge's claim for loss of revenue:
1) recorded revenues received by the Campbell River Indian Band from rentals on Reserve No. 11;
2) recorded revenues from the Tyee Spit;
3) speculative Tyee Spit rents;
4) potential income from other sources.
Nilsen concluded that the lost use and benefit to March 1993 was $18,787,587. This amount included an investment component, namely a compound interest factor.
[615]
Mr. Grover (Grover), a real estate appraiser retained by the Crown, during cross-examination acknowledged completing a report which addressed the identical question that was put to Nilsen. I qualified Grover to give opinion evidence regarding the recorded and potential revenues lost from Reserve No. 11 and the Tyee Spit. Grover's report was entered as a Cape Mudge exhibit, CM-138.
[616]
Although Grover adopted a different approach to that used by Nilsen, he commented in his report [CM-138] that much of the background material and explanations in the Nilsen report was verified and incorporated into his analysis, although not necessarily appearing in the report. Grover estimated the actual and potential revenues (as well as simple and compound interest) as of March 31, 1993 in three categories:
1) recorded reserve rents;
2) recorded Tyee Spit rents;
3) other rent potential.
Grover concluded that the lost use and benefit between 1898 and March 31, 1993 when calculated with compound interest was $18,845,295.
[617]
After reviewing the evidence and the expert opinions, I accept the value attributed by both experts (which were almost identical) at $18,800,000 for the loss of benefit and use of Reserve No. 11 (excluding the Dryland Sort), subject to the following factors or contingencies.
[618]
As I indicated above, I must consider the fact that the Tyee Spit has not been part of Reserve No. 11 since 1921 and that any potential revenue calculated after 1921 is speculative. As such, the revenues from the category of speculative Tyee Spit rents in both Nilsen's and Grover's estimates should be excluded from the compensation award. In this regard, I note both Nilsen and Grover calculated as a separate category the estimated Tyee Spit revenues.
[619]
Both experts agreed that the other income source or rent potential category of their analysis was speculative. I also note that none of the revenues included by Nilsen and Grover in the "speculative" category were actually received by the Campbell River Indian Band. The amounts were included in Cape Mudge's claim on the assumption that Cape Mudge would have managed and developed Reserve No. 11 so as to achieve a higher return than the Campbell River Indian Band actually received over the years. However, as there is no evidence to suggest that Cape Mudge would have actually generated higher revenues from Reserve No. 11, I have difficulty allowing for potential revenue for Reserve No. 11 to be included in the claim for loss of benefit and use.
[620]
I note that both Nilsen and Grover included in their estimates only those developments, which with the benefit of hindsight, are identified as having had the potential to generate positive net return to the band. No allowance was made for the risk that any potential development or investment may have resulted in a net loss to the band. This in effect guarantees compensation to the Band without any contingency for risk. As such, I am of the opinion that a contingency for risk should also be factored into the estimates.
[621]
Therefore, I am satisfied that a reasonable estimate, based on the evidence, would be $18,800,000 minus the amounts for the potential Tyee Spit rents (after 1921) and other rent potential (as calculated in both expert reports), further discounted by 5% as a contingency for risk investment or development. A factor will then have to be included to this amount to update to date of judgment.
Potential Revenues: Dryland Sort
[622]
The second component of the Cape Mudge claim is loss of potential revenues which might have been generated from leasing approximately 60 acres of land known as the dryland sort. As I indicated earlier, this parcel of property was part of the 80.89 acre Subdivision A sold to the International Timber Company in 1921 and has not been part of Reserve No. 11 for 74 years. As such I have difficulty including this loss of potential revenue from a piece of land that has not been part of the reserve for over 70 years, based on the assumption that if the Cape Mudge Band had been in possession of Reserve No. 11 they would not have sold the property to International Timber. This is purely speculation and has no basis in fact. In my view, in order to arrive at a figure which is reasonable and accurately reflects the reality of the situation, the compensation for loss of revenue should be the consideration paid by International Timber in 1921, including the gifted donkey engine and lumber, for the purchase of Subdivision A combined with the road use and land rent from 1907 to 1920. Trebett, a forestry engineer called by the Crown, in Appendix VIII of his report [C-118] calculated the total revenue received from the sale of Subdivision A lands in 1921. Road Use and Land Rent 1907 to 1920 plus 1921 sale at $17,753 and compound interest was calculated at $2,007,647. This amount will also have to be updated to date of judgment.
[623]
In the event that I am wrong in the above assessment, I note that three experts gave evidence with respect to revenues that could reasonably have been expected to have accrued to the Cape Mudge Band had the Band rented out the 60 acre parcel of land known as the dryland sort that was sold to and used by International Timber for logging purposes.
[624]
Cape Mudge called two witnesses on this issue. Mr. Techy (Techy) a forest engineer, estimated the loss of potential revenue and compound interest of this portion of the property at $22,801,865 [CM-94]. Bowden an economist called by Cape Mudge, estimated the potential revenue and compound interest at $8,618,636 [CM-97]. Trebett, a forestry engineer called by the Crown concluded that the lost revenue of this property when brought to present value by the application of compound interest totalled $3,132,194.
[625]
After reviewing the written and oral evidence I must conclude that Techy's report and evidence was flawed and unreliable. During cross-examination by the Crown it became obvious that Techy failed to properly research or document his assumptions regarding reasonable rental rates. For the most part, his conclusions were based on information gleaned from conversations with senior management persons in the industry without specific records of such conversations. Techy either failed to consider or ignored relevant documented sources of data. It appears Techy never examined the actual lease agreements entered into with respect to property on the Tyee Spit to determine if upland owner charges were levied in the Campbell River estuary, nor did he refer to relevant examples of documented rates and rentals. He also failed to account for any of the costs which would have been incurred in developing the land to generate the claimed revenues, such as the cost of creating the dryland sort, extracting gravel for sale or the cost of improvements such as the logging/railroad and log dump. Further, Techy's approach to "developing the claim" was to identify and individually value a number of overlapping revenues all deriving from essentially the same forestry oriented use. According to Techy's approach, the same 60 acre parcel of land was capable of generating simultaneously revenues in respect of land rental, road use, boom storage, riparian rights and gravel sales. Moreover, Techy indicated he adopted this approach notwithstanding that in his experience he was unaware of any examples of a logging company paying such overlapping rates for road use and foreshore use, in addition to the land rental charge (see Techy cross-exam, vol. 42, p. 5675). With respect, I cannot accept Techy's estimates of the loss of potential revenue where it is clear that he overvalued the revenues that could be obtained from leasing the land by attributing (incorrectly I may add) rental values to each of the activities that would be conducted on the land rather than by an overall rental value for the property, especially when coupled with reliance on unverified sources. As such, I am attributing
no weight
to the conclusions as to value set out in Techy's report.
[626]
Bowden, in coming to his conclusions as to potential revenue, assumed the entire 60 acre parcel purchased by International Timber could have been continuously leased as a single parcel at various estimated rental rates from 1921 to the present, although he did admit during cross-examination that he had not carried out a detailed analysis of market demand for rental of land in the Campbell River area over the relevant time periods (see Bowden cross-exam, vol. 44 p. 6098). Bowden's conclusion as to this continuous market demand over the period from 1921 to the present appears to have been contradicted by Nilsen at p. 18 of his report [CM-72]:
"It appears therefore that the predominant growth in the Campbell River area has occurred since the 1950's, and there is little evidence to support the potential for extensive leasing on the reserve prior to this time ... From this brief review, as well as consideration of the historic leasing patterns observed in the previous sections of the report it would appear that the earliest probability for any significant leasing activity of the Reserve would have been in the 1960's."
Also it appears Bowden's estimate of rental revenues is on a gross not net basis, as there was no allowance for any vacancy factor, leasing costs, site preparation or servicing costs. Further, Bowden failed to make any allowance for the fact a logging company using the property solely for the purpose of dumping and sorting logs would not have required a total of 60 acres. Bowden agreed that he was not a forestry engineer and did not have any expertise regarding an opinion as to the area of land required for a particular logging related land use. Bowden also attributed a full rental value to the entire 60 acres of subdivision A from 1989 to the present even though this parcel of land was vacant and not used for any commercial or other purpose during this period. Therefore, if I accept Bowden's evidence I will have to factor in these contingencies in coming to a reasonable estimate of the lost use and benefit relating to this portion of the reserve.
[627]
Trebett attempted to analyze the actual area of land used for logging activities between 1907 and the present and concluded based on aerial photographs, maps, documentary evidence and personal observations that less than one-third of the total 60 acres was used for logging related activities. In his report Trebett concluded that at all relevant times no more than a maximum of 17.1 acres of land was ever used. I do note that Trebett reviewed and summarized 79 similar land use agreements between forest companies and Indian Bands to determine an appropriate rental rate for each of the categories of land use he identified. These included: right of way rental, 1907-1991; riparian rights, 1907-December 1992; land use 1907-1992 and gravel royalty and foreshore use, 1907-1992.
[628]
In my view, it is also necessary to consider a number of contingencies and costs with respect to Trebett's calculation. Trebett's assessment of the right of way charges was filtered through a logarithmic chart found at Appendix 4 of his report. Trebett entered, as data in this appendix, the flat rate per foot of right of way received by various Indian Bands for the rental of a right of way through their reserves. However, he neglected to include the additional amounts received by various Indian Bands on the volume passing over the right of way (see transcript, vol. 56, pp. 7613-7617). Trebett acknowledged that if the figures used in his logarithmic graph were too low so were his overall conclusions as to the value of the loss (see transcript vol. 56, p. 7611). Exhibit CM-141 reveals that the Wewaikai Band would have received in excess of $1.2 million additional revenue beyond that estimated by Trebett had Trebett assumed that the Band would have been able to negotiate a volume based charge similar to one of the other Band's on Trebett's list. Trebett also admitted quite candidly that he had no expertise in the area of addressing rental value of land for purposes other than for the forestry industry (vol. 56, pp. 7698-7699). Accordingly, he did not attempt to ascribe any rental value to a large portion of the subject property that he concluded would not have been necessary for logging purposes (vol. 56, p. 7698). For example, in 1992, when the land was not used for logging purposes he attributed no rental value to the property as his terms of reference related to forestry use of the land and he did not investigate other uses (see Trebett cross-exam, vol. 57 pp. 7748-7750).
[629]
Further, Trebett in his calculations did not allow for any deduction to account for various costs such as the construction of the dryland sort, dredging of the boom storage area and construction of the road/railway right of way and log dump. Trebett also did not make any deduction for costs usually associated with the development and management of land such as site preparation and servicing costs, vacancies, management, accounting and administrative expenses.
[630]
I am of the view that applying the contingencies noted above with respect to both Bowden's and Trebett's estimates, a fair and reasonable estimate of the lost use and benefit relating to this portion of the reserve would be in the area of $4,000,000, plus some factor updating this amount to the date of judgment.
Present Market Value Of Reserve No. 12
[631]
Two expert real estate appraisers gave evidence with respect to the present market value of Reserve No. 12. Campbell River called as its expert Miller who in fact had prepared a report for the Crown, and his report was produced as CR-4. Similarly, the Crown called as its expert Mr. Grant (Grant), who had prepared a report for the plaintiff, Campbell River.
[632]
Miller's opinion was that the value of Reserve No. 12 as of November, 1991 was $3,000,000. Prior to trial, counsel had agreed that the valuations of the reserves were to be assessed as at December 31, 1992, however, it appears Miller was not asked to update his valuation.
[633]
Miller used the direct sales comparison approach to determine the value of Reserve No. 12. This approach involves the use of sales figures for similar properties in order to determine the value of the subject property. From p. 32 of Miller's report, sales number 3 and number 4 of his comparables provided what was considered the best evidence of market value of the subject property (see pp. 29 and 30 of Miller's report). Miller then applied two adjustments to the sales figures for comparables 3 and 4, a time adjustment and a size adjustment. A time adjustment was necessary because the comparable sales were dated July 3, 1992 and September 29, 1992, respectively. The size adjustment was based on the fact that the subject property was 287.5 acres in size while the comparables were considerably smaller. As a result of these two adjustments, Miller concluded that as at November 1991, comparable 3 would have been reduced to $10,075/acre and comparable 4 to $10,553/acre. He then took these comparables and reached the conclusion that the value of Reserve No. 12 was $3,000,000.
[634]
Campbell River then undertook to adjust Miller's appraisal value to December, 1992, by applying the methodology used by Miller. In doing this, additional statistics for residential sales listed and sold by the Multiple Listing Service of the Vancouver Island Real Estate Board for the Residential category were produced for the month of December, 1992 (see CR-132 and appendix 13 of the Campbell River's written argument) showing the average residential sale for the month of December 1992 at $135,226, based on 23 sales.
[635]
It should be noted that CR-132 is the mathematical calculation produced during Grant's cross-examination using Miller's method of making time adjustments of comparables 3 and 4 forward to December, 1992 instead of backward to November, 1991. This resulted in positive time adjustment of 16.48% and 12.3 % in sales number 3 and number 4, respectively. Campbell River also made a size adjustment to Miller's report to reflect the actual size of Reserve No. 12 at 300 acres as opposed to 287.5 acres. I am satisfied, based on the resurvey of Reserve No. 12 found at p. 10 of Miller's report and p. 25 of Grant's report [C-131], that Reserve No. 12 is 300 acres in size. Applying Miller's methodology, sale number 3, based on a time adjustment to December, 1992 together with the same size adjustment he used, would have a value of $3,894,600 based on 300 acres. Sale number 4, based on similar adjustments, would have a value of $4,084,500. The value suggested by Campbell River of $3,989,550 is simply an average of these two amounts.
[636]
Grant appraised the market value of Reserve No. 12 at $2,500,000 [C-131] as of December 15, 1992. This appraised value included 50 residential lots developed by the Cape Mudge Indian Band valued at an average of $30,000 per lot. At p. 37 of his report Grant indicated that:
"Without consideration of developed lots, the land in a natural state but with logging road development and utilities would indicate a value of: 300 acres at $3,500 per acre = $1,050,000."
The Crown is of the view that weight should be given to Grant's assessed value of the property of $1,050,000 without consideration of the developed lots. This disregards Grant's admission that he did not properly understand the level of services and that his assessment of the land at $1,050,000 assumed no services.
[637]
Grant also used the direct sales comparison approach. However, during cross-examination Grant admitted that his researcher had failed to disclose comparable sales numbers 3 and 4, as noted in Miller's report. Grant also admitted that comparable number 4 was the closest comparable to the subject property and that comparable number 3 was highly relevant.
[638]
It was also revealed during cross-examination that Grant was incorrect in the assumption that the property did not have sewer and water services. I note that on p. 25 of Miller's report, Miller assumed that the property was serviced with an 8" sewer line and an 8" domestic water line to service residential development. Grant admitted during cross-examination that he had discussions with an employee of the Municipality of Campbell River after he completed his report, during which it was confirmed that the subject property had the services referred to in Miller's report.
[639]
In light of these two important deficiencies in Grant's valuation, I am satisfied that his report is of no assistance to me in determining the value of Reserve No. 12. I am also of the opinion that based on the evidence, Campbell River's adjustment of Miller's assessment in the amount of $3,989,550 as at December 31, 1992 is a reasonable value of Reserve No. 12. This amount will have to be adjusted accordingly, to date of judgment.
Loss Of Use Of Reserve No. 12
[640]
I note that counsel for Campbell River indicated that it is prepared to accept the method used by the Crown's expert, Trebett, to calculate damages for loss of use of Reserve No. 12.
[641]
The approach taken by Mr. Gyton (Gyton), the expert called by Campbell River, was to assume that the logging carried out by Mr. Zanatta on Reserve No. 12 in 1938 would not have occurred if the Reserve had been treated by the Crown as belonging to the Campbell River Indian Band as opposed to the Cape Mudge Indian Band. Gyton therefore carried out an evaluation of timber as if it had never been logged. As such, no evidence of damages of loss of rental value of Reserve No. 12 was adduced.
[642]
Trebett, the expert called by the Crown, in his report of March 8, 1993 [C-120] reviewed the actual revenues which were generated by Reserve No. 12 over the period from 1888 to 1992. I gather these revenues were based on Mr. Zanetta's logging activities in 1938 and included, stumpage, right of way fees, land leases and mining permits. Trebett calculated the revenues to be $224,452. Trebett then made two interest calculations. First, he calculated the simple interest at $317,594 arriving at a total revenue, of principal and interest of $542,046. He then added interest on the year to year rates listed for Band trust accounts as credited by the Department of Indian Affairs and compounded it, for a total of $1,331,975 to the end of December 1992.
[643]
At the request of counsel for Campbell River, Trebett made a revised calculation on the basis of a comment at p. 8 of his report that the haul cost component of the logging cost for 1991 logging may have been $1.00/metre too high. Trebett agreed on cross-examination that he could not be sure that the extra $1.00 was the result of specific truck shortages at the time of the operations because he did not do any independent verification of this. Trebett produced an amended calculation showing damages including compound interest of $1,334,109 based on this change.
[644]
I would like to make it clear that I am including compound interest in the valuations to reflect the investment return component of the amounts in issue. It is not considered as part of an award of prejudgment interest
.
[645]
Trebett noted in his report at p. 4 that all the revenues recorded by him were "gross amounts with no allowance for administrative costs". As such, I am of the view that in any assessment of compensation for loss of revenue one should include an allowance or a contingency for administrative costs incurred in generating the revenues noted in Trebett's report. Therefore a deduction of 10% should be made from the total.
[646]
Therefore, based on the evidence I am satisfied that $1,334,109 discounted by 10% is a reasonable assessment of the loss of use of Reserve No. 12. This amount will also have to be adjusted accordingly, to the date of judgment.
[647]
With respect to Cape Mudge's claim for punitive damages against the Crown, after reviewing the evidence I am satisfied that there is no basis upon which to award punitive damages against the Crown.
XII. INTEREST
[648]
I am satisfied from a review of the relevant statutory authorities, namely the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-50, as am. S.C. 1990, c. C-8, the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended and Part I of the British Columbia
Court Order Interest Act
, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 76 as well as the relevant jurisprudence, that the plaintiff Indian Bands are only entitled to prejudgment interest from February 1, 1992 (the date the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
came into force) to the date of judgment in accordance with the British Columbia law relating to prejudgment interest.
[649]
Subsections 31(1) and (6) of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
provide:
"31(1) Except as otherwise provided in any other Act of Parliament and subject to subs. (2), the laws relating to prejudgment interest in proceedings between subject and subject that are in force in a province apply to any proceedings against the Crown in any court in respect of any cause of action arising in that Province.
"31(6) This section applies in respect of the payment of money under judgment delivered on or after the day on which this section comes into force, but no interest shall be awarded for a period before that day."
As both plaintiffs' causes of action arose in British Columbia, the plaintiffs are only entitled to prejudgment interest from February 1, 1992 to the date of judgment in accordance with the British Columbia law relating to prejudgment interest in proceedings between subject and subject.
[650]
The relevant portions of Part I of the British Columbia
Court Order Interest Act
are set out below:
"1(1) Subject to s. 2, a court shall add to a pecuniary judgment an amount of interest calculated on the amount ordered to be paid at a rate the court considers appropriate in the circumstances, from the date on which the cause of action arose to the date of the order ...
"(2) The court shall not award interest under s. 1
(a) on that part of an order that represents pecuniary loss arising after the date of the order;
(b) where there is an agreement about interest between the parties;
(c) on interest or on costs; or
(d) where the creditor waives in writing his right to an award of interest.
"6. This part does not apply to a cause of action that arose before June 1, 1974."
The effect of the above noted provisions limits, in my view, the plaintiffs to an award of simple interest on any damages for a cause of action arising after June 1, 1974 for the period from February 1, 1992 to the date of judgment. As I understand, in accordance with the British Columbia
Court Order Interest Act
an award of interest is calculated on a simple basis as s. 2 specifically provides that "a court shall not award interest ... on interest" (see also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.)).
[651]
Prior to the coming into force of s. 31 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
on February 1, 1992, the Federal Court's jurisdiction to award interest against the Crown was prescribed by s. 36 of the
Federal Court Act
, which provided:
"36. In adjudicating on any claim against the Crown, the court shall not allow interest on any sum of money that the court considers to be due to the claimant, in the absence of any contract stipulating for payment of that interest or of a statute providing in such case for the payment of interest by the Crown."
It should be noted that s. 36 was amended by S.C. 1990, c. 8, s. 9 which provided that prejudgment interest against the Crown after February 1, 1992 was transferred to the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
. Therefore, any claim for an award of interest for loss of revenue prior to February 1, 1992 is governed by s. 36 and its predecessor s. 35 of the
Federal Court Act
.
[652]
I am satisfied after reviewing the statute and jurisprudence interpreting and applying s. 36 (and its predecessor s. 35) of the
Federal Court Act
that prior to February 1, 1992, the plaintiff Indian Bands are not entitled to prejudgment interest against the Crown. In this regard, I note specifically Collier, J.'s, comments in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at pp. 448-449:
"The plaintiffs brought their action in this court. It is true they had no other choice of forum. But this is a statutory court. Its jurisdiction, in respect of the subject-matter of claims, and over persons, and its jurisdiction in respect of the remedies and other relief it can grant, must be found in existing federal statute or federal common law ...
"Here the jurisdiction of the court, in respect of interest, is specifically spelled out and limited by s. 35 [of the
Federal Court Act
].
"Even if the plaintiffs' submission as to s. 35 were sound, they are confronted with the Canadian common law principle as laid down by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 132, per Taschereau, J., where earlier decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada were cited:
'It is settled jurisprudence that interest may not be allowed against the Crown, unless there is a statute or a contract providing for it:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
"Counsel for the plaintiffs contended there was no such rule; the Supreme Court of Canada decisions were either incorrectly decided or distinguishable.
"The principle laid down by the Supreme Court of Canada whether it be correct or incorrect, is clear. As a trial judge I am bound to follow the decisions of the Supreme Court."
Justice Collier's decision to deny interest against the Crown was upheld on appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada.
XIII. COSTS
[653]
This case has taken in excess of 80 days to complete. I can find no reasonable explanation why it was necessary for this case to have taken so long to complete.
[654]
As I indicated at the beginning of my reasons, the case before me arose out of two separate actions commenced in this court. The first action, T-2652-85, was commenced by the plaintiff, the Wewayakum Indian Band (the Campbell River Indian Band) against the Crown and the Wewaiakai Indian Band (the Cape Mudge Indian Band). Campbell River commenced its action arguing that because Order-in-Council 1036, passed in 1938, was also a conveyance of lands confirmed by the McKenna McBride Report and the Ditchburn Clark Inquiry by virtue of the attached Schedule of Indian Reserves, Campbell River had full right to believe that it was the beneficial owner of both Reserve No. 11 and Reserve No. 12. There is no doubt that the designated beneficiary of Reserve Nos. 11 and 12 per the attached Schedule was the Campbell River Indian Band and yet, they did not occupy Reserve No. 12. The Wewayakum Indian Band, in order to obtain the right to occupy Reserve No.12
had no alternative
but to commence legal proceedings against both the Crown and the Wewaikai Indian Band to enforce whatever rights they may have held pursuant to Order-in-Council 1036.
[655]
As I have stated in my reasons for judgment, I concluded that because of a clerical error Reserve No. 12 was inadvertently listed as a reserve of the Wewayakum (Campbell River) Indian Band. As we are dealing with an Order-in-Council, the only legal remedy available to the Campbell River Indian Band in terms of confirming their belief or altering the Order-in-Council was through the intervention of the court, for I am of the opinion that the court has the jurisdiction to amend an Order-in-Council, albeit on the very limited ground of clerical error. Further, Campbell River was in no way involved in the creation of the error in the Schedule of Indian Reserves that was eventually incorporated or attached to Order-in-Council 1036. Therefore, the action T-2652-82 commenced by the Campbell River Indian Band is dismissed without costs.
[656]
With regard to the action commenced by the Cape Mudge or Wewaikai Indian Band, T-951-89, I am satisfied, after a review of the procedure in the case at bar, that the Cape Mudge action was brought as an afterthought in preparing to defend the action commenced by the Campbell River Band. I am of the view that the decision to commence the action may have been unduly influenced by the advice of experts
and not based
on the documents that the Band had or should have had before the action was instituted. I am also satisfied that the trial was unduly extended because of the very weak nature of Cape Mudge's claim. Cape Mudge's presentation of evidence and submissions were unduly lengthy. Therefore, the action commenced by the Cape Mudge or Wewaikai Indian Band, T-951-89, is dismissed with costs on a solicitor client basis.
XIV. SUMMARY
[657]
As my reasons for judgment in the case at bar are exceeding lengthy and for the benefit of those readers who do not wish to review these reasons in their entirety, I have, for ease of reference, set out a summary of my findings:
1. The actions of the Campbell River Indian Band and the Cape Mudge Indian Band for declarations of ownership to Reserves No. 11 and No. 12, as well as their claim for compensation, including equitable and monetary compensation, against the Crown are dismissed. The action commenced by the Campbell River Indian Band against the Cape Mudge Indian Band is also dismissed. As such, the Campbell River Indian Band is the beneficial owner of Reserve No. 11 and the Cape Mudge Indian Band is the beneficial owner of Reserve No. 12.
2. The actions of the Campbell River Indian Band and the Cape Mudge Indian Band are statute barred by the
B.C. Limitations Act
as incorporated by s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
.
3. The limitation periods prescribed by the
B.C. Limitations Act
have been incorporated by reference as federal law pursuant to the provisions of s. 39 of the
Federal Court Act
. As such, these limitation periods apply as valid federal law to bar and extinguish the claims of the plaintiff Indian Bands. There is no application of provincial law in the case at bar.
4. The 30 year limitation period contained in s. 8 of the
B.C. Limitations Act
operates notwithstanding any postponement of the running of a limitation period pursuant to ss. 6 or 7 of the
B.C. Act
. Therefore, any cause of action which arose 30 years prior to either the commencement of the Campbell River action in 1985 or the Cape Mudge action in 1989 is statute barred. Neither lack of factual knowledge nor disability, nor concealment by the Crown, would be sufficient to postpone the running of the limitation period beyond 30 years from the date the original cause of action arose.
5. In the circumstances of the case at bar, I am satisfied that it would be inequitable for the plaintiff bands to enforce their claim. Therefore, the equitable defence of laches and acquiesence should apply to bar any claim for relief which is not statute barred.
6. I am satisfied that at law Indian reserves in the province of British Columbia were created in 1938 with the passage of BCOC 1036, dated July 1938. It was with the passage of this Order-in-Council that both administration and control as well as the proprietary interest in reserve lands was transferred from the province of British Columbia to Canada. This was the culmination of a process which began with the Reserve Commissioners defining lands to be set aside for the Indians of British Columbia.
7. I am satisfied Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were not created at law in 1888 and that these reserves were not allotted by Green at that time to the Wewaikai Band as Wewaikai Reserves. I agree that Green surveyed Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 in 1888, but he had no authority to allot reserves to any Indian Band. His authority was limited to determining the extent and boundaries of the reserves.
8. I am satisfied there was a clerical error in the 1913 Schedule of Indian Reserves which made it appear that Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were designated for the Campbell River Indian Band and that this error was incorporated into the Schedule of Reserves attached to Order-in-Council 1036. I agree that Order-in-Council 1036 was a conveyance of all the lands encompassed in the McKenna McBride Report and the Ditchburn Clark Inquiry, by means of the attached Schedule of Indian Reserves, designating the beneficiaries of the reserves. However, I have determined that there was a clerical error in the Schedule which incorrectly designated Reserve No. 12 as a Campbell River Reserve. I have also determined that, in the circumstances of this case, I have the jurisdiction to correct this clerical error. I wish to make it perfectly clear that I have in no way invalidated the order in council, I am simply correcting a clerical error in the attached Schedule of Indian Reserves. Therefore, in terms of entitlement to the Reserves No. 11 and No. 12, the status quo is preserved.
9. After examination of the documentary evidence, together with what I have found to be the cohesiveness of the Laichkwiltok Indians as a group and the mandate of the Reserve Commission as well as the practice followed by the Reserve Commissioners (particularly O'Reilly in recommending the allocation of reserves) I have found that Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were originally defined and approved for the use of the Laichkwiltach Indians. In other words, originally there was no recommendation or designation to an individual subgroup with respect to each reserve. Eventually these reserves were assigned to the Campbell River Indian Band and the Cape Mudge Indian Band.
10. As I indicated above, Green had no authority to allot reserves. I am also satisfied that the "Wewayakay" notion on Green's sketch map attached to his Minute of Decision has no legal relevance to the disposition of the issues in the case at bar.
11. In terms of the approval of the reserves in 1889, this was not a final approval as the approval could not have been final until the passage of the requisite Orders in Council conveying title, administration and control to the Federal Government.
12. Reserves No. 11 and No. 12 were subsequently designated for the Campbell River Indian Band and the Cape Mudge Indian Band, respectively, in accordance with the desires of the Indians at the meeting in 1907, recorded by Halliday in his report of March 23, 1907.
13. On March 20, 1907, the Cape Mudge Indian Band passed a resolution, the purpose of which was to settle the difference of opinion between the Cape Mudge Indian Band and the Campbell River Indian Band regarding the right to fish in the Campbell River, as well as to inform the Department of Indian Affairs of the views of the Indians regarding the ownership of the reserves. For this purpose, it was "necessary to get an expression of opinion from the Indians regarding the ownership of this Reserve [Reserve No. 11]" so that the Department could amend its records and "on the strength of the resolution of the Reserve  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  River could be gazetted as belonging to the Wewaiaikum band".
14. Based on a reading of the text of the 1907 Resolution together with the background leading up to the passage of the resolution, I am satisfied that the resolution emphasized as its objective the resolution of a difference of opinion of the Cape Mudge and Campbell River Indians as to ownership of Reserve No. 11 as well as the resolution of a fishing dispute. Reserve No. 12 was not a part of the 1907 Resolution.
15. After reviewing the jurisprudence and the arguments, I am satisfied that the surrender provisions of the
Indian Act
of 1906 do not apply to transactions between Indians of the same group or tribe in respect of a resolution of a dispute.
16. I am also satisfied that the surrender provisions of the 1906
Indian Act
do not apply to the 1907 resolution as the resolution effected neither a sale, lease or alienation.
17. Upon receipt and approval of the 1907 Resolution by Vowell, a handwritten annotation was made to a copy of the schedule of Indian reserves. Unfortunately, the notation and the ditto marks below made it appear that Reserve No. 12 was allocated to the Campbell River Indian Band. This hand written annotation was eventually incorporated into subsequent published Reserve Schedules. As I indicated earlier, I am satisfied that this listing occurred as a result of a clerical error and was never intended to have any legal effect. I am also satisfied there was no intention to confirm the allocation of Reserve No. 12 to the Campbell River Indian Band.
18. The mandate and the authority of the McKenna McBride Commission makes it clear that:
a) the function of the Commission was to resolve as between the Province and the Dominion Governments the size and number of Indian reserves in British Columbia. Once the number and size was confirmed, the legal title to these reserves could be conveyed by the Province to the Federal Government so as to resolve the issue of the provincial reversionary interest;
b) the Commission had the authority to confirm the acreage and allocation of individual reserves; and
c) the Commission had no authority to reallocate reserves.
19. There is no dispute that the Crown owes a fiduciary duty to Indians. In the case at bar I have determined that the Crown owed a duty to both bands equally. However, on the facts I am satisfied that there was no breach of fiduciary duty by the Crown to either the Campbell River Indian Band or the Cape Mudge Indian Band. Employees of the Crown certainly made mistakes, but I am satisfied, on a review of the facts, that actions of the employees of the Crown did not amount to a breach of fiduciary duty. I am also satisfied, after a review of the evidence, that I cannot make a finding that the Crown or its employees deliberately misrepresented material facts to the plaintiff Indian Bands or failed to prudently advise the plaintiffs. The documentary evidence supports the view that the Indian Bands were informed and were aware of the Department's position regarding the allocation of Reserves No. 11 and 12 throughout the century.
20. I am satisfied that the conduct of both the Campbell River Indian Band and the Cape Mudge Indian Band post McKenna McBride Commission was and is inconsistent with the present claims to ownership of Reserve No. 11 and Reserve No. 12.
21. I am of the view that in the absence of evidence to the contrary, the only inference that can be drawn is that the Cape Mudge Indians who signed the Declaration of Chief and Principal Men in 1936, did so with full knowledge of its contents and effect.
22. With respect to the Declaration of the Chief and Principal Men sworn by the Campbell River Band in 1936, I am satisfied there is no evidence to impeach the significance of this declaration or that the individuals who swore the declaration did so other than with full knowledge of its contents and of their own free will.
[658]
Therefore, for the reasons noted above, the action of the Wewayakum Indian Band (the Campbell River Indian Band) against the Crown and the Wewaiakai Indian Band (the Cape Mudge Indian Band), T-2652-85, is dismissed without costs. The action of the Wewaiakai Indian Band (the Cape Mudge Indian Band) against the Crown, T-951-89, is also dismissed, with costs on a solicitor client basis.
[659]
The counterclaim by the Wewaiakai Indian Band (the Cape Mudge Indian Band) against the Wewayakum Indian Band (the Campbell River Indian Band) is dismissed without costs.
Actions dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/ldl
[End of document]