[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: The Defendant, Her Majesty the Queen (Crown) applies for an order striking out the Statement of Claim of the Plaintiffs as against her pursuant to rule 419 of the Federal Court Rules.
[2]
In the Motion to Strike, the Crown states that in support of the Application to Strike will be read the Affidavit of Chief Leo Pretty Youngman.
[3]
The Defendants, Leo Pretty Youngman, Margaret Waterchief, Levi Manyheads, James Munro, Clifford Manyguns, Percy Yellowfly, Lila Healy, Mario Waterchief, Frank Turning Robe, Hubert Lowhorn, Adam Solway and Leonard Goodeagle apply for an order seeking the following relief:
(a) striking out the Statement of Claim as disclosing no cause of action;
(b) determining as a preliminary point, questions of law dealing with the Statement of Claim, including whether the Plaintiffs are barred from bringing such an action for failure to appeal the election pursuant to the Indian Band Election Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 952;
(c) determining that this Honourable Court has no jurisdiction with respect to the matters complained of;
(d) leave to the Defendants to enter a conditional appearance; and
(e) such further and other relief as the Court deems reasonable and the circumstances of the case may require
under rules 401, 419 and 474 of the Federal Court Rules.
[4]
The facts leading up to the present application can best be summarized as follows:
[5]
The Plaintiffs began the present proceeding by filing a Statement of Claim on April 21, 1986. The Plaintiffs describe themselves as Treaty Indians and are members of the Blackfoot Band of Indians Number 146. They state that they are bringing the present action on behalf of themselves and other dissident members of the Blackfoot Band of Indians (Paragraph 1 of Statement of Claim).
[6]
The Defendant, Leo Pretty Youngman, was elected as Chief of the Blackfoot Band of Indians on December 18, 1985 and the other individual Defendants were elected, on the same date, as Band Councillors. These Defendants shall be referred to as "Chief and Council" (Paragraph 2 of Statement of Claim).
[7]
In paragraph 5 of the Statement of Claim, the Plaintiffs allege that the said election was "unlawful and invalid and contrary to the provisions of the Indian Act R.S.C. 1970, c. 149, and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms".
[8]
Paragraph 6 of the Statement of Claim lists the following as particulars of the allegedly corrupt practices that invalidated the election:
"(a) discrimination against eligible voters on grounds of residence;
"(b) failure to conduct said election according to law;
"(c) improper payment of treaty money to voters on election day."
[9]
Insofar as Her Majesty the Queen is concerned, paragraph 8 of the Statement of Claim, the Plaintiffs state that her representatives, the Attorney General of Canada and David Crombie were acting as Trustee for the benefit of Plaintiffs, and that their failure to ensure that the election was conducted according to the law constitutes a breach of trust causing the Plaintiffs "grave and irreparable damage."
[10]
The Plaintiffs, in their Statement of Claim, pray for the following relief:
"a) A declaration from this Honourable Court declaring the said election is void and is a nullity;
"b) An Order for the resignation of the Defendants, the Chief and Council;
"c) An Order in the nature of quo warranto quashing the election of the Defendants, the Chief and Council;
"d) Damages from the Defendants, Her Majesty the Queen for breach of trust;
"e) Costs of this action;
"f) Such further and other relief as this Honourable Court deems just."
[11]
Because the legal issues raised by the two separate Defendants, "Crown" and "Chief and Council", differ, I shall deal with each one separately.
Crown
[12]
At the commencement of argument by Counsel for the Crown, I asked him under what subsection of rule 419 is his Application to Strike being made. He informed me that the Crown's Application to Strike was being made under rule 419(1)(a) of the Federal Court Rules.
[13]
Upon being so advised, I informed Counsel for the Crown that in virtue of rule 419(2) no evidence can be admissible on such an application. I therefore informed Counsel that I cannot consider the Affidavit of Leo Pretty Youngman produced by the Crown in support of the application.
[14]
Rule 419 of the Federal Court Rules, concerning the striking out of pleadings, reads as follows:
"Rule 419.(1) The Court may at any stage of an action order any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that
(a) it discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, as the case may be,
(b) it is immaterial or redundant,
(c) it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious,
(d) it may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action,
(e) it constitutes a departure from a previous pleading, or
(f) it is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court,
and may order the action to be stayed or dismissed or judgment to be entered accordingly.
"(2) No evidence shall be admissible on an application under paragraph (1)(a).
"(3) In this Rule, 'departure' means that which is prohibited by rule 411."
[15]
The Plaintiffs allege that the Crown is a Trustee of the Indian Band Members' Interests, and, as such, owed a duty to ensure that the band election was properly conducted.
[16]
Counsel for the Crown admitted that there may be a duty owing by the Crown but that this duty is a duty owing to the entire band, not to the particular Plaintiffs individually who are, in reality, the unsuccessful candidates in the election.
[17]
As Counsel for the Crown stated "the obligation is only to the Band".
[18]
This however, is a question of law, and as such, the Crown should be applying under Federal Court rule 474 for a determination of whether the Crown is or is not acting as a trustee and if yes, does this obligation enure only for the entire band and not for the individuals of the band.
[19]
I certainly do not intend to resolve this issue in the present judgment. It would seem to me that when an obligation is owed to a "band" then it would be owed to the individuals who compose the "band".
[20]
In any event, the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , dealt with s. 18(1) of the Indian Act, R.S.C. 1952 c. 149, which requires that reserve lands, intended by the band to be sold or leased to third parties, be surrendered to the Crown for the purpose of negotiating on behalf of the band with the third party. The Court held that s. 18(1) clearly imposes a trust, or at minimum a fiduciary duty, on the Crown, with respect to those reserve lands.
[21]
An earlier Supreme Court of Canada case, St-Ann's Island Shooting and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  also concerned reserve lands surrendered to the Crown. This case contains some very broad language from Mr. Justice Rand. Speaking with respect to s. 251 of the Indian Act, R.S.C. 1906, c. 81, in relation to the surrender of reserve lands, Mr. Justice Rand stated at page 219 that:
"the language of the statute embodies the accepted view that these aborigines are, in effect, wards of the the state, whose care and welfare are a political trust of the highest obligation."
[22]
Mr. Justice Ritchie, in the Bill of Rights case,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 1360, characterized the above quotation as a succinct statement of
"the responsibility of the Parliament of Canada in relation to the internal administration of the life of Indians on reserves."
[23]
It is correct, as was pointed out by Counsel for the Crown, the present case does not deal with reserve lands. It deals with elections. A matter different from the previous cases.
[24]
The question of whether or not the Crown was, at the time of the elections, a trustee of the Plaintiffs is not clear.
[25]
It is my belief that this question should not be dealt with summarily in a rule 419 motion to strike.
[26]
Counsel for the Crown attempted to bring his application under rule 419 (1)(f), the Statement of Claim is an abuse of the process of the Court.
[27]
The principal argument of the Crown under 419(1)(f) was that Plaintiff's action was "Doomed to Fail". Counsel claims that it was his belief that the Plaintiffs "cannot get a remedy in the final result and therefore ought to be struck".
[28]
With the greatest of respect for this argument, I am not prepared, at this stage of the proceedings, to state that the Plaintiffs "cannot get a remedy in the final result".
[29]
The Plaintiffs are asking for a number of conclusions. With the documentation before me, the Statement of Claim and the Affidavit, I am not in a position to strike Plaintiff's Statement of Claim.
[30]
Plaintiffs, as regards the Crown, ought to be allowed to bring before the Court whatever proof they may have as to whether or not the Crown was acting as their trustee. They are entitled to their "day in Court."
[31]
I therefore dismiss the Crown's application for an Order to Strike the Plaintiffs' Statement of Claim.
The Chief and Council
[32]
The Chief and Council are, in their application for an Order to Strike moving for the following relief:
"(a) striking out the Statement of Claim as disclosing no cause of action;
"(b) determining as a preliminary point, questions of law dealing with the Statement of Claim, including whether the Plaintiffs are barred from bringing such an action for failure to appeal the election pursuant to the Indian Band Election Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 952;
"(c) determining that this Honourable Court has no jurisdiction with respect to the matters complained of;
"(d) leave to the Defendants to enter a conditional appearance; and
"(e) such further and other relief as the Court deems reasonable and the circumstances of the case may require."
[33]
At the commencement of the argument on behalf of the Chief and Council, counsel for these individuals informed me that they were withdrawing, without prejudice to their rights to once again come before the Federal Court, conclusions (b), (c) and (d) contained in their Notice of Motion.
[34]
Therefore the only relief being sought by the Chief and Council is
"(a) striking out the Statement of Claim as disclosing no cause of action."
[35]
Counsel then informed me that he is basing his application under rule 419(1)(c), the action of Plaintiffs "is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious".
[36]
After making a review of the Notice of Motion filed by the attorney for "The Chief and Council" I cannot find any allegation that they are requesting an order from the Court on the ground found under 419(1)(c). The only ground mentioned in the Notice of Motion is under rule 419(1)(a).
[37]
Notwithstanding the above, I shall deal with the Application made by "the Chief and Council" both under rule 419(1)(a) and 419(1)(c).
[38]
The Statement of Claim as filed by the Plaintiffs is vague and incomplete, at best. It states that the Defendants were elected and alleges that the election was unlawful and invalid but does not allege that the Defendants were the cause of the alleged election improprieties.
[39]
The Chief and Council, in moving to strike out the Statement of Claim as disclosing no cause of action, are relying on rule 419(1)(a). The Courts have always displayed a reluctance to strike out pleadings under this rule.
[40]
According to the Supreme Court of Canada, the Court is obliged to read the Statement of Claim as generously as possible, and to accommodate any inadequacies in the form of the allegations which are merely the result of drafting deficiencies ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 481).
[41]
Generally, the Court is to assume that all allegations in the pleadings are true, and then whether or not there would be a reasonable cause of action ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 1).
[42]
I believe that in understanding the application of rule 419 to strike a Statement of Claim, Mr. Justice Pratte, as he then was in the Federal Court, Trial Division, in the case of David Creaghan, Executor of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  best explains the rule's application.
[43]
At page 735, Mr. Justice Pratte states:
"(1) On a motion to strike out a statement of claim made under rule 419, the Court may not, in order to determine whether or not the statement discloses a reasonable cause of action, take into consideration the evidence adduced in support of the motion. The Court, however, must take this evidence into consideration in deciding whether the statement of claim is frivolous, vexatious or otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court (rule 419(2)).
"(2) Inasmuch as a motion to strike out a statement of claim is made under rule 419(1)(a), the Court is not called upon to decide whether the allegations of the statement of claim, assuming them to be true, disclose a cause of action, but whether they disclose a reasonable cause of action.
"But when a motion is made before this Court under rule 419(1)(a), the court merely has to decide whether the plaintiff, assuming all the facts alleged in the statement of claim to be true,
has an arguable case
. (Underlining is mine)
"(3) Finally, in my view, a statement of claim should not be ordered to be struck out on the ground that it is vexatious, frivolous or an abuse of the process of the Court, for the sole reason that in the opinion of the presiding judge, plaintiff's action should be dismissed. In my opinion, a presiding judge should not make such an order
unless it be obvious that the plaintiff's action is so clearly futile that it has not the slightest chance of succeeding, whoever the judge may be before whom the case could be tried
. It is only in such a situation that the plaintiff should be deprived of the opportunity of having 'his day in Court'." (Underlinine is mine)
[44]
Applying the above test to the present Statement of Claim, the pleading would appear to meet this test, as it is not obvious that no reasonable, arguable cause of action exists. If the allegations found in paragraphs 5 and 6 are true, then clearly whoever is responsible for such illegalities is potentially liable.
[45]
More evidence, which only a trial can provide, is necessary to determine what illegal conduct, if any, occurred at the election, and which of the Defendants, if any, were responsible.
[46]
The Defendants have also posed the question of whether or not the Plaintiffs are barred from bringing the action because they failed to first pursue the appeal process provided for in the Indian Band Election Regulations.
[47]
Section 12(1) of the Regulations states:
"Within 30 days after an election, any candidate at the election or any elector who gave or tendered his vote at the election who has reasonable grounds for believing that
(a) there was corrupt practice in connection with the election,
(b) There was a violation of the Act or these Regulations that might have affected the result of the election, or
(c) a person nominated to be a candidate in the election was ineligible to be a candidate,
may lodge an appeal by forwarding by registered mail to the Assistant Deputy Minister particulars thereof duly verified by affidavit."
[48]
It is possible that the Plaintiffs may be barred from bringing this action because they failed to appeal the results of the election in accordance with section 12(1) of the Regulations.
[49]
Counsel for the Plaintiffs admitted to me that Plaintiffs did not appeal "because the same people who ran the election would be the persons to whom the appeal would be made to".
[50]
I do not intend to comment on the reason given by Plaintiff's Counsel.
[51]
It would be improper for me to rule whether or not the Plaintiffs are barred from taking the present action because they failed to follow the procedure set out in section 12 of the Indian Band Election Regulations. This question is a question of law to be dealt with under rule 474 of the Federal Court Rules or at trial. This question is not to be dealt with under rule 419(1)(c).
[52]
Counsel for "the Chief and Council" made long and detailed argument concerning the question of quo warranto.
[53]
The Plaintiffs, in one of their conclusions contained in their Statement of Claim requests "An Order in the nature of quo warranto quashing the election of the Defendants, the Chief and Council".
[54]
It is the contention of the Defendants that where a remedy (for appeal) is provided by statute, as is in this case, and where the remedy is not used, then quo warranto is not available.
[55]
I agree with Counsel that the general practice of the Courts is to refuse discretionary remedies where a party has failed to pursue alternative adequate remedies.
[56]
I was submitted the case of Regina ex rel.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the Quebec Court of Appeal refused a writ of quo warranto because the appellant failed to avail himself of other adequate remedies.
[57]
Counsel for "the Chief and Council, admitted that monies were distributed to all band members on the day of the election but qualified his statement by saying that the said money was legally distributed. He also states that "he has no quarrel with quo warranto, but here it is not available where there is an adequate other remedy to Plaintiffs which they have chosen not to recognize".
[58]
He also stated that the Courts will not use quo warranto in cases of contested elections.
[59]
This latter principle was stated by Mr. Justice Choquette in the Regina ex rel.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  warranto is not the way to contest an election, unless the law provides no other remedy."
[60]
All that I am being told by Counsel for the Chief and Council may be correct but the problem is to determine whether the appeal process contained in the Indian Band Election Regulations is, in fact, an adequate alternative remedy. This question strikes at the locus standi, and thus at the very foundation of Plaintiff's claim.
[61]
I believe that this question would be more appropriately dealt with at a trial where all the questions of law and fact can be put forward.
[62]
I cannot say, from reading the Statement of Claim and from reading the Affidavit of the Defendant Youngman and from listening to all the arguments presented to me that it is obvious that the Plaintiff's action is so clearly futile that it has not the slightest chance of succeeding, whoever the judge may be before whom the case could be tried.
[63]
The case, as it is, although possibly not very strong is arguable.
[64]
I am of the opinion that the Statement of Claim does not meet with the requirements of rule 408(1). It does not contain a precise statement of the material facts upon which the Plaintiffs rely.
[65]
I therefore order that the Plaintiffs amend their Statement of Claim, within 15 days of the Order issued in the present cause, in such a way as to provide a precise statement of all the material facts upon which they rely so that the Defendants will know the case which they have to meet.
[66]
The Notice of Motion of the Crown and the Notice of Motion of the Chief and Council are dismissed.
[67]
Costs to follow the outcome of the case.
Applications dismissed
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]