[1]
Dubé, J.
: This motion by the defendant is to strike out in its entirety the statement of claim in this action pursuant to rule 419(1)(a) on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of action within the jurisdiction of this court. In a nutshell, the issue to be resolved is whether or not this court has the jurisdiction to entertain a claim for royalties due and unpaid under the Patent Act. [See footnote 1].
[2]
The statement of claim alleges that the plaintiff, a Swedish Corporation, is the owner of Canadian patent no. 982,140 granted to it on January 20, 1976, in respect of an invention entitled "Phenoxy-Hydroxypropylamines and Their Preparation". On July 30, 1984, the Commissioner of Patents granted under s. 41 of the Patent Act to the defendant, a Canadian corporation, Interim Licence no. 659 Int and on January 23, 1985, licence no. 659 under the plaintiff's patent.
[3]
The plaintiff claims in the statement of claim that subsequent to September 30, 1984, the defendant sent no accounting statements to the plaintiff and made no payment of royalties. Pursuant to paragraph 9 of the licence a notice of termination was issued on the ground of those breaches. The unremitted royalty due as of January 22, 1985, was of $28,468.66. The plaintiff therefore claims that the plaintiff is entitled to an accounting before this court to determine the amount of royalty due and unpaid and an order to the effect that the defendant has breached the terms and conditions of the licences which are now automatically terminated because of the defaults aforementioned.
[4]
The defendant argues that these claims are matters of contract to be pursued before provincial courts and not properly matters falling under the Federal Court Act [See footnote 2]. Section 20 of the Act dealing with industrial property reads as follows:
"20. The Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction as well between subject and subject as otherwise,
(a) in all cases of conflicting applications for any patent of invention, or for the registration of any copyright, trade mark or industrial design, and
(b) in all cases in which it is sought to impeach or annul any patent of invention, or to have any entry in any register of copyrights, trade marks or industrial designs made, expunged, varied or rectified,
and has
concurrent jurisdiction in all other cases in which a remedy is sought under the authority of any Act of the Parliament of Canada or at law or in equity, respecting any patent
of invention, copyright, trade mark or industrial design." (My underlining)
[5]
Any jurisdiction of this court to entertain the plaintiff's claim would have to be under the authority of the Patent Act. However, s. 72 of the Patent Act provides that the grant of a licence operates as if it were embodied in a deed, therefore a contract between the parties. Subsection 72(1) reads as follows:
"72. (1) Any order for the grant of a licence under this Act, without prejudice to any other method of enforcement, operates as if it were embodied in a deed granting a licence executed by the patentee and all other necessary parties."
[6]
In a 1932 Exchequer Court of Canada decision William J. McCraken and Concrete Pipe Limited and Thomas Watson [See footnote 3], the plaintiffs' claim was that the defendant had infringed the patent in question by selling tile making machines in prohibited territory defined in a second agreement. The court held that the issue between the parties was one relating to an alleged breach of contract affecting property and civil rights and that it has no jurisdiction to entertain such an action. Maclean, J., said at page 87 that the allegation "that the defendant had sold three machines to persons within the prohibited territory, does not suggest infringement but possibly a breach of contract".
[7]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  wherein the plaintiff pleaded that the first inventor of the subject matter of the patent application created the invention while employed by the plaintiff and that it was entitled to the benefit of the invention. The Exchequer Court struck out the paragraph on the ground that it had no jurisdiction to determine those issues: any jurisdiction would have to be found within s. 44 (now 45) of the Patent Act "as otherwise the appellant's claim, in para. 8, was one which dealt with property and civil rights and which fell within the jurisdiction of the provincial Courts". The former s. 44 and the present s. 45 deal with conflicting applications for patents. Rinfret, J., said as follows at page 39:
"It is undoubtedly true, as stated by the learned President, that the Exchequer Court has no jurisdiction to determine an issue purely and simply concerning a contract between subject and subject; ... but here the subject-matter of the appellant's allegation only incidentally refers to the contract of employment."
[8]
The Supreme Court found that the allegation primarily concerned the invention and allowed the appeal.
[9]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the court has no jurisdiction where the issue is purely and simply the rights under a contract between subject and subject. But, where the subject-matter of the plaintiff's allegation may well only incidentally refer to a contract between the parties and may lead to the result that the plaintiff is entitled to the rights from the invention, the pleading should be accepted and the issue be determined by the trial judge.
[10]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  application for stay as he found the action of the plaintiff on its face to be an action for the infringement of a patent, which is a matter within the jurisdiction of the court. He said, however, at pages 50 and 51:
"The jurisprudence cited by counsel for defendant in support of his contention that when a matter concerns primarily a breach of contract and only incidentally deals with patent infringement, the Court has no jurisdiction, has no application here as the issue before this Court is clearly one of patent infringement, the contract not even being invoked by plaintiff."
[11]
In the instant case, the plaintiff argues that it is seeking and is entitled to the remedy provided by s. 41(4) of the Patent Act. The section stipulates that the Commissioner shall under certain conditions grant to the applicant a licence under any patent relating to medicine. The section directs that in settling the terms of the licence and fixing the amount of royalty, or other consideration payable, the Commissioner shall have regard to the welfare of the public, consistent with giving due reward to the patentee.
[12]
In my view, that section does not clothe the Federal Court with the jurisdiction to preside over the collection of unpaid royalty, which is primarily a matter arising under a contract between subjects and only incidentally relates to the granting of a licence by the Commissioner. The purpose of the section is to insure that the public has access to medicine at the lowest possible price (consistent with due reward to the patent holder). Section 41(4) does not provide a statutory remedy with reference to unpaid bills.
[13]
The plaintiff relies mostly on a 1955 Exchequer Court decision Composers, Authors and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  did not pay its licence fees for the performance of a musical work in which the plaintiff owned the performing rights. The plaintiff alleged that the said performances by the defendant after the suspension of a licence constituted infringements of its copyright, that it had suffered damage by reason thereof, and sought to recover for the said infringement in addition to the unpaid licence fees. Thorson, P., remarked as follows at pages 249 and 250:
"At the commencement of the trial I had doubt whether the plaintiff had a right to sue for license fees in this Court. This was based on the assumption that the plaintiff's cause of action was based on a contract between subject and subject. My doubt was twofold, firstly, whether this Court had been vested with jurisdiction to entertain such an action and, secondly, if so, whether it was within the competence of Parliament to vest such jurisdiction in it.
"I am now satisfied that there is no reason for this doubt. A consideration of the relevant statutes makes it clear that this Court has been vested with jurisdiction to hear and determine such an action as this. I refer first to section 22(c) of the Exchequer Court Act, R.S.C. 1927. Chapter 34, as amended by section 3 of chapter 23 of the Statutes of Canada, 1928, which reads as follows:
'22. The Exchequer Court shall have jurisdiction as well between subject and subject as otherwise,
(c) in all other cases in which a remedy is sought under the authority of any Act of the Parliament of Canada or at Common Law or in Equity, respecting any patent of invention, copyright, trade mark, or industrial design.'
"In my view, the present action is within the ambit of this enactment for the plaintiff seeks a remedy respecting copyright under the authority of an Act of the Parliament of Canada, namely, subsection (8) of section 10B of the Copyright Amendment Act, 1931, which I have already cited. The plaintiff issued a license to the defendant to perform musical works in which it owned the performing rights, a segment of copyright, and Parliament has given it a statutory remedy against its licensee. The action is thus not an action to enforce a contractual right but to enforce a statutory remedy. In my view, this sufficiently distinguishes the present case from  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  as enacted by section 7 of the Copyright Amendment Act, 1931, which reads as follows:
'20(6) The Exchequer Court of Canada shall have concurrent jurisdiction with provincial courts to hear and determine all civil actions, suits or proceedings which may be
instituted for violation of any of the provisions of this Act
or to enforce the civil remedies provided by this Act.'
"This section disposes of any doubt that Parliament has given this Court jurisdiction to hear and determine such an action as this for it is clearly a civil action to enforce the civil remedy provided by subsection (8) of section 10B of the Copyright Amendment Act, 1931. In view of the enactments to which I have referred I have now no hesitation in finding that this Court has been vested with jurisdiction to hear and determine an action for license fees in respect of the issue of a license by a performing rights society such as the plaintiff for the performance of musical works in which it owns the performing rights."
[14]
With all due respect, that decision under the Copyright Amendment Act, 1931 is of no assistance to the plaintiff. That Act is dissimilar in many respects to the Patent Act. In the former Act, the right to sue for the amounts approved by the Copyright Appeal Board was expressly conferred by subs. 10B(8) which stipulated that "the society, association or company concerned may respectively lawfully sue for or collect" its fees or royalties. That section clearly provided a statutory remedy to collect unpaid royalties. Whereas the Patent Act affords no such remedy to the patentee. On the contrary, it states under s. 72(1), already cited, that the grant of a licence operates as a contract between the patentee and the licencee "without prejudice to any other method of enforcement". Again, the instant action against the licencee is primarily for the enforcement of a contract between the parties and deals only incidentally with matters under the Patent Act.
[15]
Consequently, the statement of claim herein will be struck out in its entirety pursuant to rule 419(1)(a) on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of action within the jurisdiction of this court.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/cio
Footnotes
1. R.S.C. 1970, c. P-4
2. R.S.C. 1970, c. 10 (2e Supp.)
3. [1932] Ex. C.R. 83
4. (1941), 1 C.P.R. 30 (S.C.C.)
5. (1971), 3 C.P.R.(2d) 97 (F.C.T.D.)
6. (1975), 19 C.P.R.(2d) 46 (F.C.T.D.)
7. [1955] Ex. C.R. 245
[End of document]