[1]
MacKay, J.
: In this application for judicial review the applicants seek an order setting aside the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "tribunal"). By that decision, dated August 17, 1994 it was determined that the applicants are not Convention refugees.
[2]
The applicants are a mother, Ljudmilla Pehtereva, and her two minor children, a daughter, Inna, now 14 years of age and a son, Kirill, now ten years of age. Since the childrens' claims were dependant upon that of their mother these reasons discuss the claims on the basis of the mother's circumstances and reference to "the applicant" is to her. All three applicants are citizens of Estonia.
[3]
The mother is of Russian and Tartar origin. She claimed to fear persecution if she were to return to Estonia, at the hands of Estonian nationalists from which she would not be protected by the state, on the basis of nationality, religion, political opinion and membership in a particular social group. The applicant had sought a Canadian visa before leaving her home in Tallinn, Estonia but a visa was denied on January 10, 1994. Four days later, travelling on an Estonian passport she and her children left Estonia by air for Germany and thence to the United States. Travelling by bus and taxi, they arrived in Canada on January 17 and then claimed to be Convention refugees.
[4]
The applicant had a senior job in the Revenue Department in Tallinn. She had worked there for a number of years and when a general requirement was introduced to demonstrate competency in the Estonian language she was not required to undergo a language test because she was held in high regard by her colleagues and superiors. However, before she left Estonia she was beginning to experience problems at work because of the fact that she spoke Russian.
[5]
Though she had paid little attention to her family roots until recent years, in 1992 she had joined the Tartar National Muslim Society and attended weekly meetings, to acquire some knowledge of her Tartar background. The Society ordinarily met at the home of one of its members and its meetings were relatively small, some ten to 18 members. In the Spring of 1993 she noticed a group of young people who taunted members of the Society upon leaving the meetings and out of concern she arranged for her husband to meet her and accompany her home. One evening in May she and her husband were walking to a bus stop accompanied by another Tartar and a group of men harassed them by shouting, pushing and kicking them. Their attackers ran off when a crowd, attracted by the applicant's screams, began to gather. The applicant and her husband reported the incident to a senior police officer and she then reported other earlier incidents of harassment following meetings of the Tartar Society. The officer took down the information, indicated that the police did not ordinarily provide help in such circumstances, and suggested she stop attending the meetings.
[6]
She ceased attending meetings in the summer months but in the autumn when she returned to the meetings she found fewer in attendance because of their fears. Coincidentally she experienced continuing harassment by ringing of her door bell at home in the evening hours by persons who would run off before anyone got to the door. In November, when she was returning home one dark night, having gotten off the bus she was seized by two men who led her into a dark open area and physically attacked her. They attempted to rape her but she strongly resisted them and, when the beam of headlights of a passing car caught them, her attackers kicked her and ran away. She saw their faces briefly in the light and recognized one of them as one of the attackers who had beaten her husband, her friend and herself some months before in May. After the beating she went home and some days later went to the hospital to see a doctor and then she reported the incident to the police. She did so at the same station and apparently with the same officer with whom she had previously filed a report. She told the officer she believed she was being harassed by fascists because of her nationality. He took down her statement, said they would try to investigate but indicated that he did not believe there were nationality problems in Estonia.
[7]
At the end of November, 1993, arriving home with her son one evening she found the family dog, who had been missing for a week, hanging in front of a window. When she sought to cover and remove the dead dog she found a note which said "the same may happen to you". Since her daughter was not at home, though she should have been, she went looking for her on the street and there found her lying, crying because she had seen the dog hanging. When her husband arrived home she told him of the incident and it was decided that she should not report the matter to police since it appeared they were not able or willing to assist, and further that it was becoming dangerous for her to stay in Estonia. Towards the end of December 1993, she met the mother of a member of the Tartar Society and learned from her that the member had been found hanging in a tree on December 24 and that there was no explanation for his death. The applicant and her husband then decided that she and their children should leave Estonia as soon as possible.
[8]
The claim of the applicants to be Convention refugees was heard by the CRDD in June and July, 1994 and the tribunal's decision was rendered on August 17, 1994. By that decision the tribunal stated that the central issue was whether, if she were to return to Estonia, the claimant could avail herself of state protection against persecution by nationalists for reasons provided in the definition of Convention refugee. The tribunal stated:
"The recent decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Ward
conclusively ruled that state complicity in persecution is irrelevant, the key is protection. A two-fold test for determining whether or not a fear is presumed well-founded was set out by the court. The first presumption, that a fear of persecution is well-founded, is created when a subjective fear of persecution is combined with a state's inability to protect the claimant. In order that this presumption will not operate too broadly, the court put forward a second presumption, that a state is presumed to be capable of protecting its citizens, unless there is 'clear and convincing proof' of a state's inability to protect. In the view of the panel, the claimant has not presented us with such proof." (footnotes in tribunal's decision are here omitted)
[9]
The panel reviewed the evidence before it and concluded that the applicant had not taken all reasonable steps to obtain protection in her country before she sought international protection and therefore she had not presented clear and convincing proof to rebut the presumption of the state of Estonia's ability to protect her. Thus, it concluded that there is no "serious possibility" or "reasonable chance" that the applicant would be persecuted for any of the reasons in the definition of Convention refugee should she return to Estonia. Therefore, she was not a Convention refugee, and her children, whose claims were based upon hers, were also not Convention refugees.
[10]
For the applicants, a number of grounds are urged as a basis for setting aside the tribunal's decision. I deal first with those which concern errors alleged in findings of the tribunal in light of the evidence before it, and then with errors alleged in the proceedings.
[11]
It is urged that the tribunal erred, in concluding that there was not clear and convincing proof of the state of Estonia's ability to provide protection, a requirement of the applicant's claim in light of the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . That is the essence of the claim to be Convention refugees in this case, for the alleged persecution feared is at the hands of persons who do not represent the state, persecution which two reports to one local police officer did not alleviate. In assessing the applicant's fear the tribunal considered documentary evidence about Estonia, its democratic parliamentary and electoral institutions, the existence of human rights bodies, particularly concerned with alleged mistreatment of people of Russian origin in the country, and recent progress in relieving ethnic tensions. I am not persuaded that the tribunal erred in its conclusion that the applicant did not establish a basis for a reasonable conclusion that the state was unable or unwilling to provide protection.
[12]
In addition, I am not persuaded that the tribunal ignored documentary evidence provided by the applicant. That evidence, of newspaper and other articles with translations to English where necessary, is not specifically referred to by the tribunal, but in its decision it recorded its agreement with the Refugee Hearing Officer's observations that the most reliable evidence was from independent objective sources such as
Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International
and the Department of State
Country Reports
as opposed to anecdotal, newspaper articles. The sources referred to by the tribunal are sources regularly relied upon by refugee claims tribunals as providing generally objective information on country conditions. Reliance upon such sources cannot be characterized as error; even if the newspaper articles submitted by the applicant provided examples indirectly supportive of the applicant's claim, for it is trite law that the weight to be assigned to given documents or other evidence is a matter for the tribunal concerned. Even if the reviewing court might have assigned different weight or reached other conclusions that provides no basis for the reviewing court to intervene where it is not established that the tribunal has been perverse or capricious or its conclusions are not reasonably supported by the evidence. I am not persuaded that the tribunal's conclusions can be so classified in this case.
[13]
Finally, the tribunal's decision does not set out in precise terms why it preferred certain documentary evidence and not other evidence, but that does not constitute error. Here, the applicant's concern is primarily that the documentary and other evidence offered by the RHO was relied upon without specifying why evidence of the applicant was not. But that preference of the tribunal, related to evidence of the general circumstances within Estonia, of which the applicant's experience was but an example. The general circumstances based on documentary evidence from recognized sources provided the basis for objectively assessing the applicant's expressed fear. In my opinion, the tribunal did not err by ignoring evidence offered by the applicant, or by failing to specify reasons for preferring other sources of evidence, particularly in seeking an objective overview of circumstances within Estonia. Nor am I persuaded that the tribunal misunderstood or misstated the evidence of the applicant in any way significant for its ultimate finding that the applicant is not a Convention refugee, because it found no serious possibility or reasonable chance she would be persecuted for any reason set out in the definition of Convention refugee should she return to Estonia.
[14]
There are two respects in which it is urged that the tribunal erred in the conduct of its proceedings. The first concerns its treatment of the evidence offered by an expert witness called on behalf of the applicant. The tribunal did not state at the hearing whether or not it would accept the witness' testimony as that of an expert but in its decision it sets out
"We give no weight to the expert witnesses' [sic] testimony. At the commencement of the hearing the panel stated that they would enter the witnesses' [sic] curriculum vitae (CV) and that they would assess his expertise not only on the basis of his CV but on the quality of his testimony."
The decision then sets out the reasons for the tribunal's assessment of weight to be given to the expert's testimony: his CV did not reflect anything to show he was an expert on country conditions of Estonia or of problems of Russians in Estonia; the witness could not give sources for his opinions, other than reading and conversations, and his testimony was described by the tribunal as vague and general, or anecdotal, with examples of his testimony set out by way of illustration. One example, related to an affidavit presented by the expert reporting a telephone conversation he had with an Estonian parliamentarian, which affidavit the tribunal found to be vague, general and anecdotal, and the tribunal noted that it gave little weight to the contents of the affidavit.
[15]
Assessing the weight to be given to evidence, including that of an expert, is a matter for determination by the tribunal that hears it. Only in a most extraordinary case would a court on judicial review intervene because of the weight assigned by the tribunal to evidence. Only where it is clear on review that the tribunal acted unreasonably, and in relation to evidence upon which its findings were found to be perverse, would a reviewing court intervene. These circumstances are not here established. Rather, it seems clear the tribunal assessed the evidence of the witness in question and determined that it would be given little weight, for reasons it made clear. The evidence of a person introduced as an expert is not entitled automatically to acceptance. Whether or not it is given credence, and the weight to be assigned to it, will depend upon its relevance and general consistency with other evidence, presented to the tribunal.
[16]
The second respect in which the tribunal is said to have erred arises from alleged lack of fairness in its proceedings from what is described as constant interference in the presentation of the case, particularly by the Presiding Member constantly interrupting the examination by counsel, and by frequent examining of the expert witness on the bases of his opinions.
[17]
It is true that where an adjudicator interferes too aggressively in the presentation of a case before him or her, a reviewing court will not hesitate to intervene, in order to ensure fairness in the process. Counsel for the applicant referred to a number of cases concerning refugee claims where the court on an application for judicial review has intervened. In light of the jurisprudence and after careful examination of the transcript of the Refugee Division's hearing, I am not persuaded that intervention of the Presiding Member in this case warrants the conclusion that there was any unfairness in the hearing process. In this case some interventions were obviously intended to be helpful, others were to seek clarification, and still others to indicate matters about which the Presiding Member had some question. Those are all legitimate purposes. The tribunal has an obligation to make clear if it has a serious question in regard to the applicant's testimony and it is not always easy to achieve the proper balance between listening attentively and appropriately intervening. I am not persuaded that in this case the balance can be said to have been so disturbed as to constitute unfairness in the hearings of the tribunal.
[18]
For the reasons set out, an order goes dismissing the application for judicial review, in relation to Mrs. Pehtereva, the mother, and her two minor children whose claims were dependant upon hers.
[19]
I note that no questions were proposed by counsel for consideration as serious questions of general importance pursuant to s. 83(1) of the
Immigration Act
, and no questions are certified.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slm
[End of document]