[1]
Dubé, J.
: This application is for an order to set aside the decision made by the Minister of National Revenue on November 30, 1992, wherein the Minister denied the applicant's request for the cancellation of interest.
[2]
The two grounds for this judicial review application are first, that the Minister made his decision without regard to the facts, i.e., the interest levied upon the applicant arose primarily due to an error on the part of the Minister and secondly, that the Minister failed to observe procedural fairness in that the amount of interest is due to a processing delay on the part of the Minister.
[3]
In a nutshell, the applicant's clerk made an arithmetic error in determining the total income for 1990. He did not include annuity payments of $38,803 from Sun Life Canada in computing the terminal income tax return. The information was included and the T-4RSP slips issued by Sun Life of Canada were attached to the return but the amount was not included in the calculation for the total income.
[4]
By the notice of assessment dated September 9, 1991, the Minister assessed tax to the applicant based upon the total amount of income computed by the applicant. On September 26, 1991, the applicant requested a clearance certificate and by letter dated October 17, 1991, the respondent acknowledged receipt and advised that the request would be processed as soon as the relevant information had been reviewed.
[5]
As a result of that review, the omission to include the amount of $38,803 was discovered and on December 4, 1991, the applicant was so informed. The Minister reassessed the applicant on May 22, 1992, with an additional tax liability of $18,713.61 plus arrears interest of $2,412.04. It is the latter amount that the applicant claims ought to have been waived by the Minister under the new s. 220(3.1), a 1991 amendment which reads as follows:
"220(3.1) The Minister may at any time waive or cancel all or any portion of any penalty or interest otherwise payable under this Act by a taxpayer or a partnership."
[6]
Prior to the 1991 amendment, the governing s. 161(1) allowed the Minister no discretion to waive interest upon unpaid tax. The liability for interest payable under that section was also beyond the authority of the court to cancel. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.R. 303 (F.C.A.) at pp. 208-209 C.T.C.) The section reads as follows:
"161(1) Where at any time after the day on or before which a taxpayer is required to pay the remainder of his tax payable under this Part for a taxation year,
(a) the amount of his tax payable for the year under this Part exceeds
(b) the aggregate of all amounts each of which is an amount paid at or before that time on account of his tax payable and applied as at that time by the Minister against the taxpayer's liability for an amount payable under this Part for the year.
the person liable to pay the tax shall pay to the Receiver General interest
at the prescribed rate on the excess computed for the period during which that excess is outstanding." (my emphasis)
[7]
The new section 220(3.1) is applicable with respect to penalties and interest from the 1985 taxation year but no decision has yet been released on its interpretation.
[8]
At the outset, I should point out that it is not for the court to decide whether the interest otherwise payable by the taxpayer ought to be waived or cancelled. It is within the discretion of the Minister. The function of the court in this judicial review, as I understand it, is to determine whether or not the Minister failed to observe procedural fairness or erred in law in making his decision, as outlined under section 18.1(4) of the
Federal Court Act
.
[9]
A duty to act fairly, in general, means a duty to observe the rudiments of natural justice in the exercise of administrative functions. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(2d) 353; 106 D.L.R.(3d) 385; 13 C.R.(3d) 1 at p. 630 S.C.R..). At common law, a duty to exercise procedural fairness lies on every public authority making an administrative decision which is not of a legislative nature and which affects the rights, privileges or interests of an individual. (See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.(3d) 35; [1986] 1 W.W.R. 577; 23 C.C.C.(3d) 118; 24 D.L.R.(4th) 44 at p. 653 S.C.R. and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 33; 23 C.C.C.(3d) 97, at pp. 623-24 S.C.R.). It involves the compliance with only some of the principles of natural justice. Between judicial decisions, and those which are discretionary and policy-oriented, can be found a myriad of decision-making processes with a flexible gradation of procedural fairness through the administrative spectrum. (See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at p. 629 S.C.R.). The existence of a duty to act fairly will depend on the existence of three factors: (1) the nature of the decision to be made by the administrative body; (2) the relationship existing between that body and the individual; and (3) the effect of that decision on the individual's rights. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 81; 69 D.L.R.(4th) 489; [1990] 3 W.W.R. 289 at p. 669 S.C.R.). A duty to observe procedural fairness need not be expressed in explicit terms and it may not be implied in every case. It is always a question of construing the statutory scheme as a whole in order to see to what degree, if any, the legislator intended the principle to govern. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 1).
[10]
Applying these principles and criteria to the case at bar, it cannot be said that the Minister did not act fairly towards this taxpayer. The applicant was afforded full opportunity to make representations. The Minister's statutory delegate exercising the discretion had before him the relevant considerations on which to base a decision. The three departmental officers involved, namely the Appeals Officer, the Section Chief of the Appeals Division and the Chief of Appeals testified by way of affidavit that they considered the following facts:
"(a) the request made by the applicant and the reasons therefor;
(b) in filing its income tax return for the 1990 taxation year, the applicant did not include income in the amount of $38,803.03 in its computation of total income;
(c) the applicant does not dispute its tax liability;
(d) the 'self-assessing' system of taxation puts the onus on the taxpayer to properly report income;
(e) there are a number of elective returns that can be filed in the year of death;
(f) the guidelines established in Information Circular No. 92-2 and Internal Directive ARD-92-01 dated April 16, 1992 were not met in these circumstances."
[11]
The guidelines in question stipulate that the cancellation or waiver of interest is not a widely available option but is one limited to circumstances beyond the taxpayer's control. Section 5 reads as follows:
"5. Penalties and interest may be waived or cancelled in whole or in part where they result in circumstances beyond a taxpayer's or employer's control. For example, one of the following extraordinary circumstances may have prevented a taxpayer, a taxpayer's agent, the executor of an estate, or an employer from making a payment when due, or otherwise complying with the Income Tax Act:
(a) natural or human-made disasters such as, flood or fire;
(b) civil disturbances or disruptions in services, such as a postal strike;
(c) a serious illness or accident; or
(d) serious emotional or mental distress, such as death in the immediate family."
[12]
The respondent's affiants were not cross-examined and their evidence has not been otherwise contradicted. Therefore, I fail to see how the Minister has not carried out his duty to act fairly in this matter. Again, it must be borne in mind that the original error was committed by the clerk of the taxpayer and not by the officers of the Minister and, since the whole Canadian income tax system is based on self-assessment, the officers of the Minister cannot be blamed for not having detected the taxpayer's own mistake sooner.
[13]
As to the second prong of the application, namely the alleged processing delay on the part of the Minister, the facts cited above indicate that all steps were taken within a fairly reasonable time and the affidavits of the three officers indicate the various steps that had to be taken within that time frame.
[14]
Consequently, this application for judicial review is dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/dlr
[End of document]