[1]
Cullen, J.
: The applicant, John Robert Lee (Lee), seeks orders in the nature of certiorari and mandamus as well as injunctive relief in respect of investigation reports containing allegations of improper behaviour on the part of the applicant and decisions resulting from these reports, not to reemploy the applicant at HMCS Quadra (Quadra) including decisions relating to redress of grievance pursuant to s. 29 of the
National Defence Act
. I have set out the specific requests for relief (as outlined in the notice of motion) below:
"1) Certiorari quashing the following:
a) the investigation reports dealing with the applicant;
b) the decision of the respondents, Lieutenant Commander Gentles, Major MacKenzie and Commander Hinshaw, made on September 17, 1990, not to reemploy the applicant at Quadra as a result of allegations contained in an investigative report dated August 31, 1990;
c) the decision of the respondents, Commander Nield and Colonel Fairbairn, made on September 13, 1990, not to reemploy the applicant at the Directorate of Cadets (DCDTS) as a result of the investigation of the applicant;
d) the decision of the respondent, Rear Admiral Cairns, made on April 12, 1991, denying the applicant's claim for redress of grievance under s. 29 of the
National Defence Act
.
"2) An injunction or mandamus requiring the respondents to collect and destroy all files, reports, correspondence, memoranda, notes and any other material relating to the investigation.
"3) An injunction enjoining the respondents from communicating to any other person the contents of the investigation report and any other documents referring to the investigations.
"4) An injunction enjoining the respondents from taking any further steps to review the applicant's security clearance on the basis of the investigation reports.
"5) An injunction or mandamus ordering the Chief of the Defence Staff or Rear Admiral Cairns or their successors in office to:
a) offer the applicant reemployment in the position from which he was excluded, or in an equivalent position;
b) consider the applicant for employment in 1992 as Commanding Officer (C.O.), Quandra, or an equivalent position, without having regard to any of the matter which are the subject of this application;
c) consider the applicant for employment in any other position for which he may apply without having regard to any of the matters which are the subject of this application.
"In the alternative, orders in the nature of the above as the appropriate and just remedy under s. 24 of the
Charter
."
GROUNDS FOR THE MOTION
[2]
1. The investigation and the decisions which are the subject of this application violated the rules of fairness and natural justice in that:
(a) the investigation in relating to the applicant was conducted in an unfair and prejudicial manner;
(b) the applicant was not provided with the particulars of the accusations against him or provided with particulars of these accusations or given an opportunity to rebut or explain the accusations.
2. The investigation and decisions at issue contravened orders and regulations of the Canadian Armed Forces, specifically, CFAO 19-32, CFAO 19-39 and CFAO 26-21.
3. The investigation and subsequent action against the applicant infringed his rights to security of the person and fundamental justice under s. 7 of the
Charter
.
4. The redress of grievance procedure under s. 29 of the
National Defence Act
failed to provide a fair, impartial and effective remedy to the applicant.
5. The applicant has suffered and continues to suffer severe and irreparable harm to his reputation and loss of employment opportunities as a result of the investigation and decisions resulting from the investigation. The relief is considered necessary to prevent continuation of the injury he felt he has suffered as a result of the respondent's actions.
BACKGROUND
[3]
The applicant, a Lieutenant Commander (LCdr) in the Canadian Forces Reserves (the Reserves), was employed effective April 18, 1989, as the Executive Officer (XO) of Quadra, a sea cadet training establishment located in Comox, B.C. Quadra operates from May to September and provides citizenship and adventure training in a military context for approximately 1300 sea cadets (ages 12 to 18) each year. Quadra is staffed by approximately 100 Cadet Instructor List (CIL) officers and 200 staff cadets. CIL officers are a part of the Reserve component of the Canadian Armed Forces. CIL officers serve part-time and are engaged in Class B Reserve Service (Hinshaw affidavit). Although the applicant was a CIL officer engaged in Class B Reserve Service, there is evidence that suggests that his appointment was to have been for a three year period, commencing in 1989 (Ex. A of Lee's affidavit). During the winter months, when cadet camp was not being held at Quadra, the applicant was employed at DCDTS, National Defence Headquarters (NDHQ) in Ottawa.
[4]
As there are a number of individual respondents involved in the decision making and redress process I have listed the names of the respondents, their rank and position held at the time of this application:
1) Rear Admiral Cairns (Cairns) - Commander, Maritime Forces Pacific;
2) Commander (Cdr) Hinshaw (Hinshaw) - Commanding Officer (CO) of Quadra and the applicant's superior officer;
3) Lieutenant Colonel (LCol) Gentles (Gentles) - Director Regional Operations of Pacific Regional Headquarters;
4) Major MacKenzie (MacKenzie) - Regional Cadet Officer, Pacific Regional Headquarters;
5) Commander (Cdr) Neild (Neild) - officer, Directorate of Cadets (DCDTS);
6) Colonel (Col) Fairbairn (Fairbairn) - officer, DCDTS;
7) Commander (Cdr) MacQuarrie (MacQuarrie) - Director Security Clearances;
8) Captain Cossette (Cossette) Base Security Officer, CFB Comox B.C. (Comox), Responsible for Military Police (MP) operations;
9) Master Corporal (MCpl) Schweitzman (Schweitzman) - Military Police (MP) at Comox;
10) Corporal (Cpl) Porter (Porter) - MP at Comox;
[5]
In April of 1989 the applicant moved from Ottawa to Quadra to assume his duties as XO. When cadet camp ended in September 1989, he returned to Ottawa and was employed at DCDTS. The applicant's Performance Evaluation for the period covering April 1989 to September 1989 indicated that he fully met or exceeded all requirements and demonstrated the potential to eventually command Quadra. The evaluation contained no adverse comments (Ex. B of Lee's affidavit).
[6]
In April 1990 the applicant returned to Quadra and resumed his duties as XO. In August of that year he became aware informally through military acquaintances that he was being investigated by the Military Police (MP)s, with regard to allegations of misconduct, improper behaviour and harassment. It seems that the MP investigation was initiated as a result of information received by one of the MP's in CFB Comox (Redress of Grievance File, contained in Ex. CC of Lee's affidavit).
[7]
According to the information contained in the Redress of Grievance File - Sequence of Events, Cossette, the Base Security Officer of Comox, completed a preliminary investigation of the applicant's conduct and forwarded his findings to Hinshaw, the Base Commander, in a memo dated August 22, 1990. No actual "improper sexual conduct" was confirmed but, based on interviews, there were noted instances of "improper conduct". An official investigation was then ordered, the results of which are outlined in the Military Police Investigation Report dated August 31, 1990 (Ex. V of Lee's affidavit).
[8]
On September 11 and 12, 1990, the applicant's investigation by the MPs and his termination as XO of Quadra were discussed by Neild and MacKenzie (Exs. D, E, F of Lee's affidavit).
[9]
Although Lee had no official word of an MP investigation, on September 13, 1990, he was advised by Neild that he was not going to be reemployed at DCDTS in the fall of 1990 because of the changes in staff requirements and limited funding (respondent's motion record Tab 1). The applicant was operating under the expectation that on the closing of the cadet camp he would return to DCDTS to work on the rewriting of the course training standards. However, according to the respondents, in 1989-1990 Neild had discussed this matter with the applicant and advised that he might not be rehired to work on rewriting the course training standards (page 3 respondents' motion record). No affidavit was filed by Neild.
[10]
On September 17, 1990, LCol Gentles, Hinshaw and MacKenzie met to discuss the findings of the MP's report. After reviewing the report it was determined that there was substantial and sufficient evidence of inappropriate conduct on the part of the applicant to justify a decision not to reemploy him at Quadra. (Redress of Grievance - Sequence of Circumstances, Ex. CC of Lee's affidavit and Hinshaw affidavit). It was also decided that as the applicant was near the end of his Class B Service he would be allowed to finish his term of service, but would not be engaged at Quadra the following summer. However, as the applicant was leaving Quadra and returning to Ottawa, it was thought best to inform him of the allegations against him and the decision not to reemploy him at Quadra (Hinshaw affidavit).
[11]
Later on that day (September 17, 1990) the applicant met with Hinshaw and was informed officially for the first time that an MP investigation had been conducted into allegations regarding his conduct, that the investigation was concluded and that a report had been prepared and that "things did not look good" (Hinshaw affidavit). However, the details of the investigation could not be disclosed to the applicant nor could he be shown a copy of the report. According to information contained in the Redress to Grievance File (Ex. CC) and the Hinshaw affidavit Hinshaw did provide the applicant with the following information:
1) complaints ranged from harassment to unnecessary touching of cadets during inspection;
2) complainants ranged from staff cadets to senior staff officers;
3) although much of the report contained hearsay and personal opinions of the witnesses, there were complaints from very credible individuals whose statements had been verified such as:
a) slapping a female staff officer on the buttocks during a casino night function;
b) "wolf whistling" at a female officer as she passed by him on her way to the gym;
c) touching cadets unnecessarily during inspections, including smoothing out centre creases on the front of female cadet's gunshirts;
d) saying to the security officer "Oh well, I'm the XO" after he confronted the applicant regarding his drinking and driving (this was subsequently identified as hearsay);
4) the MP report contained information regarding general complaints and feelings such as complaints by females that they felt uncomfortable when the applicant asked them out and felt that he was "hitting on them", a general feeling that he spent an unusual amount of time flirting with junior females and that it was reported that he was observed kissing and hugging junior officers during and after mess functions.
[12]
The applicant was also informed that on the basis of this report Gentles had decided that the applicant would not be considered for further employment as XO at Quadra.
[13]
The applicant denied any wrongdoing and denied putting any females in compromising positions and could not recall the incidents listed above. According to Hinshaw, the applicant stated that he did not feel that he could provide information unless he knew more details of each accusation but did admit going out with three junior officers (Hinshaw affidavit).
[14]
Until this meeting, the applicant had never been "officially" informed of any allegations of misconduct or improper behaviour, or that he was the subject of an investigation. Further, the applicant had never been interviewed by the MPs or anyone else regarding any allegations or accusations. The applicant was unsuccessful in his attempts to obtain written confirmation of the decision not to reemploy him from Hinshaw (Ex. G of Lee's affidavit).
[15]
On September 20, 1990, the applicant received a copy of his Performance Evaluation for the period April 1990 to September 1990 which contained the following comment:
"He has, however, experienced some problems dealing and relating to staff members which has resulted in some questions regarding his personal conduct being raised. [Cdr Hinshaw] have not personally witnessed any questionable conduct on his part but cannot recommend future employment until these questions have been resolved in his favour." (Ex. H of Lee's affidavit)
[16]
On September 18, 1990, the applicant notified Hinshaw of his intention to seek redress under s. 29 of the
National Defence Act
and formally submitted his application for redress on October 3, 1990, requesting details of the allegations against him, the results of the investigation and copies of the investigation reports. (Ex. I of Lee's affidavit)
[17]
On September 21, 1990, the applicant was contacted by Schweitzman (MP) requesting an interview. According to the applicant, he was cautioned and informed of his right to legal counsel but was only asked vague, general questions and nothing specific regarding the incidents which lead to the investigation. However, he was asked not to contact his colleagues regarding this matter. The applicant was also not permitted to see a copy of the investigation report. In the end the applicant decided to seek legal advice and contacted the duty counsel in Ottawa who advised him to end the interview, return to Ottawa and seek legal counsel. He did so.
[18]
According to Military Police Investigation Report dated September 24, 1990 (Ex. V Lee affidavit) the purpose of the September 21st interview was to give the applicant the opportunity to answer the allegations against him. After the applicant was cautioned and advised of his
Charter
rights, he elected to exercise his right to counsel. He then left the interview room with a copy of the caution and conferred with his father. He returned to the interview room at which time he signed the caution form as understanding it and was informed of the allegations against him. To each specific question regarding his relationship with Slt Maffinbier, Slt Johnson and Slt Rodzinyak (these names were not deleted in the reports), his conduct at mess functions and inspections, and his relationship with junior officers, the applicant replied that he was not prepared to answer those questions (why should he answer hearsay from people not prepared to step forward?) The applicant requested written questions that he could take to his lawyer and answer upon receiving legal advice. This request was declined. When asked what questions he would answer, the applicant replied that he was there to obtain information. When asked if he had contacted any witnesses the applicant indicated that he had contacted some of the persons involved in the investigation. As noted above, the applicant exercised his right to contact duty counsel and after speaking with duty counsel concluded the interview. This is the only contact the applicant had with the MPs throughout the process.
[19]
In October the investigation was reopened (despite Hinshaw telling him the investigation had been concluded) at the request of MacKenzie and another Military Police Investigation Report was completed on October 9, 1990. In November the investigation was again reopened at the request of the Base Commander, in order to determine whether the applicant had been contacting and threatening witnesses listed in the previous reports. The Military Police Investigation Report dated November 5, 1990, indicated that the applicant had telephoned certain individuals but was in no way threatening. What appears to be the final report is dated February 1, 1991 and contains an investigation summary.
[20]
On October 23, 1990, the applicant received an acknowledgement of his redress of grievance from Hinshaw advising that "the investigation into the matter is still ongoing ...". (Ex. J, Lee's affidavit) The applicant requested clarification and was informed that "action" pertained to the obtaining of further information to assess the merits of his grievance. (Exs. K & L, Lee affidavit). But, according to the applicant, based on information he obtained subsequently, this was in fact an investigation into further allegations of which he was not advised.
[21]
On November 12, 1990, the applicant wrote to the Commander Pacific region inquiring whether his redress had been forwarded to the next higher level of authority. (Ex. M, Lee affidavit) He received no response to this inquiry and on November 27, 1990, the applicant wrote to Rear Admiral Cairns requesting that he assume responsibility for his redress of grievance. The applicant was notified on November 27, 1990, that this had occurred.
[22]
In the meantime, the applicant attempted to obtain copies of the investigation reports and information regarding the status of the investigation through requests under the
Access to Information
and
Privacy Acts
. It was pursuant to this procedure, as opposed to the redress of grievance procedure, that the applicant was finally able to obtain limited information regarding the investigation. It was not until March 15, 1991, that the applicant received an "edited" copy of the Military Police Investigation File as well as related memos and reports of subsequent investigations (Ex. V, Lee affidavit). This was not provided to Lee as part of the redress procedure but by him as a result of the request he had submitted under the
Privacy Act
. However, in mid-December the applicant received a letter from Gentles, dated December 12, 1990, describing the alleged instances of misconduct in more or less general terms. Seven incidents of improper conduct were listed relating to unnecessary touching during inspections and inappropriate behaviour with female officers and staff members. The applicant was informed that his conduct had been brought to the attention of the MP Section at Comox by a staff member at Quadra and that a preliminary investigation was conducted by the base security officer and that the Base Commander had ordered a full Military Police Investigation. Gentles also explained why the applicant was not permitted to receive the information requested:
"... limitations are imposed due to the restriction on release of personal information under the
Privacy Act
, mandatory safeguards pertaining to the security of Military Police Investigation Reports and the preservation of anonymity of witnesses. It should be further noted that you were provided an opportunity by the Military Police to respond to the allegations but declined to do so." (Ex. R)
It was used, however, to end Lee's naval career.
[23]
The applicant responded by letter dated December 17, 1990, requesting more details and noting that "... before September 17, 1990, neither the Military Police, nor LCol. Gentles, nor Cdr. Hinshaw, attempted to interview LCdr. Lee about these allegations. This was a clear violation of CFAO 1939(13)(a)". (Ex. S, Lee affidavit)
[24]
The applicant did not receive a response to this letter and on January 9, 1991, wrote to Rear Admiral Cairns outlining his submissions (Ex. T, Lee affidavit). By March 1991, the applicant had received no further replies to his submissions or redress and complained to Rear Admiral Cairns about the delay in dealing with his redress.
[25]
On April 9, 1991, also as a result of his requests under the
Privacy Act
, the applicant learned that his suitability to hold a security clearance was under review as a result of the investigation reports. (Exs. W & X, Lee affidavit). The applicant was never formally advised of this review.
[26]
On April 12, 1991, Rear Admiral Cairns dismissed the applicant's redress of grievance and informed the applicant that he would not be reemployed as XO of Quadra and would not be appointed to other similar posts (Ex. Y, Lee affidavit). The applicant then requested that the Rear Admiral forward his redress to the Chief of the Defence Staff and provide disclosure pursuant to CFAO 1932(13), (redress of grievance procedure) by May 31, 1991. (Ex. AA, Lee affidavit).
[27]
On May 27, 1991, the applicant received from the DND Deputy Privacy Coordinator a copy of all the "releasable" documents from the applicant's redress file. (Ex. CC, Lee affidavit). Once again the applicant notes that the documents were provided as a result of his requests under the
Privacy Act
and not as a result of the redress process.
[28]
On June 4, 1991, the applicant wrote to the Chief of the Defence Staff requesting a meeting, a review of documents and an opportunity to explain his position. The applicant requested a response by June 21, 1991. (Ex. DD, Lee affidavit). The applicant received a standard form letter which did not address the applicant's requests. (Ex. EE, Lee affidavit). To-date the applicant has not received a proper response concerning his redress of grievance.
APPLICANT'S POSITION
[29]
The applicant maintains that he has attempted to pursue his redress of grievance under s. 29 of the
National Defence Act
but given the circumstances he can no longer obtain a fair, impartial and meaningful hearing into his grievance. The applicant claims he has been the subject of unjust and unfair treatment. The initial investigation by the MPs was not authorized under CFAO 19-39. Further, the MPs prepared a written report without attempting to interview the applicant and then submitted the report through the chain of command. The MPs also failed to locate and interview all of the witnesses to the alleged incidents. The applicant submits that he was not given full disclosure of the information regarding the allegations, the investigations and the decisions that stemmed from the investigations and therefore was not provided with the means of answering the allegations. In other words, the applicant is of the view that he was never given an opportunity to defend himself. The applicant also notes the lengthy and unnecessary delay in dealing with his grievance. The investigation began some time in July or August of 1990 and was not completed until January of 1991. Further, he commenced his grievance in September of 1990 and is still awaiting a response from the Chief of the Defence Staff.
RESPONDENT'S POSITION
[30]
The respondents raised the question of jurisdiction, i.e. whether any of the respondents are a federal board, commission or other tribunal within the meaning of s. 2 of the
Federal Court Act
, and they note that whether or not any of the respondents can be considered a federal board, commission or tribunal depends on an analysis of the function being performed at the time.
[31]
The respondents submit that with respect to the Military Police Investigation Reports they cannot be quashed as these reports did not affect the applicant's rights in and of themselves but merely provided information to the applicant's superior officers. It was an action taken. In support of their submission the respondents refer to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  for the proposition that where a person conducts an inquiry or writes a report, there is no determination capable of being quashed in that nothing was decided that could affect the applicant's rights or impose liabilities. The respondents further submit that the alleged failure to comply with CFAO 19-39 may provide grounds for a grievance, but cannot alter the fact that the Military Police investigation did not decide anything or impose a liability.
[32]
The respondents maintain that there is no evidence that Neild's decision not to rehire the applicant to rewrite the course training standard was based on other than budgetary and administrative considerations and submit that the decision not to rehire the applicant did not affect any right of the applicant nor did it impose a liability, given the applicant's limited rights as a Class B employee and as such there was no duty to act fairly imposed on Neild.
[33]
The respondents also maintain that the fairness doctrine did not apply when Gentles, MacKenzie and Hinshaw met on September 17, 1990, and when Hinshaw discussed the allegations with the applicant. In the alternative, the respondents argue that Hinshaw disclosed as much information to the applicant as was possible under the circumstances, given the constraints of s. 8(1) of the
Privacy Act
which does not allow disclosure of information without the consent of the individual(s) to whom it relates.
[34]
The respondents' position is essentially that, in the circumstances, the decision-makers in question were under no duty at that stage to act fairly toward the applicant; they breached no duty owed to him and therefore the decisions are not capable of being reviewed. In support of their position the respondents argue that the decision was not to terminate an existing relationship but to refuse to hire the applicant into the XO position for the following year. There is no vested right in such position and the applicant's tenure could have been left to expire with the passage of time. Further, there was no employee-employer relationship between the decision-makers and the applicant. The decision-makers were simply exercising their powers of command and judgment in relation to the good order and administration of Quadra. The respondents maintain that the decision was not considered final in the sense that it severed the applicant from his rights at all, in light of his Class B service. Moreover, given the hierarchal organization of the Forces, the decision was open to review under the grievance procedure. The respondents also note that the applicant was still qualified for other positions open to him on the CIL. The respondents further maintain that the decision did not affect any right of the applicant, nor impose any liability. The proper remedy in the circumstances was to grieve the decision. According to the respondents, the grievance procedure is illustrative of the tentative and provisional nature of the decision such that it is not susceptible of review at that stage.
[35]
With respect to the applicant's application for mandamus the respondents submit that the applicant has raised no statutory duty on the respondents to destroy or otherwise ignore documents or information that may have been obtained in an alleged breach of the applicant's rights to fairness. The proper remedy would be certiorari, there is no jurisdiction to quash the documents on which the decision was based.
[36]
The respondents argue that there was no duty to consider the applicant for the XO or CO position. However, to the extent there was a duty to consider, Rear Admiral Cairns performed that duty in the redress of grievance.
[37]
With respect to the injunctive relief sought, the respondents argue that injunctive relief is an equitable remedy available to aid a legal right or enforce an equitable right or duty and in the circumstance the applicant has made no title to equitable relief and as such is not entitled to injunctive relief.
[38]
The respondents also argue that as the applicant has not demonstrated that any of the respondents have breached any rights toward him there is no foundation for granting a remedy under the
Charter
.
[39]
With respect to not providing the applicant with specifics of the allegations against him and copies of the reports the policy of observing safeguards relating to the personal information, the security of MP reports and the preservation of witness anonymity was raised.
[40]
It was also alleged that the applicant has not completed the redress of grievance procedure under s. 29 of the
National Defence Act
and that this process provides an adequate remedy to the applicant.
ISSUES
[41]
The respondents have raised the following questions:
1) are the respondents a federal board, commission or tribunal within the meaning of s. 2 of the
Federal Court Act
and as such within the Federal Court's jurisdiction?
2) can certiorari issue in relation to the impugned actions of the respondents?
3) is mandamus available in these proceedings?
[42]
However, in my view, central to the matter before me is a determination of whether, in the particular circumstances of this case, procedural fairness applies and if so, to whom and to what extent? Once that issue is resolved the question becomes: was the duty to act fairly breached?
DISCUSSION
[43]
At the outset it should be made clear that the application before me is not an appeal on the merits and I am not concerned with making a determination with respect to the applicant's conduct but with the applicant's claims of unfair treatment.
[44]
Lee's 22 page affidavit comprising some 56 paragraphs and 32 exhibits and filed by the applicant is a comprehensive, thorough account of the background to this action and stands unchallenged, and must be taken as true. Only two affidavits were filed by all the respondents - one by Hinshaw and the other by Col McLean (McLean), the latter clearly not dealing with the facts of this case but rather with the process. As McLean might have argued, Lee is a Class B reservist who had no right to reappointment. That is not the case in the particular circumstances here "... [but] that a promise was made to the applicant by certain Crown officers that a course of action would be taken over the next several years which would culminate in the applicant taking over the position as commanding officer of Quadra, and indeed it was well known". (transcript p. 2).
[45]
The performance record of Lee reads in part:
"Lieutenant Commander Lee has served in a conscientious and competent manner throughout the reporting period. His long tenure in his job is evident by the ease with which he carries out the wide variety of routine tasks.
. . . . .
"The applicant should continue as D Cadets 2-2 until ready to assume CO Quadra full time, as XO Quadra for five months a year for three years."
[46]
Lee's first "knowledge" that something was amiss were "rumours" he heard from his friends, no details but he "knew" the military police were investigating him. Clearly Neild was aware of the allegations in the MP report, but on September 13th advised Lee that he would not be employed as Directorate of Cadets in the fall, "due to changed staff requirements and limited funding" and then from Cadet Camp Quadra he was to contact NDHQ in person no later than 1 October 1990 to complete "NDHQ OUT ROUTINE", and the quarters currently held by Lee were to be vacated by 1 October 90. The reason given by Neild was clearly a lie, albeit a white lie, but a lie nevertheless, which is quite clear on the evidence. Neild would like him (Lee) out if allegations are valid and had a message ready to release which would not offer further employment: this from an officer who had earlier advised Lee that he would be hired at DCDTS in the fall of 1990, to rewrite the Course Training standards.
[47]
Lee learned from Hinshaw on September 17, 1990, that because of the MP investigation and report, he would not be employed as XO at Quadra, and the agreement reached in the fall of 1988 would not be honoured. What is key is that this decision not to employ him had already been made by Hinshaw, Gentles and MacKenzie before the meeting and that the meeting with Lee was
NOT
to get his side of the story but rather to tell him of the decision already taken. Also, the three had "doubts as to the accuracy and breadth of some of the contents of the report, it was clear to all of us that if the substance of the allegations in the report were true and the applicant could not give any reasonable explanation regarding them, then the applicant could not possibly be permitted to return next year as Executive Officer". (Hinshaw affidavit, paragraph 10). The three named officers knew that Lee was to return to Quadra next year, they had already decided he was not to return and as such Lee was not given an opportunity to offer his "reasonable explanation regarding them [the allegations]". When confronted with allegations as he (Lee) understood them, he denied them and asked for further details. I agree with counsel for the applicant when he stated that: "all of these allegations are frustratingly imprecise and vague". It is also clear there were serious allegations that Hinshaw never divulged to Lee. Most damaging of all from the report: "Lee is referred to as a 'fudge packer' which apparently is a term denoting homosexual buggery".
THE MP REPORTS:
[48]
These "investigative reports" are a farce. There may have been attempts to interview all of the witnesses but when a complaint or complaints were lodged with the appropriate authority and he/she ordered the MPs to investigate, surely the onus on these MPs is two-fold, namely, determine whether the allegations have merit or do not have any basis in fact. Clearly, all the facts should be brought out, not just the unfavourable ones. In this case, not one comment throughout 3, 4 or 5 "Reports" revealed any attempt to discover whether the allegations against Lee might have been false - Let alone interview him.
[49]
Can anyone imagine accepting a report which is entirely hearsay by the investigating officer, setting down what he thinks people told him, and not attaching any witness statements to the report (i.e. one obtained through
Privacy Act
and
Access to Information
). Can one really accept as accurate, the MPs comments,
"As all avenues of investigation have been explored
, no further military police action is contemplated". (emphasis mine)
[50]
Counsel for the applicant's frustration and anger is warranted and as he expressed it:
"In our submission, what has been done is a total character assassination, a hatchet job on the applicant's character, hearsay two, three, four times removed, gossip. Lee has obviously been given no idea at all of the types of malicious and unsubstantiated comments that have been made against him or who has made them. The respondents say he's not entitled to that information.
The worst type of criminal is entitled to face his accusers; it appears the applicant isn't.
" (emphasis mine)
[51]
To his credit, Gentles wanted to give Lee total access to the report and not to reserve the anonymity of the witnesses. He was overruled by MacKenzie who advised against it "since it was not permitted under existing Canadian forces policy". This policy, although asked for, was never produced. Hinshaw, to his credit and honesty, is quoted as stating at paragraphs 16 and 17 of his affidavit (pp. 17 and 18 of transcript):
"'Lee was totally surprised and devastated; he denied any wrongdoing; he was doing nothing to be ashamed of or for which he should be punished.'
"Then in 17 he planned to fight the decision because it was unjust.
'He deserves to be able to give his side of the story. A more thorough investigation should be done. He was being left to hang out to dry with no recourse and without any help. He asked for advice on how to address his decision.'"
[52]
No contradiction exists to Lee's account of his meeting with Schweitzman, an interview requested by Schweitzman (Porter not present but he was the author of one of the MP reports), and which came days after Lee had given notice of his intention to file a redress of grievance. "There were no specific instances of misconduct put to me" (Lee's affidavit, p. 9 para. 21). Lee asked for the report Schweitzman had and this request was denied. A lawyer advised Lee to end the interview and obtain legal counsel, which he did.
[53]
Section 29 of the
National Defence Act
gives Lee the statutory right to seek redress of his grievance and complain about oppressive unjust treatment - and he did that. He needed evidence and to interview people but was told by Schweitzman at interview that this could be considered harassment.
[54]
From Exhibit V to Lee's affidavit (the Military Police Investigation Case File) page 127, counsel for the applicant reads that Mackenzie for some reason requested that the investigation be reopened. (Counsel did not know why and as there is no affidavit from MacKenzie one is left to speculate). Counsel quoted (p. 20 of transcript).
"Blank people [don't know who] were reinterviewed. The investigators felt they were reinterviewing completely different witnesses. They were almost hostile witnesses. [blank]. In the word of one of the investigators, 'they are scared of what I don't know'."
[55]
Up to this point, it is abundantly clear that the applicant was treated with a complete and utter lack of fairness. Unfortunately, as counsel for the respondent has pointed out, this is not the only consideration that must be taken into account when addressing the question before me. I must consider whether I have the authority to grant the relief sought. With respect to the Military Police reports I agree with the respondent's submissions that the reports merely provided information to the applicant's superior officers and that Cossette, Schweitzman or Porter cannot be considered a "federal board, commission or other tribunal" as defined in s. 2 of the
Federal Court Act
. Moreover, had I the authority, I would have acceded to the applicant's request for an injunction or mandamus requiring the respondents to collect and destroy all files, reports, correspondence, memoranda, notes and any other material relating to the investigation. The reports were prejudicial and may have been a product of an unfair process, however, I cannot find that the MPs reports are such that it can be determined at any point of the investigation involving several reports that Cossette, Schweitzman or Porter ever acted as a "federal board, commission, or other tribunal".
[56]
Similarly, I cannot enjoin the named respondents from taking further steps to review the applicant's security clearance. One can only hope they will read these reasons condemning the investigation and unsubstantiated allegations made - all based on hearsay, some of it plain wrong and much gossip and innuendo which some of the "witnesses" refused to corroborate - when undergoing a second series of questioning by the MPs. They might also note that one incident clearly remembered by the applicant because he was able to get enough specifics, had a perfectly reasonable explanation.
DECISIONS OF NIELD, AND
GENTLES, HINSHAW AND
MACKENZIE:
[57]
Gentles, Hinshaw and Mackenzie received an investigative report against the applicant. They set themselves up as a group to consider the report and decide Lee's future and decide it they did by not only dismissing him from his employment at Quadra but also dismissing him from his employment at DCOTS Ottawa, through Neild's decision. As I indicated earlier, to suggest the Ottawa job was lost due to funding and staff changes flies in the face of the truth. The evidence filed clearly indicates it was the MPs report and its allegations that doomed Lee.
[58]
There were admissions that Lee was not treated fairly; Gentles, Hinshaw and MacKenzie had doubts about the allegations; Hinshaw thought Lee should see the whole report and the witnesses' statements; Mackenzie said policy dictated that this could not be done but never produced the policy; Hinshaw called Lee in, not to get an explanation of the allegations but to tell him he was finished at Quadra and that decision was made despite doubts by the three officers and no opportunity for Lee to explain the alleged incidents; and then keeping some of the allegations secret or at least never raising serious allegations and sick ones with Lee. These people did not live up to the level or fairness that Lee was entitled to. One is given to wonder if any or all of these men in a quiet moment ever reflected on how they treated a fellow officer that had given 20 excellent years to sea cadets and to the reserves.
[59]
Neither Neild nor Hinshaw, Gentles and Mackenzie are a "federal board, commission or other tribunal" analogous to the base commander in the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and the three veterinarians in
Quackenbush
(1986), 5 F.T.R. 74. Therefore, although they did not give Lee the fairness to which he was entitled by making decisions based on badly flawed MPs reports, and by not waiting or giving Lee an opportunity to make explanations and rebuttals, which amounts to unfairness in the extreme, I cannot grant the relief requested.
THE REDRESS OF GRIEVANCE - DECISION OF REAR ADMIRAL CAIRNS
[60]
There is no dispute that when Rear Admiral Cairns dealt with the applicant's redress of grievance he was acting as a "federal, board or tribunal" as defined in s. 2 of the
Federal Court Act
and therefore I can exercise my jurisdiction under s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
and make a determination on this aspect of the decision-making process in the Canadian Armed Forces. The next issue to be determined is whether a duty of fairness was owed to the applicant and if so was it breached?
[61]
The respondents have referred to the Supreme Court of Canada decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 81; 69 D.L.R.(4th) 489 (S.C.C.), to support their position that there was no duty of fairness in the circumstances of the case before me because the nature of the decision did not require it, the relationship between the parties did not require it and the effect on the applicant's rights did not require it. I the
Knight
case the respondent director of education for the Board of Indian Head School Division No. 19 was dismissed by the board on three months' notice. He took action against the Board for wrongful and unlawful dismissal, alleging the absence of procedural fairness. The case raised questions about the relationship of the employment contract, the
Education Act
of Saskatchewan, R.S.S. 1978, c. E-01 (Supp) and the existence and scope of the general duty of fairness resting on a public body in the context of an employer-employee relationship. What is of importance to the case before me is the Court's comments on procedural fairness and the content of the duty to act fairly. L'Heureux-Dubé, J., noted at page 500 D.L.R. that the existence of a general duty of fairness, autonomous of the operation of any statute, depends on the existence of three factors: the nature of the decision to be made by the administrative body, the relationship existing between that body and the individual and the effect of that decision on the individual's rights. Where these three elements are found, there is a general duty to act fairly on the decision-maker.
[62]
In dealing with the "nature of the decision" L'Heureux-Dubé, J., noted that there is no longer a need to distinguish between judicial, quasi-judicial and administrative decisions in order that there be a duty to act fairly, but that not all administrative bodies are under a duty to act fairly. She referred to the finality of the decision as a factor to be considered, i.e. "a decision of a preliminary nature will not in general trigger the duty to act fairly, whereas a decision of a more final nature may have such an effect", (page 500). With respect to the applicant, Cairn's decision can be considered final in that it clearly foreclosed any further opportunities for the applicant to continue as XO of Quadra, to ever become CO of Quadra or to have similar employment in the Reserves.
[63]
In terms of the relationship between the employer and the employee, L'Heureux-Dubé, J., made reference to Lord Reid's three possible categories of employment relationships in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and the office from which one cannot be removed except for cause; she found that the respondents fell into the second category but that this conclusion did not ineluctably lead to the conclusion that the appellant board was not under a duty to act fairly. Further she indicated at pages 503-504 D.L.R.:
"The justification for granting to the holder of an office at pleasure the right to procedural fairness dictates that the administrative body making the decision be cognizant of all relevant circumstances surrounding the employment ... One person capable of providing the administrative body with important insights into the situation is the office-holder himself."
She concluded at page 505 D.L.R. that the characterization of the respondent's employment as an office held at pleasure is not incompatible with the imposition of a duty to act fairly on the part of the appellant board. Similarly in the case before me, the fact that the applicant may have held his position at "Her Majesty's pleasure" does not automatically mean that there is no duty to act fairly. Further, the applicant can also be said to hold an office under the
National Defence Act
by virtue of being a member of the Reserves, which under the legislation is a component of the Canadian Forces.
[64]
With respect to the impact of the decisions on the applicant, it is clear that there is a right to procedural fairness if the decision is a significant one and has an important impact on the individual (
Knight
, page 505 D.L.R.). In the case before me, the decisions relating to the applicant's not being "rehired" as the XO and as such not considered in future for the CO position are significant and clearly had an impact on the applicant.
[65]
Therefore, based on the above comments I am satisfied that Cairns in dealing with the applicant's redress of grievance had a duty to act fairly. I now have to determine the degree of fairness that is to be accorded to the applicant in the circumstances. As noted by Sopinka, J., in
Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 385, at page 425 D.L.R.:
"Both the rules of natural justice and the duty of fairness are variable standards. Their content will depend on the circumstances of the case, the statutory provisions and the nature of the matter to be decided. The distinction between them therefore becomes blurred as one approaches the lower end of the scale of judicial or quasi-judicial tribunals and the high end of the scale with respect to administrative or executive tribunals. Accordingly, the content of the rules to be followed by a tribunal is now not determined by attempting to classify them as judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative or executive. Instead, the court decides the content of these rules by reference to all the circumstances under which the tribunal operates."
Given the circumstances of this particular case I am of the view that the applicant was entitled, at a minimum, to a basic degree of fairness which includes knowing the case against him and being given the opportunity to explain or rebut the case against him.
[66]
Section 29 of the
National Defence Act
provides a statutory right of redress and is set out below:
"29. Except in respect of a matter that would properly be the subject of an appeal or petition under Part IX or an application or an appeal under Part IX.1, an officer or noncommissioned member who considers that he has suffered any personal oppression, injustice or other ill-treatment or that he has any other cause for grievance may as a matter of right seek redress from such superior authorities in such manner and under such conditions as shall be prescribed in regulations made by the Governor-in-Council."
An individual is entitled to seek redress according to the grievance procedure as set out in the
Queen's Regulations and Orders
19.26 and 19.27. CFAO 19-32 amplifies the regulations set out in 19.26 and 19.27. The CFAO is lengthy and is found in Ex. Z of Lee's affidavit. Paragraph 13 directs (counsel for the applicant at p. 27 of the transcript):
"Before reaching any decision an adjudicative authority ... [that's Cairns] ... in considering a redress shall disclose copies of any correspondence or other documents to be reviewed.
"What happened in this case -- well, it didn't happen in this case -- virtually all of the documentation in the redress file was kept from Lee
until after the decision
. And even then he obtained it not through the redress procedure but under the
Privacy Act
and after complaining about nondisclosure."
[67]
On October 3, 1990, Lee submitted his redress of grievance to Hinshaw. He complained about:
"... lack of fairness, lack of disclosure; and he seeks a number of items of relief and he wants a copy of the report; wants to be given the reasons. He wants all of this damage and hearsay removed from his file so it won't continue to have consequences that he doesn't know about."
[68]
No action having been taken on the redress, Rear Admiral Cairns became seized with it in late November 1990. For the first time it is confirmed in a letter by Gentles to Lee (Exhibit R to Lee's affidavit) that the purpose of his meeting with Hinshaw was to confirm the decision not to reemployee Lee. Also in this letter (p. 25 of transcript),
"Gentles ... sets out seven incidents of alleged misconduct: no names, no dates, no places. In fact, a number of them are simply unanswerable. 'People felt you were hitting on them. They felt you flirted.' How could he respond to that unless you know exactly what it is you were supposed to have done? What was the conduct? What was it he did that made people feel that? Can't respond to how people feel about things. Again, no mention at all of alleged drinking problems, and yet that later becomes the reason for the decision to review his security clearance.
"No mention of any of the other incidents that we just went through in the military police report: beating up the cadet, becoming obnoxious when he drinks. In fact, some of the allegations aren't even the same as are in the police report. He says, in no. (b):
'As a female officer was walking towards Tye Hall he wolf-whistled at her.'
"Well, the police report doesn't say that. It says it happened as she was walking past a group of cadets. That's a big difference. It was a group of cadets, there ought to be numerous witnesses to what happened and Lee could say, 'Oh yeah, I remember that. Here's so and so; he was with me at the time.'"
[69]
Then another unfair act. Two days after Gentles sent his letter he sent a memo to Cairns (See Exhibit CC of Lee's affidavit) who was the authority seized with Lee's redress, stating that the decision was well founded. Yet he had not even received Lee's response to his letter. Particularly unfair are these comments quoted from Gentles' memorandum to Rear Admiral Cairns (Exhibit CC):
"It was not until the MPIR had been received from CFB Comox that a pattern of improper conduct was revealed. It was deemed then that, in the face of such a pattern of conduct, LCdr Lee would be disqualified from consideration for rehire as the Executive Officer.
. . . . .
"The record of his deficient conduct was clear with his credibility seriously damaged beyond recovery from both a subordinate point of view and also that of his Commanding Officer. The matter was appropriately referred to the correct decision level at Pacific Region Headquarters. It was decided therefore, based on serious deficiencies of behaviour, that it would not be appropriate to consider LCdr Lee again for the position of Executive Officer."
(And let us not forget the "calibre" of those MP reports).
[70]
Did Lee get a copy of Gentles' memo? He only learned about it
AFTER
Cairns rejected his redress: when he got a copy of it under the
Privacy Act
(see transcript, p. 27, Vol. I).
[71]
Gentles, having written to Lee on 12 December 1990 saying "it would be in order to again specify in writing the instances of conduct that led to the decision to discontinue consideration of employing you further". As indicated earlier, six incidents are set forth and Lee is invited to reply before January 10, 1991, which response would be forwarded to Cairns and "would assist in dealing with your grievance as expeditiously as possible".
[72]
Lee's first response to Gentles' letter which he sent to Rear Admiral Cairns complains about lack of disclosure and counsel's feelings that standards that are applicable as determined by Muldoon, J.'s, in
Quackenbush
(supra) was requested. No one responded to that letter.
[73]
Thus, to meet the January 10 deadline set down by Gentles, "Lee submits a reply as best he can to Gentles". The letter again emphasized that he did not have enough information to be able to explain what the allegations were about. He denied any wrongdoing. Some of the allegations he denied very strongly. As an example, counsel for the applicant states at p. 29 of the transcript:
"There's one incident, set out in Gentles' letter, which alleges that he broke into a cadet's room drunk and abusive and makes it sound like a near sexual assault, that Lee is able to respond to. And he's even able -- first of all, he gives an entirely innocent explanation, and he points out a witness who would corroborate that the incident didn't happen. ... He says they've got the whole thing wrong. He says he was accompanied by another female officer, Sheila Archer. He says 'Talk to Sheila Archer, she'll tell you that it didn't happen that way'. To the best of our knowledge Ms. Archer has never been interviewed. So here is evidence of a very serious mistake, perhaps a deliberate falsehood, the possibility of evidence in favour of the applicant was ignored."
[74]
Lee filed his reply to Gentles before January 10, 1991, and nothing happened until April 12, 1991, when Rear Admiral Cairns rendered his decision. Counsel for the applicant: "No explanation is given for the delay from January to April" (p. 29 of the transcript). At page 30 of the transcript he states:
"He [Cairns] basically says he thinks Lee has been told enough. He says: 'It's regrettable the identities of police informants are not releasable under our present
Regulations
.
"Well, Lee asked for a copy of those
Regulations
: never got a reply. And then he says: 'I have been given no reason to question the credibility of the persons who provided the information'.
"Well, what about Lee's credibility, how is anybody assessing that? And then he says at page 151, he gives his decision: 'Lee will not be reemployed as executive officer HMCS Quadra. He will not in the immediate future be appointed to a position similar to that of executive officer which involve leadership and subordinate females'.
"And then the second-to-last paragraph he says: 'I am unable to address Lieutenant Commander Lee's nonrenewal of Class B service at National Defence Headquarters as this is outside my purview'.
"One wonders why, if he wasn't going to deal with it, it took from October 1990 to April 1991 to tell Lee that, that nobody could look after it; somebody else has to consider it."
One final attempt was made to make the redress procedure work. Counsel for the applicant at p. 31 of the transcript:
"Lee submitted his application for redress to the chief of the defence staff ... it was the beginning of May 1991 that he requested Cairns to forward it. And in his request, tab AA, Lee specifically says: 'In accordance with para. 13 of reference (b) ...' And that's the Canadian Forces Administrative Order we just looked at requiring disclosure: '... it is requested that complete disclosure be made to me of all material being forwarded to the chief of the defence staff for his consideration'.
No response was ever received.
" (emphasis added)
I can find no better comment on the entire situation than that given by Muldoon, J., in
Quakenbush
at page 79 F.T.R.:
"Given the potential and actual consequences for the applicant, both the techniques of gathering the evidence and the evidence thereby yielded, were of such poor quality that a fair-minded adjudicator ought to have paused significantly in face of the applicant's denial of wrongdoing."
[75]
It is not for me, a judge sitting in the Federal Court Trial Division and exercising my jurisdiction under s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
to usurp the role of Admiral Cairns. My role, as I indicated earlier is to determine if Lee was entitled to a duty of fairness, and if so, was he treated fairly and if not, what order or orders can I sign to right this wrong. I have found that there was a duty owed to the applicant and that in the circumstances he was entitled to basic fairness, which is far from what he received. This unfairness stemmed from the failure of the Forces to follow their own grievance procedure, the inordinate delay for the grievance to be dealt with, the entire way the applicant was treated throughout by the investigation and by his superior officers culminating in the manner in which the redress was handled, including the lack of response to the applicant's requests for information, the fact that decisions were made prior to receiving the applicant's submissions, and that information was finally received under the
Privacy Act
as opposed to under the grievance procedure. All in all the entire situation is replete with unfairness. In terms of what orders can be given to right the wrongs, counsel for the respondent put it quite accurately, in my view, when he argued (p. 55 of the transcript):
"... if you are minded to grant any relief to the applicant in this application, the highest relief that would be available under the circumstances of this case is simply a writ of certiorari quashing Rear Admiral Cairn's decision of April 1991 denying the redress of grievance. I'm not making any concessions here. I'm staking out the maximum ground that this application can possibly succeed on. That the writ could be accompanied by a writ of mandamus requiring that the redress be dealt with by a differently constituted chain of command as expeditiously as possible. And that you could also issue a writ of mandamus that in considering the redress, the applicant be given an adequate opportunity to answer the allegations against him."
And then this caveat:
"But I'll be submitting to you that My Lord ought not to issue such an order because there are -- the overall grievance process has not yet exhausted itself."
[76]
In response to counsel's caveat, I note that in the circumstances the applicant did everything that could reasonably be expected of him to obtain redress within the Forces. Given that there has been no response for well over eight months to the applicant's letter dated June 4, 1991 to the Chief of the Defence Staff, I am of the view that for all intents and purposes Rear Admiral Cairns' decision is a final decision and that the applicant has done everything that could reasonably be done to exhaust the process.
[77]
Therefore, I am satisfied that there was a duty of fairness and that in circumstances surrounding the denial of the applicant's redress of grievance the duty of fairness was breached. Fairness requires, at a minimum, notice of the accusations against one and an opportunity to respond
BEFORE
a decision is made. This includes being provided with information so that the applicant can respond in a meaningful and informed manner. I make these comments cognizant of the fact that there is a need, particularly in a structured rank setting, to preserve the anonymity of witnesses and complainants, however, an individual should still be accorded some basic fairness, especially when dealing with one's career and livelihood. As Muldoon noted in
Quackenbush
(supra) at page 78:
"When a person's livelihood and career stand in the balance one ought not to be so tender about identifying his accusers that they are reduced to phantoms."
[78]
In terms of disclosure of information to the applicant, the respondents have argued that s. 8 of the
Privacy Act
prevents them from releasing the information requested by the applicant. Section 8(1) provides, subject to exceptions outlined in subsection (2), that:
"Personal information under the control of a government institution shall not, without the consent of the individual to whom it relates, be disclosed by the institution except in accordance with this section."
Personal information is defined in s. 3 of the
Privacy Act
and reads in part:
"'personal information' means information about an identifiable individual that is recorded in any form including, without restricting the generality of the foregoing ..."
Counsel for the applicant contends that based on a reading of paragraph (e) "the personal opinions or views of the individual except where they are about another individual or ...", where someone expresses his/her opinion or view about someone else those views are not personal information.
[79]
However, I note that paragraph (g) specifically includes as personal information "the views or opinions of another individual about the [identifiable] individual" and therefore views or opinions of another individual about that individual are exempt and cannot be released without the individual's consent.
[80]
The applicant has also argued that even if the information was personal information, s. 8 of the
Privacy Act
still does not prohibit disclosure because s. 8 only requires the consent of the individual to whom it relates and in this case the individual to whom it relates is the applicant Lee. Further, the applicant has raised
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R. 314 (F.C.T.D.) in support of the proposition that the
Privacy Act
is not a ground of nondisclosure, specifically Madame Justice Reed's comments at pages 320 and 321 Admin. L.R.:
"The reliance on provisions of the
Access to Information Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1 and the
Privacy Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-21 is misplaced. As has been said before those legislative provisions prescribe circumstances under which individuals will not be given certain information which they seek from the government. Those exemptions, however, are not designed to operate in context of a situation where the individual seeking the information is faced with serious consequences respecting his liberty as a result of decisions being made on the basis of that information. Those statutes prescribe limits to an individual's access to information when the information being sought may be required for no more serious reason than idle curiosity. Also, in that context, this Court has a reviewing function which ensures that the exemptions claimed are properly so claimed - a role which the respondent categorically denies is appropriate in the more serious circumstances in which the applicant finds himself."
Madame Justice Reed also rejected the argument respecting confidentiality and safety of witnesses and concluded that there has to be convincing evidence of an actual threat to a witness's safety.
[81]
I agree that in the case before me we are not dealing with information being sought for "idle curiosity" and that the applicant does face serious consequences in terms of his livelihood, but we are not dealing with the applicant's liberty. As noted by counsel for the respondents the liberty interest in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was so high that the level of disclosure was correspondingly high and therefore it did not avail to plead the provisions of the
Privacy Act
. In this case the interest may be lower and as such the reliance on the
Privacy Act
may have been justified but I am not satisfied that on these particular facts the information the applicant was given was sufficient to protect his fairness rights. Indeed, the lack of opportunity to rebut the allegations was noted by Cairns,
"I am concerned that LCdr Lee was not given a real opportunity to rebut the allegations made against him which formed the basis of the decision that he should not return as XO in 1991. (Ex. CC, Memo dated November 28, 1990)"
and by Gentles, who agreed that it was wrong to preserve the anonymity of witnesses and that at the meeting on September 17th the applicant should have been allowed to read the MP's investigation report(s).
[82]
Some relief sought from the Chief of Defence Staff or from Rear Admiral Cairns again is beyond my jurisdiction to order by way of injunction or mandamus. I cannot give Lee either of his jobs back, nor can I order that it be done by those with the authority to do so. As counsel for the respondents indicated, "mandamus only lies, of course, in the event of a breach of a statutory duty. And there's no statutory obligation on any of the respondents, in particular of course, the chief of defence staff or Rear Admiral Cairns, to do anything in relation to the applicant's employment. There is no statutory duty; there is therefore no jurisdiction to grant a writ of mandamus".
[83]
Therefore, for the reasons noted above, the decision denying the applicant's redress of grievance must be quashed. Further, the redress is to be dealt with by a differently constituted chain of command
as expeditiously as possible
and in considering the redress the applicant is to be given an adequate opportunity to answer the allegations against him.
[84]
As I have quashed Cairns decision on the basis of breach of fairness, there is no need at this juncture to deal with the other grounds for quashing, namely that the decision contravenes the CFAOs and is a breach of the applicant's
Charter
rights.
COSTS
[85]
I am going to accede to counsel for the applicant's request that costs be awarded on a solicitor and client basis. This applicant has been the victim of sloppy investigating procedures, innuendo, lies, gossip hearsay and numerous delays. Why couldn't the military be up front with the applicant, giving him at least the rights available to an accused criminal - to know the whole case against him. If the allegations, particularly the more serious of them, were established by witness or witness statements and had the applicant accepted them as facts he might very well have decided not to grieve or determine that the decisions made by his superiors were well founded and quietly fade from the scene. He was put in a position where he was fighting ghosts to protect his reputation and his job, and managing as best he could at great personal and monetary cost.
[86]
It is no answer to plead mea culpa when documents are not forwarded promptly and it is offensive when letters go unanswered or requests for information, or for a written copy of a policy relied upon by the respondents, are ignored.
[87]
Therefore, in my view the treatment accorded to the applicant by the respondents amounts to a high-handed, arbitrary and excessive conduct of a kind to be penalized by an order of solicitor and client costs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slm
[End of document]