[1]
Reed, J.
: The claims in this action arise out of the closing of the salmon fishery in Saint John Harbour, the Bay of Fundy and the Saint John River. The fishery was closed, first in 1972 for nine years, and then in 1986 on a permanent basis. The plaintiffs claim that they sold their "fishing privileges" to the defendant, in 1981, under threat and on the basis of representations made to them which were false. These representations were made by the Minister of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans and by officials of that department. These representations can be summarized: (1) there would be no opportunity subsequent to May 31, 1981 for the plaintiffs to sell their fishing privileges - 1981 would be the only occasion on which the government would make an offer to buy the fishing privileges; (2) many of the plaintiffs would lose their licences the following year, in any event, because of the nature of their employment outside the fishery or for other reasons.
Fishing Prior to 1971
[2]
Most of the facts are not in dispute. The plaintiffs, all engaged in commercial salmon fishing either in the Saint John Harbour, the Bay of Fundy or the Saint John River immediately before the ban in 1972. Many of the plaintiffs started fishing when they were 12 or 14 years of age; they fished at first with their fathers or uncles. One had fished since 1915 when, as he testified, the boats were powered by sail or oars. Many of the plaintiffs described their involvement in the salmon fishery as having been "their way of life". The fishing activities of most of the plaintiffs were not extensive in scope. The equipment they operated, consisted of a boat, generally varying from 16' to 25' in length (the largest was 33'), an outboard or inboard motor and from two to four salmon drift nets (one had eight). Some operated set nets as well as drift nets; others used weirs as well. The plaintiff, Mr. Wilson, who fished in the Saint John River, used a spearhead net.
[3]
Prior to 1971, no licence was required to engage in commercial fishing in the Saint John Harbour. Licences for commercial salmon fishing in the Bay of Fundy had been required from 1920 onward but, until 1968, these were issued on demand upon paying the required fee. Licences for fishing in the Saint John River had also been required for some time but these were issued to the riparian landowners.
[4]
In 1968, a "limited entry" licencing system, was introduced for commercial salmon fishing in the Bay of Fundy. Under this system, licences were issued only to those who had held licences prior to 1968 or to persons who were replacing such existing licence holders. This system was designed to ensure that the number of fishermen in the area did not increase. Transfers of licences (privileges) were allowed to immediate family members if they could meet certain criteria. The criteria for the renewal or issuing of a licence included requirements such as: the licence holder must be a Canadian citizen, live in the area for six months of the year and personally operate "the privilege". (Exhibit 28 contains the complete text of the 1968 policy.) In 1971, a limited entry licencing system was instituted for the Harbour area as well. Entitlement to a licence was based on the individual having fished for salmon in the Saint John Harbour prior to 1971.
New Policy Announced For 1972
[5]
In addition to establishing a limited entry system for the Saint John Harbour, in 1971, the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans also announced a "New Atlantic Salmon Policy", applicable to the whole region. A news release was issued on March 12, 1971, setting out conditions which were to apply the following year. The news release stated in part:
"... only bona fide commercial fishermen will be allowed to take salmon in 1972. No new entrants will be allowed into the industry until runs begins to improve.
. . . . .
"We have too many fishermen and too much gear chasing too few salmon. Few commercial fishermen can make a decent living as things stand now.
"In order to trim our fishing effort back we will have to get rid of the moonlighters.
Only those commercial fishermen who earn their livelihood principally by fishing will be retained in the salmon fishery
. Those who have full-time jobs in other industries are now being given twelve months' notice. Only bona fide fishermen will be allowed to take atlantic salmon commercially from 1972 onwards.
"The following conditions will apply throughout the atlantic region:
(1) No new commercial fishing licences will be issued to individual fishermen,
(2) Existing licences will be nontransferable, this means that, when a commercial fisherman retires from the fishery he automatically retires his licence,
(3) A commercial salmon fisherman must fish his gear every year in order to retain his licence,
(4) Beginning next year (i.e., beginning in the spring of 1972) individuals who are regularly employed in an industry other than fishing will lose their commercial salmon fishing privilege,
(5) Licence appeal committees will be set up in each region to review individual cases where extenuating circumstances exist." (underlining added)
Minutes taken, of a meeting with the Saint John County commercial salmon fishermen, on March 16, 1971, recorded the following:
"This meeting in general allowed the passage of information regarding restrictions planned for this year which apply to salmon fishermen in the Bay of Fundy, St. John Harbour [sic] and St. John River, and a comprehensive explanation to fishermen of the salmon policy regarding existing licences being nontransferable and the fact of any person regularly employed in another industry not having their licences renewed."
And a letter, dated March 31, 1971, sent by the Department of Fisheries to the Port Manager of the Saint John Harbour stated:
"We further advise that the Salmon Fishery will be subject to our Department's Salmon Management Policy. The restrictive part of the Policy places a limit on the effort as well as
a twelve month notice of cancellation of the privilege for fishermen who are engaged in other regular employment
.
"It is anticipated that we will be approving approximately fifty licences for the harbour area this year. It is further expected that this number will be reduced by about 50% in 1972." (underlining added)
[6]
Despite the original statement that no transfers of salmon fishing privileges would be allowed this was subsequently modified to allow transfers to "a son or son-in-law" with the proviso that "this is a terminal transfer". A news release issued on May 11, 1971 stated, in part:
"Conditions attached to commercial licences to fish for Atlantic Salmon are being eased.
"Fisheries Minister Jack Davis announced today that a current licence holder will be still able to transfer his licence to a son or son-in-law. This, however, is a terminal transfer and cannot be handed down to another generation.
"The regulation stipulating a salmon fisherman must have a yearly landed catch record to retain his licence has been removed. A fisherman does not have to fish salmon every year but he must renew the salmon licence annually to retain it.
"Atlantic Salmon policy announced on March 12th stated that:
(1) No new additional licences will be issued;
(2) Existing licences will be nontransferable. (This is now changed to provide for transfer from current holder to son or son-in-law);
(3) Beginning in 1972 those regularly employed in an industry or occupation other than fishing will lose their licences;
(4) Licence Appeal Committees will be set up to review individual cases where extenuating circumstances exist. (These committees are now being appointed).
"The Fisheries Minister also announced that:
. . . . .
"Consideration will be given to provide compensation for gear and equipment owned by commercial fishermen who lose their licences in 1972 because they are regularly employed in another industry or occupation."
[7]
A further elaboration of the policy was set out in a memorandum sent by the Chief, Conservation and Protection Branch, Department of the Environment (Fisheries), to all District Protection Officers on February 3, 1972. It stated:
"A meeting held in Ottawa on January 7th considered several subjects pertinent to Atlantic Salmon Management as it relates to Policy and Regulations.
. . . . .
"The policy conditions which have been agreed upon do not vary greatly with the present Policy, but are either more explicit, or confirm certain sections:
1. No new licences will be issued.
2. No transfer of licences (only father to son or son-in-law - terminal).
3. Must renew licence each year, but does not need to fish.
4. No increase in Fathomage.
5. Bona fide fisherman.
6. Other sections of Policy are retained.
"With particular reference to Item 5, it was difficult to define a 'bona fide' fisherman and the approach taken was to exclude, rather than define. It is now policy to exclude those holding licences that are full-time employed.
Full-time employment means:
Those employed by others for nine months or more, or those who are self-employed in something other than primarily industry (forest and farm industries).
"The onus would be on the licencees to prove that that licencee was employed less than nine months to the Appeal Committee. This also means that licencees drawing pensions would not be excluded since they are not employed."
Ban On Salmon Fishing In 1972
[8]
Before the salmon fishing season opened in 1972, the commercial fishing of salmon in the Saint John Harbour, in the Saint John River and in the Bay of Fundy was banned. The ban was imposed because of a depletion in the salmon stocks caused by a number of factors, not the least of which was the overfishing which was occurring off the coast of Greenland. In addition there was overfishing of salmon in Newfoundland, at the mouths of the major river systems in that province, and poaching as well as native fishing in New Brunswick itself. The plaintiffs are particularly outraged that the government chose to preserve sports fishing in New Brunswick but not the commercial fishery in which they were engaged.
[9]
When the ban was imposed in 1972, a distinction was made between bona fide and non bona fide fishermen. Those falling into the non bona fide category were compensated for their fishing assets and "their salmon fishing licences" were cancelled (Exhibit 38). Those falling into the bona fide category were given the choice of selling their salmon fishing assets to the defendant and getting out of the fishery or of accepting annual compensation. The plaintiffs all qualified as bona fide fishermen and all chose the annual compensation. The amount of compensation which was paid was based on information provided by the plaintiffs to the defendant, principally concerning their investment in salmon fishing equipment and their income from salmon fishing in the years prior to the ban. The annual compensation paid to each of the plaintiffs during the ban was as follows:
(a) Wilfred Bannon - $1,404
(b) James F. Bartlett - $2,187
(c) Cyril Burke - $1,000
(d) Edward A. Butler - $1,944
(e) Edward Cobham - $2,306
(f) Malcolm A. Cormier - $700
(g) William C. Cormier - $1,980
(h) Arthur J. Daigle - $1,000
(i) René J. Doucette - $1,534 *
(j) John H. Doyle - $1,000
(k) Frank Elliott - $1,260
(l) Maxwell L. Harned - $3,134
(m) Roland Keleher, Jr. - $3,780
(n) Alvery LeBlanc - $2,520
(o) Frederick T. London, Sr. - $1,000
(p) Millard McAllister - $883
(q) Patrick G. McEachern - $1,800
(r) Walter A. McEachern - $1,080
(s) Samuel L. McGuire - $1,057
(t) Stanley McKinnon - $693
(u) Norman McLennon - $1,180
(v) Edward L. Petts - $900
(w) Frank D. Silliphant - $900
(x) William J. Wheaton - $990
(y) Frank R. White - $1,728
(z) Walter Williams - $300
(aa) James E. Wilson - $1,080
* Compensation paid for 1980 only because Mr. Doucette was not aware he was eligible for compensation before that time.
In the case of Wilfred Bannon and John H. Doyle who died during the ban, the compensation was paid in the years following their deaths to their estates, that is to their wife and mother respectively.
[10]
The ban on the commercial salmon fishing imposed in 1972 was originally scheduled to last for five years; it was subsequently extended to 1980. During those years, while no licences to fish were issued, some "paper licences" were issued. These were marked "For record purposes only. Not valid for fishing". Whether or not a party received a "for record purposes only" licence between 1972 and 1980 had no relevance to their subsequent entitlement to fish when the ban was lifted.
1981 Reopening Of The Fishery - Conditions For 1982 Licences Announced - Subsequent Years
[11]
In 1980, it was determined that the salmon stocks had been rebuilt sufficiently to allow the reopening of the fishery. It was announced that the ban on commercial salmon fishing would be lifted in 1981 and licences would again be issued. The right to fish (apply for a licence) in 1981 was accorded to all those who had received compensation in 1980. At the same time, all were told that in 1982 the terms and conditions of holding a licence would be more restrictive than previously had been the case. It was announced that anyone who did not choose to fish in 1981 could have their fishing privileges bought by the government and the government would pay $2,000 or an amount equal to the compensation that person had received during any one year of the ban.
[12]
It was the expressed intention of the defendant to attempt to reduce the number of fishermen fishing for salmon in the commercial salmon fishery. In economic terms what was being sought was "a rationalization of the industry". At the same time that the requirements for 1982 were being announced, the defendant also stipulated that no transfers of licences in 1981 would be allowed, except where the fishing privilege was held by a widow or an estate. In that case a transfer was allowed to a son or daughter or to a son-in-law or daughter-in-law providing the transferee earned his or her main income from fishing. The defendant also told the fishermen that if all who were entitled to fish salmon in 1981 did so, each individual's quota would not be large and a short fishing season was contemplated. There is no doubt that the fishermen were being placed in what I will call a "squeeze situation". This was done with the avowed intention of encouraging, indeed forcing some of them to get out of the industry.
[13]
All of the plaintiffs in this action elected to sell their fishing privileges to the government and to forego their right to apply for fishing licences for the 1981 season. They received the following buy back payments:
(a) Wilfred Bannon - $2,000
(b) James F. Bartlett - $2,187
(c) Cyril Burke - $2,000
(d) Edward A. Butler - $2,000
(e) Edward Cobham - $2,306
(f) Malcolm A. Cormier - $2,000
(g) William C. Cormier - $2,000
(h) Arthur J. Daigle - $2,000
(i) René J. Doucette - $2,000
(j) John H. Doyle - $2,000
(k) Frank Elliott - $2,000
(l) Maxwell L. Harned - $3,134
(m) Roland Keleher, Jr. - $3,780
(n) Alvery LeBlanc - $2,000
(o) Frederick T. London, Sr. - $2,000
(p) Millard McAllister - $2,000
(q) Patrick G. McEachern - $2,000
(r) Walter A. McEachern - $2,000
(s) Samuel L. McGuire - $2,000
(t) Stanley McKinnon - $2,000
(u) Norman McLennon - $2,000
(v) Edward L. Petts - $2,000
(w) Frank D. Silliphant - $2,000
(x) William J. Wheaton - $2,000
(y) Frank R. White - $2,000
(z) Walter Williams - $2,000
(aa) James E. Wilson - $2,000
[14]
The commercial salmon fishing was reopened in 1981, and it remained open in 1982 and in 1983. Licences were issued to those eligible and who had elected not to participate in the 1981 buy back program. In 1984, the commercial salmon fishing ban was reintroduced and season closure compensation in the amount of $4,000 was paid by the government of New Brunswick to those who had fished salmon commercially in 1982 and 1983. In 1985, the season remained closed and the Federal Government paid compensation in the amount of $4,000 to those who had fished salmon commercially in 1982 and 1983. In 1986 the season remained closed and the defendant initiated another buy back program. The price paid, at that time, for the relinquishment of the fishing privileges, was between $15,000 (when there was no supporting evidence with respect to fishing revenues for the preceding years) and $45,000 (the maximum amount payable). An additional $5,000 was paid to each fisherman, by the government of New Brunswick, as a "signing bonus".
Terms And Conditions Under Which Plaintiffs Sold Their Fishing Privileges In 1981
[15]
The plaintiffs' claims in this action revolve around the representations made to them in 1981, which induced them to forego their fishing privileges for that year. A letter, undated, was sent by the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans, to all the licence holders, probably sometime in April 1981, which reads as follows:
"I am pleased to announce the reopening of the commercial salmon fishery in New Brunswick this year. All those who received compensation in 1980 will be eligible to participate in the fishery in 1981.
"I am asking you to read the information in this letter very carefully as you are being asked to make an important decision in the weeks to come.
"Although salmon stocks are still recovering, the decision to permit a limited commercial fishery this year will require controls, and a commitment to conservation by all fishermen. In that regard, quotas will be applied to each river system, and each licenced fisherman will be entitled to a share of the quota for his area. Quotas will be allocated fairly among fishermen through the distribution of tags.
"Obviously, with 489 fishermen eligible to participate in the fishery this year, and the limited number of fish available, individual shares of the salmon quota will be small. The salmon quota for New Brunswick is only 50,000.
"It is my intention that
in future, only those who are dependent on the commercial fishery including salmon, for their livelihood will be eligible for licences. In 1982 the conditions to
obtain a commercial salmon fishing licence
will be as follows:
1. The licence holder must personally have participated for the duration of the 1981 salmon fishing season, weather permitting;
2. The licence holder must personally operate his or her specified fishing gear;
3. The licence holder must be a full-time resident of the area in which he/she fishes;
4. Licence holders will be permitted to fish for salmon only in the zone named on their licence.
5.
Licence holder must not be employed full-time outside the commercial fishery or other primary industries for more than nine months annually.
"I must tell you clearly that these measures are being taken to ensure the conservation of the salmon stocks so that this fishery will not have to face another ban in the future.
"If you prefer not to participate in the salmon fishery in 1981, the Department of Fisheries and Oceans is offering to buy back your licence.
You must decide this season since the offer to purchase your licence is open only for the year 1981. The price is set at $2,000, or the
amount of compensation you received during one year whichever is greater.
"Those who wish to sell their salmon fishing privilege to the government must make a request to the Department no later than May 31, 1981. ...
"Please note: written requests must be postmarked no later than
May 31, 1981.
Licence transfers will not be permitted in 1981 except where held by estates
or widows who may, instead of the buy back option, transfer the licence to a son, son-in-law, daughter or daughter-in-law. These persons must earn their main income from the fishery. ..." (single underlining added)
The representations, which form the basis of the plaintiffs' claim, flow from the above letter and from the statements made by officials of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans.
[16]
The sale of the fishing privileges carried with it, of course, the loss of any entitlement to a licence in subsequent years. Upon receipt of their "buy back" cheques, the plaintiffs were each asked to sign a release which read, in part, as follows:
"I accept this cheque ... and understand that my commercial salmon fishing privilege is not renewable and that I will not be eligible to engage in the commercial salmon fishery."
[17]
All plaintiffs feel unjustly treated because they had been told that the only buy back program would be that initiated in 1981 and yet there was a subsequent buy back program in 1986. At this later time the fishermen were paid ten to twenty times the amount paid to the plaintiffs in 1981 for their fishing privileges. Some of the plaintiffs feel that they were unjustly dealt with because they had been misled as to what would be required to obtain a licence in 1982 (particularly with reference to what I will call "the other employment condition").
1981 Program - The Only Program - Misrepresentation?
[18]
The evidence establishes that the plaintiffs were told that the 1981 buy back program would be the only opportunity for them to sell their licences. That conclusion follows not only from the Minister's letter set out above but also from the conduct of the officers of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans. It is clear that the Department and its officers were promoting this view. They were trying to encourage fishermen to get out of the industry "voluntarily". It is a fair conclusion from the evidence that the May 31, 1981 deadline, mentioned in the April letter, was chosen to obtain commitments from the individuals concerned that they would not participate in the 1981 salmon fishery before that season opened on June 1, 1981. The statement that they must sell before May 31, 1981, or not obtain anything, turned out not to be true. The buy back program was extended into 1982. Some fishermen were allowed to sell their fishing privileges at that later time despite the fact that they had fished the 1981 season. It is not, however, the terms of this "extended buy back program" about which the plaintiffs complain. Indeed one of the plaintiffs was himself a participant in the extended program. It is the buy back which occurred in 1986, after the salmon fishing season had been open for three years and closed for another two, which is the basis of the plaintiffs' complaint.
[19]
One can understand the plaintiffs' natural outrage on learning about the 1986 program. However, it is not credible to believe that they really construed the defendant's April 1981 letter and the representations made by department officers in 1981 as being a commitment that there would never, at any time in the future, be another buy back program. It is not credible to believe that they interpreted the letter and the representations as a commitment that there would not be another buy back program five or six years hence, if it was necessary to close again the fishery at that time. I think the plaintiffs understood the letter and the representations to mean that they could have their "fishing privileges" bought in 1981 or they could fish in 1981.
[20]
The position of the plaintiffs is not unlike that of a person who sells a house only to discover, six years later, that as a result of inflation a much higher price could have been obtained had they not sold at the earlier time. The representations made to the plaintiffs, to the effect that the offer to purchase their licences would be open for only one season, while they may have been misrepresentations with respect to the extended program of 1982, were not such with respect to that of 1986. In 1981, no one, neither the defendant, her officials and representatives, nor the plaintiffs addressed their minds to what might or might not happen six years later.
Employment Around The Docks At The Port Of Saint John
[21]
Most of the plaintiffs, as well as engaging in commercial salmon fishing, also worked as stevedores at the Port of Saint John. The extent to which this employment was a factor in the plaintiffs' decisions to sell their fishing privileges in 1981 will be assessed on an individual basis later.
[22]
The amount of work available to stevedores at the Port of Saint John fluctuated over the years. In 1971, when commercial salmon fishing licences for the Harbour were first required, the Port of Saint John was referred to as a "winterport". The port's main busy season was in the winter. In the summer, when the St. Lawrence River was open all the way to Montreal, ships went to Montreal instead of to Saint John. The pattern of employment for many of the plaintiffs in 1971, as well as in earlier years, had been to work as stevedores during the winter and to engage in the fishery in the late spring and during the summer.
[23]
By 1980-1981, when the salmon fishing ban was lifted, the pattern of employment around the Port of Saint John had changed. The docks were busy year round. Although Montreal was now kept open all year round, the containerization of cargo and the installation of container facilities at the Port of Saint John had made that port busier than it previously had been. The evidence establishes that the average number of hours worked by stevedores at the port during the time in question was between 1,600 to 2,000 hours a year, depending upon the type of work they did. Some of the plaintiffs worked as much as 2,200 to 2,300 hours during the years 1981 and 1982. (A forty hour week over a 50 week period adds up to 2,000 hours a year). The amount of work available at the port was to change again in the mid and late 1980's. As of that time Halifax had been developed as a container port. The Port of Saint John again became unused much of the time. In any event, in 1981, since the port had become a busier place from what it had been in 1971 and salmon fishing had been banned for the previous nine years, stevedoring obviously played a much more significant role as a source of livelihood for the plaintiffs "working the port" than did fishing.
[24]
The plaintiffs worked at various jobs around the docks: longshoremen; checkers (looking after the placement and documentation of cargo in the storage sheds); shipliners (lashing and unlashing cargo); truckers (loading and unloading railway cars). Some belonged to a basic work force and worked primarily for one employer; others worked on a call up system in gangs; others presented themselves daily at the docks to see if there was work for which they might be hired. In all cases the amount of work available depended upon the number of ships which used the port. In all cases there was no guarantee that any minimum amount of work would be available. Whatever the method of hiring, when an individual was called in or engaged for a period of employment, he was guaranteed a four hour shift and no more. Sometimes when the port was busy an individual would work more than the minimum four hour shift. Sometimes they would work 8, 12 or even 16 hours. Sometimes there would be a great deal of work during one week but very little during the next three. The plaintiffs who were employed in this manner around the docks, whatever their precise job, will be referred to in these reasons, for ease of reference, as stevedores.
"Other Employment Condition" - Misrepresentation
[25]
As noted above the Minister's April 1981 letter indicated that:
"... only those who are
dependent on the commercial salmon fishery for their livelihood
will be eligible for licences. In 1982 the conditions to obtain a commercial salmon fishing licence will be as follows:
1. The licence holder must personally have participated for the duration of the 1981 salmon fishing season, weather permitting
. . . . .
2. Licence holders
must not be employed full-time outside the commercial fishery
or other primary industries for
more than nine months annually
." (underlining added)
The evidence establishes that many of the plaintiffs who were working the port understood that these terms and conditions would preclude them obtaining a fishing licence in 1982 because of their employment as stevedores. Some of the plaintiffs were clear that they had relied on the Minister's letter in this regard. Some also referred to statements made by representatives of the defendant which led them to believe or at least reinforced their understanding that employment as a stevedore would disqualify them from holding a licence in 1982 (see particularly the evidence of Mr. Keleher and Mr. White). Others were less clear as to the source of their understanding. One of the plaintiffs, when questioned about the source of his understanding answered: "it was common knowledge among the fishermen".
[26]
The interpretation which the plaintiffs put on the Minister's letter and which they took from the statements made by department officials was entirely reasonable. This is particularly so given the context of the previous policy of the defendant, which since 1971 had spoken of preserving the fishery for those dependent upon it for their livelihood.
[27]
The plaintiffs subsequently discovered that other individuals who worked the Port of Saint John as stevedores, on essentially the same basis as many of the plaintiffs, were not disqualified from holding a commercial salmon fishing licence in 1982. These individuals retained their "fishing privileges"; they obtained commercial salmon fishing licences in 1982 and in subsequent years. They received season closure compensation in 1984 and in 1985 and they benefited from the buy back program in 1986.
[28]
The conclusion that these other individuals held employment of the same general nature and extent as that engaged in by the plaintiffs arises from the following evidence: the evidence of Mr. Bettle concerning the average number of hours the various categories of stevedores worked during the relevant years and the nature of that work; the plaintiffs' evidence concerning the numbers of individuals with whom they worked, who were engaged in the same type of employment as the plaintiffs and who kept their licences; the specific evidence of Mr. Charlton, Mr. Ward, Mr. Curwin and Mr. Albert Cobham. The plaintiffs, of course, did not have specific knowledge of the exact number of hours worked by the various persons who they named as having worked alongside them as stevedores and who kept their licences. Nevertheless that does not prevent the plaintiffs' evidence in this regard from having some weight. The plaintiffs had significant general knowledge of the type and extent of the employment engaged in by these other individuals. Mr. McGuire testified that at least one of the persons whom he named must have worked more often than he did because that person had his "ticket" (was a union member) while Mr. McGuire did not. I have no hesitation in concluding, on the basis of the evidence, that other individuals who engaged in work similar in nature and extent to that engaged in by many of the plaintiffs (who will be specifically identified later) kept their licences in 1982 and in the years following.
[29]
The defendant called no evidence to refute the plaintiffs' contention that others who were in essentially the same position as these plaintiffs had been allowed to keep their licences in 1982. The defendant called no evidence to establish that a distinction existed between the two groups. In cross-examination, counsel for the defendant repeatedly asked the plaintiffs why they had concluded that the phrase "employed full-time outside the commercial fishery" encompassed work as a stevedore, work which was by its nature irregular and which carried with it no guarantee of any minimum number of hours of employment. The plaintiffs, in general, made their decision on the basis of the number of hours they were working at the time. Counsel for the defendant's questions seemed to indicate that the plaintiffs should have addressed themselves to the nature of the terms of employment relationship (no specific amount of work guaranteed) when deciding whether they were "employed full-time outside the commercial fishery". The plaintiffs were asked whether they had consulted the fisheries officers, or other representatives of the defendant, with respect to the correct interpretation of "employed full-time". They were asked whether they had sought advice as to whether employment as a stevedore fell within the "employed full-time" category. Counsel seemed to be laying a foundation for direct evidence which would show that the defendant never intended the stevedoring employment in which the plaintiffs engaged to fall within the "employed full-time category", and that had the plaintiffs consulted the fisheries officers they would have been so advised. No such direct evidence was called.
[30]
With respect to the failure of the plaintiffs to consult with fishery officers on the appropriateness of their interpretation of the other employment condition, this course of action was not unreasonable. The letter was written in the context of past policies, which since 1972, had used terms such as "only those commercial fishermen who earn their livelihood principally by fishing" would get a licence. The Minister's 1981 letter itself stated that in the future "only those who are dependent on the commercial fishery" for a livelihood would be eligible for a licence. It was not unreasonable for the individuals to fail to seek clarification since they thought they understood the terms and conditions of the policy. The plaintiffs' actions in this regard were entirely reasonable.
[31]
Defendant's counsel took the position, throughout, that the policy as announced in the Minister's April 1981 letter had been enforced. The evidence, as to exactly what this policy was, however, is somewhat confused. I have no doubt that the defendant's failure to call any direct evidence is part of the cause for this unsatisfactory state of the evidence. Counsel for the defendant took the position, in argument, that the correct interpretation of the Minister's April 1981 letter was a matter of law and therefore it was not necessary to call evidence with respect to its interpretation. Mr. Bellefontaine, the defendant's representative, who was examined for discovery, indicated that the defendant's policy had not intended to require anyone to work full-time in the fishery for three months of the year. At pages 84-85 of his examination for discovery (Exhibit 102 Vol. I) the following exchange is found:
"So, it wasn't necessary to be engaged in the fishery for any length of time, but rather not to be engaged outside of the fishery, for a nine month period, is what the policy was?
"Yes. That's correct. Because in categorizing fishermen it was felt, in some areas, a fisherman could make his full years' income or living, during a very short season -- three to four months, six months --
. . . . .
"So, as I take it, it would be, I guess, theoretically possible in 1982 to not have any other employment, and not be engaged in any other type of fishery, other than the salmon, and be able to receive a licence. [the salmon season was open for four weeks in 1982 (July 5 to August 1)]
"In 1981, was, I believe so [the salmon season was open for seven weeks in 1981 (June 8 to July 31)]
"... would it be the same for 1982?
"Yes."
Mr. Bellefontaine was also asked about the text of a document which had never been made public (Exhibit 102, Vol. II, page 138 and Exhibit 102A, page 139)
"... in Section 1, Part 2, or 'B', Part 2, it says that:
'Part-time fishermen to be told that the present state of salmon stocks may or probably will result in their elimination from the fishery in 1982 or thereafter.'
"From what I understand you have told me previously, this was not, in fact, the case?
"I think the term here, 'part-time', is not used quite appropriately. It would be those that would be considered non-full-time fishermen under the salmon policy.
. . . . .
"But he [the author of the policy paper] may have simply written this to specify or to separate the two for the purposes of background information,
but clearly there's never been any announcement that part-time fishermen would be eliminated from the salmon fishery.
" (underlining added)
In response to an undertaking given by Mr. Bellefontaine on discovery the defendant indicated that no fishermen had been excluded from the fishery in the years 1982 and 1983 on the basis that they were employed more than nine months outside the fishery (Exhibit 102, vol. 1, p. 116A).
[32]
Counsel, at times, seemed to be operating on the basis that the defendant's "other employment condition" was enforced by means of classifying fishermen into either part-time or full-time commercial fishermen for purposes of their commercial fishermen's licences (A separate and distinct step from obtaining a salmon fishing licence). On reviewing the evidence I realize that it is not entirely clear as to what part, if any, the classifications full-time and part-time played in establishing entitlement to a salmon fishing licence in 1982 and 1983. Again the defendant's failure to call evidence leaves the state of the record somewhat unsatisfactory. It is clear that a classification system was set up in 1980-1981. Mr. Bellefontaine gave discovery evidence that fishermen were classified as either part-time or full-time on the basis of the application forms they filled out and on the basis of the fisheries officers' personal knowledge. Appeal committees were set up to review that classification. As a result of this classification procedure an individual's commercial fisherman's licence was marked either "part-time" or "full-time". Obtaining a salmon fishing licence was a second and different step. There are internal departmental memoranda indicating that part-time fishermen would not be allowed commercial salmon fishing licences in 1982. One of the plaintiffs' witnesses, Mr. Charlton, when asked about the significance of the part-time/full-time classification, answered:
"I think it made a difference on -- I'm not too sure because, as I say, I got the form, but there was something -- a part-time licence that hurt you some way. But really, I didn't get into it, because I was full-time ..."
[33]
When cross-examining the four individuals, Mr. Charlton, Mr. Ward, Mr. Curwin and Mr. Albert Cobham, all who worked as stevedores and retained their licences, counsel for the defendant seemed to be laying a foundation which would be followed by evidence to show that these individuals had filled out their commercial fishermen's licence applications (not applications for salmon licences) in such a way as to mislead, and that had the officials in charge of implementing the classification policy known the exact extent of their outside employment these individuals would not have been entitled to be classified as full-time fishermen. But no such direct evidence was called. What is more these four individuals were originally classified by officials as part-time fishermen but that classification was overruled by the appeal committees.
[34]
As has already been noted appeal committees were set up to review classifications. Mr. Charlton, Mr. Ward, Mr. Curwin and Mr. Albert Cobham all had their classifications reviewed by the appeal committee and all were classified as full-time fishermen. The appeal committees were composed of fisheries officers and others who knew the fishing community. To make a finding that the four were improperly licenced I would have to find not only that their application forms were somewhat cavalierly filled out but also that they either hoodwinked the appeal committees or the appeal committees disregarded the defendant's policy in deciding upon the appeals of those individuals. As noted previously, the defendant did not call any evidence to assist in the characterization of the evidence adduced by the plaintiffs. I am not prepared to conclude on the basis of the evidence that the four witnesses. Mr. Charlton, Mr. Ward, Mr. Curwin and Mr. Albert Cobham were licenced in a manner contrary to the defendant's policy.
[35]
I conclude on the basis of the evidence that the defendant's policy was not intended to exclude individuals working as stevedores from obtaining licences in 1982 and 1983. It is clear that a significant number of individuals who engaged in employment as stevedores at the Port of Saint John, on a basis and to an extent similar to that engaged in by the plaintiffs, retained their licences. I conclude that the plaintiffs (to be particularly identified later) were misled by the terms of the Minister's letter and by statements of department officials into thinking that they would not be able to obtain a licence in 1982 when this was not the case. The plaintiffs placed an entirely reasonable interpretation on the letter and on the statements made to them and acted to their detriment on that basis.
Individual Plaintiffs - Reasons For Selling
[36]
There are twenty-seven plaintiffs in this action. Their reasons for selling differ. Some of the plaintiffs sold because they were convinced that the other employment condition which was to be imposed in 1982 would preclude them holding a licence in that year. Others sold primarily for other reasons and the other employment condition played little or no part in their decision.
[37]
As with all decision making, there is often more than one factor at play. One factor which was clearly at play, in the plaintiffs' decisions to sell their fishing privileges, was the particular individual's estimate of the profitability of re-entering the industry. Some of the plaintiffs gave evidence that they understood that if all the fishermen who were entitled to fish did so, each person's quota would be approximately 17 (19) salmon and 20 grilse (small salmon). There is no precise evidence as to where this belief came from. Some of the plaintiffs thought they had been given this information by fisheries officers but were unable to be precise in this regard. Witnesses other than the plaintiffs also testified that this had initially been their understanding. The defendant called no evidence from the fisheries officers to establish what information exactly had been provided. There is statistical evidence in the documents, which have been filed, setting out the number of fishermen in the Saint John-Fundy area and the total number of fish to be allocated but this does not establish what specific allotment was contemplated for individuals in the Saint John area. The quotas actually allocated to the fishermen who remained in the industry and fished in the Saint John area in 1981 was close to 100 fish each.
[38]
I am sure that if the plaintiffs had known that there would be a buy back in 1986, particularly one paying ten to twenty times the amount paid in 1981, they would all have elected not to sell in 1981. I perceive my task in assessing the evidence, however, to be that of determining which of the plaintiffs, in the absence of any knowledge of this subsequent buy back and knowing there was uncertainty as to how many fish would be allocated and how many might be caught, sold their licence primarily or substantially because they understood that the other employment condition would preclude them from holding a licence the following year.
[39]
I emphasize to the plaintiffs that the court's decision in this respect is made and can only be made on the basis of the material before it, that is, in this case, on the basis of the oral testimony of the various plaintiffs and the documentary material which has been filed. It may be that some among them, in fact, placed heavy reliance on the other employment condition in making their decision to sell. If this is not clearly substantiated in the evidence, however, it cannot be reflected in the court's decision.
[40]
Among those who sold in 1981 without reliance on the "other employment condition" are those who were unable themselves to fish in 1981. They had no choice but to sell. As noted above, the new rules stipulated that no transfers were to be allowed except by a widow or an estate and then only to a son or daughter or to a son-in-law or daughter-in-law who was a fisherman. If the privilege holders could not themselves fish in 1981, their fishing privilege would, in any event, lapse the following year. These individuals were simply caught in what might be described as a forced expropriation situation. One of the plaintiffs in this category was Mrs. Doyle; she held her son's "fishing privilege"; her son had died in 1974; there is no evidence that Mrs. Doyle could fish the privilege herself; there is no evidence that there was a son, daughter, son-in-law or daughter-in-law to whom she could have transferred the privilege. Mrs. Bannon was in a similar position; she held her husband's fishing privilege; he had died in 1974; there is no evidence that Mrs. Bannon could fish the privilege herself; there is no evidence that there was a son, daughter, son-in-law or daughter-in-law to whom she could have transferred the privilege. Mrs. Bannon died shortly before the trial of this action and her daughter, Mrs. Ferguson, now represents her mother's estate. Mr. William Cormier also found himself in essentially a forced expropriation situation. He was on welfare at the time. He stated that it would have been irresponsible for him to have gone off welfare and take the chance that he could catch enough salmon to replace the welfare payments which supported his family. He wanted to pass his salmon privileges "down" to his son, as he had done with his shad and gaspereau licences, but because of the no transfer rule (except for estates and widows) he was unable to do so.
[41]
Some of the plaintiffs gave up their fishing privileges in 1981 because they were in ill health or because they had reached an age when they simply did not wish to fish anymore. This decision was taken in the context of the no-transfer rule. Plaintiffs who in my opinion fall into this category are: Mr. Wheaton, Mr. Elliott, Mr. McAllister and Mr. McLennan. Mr. Wheaton had been retired since 1974. In addition, he had a back problem. Mr. Elliott became ill in 1981; he had a rupture, cancer was found and he died in August of 1982. While the exact date of the commencement of his illness is not in evidence, I conclude from the seriousness of that illness that it was the main reason that he sold his fishing privileges in 1981. Mr. McAllister at the date of the trial of this action was 87 years old. He started fishing in 1915. He stated that he was not too old to fish in 1981 and he was not too old to fish now. I do not doubt that assertion. Nevertheless, it is clear that his decision was discussed with his family beforehand and, as his son stated, it was decided that his father should get, at that time, what he could out of the privilege for himself. The other employment condition played no role in Mr. McAllister's decision to sell his fishing privilege. Mr. McLennan had a back problem; in 1980 he was off work for eight months; he gave evidence that he considered he was simply getting too old for Sou'Westers and fog in the Bay. Also he would have had to purchase a new boat which he was reluctant to do. His reasons for selling the privilege were not related to the other employment condition.
[42]
Apart from necessity, age and lack of health there are other reasons which led some plaintiffs to decide to sell their fishing privileges, which reasons I conclude on the basis of the evidence were not significantly influenced by the defendant's failure to accurately explain the "other employment condition". Mr. Doucette had joined the Coast Guard in 1972; he was making a substantial wage in 1981. He was not one of the plaintiffs whose work around the docks fell into the stevedoring category. Mr. Bartlett had no gear, no boat and knew the season would be short. He testified that he was not interested in getting back into fishing for a short season. Undoubtedly the "other employment condition" played some role in his decision but I conclude that the overriding factor, as far as Mr. Bartlett was concerned, was his judgment that it would not be economically worthwhile. Mr. London indicated that he sold because he was convinced he would not make enough money to make it worthwhile. Mr. Harned stated that he knew that the amount of work he did as a stevedore (400 hours per year) would not disqualify him in 1982 but that the expense of buying new gear would not be recouped given the small quota he expected would be allocated. Mr. Williams only worked part-time at the port. He gave evidence that he expected the port to become busier in 1982 and therefore he would be working more the following year and not able to meet the no outside employment requirement. A more convincing conclusion from his evidence is that he did not want to get back into the fishery at that time, primarily because he did not expect it to be economically profitable. Mr. Wilson sold because he was not going to be able to use his spearhead nets (they were a prohibited type of equipment). He did not think he could catch enough fish with a straight net, at the place in the river where he fished, to make it worthwhile. In none of these cases does the evidence establish that the decision to sell was significantly influenced by the other employment condition.
[43]
The evidence concerning Mr. Burke, Mr. Daigle, Mr. Walter McEachern, Mr. Petts and Mr. Malcolm Cormier is vague and sometimes somewhat confused. That evidence cannot support a conclusion that the other employment condition played a significant role in their decisions to sell their fishing privileges.
[44]
The plaintiffs whose situations remain to be considered are: Mr. McKinnon, Mr. Keleher, Mr. Patrick McEachern, Mr. Edward Cobham, Mr. White, Mr. McGuire, Mr. Silliphant, Mr. Butler and Mr. LeBlanc. In each of these cases I conclude that the evidence supports a finding that these individuals sold either because they were primarily convinced that the other employment condition would preclude them from holding a licence the following year or because their understanding of the other employment condition played a significant role in their decision to sell.
[45]
Mr. McKinnon sold his privilege because he understood that the other employment condition would preclude him from holding a licence in 1982. He had fishing gear at the time; indeed, he had bought a new boat in 1977 expecting the fishery to open in 1978. He fished for gaspereau and shad in 1982 and 1983. Mr. Keleher sold his privilege because he was convinced that his employment on the docks would mean that he would not be entitled to a licence the following year. He was also concerned about the economic viability of the industry and he had no gear in 1981, (he had given his 1971 gear to his brother). Nevertheless I conclude that the other employment condition played a significant role in his decision to sell. In 1981, he wrote to the defendant concerning this decision:
"After reading the Minister's letter very carefully as instructed and after attending a meeting of the Saint John Commercial Fishermen's Association where Mr. Trudeau [a fisheries official] was present, and after hearing his ultimatum I have reluctantly decided to sell my salmon licence to the federal government."
[46]
Mr. White's decision was also conditioned largely on the fact that he understood he would not be able to get a licence the following year because he was working outside the industry full-time. Mr. McGuire and Mr. LeBlanc also fall into this category. Neither Mr. White, Mr. McGuire nor Mr. LeBlanc remember the Minister's letter. That letter was sent to all the fishermen. It is likely it was received by all except those for whom returns were received (Exhibit 66). Mr. White remembers being told by fishery officers to sell or he would "lose out". Whether the plaintiffs remember the letter specifically or not is not crucial to their claim. It is clear that the source from which their understanding of the other employment condition came was the Minister's letter and the statements made by the department officials. Most of the plaintiffs do not have extensive formal education. One indicated that he had practically none. They are not employed at jobs where remembering details for long periods of time is necessary. Also it is natural that after eight years anybody's memory would be somewhat faded. The evidence must be assessed keeping these factors in mind. I do not think the fact that some of the plaintiffs cannot remember the Minister's letter or whether it was a long one or a short one is fatal to their claim. If their decision to sell was based on an understanding of the terms and conditions which were to prevail the following year, which understanding had its origin either directly or indirectly in the Minister's letter and the statements of department officials, then the defendant's conduct was the source of the actions the plaintiffs took which resulted in detriment to them. I note again that the defendant called no evidence to refute the plaintiffs' assertions that their understanding of the conditions originated with the department (including the Minister) and was one which prevailed generally. Those fishermen who kept their licences were either exceptions to this general view or, more likely, simply decided to take the risk. No evidence was given that the defendant, her officers or representatives did anything to discourage the view which prevailed amongst the plaintiffs or to clarify what was meant by the other employment condition.
[47]
I conclude from the evidence that Mr. Silliphant's decision to sell was also significantly conditioned by his understanding that the other employment condition would preclude him holding a licence in 1982. His letter, written in 1981 to the defendant, stating that he intended to relinquish his licence focused on the likely unprofitability of re-entering the fishery. Nevertheless, I conclude on the basis of his oral evidence that the other employment condition played a significant role in his decision. He continued fishing for species other than salmon after he had sold his salmon licence. He fished for shad and gaspereau after 1981 and continued to hold a lobster licence as well.
[48]
I conclude that the evidence establishes that Mr. Patrick McEachern and Mr. Edward Cobham also fall into the category of individuals whose decisions to sell were significantly influenced by the other employment condition. Mr. McEachern had lost his gear (the nets had been stolen, his boat had been lost in a gale) but nevertheless, I conclude that his evidence establishes that he sold his fishing privilege in 1981 because he was convinced that he would not be able to meet the policy guidelines the following year. The evidence concerning Mr. Edward Cobham is somewhat less satisfactory. He gave different stories on discovery and at trial concerning the representations of fisheries officers. On the witness stand he did not leave a favourable impression insofar as his credibility is concerned. Nevertheless, I conclude that the other employment condition was a significant factor in his decision to sell. This conclusion is based largely on the letter he sent, when he relinquished his licence, in April of 1981, long before this litigation commenced. He stated at that time, in a letter written for him by his wife:
"In regard to your letter about salmon licence as I am employed twelve months a year I would like to turn my licence in." (Exhibit 5u)
[49]
Mr. Butler's decision to sell was based on his understanding that if he did not fish for three months he would not qualify for a licence the following year. Also, he considered himself to be working full-time at the port. He worked 2,202 hours in 1980. When he wrote to the Department of Fisheries relinquishing his licence he referred to his age and to the cost of the equipment which would be required for him to re-enter the fishery. These comments, however, have to be placed in the context of his understanding that he would not be eligible to obtain a licence in 1982.
[50]
There are twenty-seven plaintiffs in this action. I have not discussed every part of the evidence but that should not be taken as an indication that I have not considered it all. To refer to every sentence and document would require written reasons of excessive length. I have made selective references to specific parts of the evidence which I consider illustrate the conclusions to which I have come. I have with respect to each plaintiff considered the evidence as a whole.
Charter Of Rights - Section 15
[51]
Section 15(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms provides:
"15(1) Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination and, in particular, without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability."
In his memorandum of law filed before the beginning of the trial, counsel for the plaintiffs indicated that he would raise a s. 15 Charter argument. He argued that the facts in this case support a conclusion that the plaintiffs were denied "equal protection and equal benefit of the law".
[52]
Counsel for the defendant objected to this line of argument because it had not been pleaded. Counsel for the plaintiffs' response to that objection was: (1) he did not need to make specific reference to a potential Charter argument in his pleading because the Charter was not a statute but a part of the constitution, as set out in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 321; 11 C.C.C.(3d) 481; 9 D.L.R.(4th) 161; 8 C.R.R. 193, at p. 365 S.C.R.; (2) in any event, under the normal rules of pleading one only has to plead the material facts to support an argument - there is no need to plead the law; (3) if either of these positions were not correct he should be allowed, now, to amend the statement of claim because the plaintiffs should not be denied the opportunity to make a Charter argument simply because counsel had not, prior to the eve of trial, pleaded that argument.
[53]
Whatever may be the effect of the comments of Mr. Justice Estey in the Skapinker case, I am sure it would be a shock to the parliamentarians at Westminister who enacted the Constitution Act, 1982, to discover that it was not a statute. I do not think Mr. Justice Estey meant to establish so broad a principle. Rather I take his comments to refer to the fact that the Constitution Act, 1982 is not a statute of the Parliament of Canada and is not now amendable as an ordinary statute. I certainly do not think he meant to establish a rule that an argument based on Charter grounds could be argued without specifically being pleaded simply because the Charter "is the supreme law of Canada" (page 366 S.C.R. of the Skapinker decision, supra, and s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982).
[54]
I accept counsel for the plaintiffs' argument that the appropriate legal principle is set out by Mr. Justice Urie speaking for the Federal Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 351-352 F.C.: it is sufficient for a pleader to state the material facts, he need not state the legal result. See also  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 308 (F.C.A.). In the present case, however, there is no mention of any section of the Charter in the plaintiffs' statement of claim nor are there sufficient facts pleaded to support a s. 15 argument. The defendants had no notice that a s. 15 Charter argument would be raised. The rules of pleading are designed to ensure that the parties to litigation have adequate notice of the case they have to meet and are not taken by surprise. The defendants were not given such notice in this case with respect to a potential Charter argument.
[55]
There is considerable force, however, in counsel's argument that his clients should not be denied the right to make a Charter argument merely because he forgot to plead it before the eve of the trial. At the commencement of trial I indicated that to allow the plaintiffs to raise a s. 15 Charter argument now, would require: (1) an amendment to pleadings and (2) an opportunity for the defendant to build an evidenciary basis to support a section one defence to the s. 15 Charter argument. To grant such, at the opening of trial, would clearly have required an adjournment. This was a trial which had been set down for hearing several months prior to the date of trial and it seemed likely to involve 34 witnesses or more, many of whom were in the courtroom at the commencement of the hearing.
[56]
In the light of the great inconvenience, delay and extra costs which would be occasioned by an adjournment I ruled that evidence which counsel for the plaintiffs might proffer with respect to the s. 15 argument would be accepted, under reserve. Much of it was likely in any event to be relevant to the misrepresentation claim. I indicated that an amendment to pleadings may be allowed at any time by the court and that, in this particular case, it was appropriate to assess whether an amendment should be allowed, after both counsel had been given the opportunity on the basis of the plaintiffs' evidence alone, to address argument to the plaintiffs' s. 15 claim. In this way there would be an opportunity to assess the strength of the plaintiffs' s. 15 argument before deciding whether an amendment to the pleadings should be allowed. I acknowledge that this is an unusual procedure and likely one that is rarely appropriate. However, in this case, it was appropriate, in order to ensure that the plaintiffs were not denied an opportunity to put forward all arguments which might apply.
[57]
Counsel for the plaintiffs' s. 15 argument is based mainly on the decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.). The plaintiffs in that case alleged discrimination on the basis of national origin because, not being Canadian citizens, they were not entitled to become members of the Law Society of British Columbia by virtue of the Barristers and Solicitors Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 26, s. 42. Madame Justice Wilson, in writing the majority decision stated, at pages 259-261:
"... a rule which bars an entire class of persons from certain forms of employment solely on the ground that they are not Canadian citizens violates the equality rights of that class ...
"Relative to citizens, noncitizens are a group lacking in political power and as such vulnerable to having their interests overlooked and their rights to equal concern and respect violated ... I would conclude therefore that noncitizens fall into an analogous category to those specifically enumerated in s. 15. I emphasize, moreover, that this is a determination which is not to be made only in the context of the law which is subject to challenge but rather in the context of the place of the group in the entire social, political and legal fabric of our society. While Legislatures must inevitably draw distinctions among the governed, such distinctions should not bring about or re-enforce the disadvantage of certain groups and individuals by denying them the rights freely accorded to others.
. . . . .
"While I have emphasized that noncitizens are, in my view, an analogous group to those specifically enumerated in s. 15 and, as such, are entitled to the protection of the section, I agree with my colleague that it is not necessary in this case to determine what limit, if any, there is on the grounds covered by s. 15 and I do not do so."
Counsel argues that in the present case the plaintiffs have been denied equal treatment under the law because individuals working alongside them who fished in the same manner, in the same area and with the same type of equipment as they did were paid twenty times more for their fishing privileges in 1986 than the plaintiffs had been paid in 1981.
[58]
The facts referred to by counsel for the plaintiffs do not establish a denial of equality before and under the law, nor a denial to the equal protection and benefit of the law as provided for by s. 15. It is not necessary to consider whether the defendant's actions were "under the law" or constituted a "benefit of the law". Nor is it necessary to consider whether discrimination between two groups can fall within s. 15 if that discrimination is not based on a difference related to personal characteristics - the Andrews case specifically leaves that issue open. It is sufficient for the purposes of this case to note that the two categories of individuals are not similarly situated.
[59]
Counsel for the plaintiffs has singled out three characteristics of the two groups: they fished using the same type of gear; they both fished salmon; they fished in the same area. But a very significant difference between the two groups exists: the plaintiffs were bought out in 1981 after the fishery had been closed for nine years; they had not fished since 1971; many of them no longer had fishing gear; many had old gear. The individuals who were bought out in 1986 had engaged in the fishery in 1981-1984. That activity required a certain amount of investment in new gear. Also, the very fact that the defendant's rationalization of the industry had concentrated the fishing privileges into fewer hands would make each privilege more valuable. This is what the defendant's buy out program of 1981 was intended to do. Another difference between the two situations is that two-thirds of the monies paid to the 1986 group did not come from the defendant; those amounts were paid to the fishermen by the Province of New Brunswick. It is simply not possible to classify those who sold out in 1981 and those who sold out in 1986 as being similarly situated for the purposes of a s. 15 argument. Also, to the extent that the argument might be rephrased to allege unequal treatment between two groups of individuals in 1981, and not as between the 1981 and 1986 groups, such argument could not succeed. Section 15 of the Charter was not in force in 1981. Thus I am forced to conclude, that counsel's Charter argument could not prevail. Accordingly, there would be no point in allowing an amendment to be made to the pleading.
Fishing Privileges - Legal Characterization
[60]
Counsel for the defendant's main contention is that the plaintiffs held no property rights (no property interest) in their fishing licences or in a right to fish and therefore they had nothing to sell. Counsel argues that policies developed for the guidance of departmental officials do not constrain the Minister in the exercise of his absolute discretion pursuant to s. 7 of the Fisheries Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. F-14 (now R.S.C. 1985, c. F-14). It is argued that the amounts paid in 1981 were simply ex gratia payments to which the plaintiffs had no legal right and therefore the plaintiffs' claims are without merit. Section 7 states:
"7(1) Subject to subsection (2), the Minister may, in his absolute discretion, wherever the exclusive right of fishing does not already exist by law, issue or authorize to be
issued leases and licences for fisheries or fishing
, wherever situated or carried on.
"7(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, leases or licences for any term exceeding nine years shall be issued only under the authority of the Governor in Council." (underlining added)
[61]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mr. Justice Strayer dealt with the argument that because fishing licences have commercial value and are frequently bought and sold they should be regarded as vesting in their holders a right which is indefeasible, except where there has been a breach of a condition of the licence. He concluded at page 520:
"But licences terminate each year and by s. 7 the Minister has an 'absolute discretion' in the issuance of new licences. I am therefore unable to find a legal underpinning for the 'vesting' of a licence beyond the rights which it gives for the year in which it was issued."
Similarly, in Re National Trust Co. and Bouckhuyt (1988), 23 O.A.C. 40; 43 D.L.R.(4th) 543, the Ontario Court of Appeal found that a basic production quota for tobacco under the provincial Farm Products Marketing Act was not property because the basic production quota and its allotment, reduction and cancellation were at the complete discretion of the Tobacco Board. (p. 551)
[62]
There is no doubt the plaintiffs believed they had some sort of continuing legal right to fish in the area in question. They understood this to follow from the fact that they had fished there in previous years. Both the language used by the defendant and the defendant's conduct reinforced the plaintiffs' expectations and understanding in this regard. At the same time the plaintiffs were under no illusions about the power of the Minister to close the fishery, if he so desired, or to alter the eligibility requirements for a licence, as had been done in past, for example, with respect to "transfers".
[63]
Counsel for the plaintiffs referred to the jurisprudence which has held that licences to fish are profits à prendre and therefore are a species of property right. See for example,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 117. Counsel for the defendant argued that while this might be true of private fishing licences it was not true with respect to fishing in tidal waters since this has been the subject of a public right to fish since the time of Magna Carta.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (J.C.P.C.). Counsel for the defendant drew attention to the distinction in the Fisheries Act between a lease of a fishery and a licence to fish.
[64]
I do not think it is necessary to determine whether the plaintiffs' fishing privileges were a species of property right or not. As has already been noted, the eligibility requirement which the Minister established for entry into the 1981 fishery was that an individual had to have received salmon season closure compensation in 1980. This, in turn, meant that the individual had to have held a commercial salmon fishing licence in 1971 and had been able to prove himself a bona fide fisherman at that time. Having opened the 1981 fishery to everyone who fell within this category, the Minister and his officials then encouraged individuals who were eligible for a licence to give up their "right" (privilege) to apply for a licence. This was done by offering to purchase the fishing privilege and by announcing that stringent and more restrictive criteria to obtain a licence would be applied in 1982. In that context some of the plaintiffs were encouraged to act and did act, to their detriment, on the basis of the defendant's misrepresentations concerning the other employment condition. That is enough to found a cause of action regardless of how the "right" (privilege) to apply for a licence is categorized.
[65]
There is no doubt that the Minister could have closed the fishery and paid the plaintiffs nothing. There is no doubt that the Minister could have established conditions in 1981 requiring that in order to be entitled to a licence in 1981 one had to prove that he or she was not engaged in employment outside the fishing industry. There is no doubt that the Minister could have altered the eligibility requirements for 1981 after he had announced them. There is no doubt he could have changed his mind about the buy back offer after he had made it, and decided not to "buy out" anybody. I make no determination as what would be the applicable rules if he had changed his mind, in this way, after some but not all of the fishermen eligible for the "buy out" had accepted the offer. But, he did not do any of these things. He established by policy directive the eligibility requirements for a licence in 1982 [see footnote 1]. These were issued to the relevant officials of his department. He thereby set up conditions designed to induce some of the fishermen eligible for a licence to forgo their right to apply for and obtain a licence. It is the Minister's course of action in this regard which is important, not what he might have done.
[66]
I do not accept the argument that because the Minister has discretion pursuant to s. 7 of the Act to have followed another course of action, that the course of conduct he actually followed in 1981 cannot give rise to a cause of action. I do not accept the argument that because the plaintiffs had no property rights (if this is indeed correct) that they had nothing to sell.
Contractual Or Tortious Misrepresentation
[67]
Counsel for the plaintiffs cites  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  I accept that argument.
[68]
The Hedley Byrne case stands for the proposition that when an individual in the ordinary course of business affairs gives information to another in circumstances where he knows that person is relying on that information a duty of care arises. In such circumstances if the person to whom the information is given suffers damage as a result of his reliance on the information, which information was false and was negligently or carelessly given, then a cause of action arises. The provider of the information is liable for the damage caused. See also Ministry of Housing and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), particularly the summary of the law found at pages 268-269:
"... the duty to use due care in a statement arises, not from any voluntary assumption of responsibility, but from the fact that the person making it knows, or ought to know, that others, being his neighbours in this regard, would act on the faith of the statement being accurate. That is enough to bring the duty into being. It is owed, of course, to the person to whom ... he knows is going to act on it, see the judgment of Cardozo, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . But it is also owed to any person whom he knows, or ought to know, will be injuriously affected by a mistake ..."
[69]
In the present case the information was all in the hands of the defendant. The statements concerning what were going to be the eligibility requirements in 1982 were made knowingly, indeed with the intention, that the plaintiffs would rely on them. The defendant had a duty of care to see that those statements were accurate and not framed so as to mislead. If the defendant did not intend "full-time employment" to include work such as the stevedoring engaged in by the plaintiffs (and this certainly seems to be the case from the actions subsequently taken) then the defendant had an obligation to ensure that this was clear. If the defendant was not going to enforce the policy enunciated in the letter of April 1981, then she should not have made representations to the plaintiff that she would do so. The defendant's misrepresentations in this regard caused those plaintiffs which have been identified, to act to their detriment.
[70]
With respect to the Esso Petroleum and J. Evans & Son cases, these both deal with representations made in the context of a contractual relationship. The headnote, at page 6, of the Esso Petroleum case summarizes the law as follows:
"Where, during the course of precontractual negotiations, one party, who had special knowledge and expertise concerning the subject matter of the negotiations, made a forecast based on that knowledge and expertise with the intention of inducing the other party to enter into the contract, and in reliance of the forecast the other party did enter into the contract, it was open to the court to construe the forecast as being not merely an expression of opinion but as constituting a warranty that the forecast was reliable ..."
Since the forecast was unsound in that case the defendant was liable for the damages suffered by the plaintiff as a result of the contract into which he had entered in reliance on that forecast.
[71]
It is clear that the sale of the fishing privileges by the plaintiffs to the defendant in 1981 were contracts. The defendant took the position, as noted above, that if what was being sold did not constitute a property interest the plaintiffs had nothing to sell, and that no consideration could exist. That is clearly too narrow a view of consideration. Waddams, The Law of Contracts, 2nd Ed. (Toronto, Canada Law Book Inc., 1984) at page 90 writes:
"... any act or promise by B or any forbearance to act is sufficient consideration for A's promise if the promise is given in return."
He cites as examples of sufficient consideration: forbearance to sue on a debt; forbearance to leave a homestead; forbearance to return to home abroad. Cheshire and Fifoot, Law of Contract, 10th Ed. (London, Butterworths, 1981) at page 62, fn. 11, contains the following passage:
"... Lord Ellenborough in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  from the plaintiff: it may be some detriment to the plaintiff or some benefit to the defendant': Patteson, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  right, interest, profit or benefit accruing to one party, or for some forbearance, detriment, loss or responsibility given, suffered or undertaken by the other' ..."
At page 63, Cheshire and Fifoot explain consideration in the following terms:
"But such benefit and detriment assumes that the promises are binding, which is precisely what it is sought to prove. A further disadvantage to the use of the word 'detriment' is that it has to be understood in a highly technical sense. So a promise to give up smoking is capable of being a detriment in the law of consideration even though smoking is bad for the promisor."
A similar reference is found in Waddam's text at page 89, citing the American case  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (1881).
[72]
The representation made by the defendant, that those employed full-time for more than nine months outside the industry would not be entitled to licences in 1982, clearly induced and was intended to induce some individuals to enter into contracts to forgo their right to apply for licences in 1981. That representation turned out to be false insofar as the stevedoring employment engaged in by the plaintiffs is concerned. That representation misled those plaintiffs, who have been identified above, into thinking that it would preclude them obtaining a licence in 1982 when the evidence demonstrates that this was not the case.
[73]
Counsel for the plaintiffs put forward alternative arguments based on: equitable fraud, unjust enrichment, breach of trust or fiduciary relationship, interference by the defendant with the plaintiffs' property rights in the commercial salmon fishery. I find it unnecessary to review any of these arguments having come to the conclusion that those based on tortious or contractual misrepresentation must succeed. In the course of argument I indicated to counsel that the facts in this case called to mind the doctrine of legitimate expectation which has developed in the administrative law context.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Provenance and Protection of Legitimate Expectations (1988), 47 Camb. L.J. 238. It was agreed that should I decide to consider any of the jurisprudence relating to that doctrine I would seek argument from counsel. I have not considered that jurisprudence and therefore have not sought further representation from counsel.
Conclusion - Damages
[74]
The plaintiffs Mr. McKinnon, Mr. Keleher, Mr. Patrick McEachern, Mr. Edward Cobham, Mr. LeBlanc, Mr. White, Mr. Butler, Mr. Silliphant and Mr. McGuire relied on the defendant's representation that individuals who worked full-time nine months outside the fishery would not be entitled to a licence in 1982. They interpreted that condition as precluding them from holding a commercial salmon fishing licence in 1982 because of the stevedoring work they did. The evidence establishes that this was not so. Others holding employment similar in nature and in extent to that engaged in by these plaintiffs were granted licences in 1982. The misrepresentation induced the plaintiffs to sell their fishing privileges. The plaintiffs listed above are entitled to compensation for the damages they incurred as a result of their reliance on this misrepresentation. The damages each incurred are calculated as follows: loss of revenue for 1981-1983 - $9,000; loss of compensation for 1984-1985 - $8,000; loss of buy back value in 1986 - $35,000. This amounts to $53,000. Those plaintiffs who would have had to purchase new gear shall have $3,000 deducted from the damages so calculated. The evidence discloses that Mr. LeBlanc did not have gear at one period of time - that he tore his nets and sold the corks. I interpret the evidence as establishing that these events occurred after the 1981 fishing season and therefore those factors do not enter into the calculation of the damages payable to him. In calculating the damages I have considered that the catching of fish is uncertain and that the inclusion of more fishermen in the industry in 1986 might have resulted in making the compensation paid to each lower.
Judgment accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
Footnote
1. Such requirements could have been prescribed by regulation pursuant to s. 43 of the Fisheries Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-14, but the Minister's authority pursuant to s. 7 of the Fisheries Act was used. Section 43 provides:
"The Governor in Council may make regulations for carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act and in particular, but without restricting the generality of the foregoing, may make regulations
. . . . .
(f) respecting the issue, suspension and cancellation of licences and leases;
(g) respecting the terms and conditions under which a licence and lease may be issued;"
[End of document]