[1]
Denault, J.
[Translation]: The applicant is seeking judicial review of a decision of the Refugee Division rejecting her claim, in which she stated that she had a well-founded fear of persecution in her country of origin, El Salvador, by reason of her political opinion and her membership in a particular social group.
[2]
In its very short judgment, the tribunal merely summarized the facts as stated by the refugee hearing officer and reproduced lengthy passages from her assessment of the evidence in which, specifically, she suggested the questions that the tribunal should ask itself. In a few paragraphs, the tribunal concluded that the analysis established "irreconcilable doubts" and that the answers to the questions raised were not adequate to overcome the burden of proof that rested on the applicant. The tribunal saw fit to add that even if the claim had been established, the change of circumstances in El Salvador was such that "the earlier situation no longer exists, according to the documentation filed".
[3]
I must agree with counsel for the parties that the wording of this decision leaves something to be desired. While counsel for the applicant took it to mean that his client was not credible, his adversary contended, on the contrary, that the tribunal had found her credible but that the issue lies rather in the nature of the deductions that the tribunal made from the facts, which deductions the applicant does not share. Counsel for the applicant further argued that at the hearing the members of the Refugee Division did not permit him to call a number of witnesses who could have established the applicant's credibility.
[4]
After reading the evidence in its entirety, it is clear that the members of the Refugee Division believed the applicant's statement of the main facts relating to her claim. On this point, she suffered no prejudice from the fact that the witnesses who were present to corroborate the facts she stated were not called.
[5]
The issue in this case really lies in the nature of the deductions that the tribunal made from the facts, which obviously do not coincide with the deductions made by the applicant.
[6]
On this point, it must be recalled that the presumption of truth that applies to the facts recounted by the applicant does not apply to the deductions made from those facts (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)).
[7]
In the case at bar, I believe that despite the clumsy wording of the decision, the deductions made by the tribunal from the facts in evidence were not unreasonable to the point that they require the intervention of this court.
[8]
Accordingly, the application is dismissed. There is no reason to state a serious question of general importance which would open the way to an appeal under the provisions of s. 83 of the
Act
.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/nmg