[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is an appeal from part of a decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary of September 21, 1995 dealing with questions and answers arising out of the examination for discovery of the plaintiff's witness.
[2]
The plaintiff is the patentee of Canadian Patent 1,265,809 which was issued February 13, 1990 (referred to hereinafter as "the Patent") claiming a priority filing date of August 5, 1986 based on an original Hungarian filing date. The Patent purports to claim two morphologically homogeneous crystal forms of famotidine and the processes to make these forms. The two forms are designated in the Patent as form A and form B, with form B being the crystal form of lower melting point.
[3]
In its twice Amended Statement of Claim, the plaintiff alleges that the defendants are infringing its Patent. In the Amended Statement of Defence, the defendants deny infringement of any of the claims in the Patent and, by counterclaim, allege that the Patent and the claims relied upon by the plaintiff are invalid and void.
[4]
The plaintiff was first examined for discovery during the week of September 12 to 16, 1994 in Budapest, Hungary, through its nominated representative, Dr. Bela Stefko. During this examination for discovery, the plaintiff refused to answer certain questions and refused to produce file histories for the prosecution of its two Hungarian patents allegedly corresponding to the Canadian patent in this suit.
[5]
By Notice of Motion dated August 30, 1995, the defendants sought an order to compel, inter alia, the plaintiff to answer Questions 72-73-75 and 86 asked of its representative Dr. Bela Stefko on September 14, 1994 and Question 4 asked of its representative Dr. Bela Stefko on September 12, 1994.
[6]
This motion was heard before Mr. Peter A.K. Giles, the Associate Senior Prothonotary, on September 5 and 6, 1995. Mr. Giles, by Order signed September 21, 1995 ordered, inter alia:
"7. Richter Gedeon shall answer the following Questions in Category IV of the motion, Invalidity-Derivation, as follows:
86 Question to be answered by Richter Gedeon.
"9. Richter Gedeon shall answer the following Questions in Category V of the motion, Invalidity-Anticipation - Prior Knowledge Available to the Public, Printed Publication and Obviousness, as follows:
72 Question to be answered by Richter Gedeon.
73 Question to be answered by Richter Gedeon.
75 Question to be answered by Richter Gedeon.
"13. Richter Gedeon shall answer the following Questions in Category VI of the motion, Bioavailability Tests/Utility, as follows:
4 File histories to be produced."
[7]
The plaintiff is now seeking an Order reversing, in part, this Order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary Giles. At the hearing, I was advised that I did not have to deal with the appeal concerning Question 4. Consequently, no ruling is necessary on this issue.
[8]
An Order of a prothonotary can be appealed to this court pursuant to rule 336(5) of the
Federal Court Rules
which provides as follows:
"(5) Any person affected by an order or decision of a prothonotary, other than a judgment under rules 432 to 437, may appeal therefrom to the court and such appeal shall be made by an application of which a notice shall be given to all interested parties setting forth the grounds of objection and served within 14 days after the order of decision complained of, and four clear days before the day fixed for hearing the same, or served within such other time as may be allowed by the court of a prothonotary on ex parte application. The appeal shall be filed no later than two days before the date named for hearing (In this paragraph, 'court' means 'trial division', if the matter is in the trial division, and 'Court of Appeal', if the matter is in the Court of Appeal."
[9]
The standard of review that applies on such an appeal has been well stated by Jerome, A.C.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) at 463-464, MacGuigan, J.A., set out the applicable standard of review as follows:
'I also agree with the Chief Justice in part as to the standard of review to be applied to a discretionary decision of a prothonotary. Following in particular Lord Wright in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.) at p. 484, and Lacourciere, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Div. Ct.), discretionary orders of prothonotaries ought not be disturbed on appeal to a judge unless:
(a) they are clearly wrong, in the sense that the exercise of discretion by the prothonotary was based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts, or
(b) they raise questions vital to the final issue of the case.
"Where such discretionary orders are clearly wrong in that the prothonotary has fallen into error of law (a concept in which I include a discretion based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts), or where they raise questions vital to the final issue of the case, a judge ought to exercise his own discretion de novo."
[10]
The relevant legislative dispositions that address the conduct of examination for discovery are rules 458, 459 and 466 of the
Federal Court Rules
which read as follow:
Rules
"458(1) A person who is being examined for discovery shall answer, to the best of the person's knowledge, information and belief, any question that
(a) is relevant to any unadmitted allegation of fact in any pleading filed in the action by the party being examined or the examining party; or
(b) concerns the names or addresses of any person, other than an expert witness, who might reasonably be expected to have knowledge relating to any matter in question in the action.
"(2) A person who is to be examined for discovery shall, prior to the examination, become informed by making all reasonable inquiries of any present or former officer, servant, agent or employee of the party, including any who are outside Canada, who might reasonably be expected to have knowledge relating to any matter in question in the action.
"459(1) A party may object to a question asked in an examination for discovery on the grounds that
(a) the anwer is privileged;
(b) the question does not comply with rule 458(1); or
(c) the question is unreasonable or unnecessary.
"(2) A person may not object to a question asked in an examination for discovery of the grounds that
(a) the answer would be evidence or hearsay;
(b) the question constitutes cross-examination, unless the question is for the sole purpose of testing a person's credibility; or
(c) the question constitutes cross-examination on the affidavit of documents of the party being examined.
"466 Where, prior to the time when an examination for discovery is being conducted or discovery or inspection of document is being obtained or given under these rules, an order has been made under rules 480 that an issue of fact be, after trial, the subject of a reference, the discovery or inspection shall not extend to such issue of fact."
[11]
In the present case, the plaintiff is opposed to having to answer the following Questions:
"Q 72	Confirm that Example 5 of the Hoffman patent (Exhibit D-14) shows a procedure for producing famotidine crystals having a melting point of 160%C.
"Q 73	When did the Hoffman Patent (Exhibit D-14) first come to the attention of the research people at Richter Gedeon and also when did they first note that in Example 5 there was a disclosure of the production of famotidine crystals having a melting point of 160%C.
"Q 75	In Example 5 (Exhibit D-14), when they show that the crystals of famotidine had a melting point of 160%C, is that indicative of what Richter Gedeon had identified as a Form B crystal.
"Q 86	Confirm that by 1985, 1986, Richter Gedeon was well aware that Yamanouchi had disclosed in published applications and in patent famotidine in the crystalline form having a melting point in the range of 160 to 163 or 4%C. And that, in fact, was as Richter Gedeon had designated, indicative of Form B crystals."
[12]
Upon reviewing the evidence, I am persuaded that these questions asked by the defendants go to the root of interpreting the most important document, the Patent itself. They are at the heart of this dispute and do not only address questions of fact. I am also of the view that should the plaintiff be compelled to answer these questions, there would be no need for a trial.
[13]
As Madame Justice Reed stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 35, at 39 C.P.R. (T.D.):
"As noted above, it is difficult to know why the prothonotary refused to require the question to be answered because reasons were not given. If as counsel asserts it was because the question asks for the interpretation of a document, then I am of the view that the prothonotary acted under a misapprehension as to the character of the question.
The question, while it asks for an explanation of a reference which occurs in a written document, is asking a question of fact. It is not asking for an 'interpretation' of the document. In my view, a distinction must be drawn between questions which refer to documents and ask for information concerning facts which are stated therein and questions which ask a witness to interpret the document in the sense of answering what message or new information or meaning the witness takes from that document
." (emphasis added)
[14]
Further, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 381 (T.D.), Nadon, J., wrote the following:
"In view of rule 458, a witness who is subject to examination must only answer questions that are within his or her knowledge and that are relevant to a matter in question in the action. No question may be asked that requires expert opinion, for example, a question that requires an interpretation of a patent, since the information to which the question relates may not be admitted in evidence other than under rule 482: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.)."
[15]
However, because the first part of Question 73 asks a straight forward question of fact, the plaintiff will be compelled to answer that Question which reads "When did the Hoffman Patent (Exhibit D-14) first come to the attention of the research people at Richter Gedeon".
[16]
Accordingly, this motion by way of appeal is allowed except with respect to part of Question 73. Costs to the plaintiff in any event of the cause.
Appeal allowed in part.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/ldl
[End of document]