[1] Nadon, J.
: The applicants seek judicial review of a negative decision of the Refugee Division dated August 4, 1993.
[2]
The applicants are husband and wife and are citizens of Cuba. Between 1984 and 1990 they studied in Moscow at the Power Engineering Institute. They were married in Moscow in 1987. Upon their return to Cuba in March of 1990 they both found work as engineers.
[3]
The applicants left Cuba on March 27, 1992, bound for Moscow. When their plane landed at Gander International Airport, Newfoundland, (presumably to take fuel) the applicants left the plane and claimed refugee status.
[4]
The applicants left Cuba legally. In effect, the applicants applied for visas to travel to Moscow to visit friends and the Cuban authorities granted them visas for one (1) month.
[5]
The issue for determination herein is whether the applicants have a well-founded fear of persecution for one of the reasons set out in the definition of Convention refugee. Counsel for the applicants, rightly in my view, conceded that the applicants had not been persecuted prior to their departure from Cuba in March of 1992.
[6]
The applicants' fear stems from the fact that although they left Cuba legally, they did not return within the time specified in their visas. As a result, the applicants fear that they will suffer persecution at the hands of the Cuban authorities.
[7]
The board gave a negative answer to their claims and expressed itself as follows:
"The claimants' violation of the term of their exit permits by not returning is nothing more than a violation of a law of general application. The prospect of being prosecuted for this reason does not satisfy the requirements of the definition of Convention refugee. However, I am required to consider whether the punishment for such offence is so disproportionate to the offence committed, for a Convention reason, such that it would amount to persecution."
The board then went on to state:
"After having considered the whole of the evidence adduced in this case, I find that there is insufficient evidence for me to conclude that the reprisals or punishments, if any, that the claimants face if they are prosecuted on their return to Cuba, because of their violation of a law of general application and claiming refugee status in Canada, would amount to persecution."
[8]
The applicants' fear is expressed as follows at para. 13 of their Memorandum of Argument:
"The applicants in this case fear severe sanctions if they are forced to return to Cuba. In the first palce, [sic] evidence was before the board that if they return, they will face at least between one and three years of imprisonment for attempting to leave."
I am satisfied that there is ample evidence to support the applicants' submission that, in all likelihood, they will be imprisoned should they return to Cuba for a period of up to three years. The issue is whether that constitutes persecution. The board found that it did not whereas the applicants submit that it does.
[9]
The first part of the board's conclusion i.e. that the breach of the term of an exit permit merely constitutes a breach of law of general application is supported by the Federal Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . (Cases A-256-90, A-266-90, A-267-90, A-277-90 and A-301-90 were joined for the purposes of hearing before the Court of Appeal. The hearing took place in Montreal on May 29, 1991 and common reasons were delivered on June 21, 1991.)
[10]
In that case, the Court of Appeal was concerned with s. 109 of the Czechoslovakian penal code which provided for a term of imprisonment between six months and five years for anyone who, without state approval, remained outside of the country. Counsel for the appellants argued that fear of these penalties constituted a well-founded fear of persecution. Marceau, J.A., speaking for the court, dealt with this argument as follows:
"The problem appears to me to be the same for all cases where the legislation of the State provides severe punishment for those of its nationals who leave the territory in an irregular manner or remain abroad beyond the time authorized.
"I will say, first, that while in humanitarian terms I am very much inclined to sympathize with the idea of granting refugee status to everyone who faces criminal sanctions such as those imposed by s. 109 of the
Czech Criminal Code
, in practical and legal terms the idea seems to me to be illogical and without any rational basis. Neither the international Convention nor our
Act
which is based on it, as I understand it, had in mind the protection of people who, having been subjected to no persecution to date, themselves created a cause to fear persecution by freely, of their own accord and with no reason, making themselves liable to punishment for violating a criminal law of general application. I would add, with due respect for the very widely held contrary option, that the idea does not appear to me even to be supported by the fact that the transgression was motivated by some dissatisfaction of a political nature ... because it seems to me, first, that an isolated sentence can only in very exceptional cases satisfy the element of repetition and relentlessness found at the heart of persecution (cf.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), but particularly because the direct relationship that is required between the sentence incurred and imposed and the offender's political opinion does not exist.
"In my opinion, a provision such a s. 109 of the
Czech Criminal Code
can have a determining effect on the granting of refugee status only in an appropriate context. This will occur in cases where the provisions, either in itself or in the manner in which it is applied, is likely to add to the series of discriminatory measures to which a claimant has been subjected for a reason provided in the Convention, so that persecution may be found in the general way in which he is treated by his country. I noted earlier that counsel for the appellants had in effect attempted to connect his clients' fear of criminal sanction to the difficulties they had experienced in the past. The problem is that such a connection is not possible here, since there is no reason to believe that the claimants' membership in the Catholic religion, a major cause of the difficulties they had experienced, or even their disagreement with the government, if we assume that this had some unfortunate consequence for them in the past, could have any influence at all on the manner in which s. 109 would be applied to them." (pp. 6-7)
[11]
The principle stated by Marceau, J.A., in
Valentin
, supra, was somewhat modified by a more recent decision of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Federal Court of Appeal held that a law of general application may, by reason of severe treatment totally out of proportion to the offence committed, constitute persecution.
[12]
This decision may explain the second part of the Board's conclusion where the board posed the question as to whether the punishment in Cuba for the offence committed by the applicants was "so disproportionate to the offence committed, ... such that it would amount to persecution". As I have indicated the board answered this question by a no.
[13]
Like my colleague Wetston, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), I am unable to conclude that the board erred in reaching its conclusion. I accept that the relevant principles of law were properly applied by Wetston, J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> - <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[14]
For these reasons, I must, with regret, dismiss the present application.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/saf
[End of document]