[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This is an application for an order setting aside the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board dated April 26, 1993, wherein it was held the applicant is not a Convention refugee.
[2]
Mr. Syed, a 32 year old citizen of Pakistan, arrived in Canada on April 10, 1992, at which time he had a claim for Convention refugee status on the grounds of his political opinion. A hearing was held before the Refugee Division on October 5, 1992.
[3]
The applicant testified he had joined the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) in 1986 and continued working for the party up to the time he departed from Pakistan. Mr. Syed stated he worked for the election of the PPP member of his ward, Mazar Iqbar Butt, managing one of the three to four hundred wards in Lahore. As the general secretary in his zone, the applicant had twenty to twenty-five workers under his control during an election. The opposition candidate defeated by Mr. Butt in the December, 1991 election was the General Secretary of the Islami Jamjoori Ittehad (IJI) Party for the state of Punjab.
[4]
On January 6, 1992, five or six IJI thugs armed with sticks and guns arrived to trash the applicant's billiard business. Among the thugs was the defeated IJI general secretary for Punjab state and Moazzam, a local leader of the IJI who had previously threatened the applicant that his sone would be kidnapped due to Mr. Syed's support for the PPP. Mr. Syed testified he wen to the police. Two days later, his home was broken into. He believed the culprits were the IJI and he again reported the incident to the police. On the night of January 15, 1992, the applicant was shot at while travelling in his car. He believed it was Moazzam. On January 17, 1992, he was at home when Moazzam arrived with other IJI thugs who threatened to kill him and threw stones at his house. The applicant also reported this incident to the police.
[5]
Because of his fear of the IJI, Mr. Syed moved with his family to Lahore. On January 22, 1992, a neighbour telephoned the applicant's wife and informed her that three or four jeep loads of police went to their houses to arrest the applicant for tampering with ballot boxes and possessing guns. The applicant then left Pakistan on January 31, 1992, proceeded to France and arrived in Canada on April 10, 1992, at which time he made a Convention refugee claim on the grounds of political opinion. Mr. Syed advised the Refugee Division that unspecified charges had been laid against him and a warrant was outstanding for his arrest. He feared he could be killed as a result of being jailed. He stated he was the main target of the IJI because he had worked hard for the PPP's victory in his ward and the general secretary of the IJI was embarrassed about losing. Since his arrival in Canada, Mr. Syed had received a letter from his wife stating the police were making inquiries about him.
[6]
By decision dated April 26, 1993, the Refugee Division held the applicant was not a Convention refugee. The tribunal found the documentary evidence indicated that Pakistan's political situation was very unsettled and the country had experienced a great deal of communal, racial and inter-party political rivalry with sometimes erupted into violence. It held that while some PPP members do face problems from the government, and tow or three hundred were arrested, most of the arrests were made in the Sindh province, and many involved persons of high political profile. The applicant did not have anywhere near such a profile. He was a mid-level political worker who was involved in a local ward and he came from the Punjab state.
[7]
The applicant now seeks to have that decision set aside on the grounds the Refugee Division failed to provide adequate reasons to support its decision; erred in law in failing to base its decision on the totality of the evidence before it; and, erred in law by failing to consider the cumulative effect of the persecution against the applicant.
[8]
The function of written reasons is to allow an individual adversely affected by an administrative tribunal's decision to know the underlying rationale for the decision. To that end, the reasons must be proper, adequate and intelligible and must give consideration to the substantial points of argument raised by the parties.
[9]
Here, the reasons set out a summary of the applicant's evidence, a summary of the documentary evidence considered by the Refugee Division, followed by a conclusion which makes no reference to any of the evidence given by the applicant. There is no mention of the applicant's arrest in November of 1991, the outstanding arrest warrant that was issued against him, the threats received by himself and his family, the beating he testified he was subjected to while in police custody, or that the billiard club he was running was destroyed. Although it is within the tribunal's jurisdiction to accept or reject this information, it cannot simply ignore it. The Refugee Division is obligated, at the very least, to comment on the evidence adduced by the applicant at the hearing. If that evidence is accepted or rejected, the applicant should be advised of the reasons why.
[10]
After carefully reading the decision of the Refugee Division and considering submissions made by counsel, I am satisfied the prudent and fair course of action is to set the decision aside and refer the matter back to a newly constituted board for a rehearing.
[11]
For these reasons, the application is granted.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/saf
[End of document]