 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 181)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Russell, J.
February 8, 2012.
Counsel:
J. Byron M. Thomas and Raoul Boulakia, for the applicant;
David Duggins, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
J. Byron M. Thomas, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
INTRODUCTION
[1]
Russell, J.
: This is an application under subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC- 2001, c. 27 (Act) for judicial review of the decision of the Refugee Protection Division (RPD) of the Immigration and Refugee Board (IRB), dated 13 June 2011 (Decision), which refused the Applicant's application to be deemed a Convention refugee or a person in need of protection under sections 96 and 97 of the Act.
BACKGROUND
[2]
The Applicant is a 38-year-old citizen of Bolivia. She currently lives in Toronto and has a one-year-old daughter. The Applicant's daughter is a Canadian citizen by birth and is not a party to this application.
[3]
In 2004, the Applicant met her former common-law husband, Manuel Rodriguez (Manuel). Shortly after they met, the couple moved into a house together in Cliza, Bolivia. After they moved in together, Manuel began to physically and sexually abuse the Applicant. He often came home drunk and forbade the Applicant from seeing her family. On 4 May 2005, Manuel threw the Applicant to the floor of their home and kicked her. After this assault, the Applicant went to the police in Cliza.
[4]
When the Applicant went to the police station, the police officer who took her complaint laughed at her. He said that if Manuel was a abusing her she should be a better wife and stop blaming her husband for her problems. The police officer then went into an office and made a telephone call. The Applicant heard the police officer tell the other party that a woman was making a complaint against Manuel. The police officer returned and told the Applicant that he had spoken with Demetrio Rodriguez - Manuel's uncle and a senior police officer (Demetrio). The police officer told the Applicant that Demetrio said she should go home and stop wasting police time. Demetrio also said that the police were there to solve real crimes, not the complaints of a woman who could not keep her husband happy.
[5]
On the same day that the Applicant went to the police station, she also saw a doctor. The doctor gave her a report on 6 May 2005 which documented the injuries Manuel had inflicted on her. The Applicant did not return to the police station with this report.
[6]
The Applicant did not tell Manuel about her visit to the police station. Nevertheless, the next day, Manuel came home in a rage. He told the Applicant that she was making a fool of him to his uncle and that what went on under his roof was his business and no one else's. To show the Applicant that he was in charge, he beat and raped her.
[7]
By July 2005, the Applicant found her situation unbearable. She quit her job and fled the home while Manuel was at work. She left Cliza and went to live with her brother in Cochabamba, Belize. Manuel hunted the Applicant down in Cochabamba. One day, he found the Applicant in a market in there; he grabbed her by the hair, dragged her to the ground, and kicked her. He said she would come back to him whether she liked it or not. Other people who were at the market intervened to stop the violence. Manuel told the Applicant it was not over between them and left.
[8]
After Manuel attacked her in the market, the Applicant went to see a doctor in Cliza. This doctor also provided her with a report setting out the injuries she had suffered. The Applicant then returned to the same police station in Cliza she had gone to before to file a report. She went there because she believed she had to report in the jurisdiction where Manuel lived. On this second occasion, the Applicant spoke with a different police officer than she had on her first visit. This police officer gave her a form to complete. After the Applicant completed the form, the police officer stamped her form and gave her a letter with a stamp on it. He also told her that the police would call Manuel, so she gave the police Manuel's contact information. She also gave the police her parents' contact information in Cochabamba, but she did not provide the police with a copy of the report from the doctor she had obtained earlier that day. The Applicant left the police station and returned to Cochabamba.
[9]
Because she thought she could not stay in Cochabamba, and believed that Manuel would find her there again, the Applicant went to La Paz, Bolivia, to live with her uncle. While she was in La Paz, she did not leave her uncle's house for fear that Manuel would find her as he had in Cochabamba. During this time, the Applicant's parents told her that the Manuel was still looking for her and the police were not investigating her complaint against him.
[10]
The Applicant's uncle advised her to leave Bolivia because he thought there was no safe place for her there. She left Bolivia on 22 August 2005 and travelled to Managua, Nicaragua. In Managua, the Applicant hired a smuggler who, for $1300 US, took her to Guatemala. A second smuggler took her to Mexico, and a third smuggler took her to Texas, in the United States of America (USA). From Texas, the Applicant travelled to Arlington, Virginia. She lived and worked around Arlington until 20 December 2009, when she came to Canada.
[11]
In July 2009, the Applicant learned of Canada's refugee protection system. She hired a smuggler who brought her across the Canada-USA border to Sherbrooke, Quebec on 20 December 2009. The Applicant claimed protection on 22 December 2009.
[12]
The RPD heard the Applicant's claim on 30 May 2011. At the hearing, the Applicant, her lawyer, a Refugee Protection Officer, a translator, and the RPD panel member were present. After the hearing, the RPD considered the Applicant's claim. On 13 June 2011, the RPD denied her claim for protection and gave her notice of the Decision on 28 June 2011.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
[13]
The RPD determined the Applicant's claim solely on the availability of state protection and found that she had not rebutted the presumption of state protection.
[14]
The RPD reviewed the Applicant's allegations of abuse by Manuel, her attempts to get help from the Bolivian police, and her travel from Bolivia to Canada. It noted that it had considered the IRB Chairperson's guideline
Women Refugee Claimants Fearing Gender-Related Persecution
. The RPD also said that it had considered all the evidence before it, including a psychological report prepared by Dr. Judith Pilowsky, a clinical and rehabilitation psychologist practising in Toronto, the Applicant's testimony, and counsel's submissions.
State Protection
[15]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the RPD noted that states are presumed to be able to protect their citizens and that international protection only comes into play when a claimant's own state is unable to provide protection. Though the Applicant is from Bolivia, the RPD found that Costa Rica is in control of its territory and has a functioning security force in place. The RPD also noted that
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  establishes that, to rebut the presumption of state protection, a claimant must provide reliable and probative evidence to satisfy the RPD, on a balance of probabilities, that state protection is inadequate. Further, the RPD noted that a claimant cannot assert subjective reluctance to engage the state in order to rebut the presumption (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) and that the burden of proof on a claimant increases directly with the level of democracy in the state against which protection is claimed.
[16]
Because Bolivia is a democracy, the RPD said that the Applicant had to show more than that she went to the police for protection and that her efforts to get protection were not successful. The RPD pointed out that no government is expected to provide perfect protection and that local failures in providing protection are not enough to rebut the presumption of state protection.
Country Condition Evidence
[17]
The RPD reviewed the evidence before it and concluded that Bolivia is a multi-party democracy, in which President Evo Morales was elected in 2009 after free and fair elections. It also found that Bolivia faced some human rights problems, including killings by security forces, harsh prison conditions, and a corrupt judiciary. The RPD also found that rape is a serious and underreported problem in Bolivia, even though it is a criminal offence. In addition, the RPD found that spousal rape is not a crime in Bolivia and that violence against women is a pervasive and underreported problem; laws against domestic violence in Bolivia were enforced irregularly and the government took few meaningful steps to combat domestic violence. The RPD noted that, to November 2010, the Family Protection Unit (FPU) had handled 70,792 cases of domestic violence. The FPU is a police authority established to handle cases of assault which are not crimes under the Bolivian Penal Code and has sub-units in many regions of Bolivia.
[18]
Though services for women who experience domestic violence are limited, the RPD found that Bolivia was taking steps to address the issue. The Bolivian government had rewritten a law (Law 1674) to address the roles of FPUs, municipal legal services, and non-governmental organizations in combating domestic violence, though this law had not fulfilled expectations. Municipalities in Bolivia are required by law to provide support shelters for women. Although, at the time the Decision was rendered, only thirteen shelters for women existed, the RPD found that more were going to be established within a short time. Victims of domestic violence in Bolivia can record complaints against abusers with the FPU, family courts, and public health centres. An ombudsman is also in place to handle complaints about the reporting service if a victim was not satisfied with the response received.
The Applicant's Efforts
[19]
The RPD found that, after the Applicant had attempted to file a complaint against Manuel on 4 May 2005, she did not pursue further action when the police officer laughed at her and told her to go home. She also did not give the police a copy of the report she had obtained from her doctor at that time. The RPD found that the Applicant was speculating when she said that the police officer had telephoned Demetrio and that her first attempt to get protection against Manuel was not a credible rebuttal of the presumption of state protection because it was a local failure and was based on speculation.
[20]
The RPD also examined the Applicant's second report to the police, after Manuel attacked her in the Cochabamba market. The RPD noted that the second police officer took her complaint and provided her with a stamped letter, even though he worked at the same station she had reported to before without success. After going to the police a second time, the Applicant fled to La Paz and then left Bolivia. The RPD further noted that, during her second complaint, she had not given the police an address at which she could be contacted in La Paz and had not informed them of her departure from Bolivia. The RPD found that these events were not enough to rebut the presumption of state protection because her departure from Bolivia had effectively ended the police investigation into Manuel's attack on her.
[21]
The RPD also noted that the Applicant had lived in the USA for four years between her flight from Bolivia and her claim in Canada. It found that her continuing fear of Manuel was based on her mother and sister's experiences of abuse and her belief that the police in Bolivia do not take domestic violence seriously. Although Bolivia had difficulty protecting women from abuse in the past, the RPD found that the country is demonstrating an awareness of its past problems and is making advances in protecting women from domestic violence.
Conclusion
[22]
The RPD found that there was no persuasive evidence that the Applicant faced persecution in Bolivia. It also found that the Applicant would not face a risk to her life, or of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, or a risk of torture if she returned to Bolivia. The RPD concluded that the Applicant is not a Convention refugee or a person in need of protection and denied her claim.
ISSUES
[23]
The Applicant raises the following issues in this application:
a. Whether the RPD's state protection finding was reasonable;
b. Whether the RPD provided adequate reasons;
c. Whether the RPD applied the correct test for state protection.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
[24]
The Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  held that a standard of review analysis need not be conducted in every instance. Instead, where the standard of review applicable to a particular question before the court is well-settled by past jurisprudence, the reviewing court may adopt that standard of review. Only where this search proves fruitless must the reviewing court undertake a consideration of the four factors comprising the standard of review analysis.
[25]
In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Federal Court of Appeal held at paragraph 36 that the standard of review on a state protection finding is reasonableness. This approach was followed by Justice Leonard Mandamin in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Further, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Danièle Tremblay-Lamer held at paragraph 11 that the standard of review on a state protection finding is reasonableness. The standard of review on the first issue is reasonableness.
[26]
Recently, in
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Supreme Court of Canada held at paragraph 14 that the adequacy of reasons is not a stand-alone basis for quashing a decision. Rather, "the reasons must be read together with the outcome and serve the purpose of showing whether the result falls within a range of possible outcomes." The adequacy of the reasons will be analysed along with the reasonableness of the Decision as a whole.
[27]
When reviewing a decision on the standard of reasonableness, the analysis will be concerned with "the existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process [and also with] whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law." See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paragraph 47, and
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Put another way, the Court should intervene only if the Decision was unreasonable in the sense that it falls outside the "range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law."
[28]
On the third issue, Justice Michael Kelen held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that, where an applicant asserts that an officer applied the wrong test, the standard of correctness applies. Further, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Yves de Montigny held at paragraph 35 that, when examining the RPD's application of the test for state protection, the appropriate standard of review is correctness. Justice Paul Crampton made a similar finding in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The standard of review on the third issue is correctness.
[29]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paragraph 50, the Supreme Court of Canada held that
When applying the correctness standard, a reviewing court will not show deference to the decision maker's reasoning process; it will rather undertake its own analysis of the question. The analysis will bring the court to decide whether it agrees with the determination of the decision maker; if not, the court will substitute its own view and provide the correct answer. From the outset, the court must ask whether the tribunal's decision was correct.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
[30]
The following provisions of the Act are applicable in this application:
Convention refugee
96.
A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(
a
) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(
b
) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
Person in Need of Protection
97.
(1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(
a
) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning - of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(
b
) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care
[...]
Définition de « réfugié »
96.
A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a
) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
Personne à protéger
97.
(1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a
) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
[...]
ARGUMENTS
The Applicant
The RPD Accepted Her Evidence
[31]
The RPD did not make any adverse credibility findings in the Decision. As such, the Applicant says that the RPD must have accepted her account of the abuse she suffered in Bolivia and her attempts to seek protection there. She also says that the RPD accepted as credible the evidence she submitted to support her belief that Manuel still pursues her.
The State Protection Finding was Unreasonable
The RPD Ignored Evidence
[32]
The Applicant argues that, when it relied on country condition evidence in making the Decision, the RPD improperly relied on older pieces of evidence which it preferred over more recent evidence.
[33]
The RPD relied on the IRB's Response to Information Request (RIR) BOL102093.FE, dated 15 December 2006 (RIR 2006), which established that Law 1674 had not lived up to its promises. RIR 2006 also established that not all the regional FPUs recorded domestic violence complaints. Further, RIR 2006 shows that Law 1674 is preventative, rather than punitive and that, although domestic violence victims can complain to the Municipal Legal Services, only 39% of municipalities have such services. The RPD also referred to a 2009 report (CIDA Report) from the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) which said that CIDA was going to support a shelter for women in Bolivia.
[34]
The RPD improperly preferred these two pieces of evidence over a more recent report from the USA Department of State, written in 2011 and entitled
Bolivia
:
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2010
(DOS Report). The DOS Report establishes that domestic violence is prevalent in Bolivia and that the situation there has not improved. The RPD's conclusion on state protection was unreasonable because it relied on older evidence rather than the most recent evidence available. Had the RPD properly used the most current evidence, it would have concluded that state protection is not available for abused women in Bolivia, including the Applicant. It cannot be that the RPD considered all the evidence before it when it relied on older evidence for a conclusion which is contradicted by newer evidence.
[35]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice John Evans held at paragraph 17 that:
[...] the more important the evidence that is not mentioned specifically and analyzed in the agency's reasons, the more willing a court may be to infer from the silence that the agency made an erroneous finding of fact "without regard to the evidence":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). In other words, the agency's burden of explanation increases with the relevance of the evidence in question to the disputed facts. Thus, a blanket statement that the agency has considered all the evidence will not suffice when the evidence omitted from any discussion in the reasons appears squarely to contradict the agency's finding of fact. Moreover, when the agency refers in some detail to evidence supporting its finding, but is silent on evidence pointing to the opposite conclusion, it may be easier to infer that the agency overlooked the contradictory evidence when making its finding of fact.
[36]
The Applicant says that the documentary evidence before the RPD clearly shows that the Bolivian police are not capable of accepting and acting upon domestic abuse complaints. The RPD's conclusion that the Applicant did not provide clear and convincing evidence to rebut the presumption of state protection was unreasonable.
Future Changes do not Amount to State Protection
[37]
The Applicant also says that the RPD improperly looked at what
will
happen in Bolivia with respect to protection against domestic violence, rather than at what actually
is
happening. The DOS Report, which shows the current state of affairs, contradicts the RPD's conclusion. The RPD unreasonably relied on unrealized change to support its conclusion that state protection is available to the Applicant.
The Treatment of the Applicant's Evidence was Unreasonable
[38]
After she went to the police on 4 May 2005 and was laughed at, the Applicant did not complain to a senior officer. The Applicant says that the RPD downplayed the significance of her encounter with the police officer who laughed at her. The RPD's finding that she should have approached a senior officer to complain was unrealistic because Demetrio is a high-ranking police officer. Both Demetrio and the police officer she spoke to on this occasion refused to help her. Further, although the RPD found that she was speculating when she said the police officer who laughed at her spoke to Demetrio, this finding was unreasonable. That police officer told the Applicant that he had spoken to Demetrio. Also, the fact that Manuel beat the Applicant after she went to the police shows that the police officer called Demetrio.
[39]
The RPD's conclusion that her departure ended the police investigation into her second complaint ignored several pieces of evidence:
a. She gave the police her parents' address but the police never contacted anyone;
b. Manuel continues to harass her family and friends, which shows the police took no action against him;
c. She was afraid Manuel would find out her address if she gave it to the police;
d. There was no police investigation into the complaint she filed against Manuel.
The RPD did not Consider Similarly Situated Individuals
[40]
At the hearing, the Applicant testified that her sister had also experienced domestic abuse in Bolivia; her testimony also established that her sister had been turned away by the police when she had tried to report the abuse. The Applicant argues that, when the RPD concluded that she should have gone to a higher authority to complain about her treatment by the police, it ignored this evidence. Her sister's treatment by the police and the documentary evidence before the RPD establish that it is pointless to go to the police for protection from domestic abuse in Bolivia.
The RPD Considered the Wrong Country
[41]
The RPD's statement that "Costa Rica is in effective control of its territory and has in place a functioning security force to uphold the laws and constitution" shows that it considered country documents from the wrong country. This means the Decision is unreasonable.
The Reasons are Inadequate
[42]
The Applicant says that the RPD failed to make a finding as to whether the state protection available in Bolivia was adequate, so the reasons it gave for the Decision are inadequate. When it held that Bolivia was aware of its problems and was making advances, the RPD failed to consider whether these advances actually resulted in adequate state protection (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
The RPD Applied the Wrong Test for State Protection
[43]
The RPD based its conclusion on state protection in part on legislation Bolivia had enacted. However, the Applicant says that the documentary evidence before the RPD showed that these laws are ineffective in practice. Further, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Douglas Campbell held at paragraph 14 that
It cannot be said that a state is making "serious efforts" to protect women, merely by making due diligence preparations to do so, such as conducting commissions of inquiry into the reality of violence against women, the creation of ombudspersons to take women's complaints of police failure, or gender equality education seminars for police officers. Such efforts are not evidence of effective state protection which must be understood as the current ability of a state to protect women. [Emphasis in original]
[44]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Frederick Gibson held at paragraph 15 that
[The] ability of a state to protect must be seen to comprehend not only the existence of an effective legislative and procedural framework but the capacity and the will to effectively implement that framework.
[45]
Although the RPD in this case found that counselling services, legal aid, medical assistance, and shelters existed in Bolivia, these do not meet the required standard of adequate state protection. There is legislation in place in Bolivia to protect victims of domestic violence, but <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, show that legislation alone is not enough; legislation must translate into adequate protection on the ground. When it failed to look at the adequacy of state protection, the RPD applied the wrong test, so the Decision must be returned for reconsideration.
The Respondent
The RPD Considered all the Evidence
[46]
Although the Applicant has argued that the RPD did not consider the DOS Report, the Respondent notes that the RPD specifically referred to this report at paragraphs 10 to 12 of the Decision. Since the RPD considered the DOS Report, which went against its conclusions,
Cepeda- <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , has no application here.
The Applicant did not Rebut the Presumption of State Protection
[47]
Ward
and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, establish that state protection is presumed and that this presumption can only be displaced on clear and convincing evidence.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  establishes that it is not enough to show that the government of a state is not always successful in protecting its citizens. In this case there was clear evidence that Bolivia is a democracy, and so the Applicant bore a heavy onus to rebut the presumption of state protection. She did not discharge this onus.
[48]
The evidence before the RPD was that the Applicant had sought state protection on two occasions, and was unsuccessful the first time she went to the police. The second time she approached the police, she was issued a formal complaint, but she left Bolivia before the police process could be completed. Based on the evidence before it, the RPD reasonably concluded that the Applicant had made only minimal efforts to seek state protection. Although she testified that her parents had followed up with the police, this is not supported by the affidavit the Applicant's mother produced and which the Applicant submitted to the RPD.
[49]
The documentary evidence before the RPD was sufficient to ground a finding that the Applicant had not rebutted the presumption of state protection. The RPD referred to evidence which showed that the FPUs handled 70,792 cases of domestic violence up to 2010. Although the Applicant has argued that this shows inadequate protection, the Respondent notes that
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCA) teaches that imperfect protection does not rebut the presumption of state protection.
[50]
The Respondent also points to evidence before the RPD to show that the FPUs, to which victims of domestic violence or their families could complain, are present in many regions of Bolivia. Although the Applicant has said that FPUs are not available in all areas, the Respondent says that she has not shown that they are not available in the area where she lived. The limited implementation of FPUs in Bolivia cannot, on its own, rebut the presumption of state protection.
[51]
The Bolivian government has also passed legislation to combat domestic violence. The existence of a legal framework is an appropriate indicator of a state's efforts to provide protection. The RPD considered the application of the laws which are in place and not simply their existence.
[52]
The Respondent acknowledges that domestic violence is prevalent in Bolivia, but he points to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> where Justice Gibson held that
In
Canada (Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of human rights can guarantee the protection of all of its citizens at all times. Thus, it is not enough for a claimant merely to show that his government has not always been effective at protecting persons in his particular situation. Terrorism in the name of one warped ideology or another is a scourge afflicting many societies today; its victims, however much they may merit our sympathy, do not become Convention refugees simply because their governments have been unable to suppress the evil.
Precisely the same can be said about the evil of family violence.
[53]
The Applicant's arguments amount only to an invitation to the Court to re-weigh the evidence which is not the proper function of the Court. Because the RPD considered the evidence and drew a reasonable conclusion, the Decision should stand.
The Applicant Bears the Onus to Rebut the Presumption of State Protection
[54]
Although the Applicant has said that the RPD applied an incorrect test for analysing state protection, the Respondent says that the RPD correctly stated the law established by
Ward
and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , both above, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The RPD was not obligated to make a finding on whether or not state protection was adequate. The Applicant simply did not discharge the onus she bore to rebut the presumption of state protection. The RPD clearly applied the correct test when it considered whether the Applicant had rebutted the presumption of state protection.
The Respondent's Further Memorandum
[55]
The Respondent further argues that
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
, above, and
Alberta (Information and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  establish that the correctness standard is only applicable where the question at issue is one of central importance to the legal system which is outside the decision-maker's specialized area of expertise. Since the RPD's state protection finding is subject to the reasonableness standard, a failure to mention contradictory evidence cannot render the Decision unreasonable. Rather, the reviewing Court must ask whether "when read in light of the evidence before it and the nature of its statutory task, the tribunal's reasons adequately explain the bases of its decision." (
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
at paragraph 18).
[56]
In this case, the Decision was reasonable because it provided clear and intelligible reasons for the conclusion that the Applicant had not rebutted the presumption of state protection. Since the RPD's conclusion falls within the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> range, this Court should not interfere.
The Applicant did not Adequately Test State Protection
[57]
The Respondent says that it is clear that the RPD rejected the Applicant's claim because she did not rebut the presumption of state protection. The RPD concluded that state protection was forthcoming after her second complaint, but the Applicant prematurely ended the investigation into that complaint when she failed to provide a correct address to the police or inform them she was leaving Bolivia. The Applicant made no complaint to a higher authority in Bolivia about the conduct of the first officer she interacted with and only made minimal efforts to seek state protection.
The State Protection Finding was a Possible Outcome
[58]
The Applicant failed to follow up with the police on the state of their investigation, and her allegation that her mother followed up on her behalf is not supported by her mother's affidavit. Further, the Applicant's argument that Manuel's continued freedom shows that state protection is inadequate amounts to a suggestion that the Bolivian police should have imprisoned him without trial, solely on the strength of her allegations.
[59]
If the Applicant was correct when she said at the hearing that her parents told her the police said there was nothing they could do about Manual, this actually supports the RPD's conclusion that her departure ended the investigation into her complaint. Without the Applicant's testimony, the Bolivian police could not do anything. The Applicant's own evidence supports the RPD's conclusion on state protection and, since the record supports the RPD's conclusion, the Court should not interfere with the Decision.
The RPD Appropriately Considered the Evidence
[60]
The Applicant challenges the RPD's use of the RIR 2006 at the same time as she uses that document to support her position. At the hearing, the Applicant pointed to this document (see page 206 of the Certified Tribunal Record) and cannot now complain that the RPD relied on it. This document was part of the IRB's National Documentation Package for Bolivia, so it was properly before the RPD.
[61]
In the Decision, the RPD pointed to evidence that was contrary to its findings. The RPD also explicitly acknowledged that Bolivia faces difficulties in addressing domestic violence. The objective evidence before the RPD also showed that assault was a crime under the Bolivian Penal Code; the second incident the Applicant complained of was an assault forbidden by the Bolivian Penal Code. Although there was evidence to suggest that laws specifically addressing domestic violence are not enforced, there is no evidence that the Bolivian Penal Code is not being enforced.
[62]
Although there was evidence which showed that up to 70% of Bolivian women suffer domestic violence, this does not show a lack of state protection. These statistics show the magnitude of a social problem, but do not speak to Bolivia's ability to protect its citizens. It is not clear that laws on spousal rape were relevant to the Applicant, who was never married to Manuel.
[63]
Although the Applicant's mother and sister may have suffered domestic violence, their experiences do not demonstrate a lack of state protection in this case. Apart from the Applicant's testimony, there was no evidence that the sister had sought and been denied state protection. The Applicant's mother did not say in her affidavit that she too had been denied state protection. Neither the mother nor the sister's experiences provided the clear and convincing evidence necessary to displace the presumption of state protection.
The RPD is not Required to Mention all the Evidence
[64]
The Respondent argues that
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
, above, has presumptively overruled
Cepeda- <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and any other case which requires a specific finding or line of analysis. He notes that
Cepeda-Gutierrez
was based on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  which held that the failure to mention a report was an error of law. After
Alberta Teachers' Association
, above, questions of law are no longer presumptively evaluated on the correctness standard. Rather,
Alberta Teachers' Association
establishes that the standard of review in this case is reasonableness; in the context of review on the reasonableness standard, the Applicant's argument that the RPD failed to address contradictory evidence is precisely the kind of formalistic argument the Supreme Court of Canada rejected in
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
. This argument cannot raise a reviewable error.
[65]
In the alternative, the Respondent says that
Cepeda- <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , does not stand for the proposition the Applicant says it does. In that case, Justice Evans concluded that there was no reviewable error with respect to the RPD's conclusion on persecution, notwithstanding that the RPD did not mention one particular piece of contradictory evidence (see paragraph 22). The totality of the evidence established that Cepeda-Gutierrez did not face a risk of persecution. Where the RPD has mentioned evidence to justify an inference that it referred to that evidence, there is no reviewable error (
Cepeda-Gutierrez
at paragraph 28). In this case, the RPD mentioned all the contradictory evidence before it, so the Court can infer that it considered all the evidence.
[66]
The Respondent also says that
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  establish that
Cepeda- <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , does not apply to country condition evidence.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> to 22, Justice Michael Kelen held that
It is trite law that the reasons given by the RPD are not to be read hypercritically by a court and nor is it required to refer to every piece of evidence that it received that is contrary to its finding, and to explain how it dealt with it:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.C.W.S. (3d) 264 (F.C.T.D.), per Justice Evans (as he then was) at paragraph 16. The RPD is presumed to have considered all the evidence, however, the more important the evidence that is not mentioned specifically and analyzed in the RPD's reasons, the more willing a court may be to infer from the silence that the RPD reached its decision without regard to the evidence:
Cepeda- <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
, at para. 17.
The applicant has cited a number of recent decisions of this Court where the RPD's determinations on state protection were overturned because the RPD selectively analyzed or failed to deal with compelling evidence of a state's inadequate provision of protection:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  per Justice O'Keefe at para. 38;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  per Justice Dawson at para. 15;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  per Justice Near at para. 17;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  per Justice Russell at paras. 70-71. In all of the above cases, the RPD failed to explain why it preferred certain documentary evidence over significant and reputable documentary and testimonial evidence which indicated that state protection was inadequate.
In this case, the RPD acknowledged at paragraph 14 of the decision that violence against women was a serious problem in Mexico and that enforcement action against male abusers is sorely lacking:
para14 Counsel's well-crafted submissions point to a number of failings of the Mexican authorities in dealing with gender violence including a culture of acceptance of the practice even among those who are to enforce the laws against it, a culture of impunity for the abusers and obstacles to protection such as corruption, financial resources available to women, judges discretion in deciding what measures to grant, and practical matters such as orders not being effective until they are served on the abuser. Certainly, documentary evidence indicates that Mexico is having an ongoing battle with violence against women, crime and corruption. While the documentary evidence does support some of what the female claimant fears, it is also mixed with information on current efforts Mexico is taking to combat crime, corruption and violence against women,
There is no basis in view of the above excerpt to hold that the RPD ignored contrary evidence. The RPD may not have referred to specific documentation but it is clear from the reasons that the RPD read and considered the applicants' written submissions and the documentary references which they cited.
[67]
Here, the RPD considered all the evidence the Applicant cited and addressed all of her arguments. There is therefore no basis to conclude that the Decision is unreasonable.
The Applicant Bore the Onus to Rebut the Presumption of State Protection
[68]
When she argues tat the RPD failed to establish the adequacy or effectiveness of state protection, the Applicant has improperly shifted the burden of proof to the RPD. At all times, the Applicant bore the onus to establish that state protection was inadequate. The RPD found that state protection was available to the Applicant without limitation or qualification, and the RPD was aware that the appropriate test for protection is adequacy.
[69]
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
, above, establishes that a tribunal need not make an explicit finding on the constituent elements leading to its final conclusion. So long as the reasons permit the Court to determine how a result in the acceptable range was reached, the Decision should stand. The Court should not substitute its own view by designating certain omissions from the reasons as fatal (see
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
at paragraph 16).
ANALYSIS
[70]
There were no credibility problems in this case, and the RPD based its Decision upon the Applicant's failure to provide "clear and convincing evidence of the state's inability to protect."
[71]
The RPD concluded that the Applicant had not herself taken sufficient steps to secure protection, so her experiences did not show that adequate protection would not be there if she reasonably attempted to access it. However, the Applicant also argued and pointed to evidence that there is no protection in Bolivia for women who are the victims of domestic violence and that the state is either unwilling or unable to protect her.
[72]
In order to answer this branch of her argument, the RPD reviewed the country condition documents and then reasoned and concluded as follows:
The claimant lived in the United States for the next four years before she made a refugee claim in Canada, but maintains that Manuel still looks for her. The claimant fears the police would not protect her if she returned to Bolivia as "the police do not believe domestic abuse is important. It is normal behaviour." The claimant bases her opinion, in part, on past experiences of her mother and her sister, who were victims of gender related violence. I accept that Bolivia's past history of offering protection to women as victims of domestic violence was lamentable combined with societal beliefs that accepted this violence as a way of life. Yet, as this claim is forward looking, I accept that Bolivia is demonstrating an awareness of its past problems and is making advances through legislation, application and continued dialogue within the government, its citizens and foreign countries on further efforts to improve its past weakness related to domestic violence.
[73]
In my view, the RPD failed to assess whether, notwithstanding the government initiatives referred in the Decision, there is adequate protection in practice. There was certainly a significant amount of evidence before the RPD that Bolivia's "lamentable" past history of protecting victims of domestic violence has not changed. This is why it was important for the RPD to look at the situation on the ground and ascertain whether the presumption of adequate state protection had not been overcome in this case.
[74]
Several recent decisions of the Court have dealt with this issue but I think it is sufficient to refer to the guidance provided by Justice Mosley in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paragraphs 13 and 16, whose words in relation to Honduras could equally apply to the case before me:
The Board outlined the correct legal principles applicable to refugee claimants alleging persecution at the hands of a non-state actor and the presumption of state protection as set out in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] F.C.J. No. 399  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The claimant "must adduce relevant, reliable and convincing evidence which satisfies the trier of fact on a balance of probabilities that the state protection is inadequate" ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 38). State protection need not be perfect, but it must be adequate.
...
The Board did not provide any analysis of the operational adequacy of the efforts undertaken by the government of Honduras and international actors to improve state protection in Honduras. While the state's efforts are indeed relevant to an assessment of state protection, they are neither determinative nor sufficient ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] F.C.J. No. 816 at para 75). Any efforts must have "actually translated into adequate state protection" at the operational level ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[75]
In the present case, the RPD relied upon: the evidence from 2006, which shows how the 1995 law on domestic violence was "rewritten"; on the CIDA Report, in which the RPD noted that a shelter was going to be built with funds from CIDA and that things in Bolivia "are about to change." However, the evidence from the DOS Report suggests that things have not improved and confirms that:
1. Violence against women is pervasive;
2. 70% of women suffer abuse in Bolivia;
3. Spousal rape is not a crime;
4. That the government took few meaningful or concrete steps to combat domestic violence;
5. That the FPUs, which are supposed to help women, lack financial and structural support and personnel to follow-up complaints, and that most cases went unreported.
[76]
Given this evidence, I think it was unreasonable for the RPD not to assess what Justice Mosley calls "the operational adequacy" of the efforts undertaken by the government of Bolivia before concluding that the Applicant has not rebutted the presumption of state protection. Had the RPD done so, its views of the Applicant's own efforts might well have been different.
[77]
Counsel agree that there is no question for certification and the Court concurs.
JUDGMENT
[78]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
1. The application is allowed. The Decision is quashed and the matter is returned for reconsideration by a differently constituted RPD.
2. There is no question for certification.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Russell
[Traduction]: Il s'agit d'une demande visée au paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (la Loi), concernant le contrôle judiciaire de la décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés (la SPR) de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (la CISR), rendue en date du 13 juin 2011, de rejeter la demande présentée par la demanderesse afin que la qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention ou celle de personne à protéger au sens des articles 96 et 97 de la Loi lui soit reconnue (la décision).
LE CONTEXTE
[2]
La demanderesse, une citoyenneté de Bolivie âgée de 38 ans, vit actuellement à Toronto et a une fillette d'un an. Celle-ci est une citoyenne canadienne de naissance qui n'est pas partie à la présente demande.
[3]
La demanderesse a fait la connaissance de son ancien conjoint de fait, Manuel Rodriguez (Manuel), en 2004. Le couple s'est installé dans une maison à Cliza, en Bolivie, peu de temps après, puis Manuel a commencé à être violent physiquement et sexuellement à l'égard de la demanderesse. Il rentrait souvent ivre à la maison et interdisait à la demanderesse de voir sa famille. Le 4 mai 2005, Manuel a jeté la demanderesse sur le sol alors qu'ils se trouvaient dans leur maison et lui a donné des coups de pied. La demanderesse s'est rendue au poste de police de Cliza après cette agression.
[4]
Au poste de police, le policier qui a reçu la plainte de la demanderesse s'est moqué d'elle. Il a dit que, si Manuel s'en prenait à elle, elle devrait être une meilleure épouse et arrêter d'imputer ses problèmes à son mari. Il est ensuite allé dans son bureau et a fait un appel téléphonique. La demanderesse l'a entendu dire à son interlocuteur qu'une femme portait plainte contre Manuel. Le policier a ensuite dit à la demanderesse qu'il avait parlé à Demetrio Rodriguez, l'oncle de Manuel et un haut gradé de la police (Demetrio). Il a ajouté que Demetrio avait dit qu'elle devrait retourner chez elle et ne plus faire perdre de temps à la police. Demetrio a dit également que les policiers étaient là pour résoudre les crimes graves, non pour entendre les plaintes d'une femme incapable de rendre son mari heureux.
[5]
Le même jour, la demanderesse a consulté un médecin. Ce dernier lui a remis un rapport daté du 6 mai 2005, qui décrivait les blessures infligées par Manuel. La demanderesse n'est pas retournée au poste de police avec ce rapport.
[6]
La demanderesse n'a rien dit à Manuel au sujet de sa visite au poste de police. Pourtant, Manuel était furieux à son retour à la maison le lendemain. Il a dit à la demanderesse qu'elle l'avait ridiculisé devant son oncle et que ce qui se passait sous son toit ne regardait que lui. Pour montrer à la demanderesse que c'était lui qui commandait, il l'a battue et violée.
[7]
En juillet 2005, estimant que sa situation était devenue intolérable, la demanderesse a quitté son emploi et s'est enfuie de la maison pendant que Manuel était au travail. Elle est allée vivre avec son frère à Cochabamba, au Belize. Manuel a poursuivi la demanderesse jusque dans cette ville. Lorsqu'il l'a aperçue dans un marché, il l'a agrippée par les cheveux, l'a traînée sur le sol et lui a donné des coups de pied. Il lui a dit qu'elle allait retourner vivre avec lui, que cela lui plaise ou non. Des personnes qui se trouvaient dans le marché sont intervenues pour mettre fin aux actes de violence. Manuel a dit à la demanderesse qu'il n'en avait pas fini avec elle et il est parti.
[8]
La demanderesse a consulté un médecin de Cliza après cette agression. Ce médecin lui a également remis un rapport faisant état de ses blessures. La demanderesse est ensuite retournée au poste de police où elle était allée précédemment. Elle est retournée à ce poste de police parce qu'elle croyait qu'elle devait porter plainte à l'endroit où Manuel habitait. Le policier à qui elle a parlé -qui n'était pas le même que lors de sa première visite - lui a remis un formulaire à remplir. Une fois le formulaire rempli, le policier y a apposé un timbre et a remis à la demanderesse une lettre portant un timbre. Il lui a dit que la police appellerait Manuel. Elle lui a donc donné les coordonnées de ce dernier. Elle lui a aussi donné les coordonnées de ses parents à Cochabamba, mais elle ne lui a pas remis une copie du rapport du médecin qu'elle avait obtenu un peu plus tôt ce jour-là. La demanderesse est ensuite retournée à Cochabamba.
[9]
Comme elle pensait qu'elle ne pouvait pas rester à Cochabamba et que Manuel la retrouverait à nouveau dans cette ville, la demanderesse est allée vivre avec son oncle à La Paz, en Bolivie. Elle ne sortait jamais parce qu'elle craignait que Manuel ne la retrouve comme cela s'était produit à Cochabamba. Elle a été informée par ses parents que Manuel était toujours à sa recherche et que la police ne faisait pas enquête sur la plainte qu'elle avait déposée contre lui.
[10]
L'oncle de la demanderesse lui a conseillé de quitter la Bolivie parce qu'elle n'était en sécurité nulle part dans ce pays. Elle a quitté la Bolivie le 22 août 2005 pour Managua, au Nicaragua, où elle a versé 1 300 $ US à un passeur pour qu'il l'emmène au Guatemala. Un deuxième passeur l'a ensuite conduite au Mexique et un troisième, au Texas, aux États-Unis. De là, elle s'est rendue à Arlington, en Virginie. Elle a habité et travaillé dans la région jusqu'au 20 décembre 2009, lorsqu'elle est venue au Canada.
[11]
En juillet 2009, la demanderesse a pris des renseignements au sujet du système canadien de protection des réfugiés. Elle a embauché un passeur qui lui a fait traverser la frontière américano-canadienne à Sherbrooke (Québec) le 20 décembre 2009. Elle a demandé l'asile le 22 décembre suivant.
[12]
La SPR a instruit la demande d'asile de la demanderesse le 30 mai 2011. La demanderesse, son avocat, un agent de protection des réfugiés, un traducteur et le membre du tribunal de la SPR étaient présents à l'audience. Après celle-ci, la SPR a étudié la demande d'asile de la demanderesse. Elle a rejeté cette demande le 13 juin 2011 et en a avisé la demanderesse le 28 juin suivant.
LA DÉCISION FAISANT L'OBJET DU CONTRÔLE
[13]
La SPR a fondé sa décision uniquement sur la possibilité, pour la demanderesse, d'obtenir la protection de l'État et elle a conclu que la présomption de protection de l'État n'avait pas été réfutée.
[14]
La SPR a passé en revue les allégations de la demanderesse concernant les actes de violence commis à son endroit par Manuel, ses tentatives d'obtenir l'aide de la police bolivienne et son voyage de la Bolivie au Canada. Elle a indiqué qu'elle avait tenu compte des Directives de la présidente de la CISR intitulées
Revendicatrices du statut de réfugié craignant d'être persécutées en raison de leur sexe
. Elle a aussi mentionné qu'elle avait tenu compte de l'ensemble de la preuve dont elle disposait, notamment un rapport psychologique préparé par Judith Pilowsky, une psychologue clinique spécialiste de la réadaptation de Toronto, le témoignage de la demanderesse et les observations des conseils.
La protection de l'État
[15]
S'appuyant sur
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, la SPR a rappelé que les États sont présumés être en mesure de protéger leurs citoyens et que la protection internationale entre en jeu seulement lorsque le propre État du demandeur est incapable d'assurer sa protection. Bien que la demanderesse soit originaire de la Bolivie, la SPR a indiqué que le Costa Rica contrôle son territoire et dispose d'une force de sécurité efficace. Elle a aussi rappelé que, selon
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  un demandeur d'asile doit, pour réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État, produire une preuve digne de foi et ayant une valeur probante suffisante pour convaincre la SPR, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que la protection de l'État est insuffisante. La SPR a également indiqué qu'un demandeur d'asile ne peut faire valoir une réticence subjective de l'État pour réfuter la présomption (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) et que, plus le niveau de démocratie dans l'État à l'encontre duquel la protection est demandée est élevé, plus le fardeau de preuve incombant au demandeur d'asile est lourd.
[16]
La SPR a indiqué que, la Bolivie étant une démocratie, la demanderesse ne devait pas se contenter de démontrer qu'elle avait sollicité la protection de la police et que ses efforts à cet égard avaient été vains. La SPR a souligné qu'on ne peut s'attendre d'aucun gouvernement qu'il assure une protection parfaite et que les manquements locaux concernant la fourniture de cette protection ne sont pas suffisants pour réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État.
La preuve relative aux conditions existant en Bolivie
[17]
Après avoir passé en revue la preuve qui lui avait été présentée, la SPR a conclu que la Bolivie est une démocratie multipartite où le président, Evo Morales, a été élu en 2009 à la suite d'élections libres et justes. Elle a fait remarquer qu'il y avait eu certains problèmes en matière de droits de la personne en Bolivie, notamment des assassinats par les forces de sécurité, des conditions de détention très dures et des juges corrompus. Elle a constaté qu'en Bolivie le viol est un problème grave qui ne fait pas toujours l'objet d'un signalement, même s'il s'agit d'une infraction criminelle. De plus, elle a constaté également que le viol conjugal n'est pas un crime en Bolivie et que la violence contre les femmes est un problème répandu qui est peu signalé; les lois contre la violence conjugale en Bolivie n'ont pas toujours été appliquées et le gouvernement a pris peu de mesures importantes pour lutter contre cette violence. La SPR a fait remarquer que la brigade de protection de la famille (BPF) avait traité 70 792 dossiers de violence conjugale jusqu'en novembre 2010. La BPF est une instance policière chargée de traiter les cas d'agression qui ne constituent pas des crimes selon le code pénal bolivien et compte des sous-services dans de nombreuses régions de la Bolivie.
[18]
Quoique les services offerts aux femmes victimes de violence conjugale soient limités, la SPR a indiqué que le Bolivie prenait des mesures pour régler le problème. Le gouvernement bolivien a réécrit une loi (la loi no 1674) afin de définir le rôle des BPF, des services juridiques municipaux et des organisations non gouvernementales dans la lutte contre la violence conjugale. Cette loi n'a cependant pas répondu aux attentes. En Bolivie, les municipalités sont tenues par la loi de fournir des refuges aux femmes. S'il n'existait que 13 refuges de ce genre au moment où elle a rendu sa décision, la SPR a fait remarquer que d'autres refuges allaient être créés prochainement. Les victimes de violence conjugale en Bolivie peuvent porter plainte contre leurs agresseurs auprès des BPF, des tribunaux de la famille et des centres de santé publique. De plus, une victime peut porter plainte auprès d'un ombudsman si elle n'est pas satisfaite de la réponse qu'elle a reçue.
Les efforts de la demanderesse
[19]
La SPR a constaté que la demanderesse n'avait rien fait après avoir tenté de déposer une plainte contre Manuel le 4 mai 2005, lorsque le policier s'est moqué d'elle et lui a dit de rentrer chez elle. En outre, la demanderesse n'a pas remis à la police une copie du rapport qu'elle avait obtenu de son médecin. La SPR a estimé que la demanderesse formulait une hypothèse lorsqu'elle a dit que le policier avait téléphoné à Demetrio et que sa première tentative d'obtenir la protection de l'État contre Manuel ne réfutait pas de manière crédible la présomption de protection de l'État parce qu'il s'agissait d'un manquement des autorités locales et qui était en outre seulement hypothétique.
[20]
La SPR a aussi examiné la deuxième plainte déposée par la demanderesse auprès de la police après que Manuel l'avait attaquée dans le marché de Cochabamba. Elle a fait remarquer que le deuxième policier avait consigné sa plainte et lui avait remis une lettre portant un timbre, même s'il travaillait au poste de police où elle avait porté plainte inutilement la première fois. Après être allée au poste de police une deuxième fois, la demanderesse s'est enfuie à La Paz, puis elle a quitté la Bolivie. La SPR a fait remarquer en outre que, à l'occasion de sa deuxième plainte, la demanderesse n'avait pas donné à la police une adresse où elle pouvait être rejointe à La Paz et ne l'avait pas informée de son départ de la Bolivie. La SPR a conclu que ces faits n'étaient pas suffisants pour réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État parce que le départ de la demanderesse de la Bolivie avait, dans les faits, mis fin à l'enquête policière sur l'agression commise contre elle par Manuel.
[21]
La SPR a fait remarquer également que la demanderesse avait vécu aux États-Unis pendant quatre ans entre son départ de la Bolivie et la présentation de sa demande d'asile au Canada. Elle a conclu que la crainte que lui inspirait toujours Manuel était fondée sur la violence dont sa mère et sa sœur avaient été victimes et sur sa conviction que la police ne prend pas au sérieux la violence conjugale en Bolivie. Bien que la Bolivie ait eu de la difficulté à protéger les femmes contre la violence dans le passé, la SPR a indiqué que le pays reconnaît ses problèmes et fait des progrès en ce qui concerne la protection des femmes contre la violence conjugale.
La conclusion
[22]
La SPR a conclu que la preuve ne la convainquait pas que la demanderesse avait été exposée à la persécution en Bolivie. Elle a conclu également que la demanderesse ne serait pas exposée à une menace à sa vie, au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités ou au risque d'être soumise à la torture si elle retournait en Bolivie. En conséquence, elle a conclu que la demanderesse n'avait pas qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention ni celle de personne à protéger et elle a rejeté sa demande d'asile.
LES QUESTIONS EN LITIGE
[23]
La demanderesse soulève les questions suivantes dans sa demande:
a. La conclusion de la SPR concernant la protection de l'État était-elle raisonnable?
b. Les motifs de la SPR étaient-ils suffisants?
c. La SPR a-t-elle appliqué le critère approprié concernant la protection de l'État?
LA NORME DE CONTRÔLE APPLICABLE
[24]
La Cour suprême du Canada a statué dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  que l'analyse relative à la norme de contrôle n'a pas à être menée dans tous les cas. Lorsque la norme de contrôle applicable à une question particulière dont la cour est saisie est bien établie par la jurisprudence, la cour de révision peut tout simplement appliquer cette norme. Ce n'est que lorsque cette démarche s'avère infructueuse que la cour de révision doit examiner les quatre facteurs faisant partie de l'analyse relative à la norme de contrôle.
[25] <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Carrillo
, précité, la Cour d'appel fédérale a statué, au paragraphe 36, que la norme de contrôle qui s'applique à une conclusion relative à la protection de l'État est celle de la raisonnabilité. Cette approche a été suivie par le juge  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . La juge Danièle Tremblay-Lamer était arrivée à la même conclusion au paragraphe 11 de
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . La norme de contrôle applicable à la première question est celle de la raisonnabilité.
[26]
Récemment, la Cour suprême du Canada a statué, au paragraphe 14 de
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  que l'insuffisance des motifs ne permet pas à elle seule de casser une décision. En fait, « les motifs doivent être examinés en corrélation avec le résultat et ils doivent permettre de savoir si ce dernier fait partie des issues possibles ». Le caractère suffisant des motifs sera analysé en fonction de la raisonnabilité de la décision dans son ensemble.
[27]
Lorsque la norme de la raisonnabilité s'applique, l'analyse portera sur « la justification de la décision, [...] la transparence et [...] l'intelligibilité du processus décisionnel, ainsi [que sur] l'appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit ». Voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 47, et
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . En d'autres termes, la Cour ne devrait intervenir que si la décision était déraisonnable en ce sens qu'elle ne fait pas partie des « issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit ».
[28]
En ce qui concerne la troisième question, le juge Michael Kelen a statué, au paragraphe 12 de
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  que, dans les cas où le demandeur prétend qu'un agent a appliqué le mauvais critère, la norme de contrôle qui s'applique est celle de la décision correcte. En outre, dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  le juge Yves de Montigny a statué, au paragraphe 35, que l'application, par la SPR, du critère relatif à la protection de l'État est assujettie à la norme de la décision correcte. Le juge Paul Crampton est arrivé à la même conclusion dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . La norme de contrôle qui s'applique à la troisième question est celle de la décision correcte.
[29]
La Cour suprême du Canada a statué, au paragraphe 50 de <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité:
La cour de révision qui applique la norme de la décision correcte n'acquiesce pas au raisonnement du décideur; elle entreprend plutôt sa propre analyse au terme de laquelle elle décide si elle est d'accord ou non avec la conclusion du décideur. En cas de désaccord, elle substitue sa propre conclusion et rend la décision qui s'impose. La cour de révision doit se demander dès le départ si la décision du tribunal administratif était la bonne.
LES DISPOSITIONS LÉGISLATIVES PERTINENTES
[30]
Les dispositions suivantes de la Loi s'appliquent à la présente demande:
Définition de « réfugié »
96.
A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a
) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
Personne à protéger
97.
(1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a
) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
[...]
Convention refugee
96.
A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(
a
) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(
b
) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
Person in Need of Protection
97.
(1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them personally
(
a
) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning - of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(
b
) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care
[...]
LES PRÉTENTIONS DES PARTIES
La demanderesse
La SPR a accepté sa preuve
[31]
La SPR n'a tiré aucune conclusion défavorable concernant la crédibilité dans sa décision, ce qui, selon la demanderesse, signifie que la SPR a accepté son récit de la violence dont elle a été victime en Bolivie et de ses tentatives d'obtenir une protection dans ce pays. La demanderesse affirme en outre que la SPR a jugé crédible la preuve qu'elle a produite pour démontrer que Manuel était toujours à sa recherche.
La conclusion concernant la protection de l'État était déraisonnable
La SPR n'a pas tenu compte de tous les éléments de preuve
[32]
La demanderesse prétend que la SPR a préféré, en ce qui concerne les conditions existant en Bolivie, des éléments de preuve plus anciens à des éléments de preuve plus récents.
[33]
La SPR s'est appuyée sur la Réponse à une demande d'information BOL102093.F de la CISR, datée du 15 décembre 2006 (la RDI de 2006), qui indiquait que la loi no 1674 n'avait pas tenu ses promesses. La RDI de 2006 indiquait également que ce ne sont pas toutes les BPF régionales qui reçoivent des plaintes de violence conjugale. En outre, elle mentionne que la loi no 1674 est préventive et non punitive et que, si les victimes de violence conjugale peuvent porter plainte auprès des services juridiques municipaux, de tels services sont offerts dans seulement 39 % des municipalités. La SPR a également fait référence à un rapport de 2009 de l'Agence canadienne de développement international ((le rapport de l'ACDI), selon lequel celle-ci allait financer un refuge pour femmes en Bolivie.
[34]
La SPR a eu tort de préférer ces deux éléments de preuve à un rapport de 2011 du département d'État des États-Unis intitulé
Bolivia
:
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2010
(le rapport du département d'État). Ce rapport établit que la violence conjugale est répandue en Bolivie et que la situation ne s'est pas améliorée. La conclusion tirée par la SPR relativement à la protection de l'État était déraisonnable parce que les éléments de preuve sur lesquels elle était fondée n'étaient pas les plus récents qui étaient disponibles. Si la SPR s'était appuyée sur les éléments de preuve les plus récents comme elle aurait dû le faire, elle aurait conclu que les femmes victimes de violence, dont la demanderesse, ne peuvent obtenir la protection de l'État en Bolivie. On ne peut pas dire que la SPR a tenu compte de toute la preuve dont elle disposait si sa conclusion est contredite par des éléments de preuve plus récents.
[35]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  le juge John Evans a affirmé au paragraphe 17:
[...] plus la preuve qui n'a pas été mentionnée expressément ni analysée dans les motifs de l'organisme est importante, et plus une cour de justice sera disposée à inférer de ce silence que l'organisme a tiré une conclusion de fait erronée « sans tenir compte des éléments dont il [disposait] »:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.F. 1re inst.). Autrement dit, l'obligation de fournir une explication augmente en fonction de la pertinence de la preuve en question au regard des faits contestés. Ainsi, une déclaration générale affirmant que l'organisme a examiné l'ensemble de la preuve ne suffit pas lorsque les éléments de preuve dont elle n'a pas discuté dans ses motifs semblent carrément contredire sa conclusion. Qui plus est, quand l'organisme fait référence de façon assez détaillée à des éléments de preuve appuyant sa conclusion, mais qu'elle passe sous silence des éléments de preuve qui tendent à prouver le contraire, il peut être plus facile d'inférer que l'organisme n'a pas examiné la preuve contradictoire pour en arriver à sa conclusion de fait.
[36]
La demanderesse dit que la preuve documentaire présentée à la SPR montre clairement que la police bolivienne n'est pas capable d'accepter les plaintes de violence conjugale et d'y donner suite. La conclusion de la SPR selon laquelle la demanderesse n'a pas produit une preuve claire et convaincante réfutant la présomption de protection de l'État était déraisonnable.
La protection de l'État ne peut pas prendre la forme de changements futurs
[37]
La demanderesse affirme également que la SPR a eu tort de prendre en considération ce qui
se passera
en Bolivie en ce qui concerne la protection contre la violence conjugale et non ce qui
se passe
actuellement. Le rapport du département d'État, qui décrit la situation actuelle, contredit la conclusion de la SPR. Celle-ci s'est appuyée de manière déraisonnable sur des changements qui ne se sont pas encore concrétisés pour conclure que la demanderesse peut obtenir la protection de l'État.
Le traitement de la preuve de la demanderesse était déraisonnable
[38]
Après s'être rendue au poste de police le 4 mai 2005 et avoir fait rire d'elle, la demanderesse n'a pas porté plainte à un officier supérieur. Elle affirme que la SPR a minimisé l'importance de sa rencontre avec le policier qui s'est moqué d'elle. La conclusion de la SPR selon laquelle elle aurait dû se plaindre de la conduite du policier à un officier supérieur n'était pas réaliste parce que Demetrio est un haut gradé de la police. Demetrio et le policier en question ont refusé de l'aider. En outre, la conclusion de la SPR selon laquelle elle avançait une hypothèse lorsqu'elle disait que le policier qui s'était moqué d'elle avait parlé à Demetrio était déraisonnable. Le policier a dit à la demanderesse qu'il avait parlé à Demetrio. De plus, le fait que Manuel avait battu la demanderesse après la visite de celle-ci au poste de police montre que le policier avait téléphoné à Demetrio.
[39]
La SPR a omis de tenir compte de plusieurs éléments de preuve lorsqu'elle a conclu que le départ de la demanderesse avait mis fin à l'enquête policière sur sa deuxième plainte:
a. la demanderesse a fourni l'adresse de ses parents, mais la police n'a jamais communiqué avec personne;
b. Manuel continue de harceler sa famille et ses amis, ce qui montre que la police n'a pris aucune mesure contre lui;
c. la demanderesse craignait que Manuel obtienne son adresse si elle la donnait à la police;
d. la police n'a pas fait enquête sur la plainte qu'elle a déposée contre Manuel.
La SPR ne s'est pas intéressée aux personnes se trouvant dans une situation semblable à celle de la demanderesse
[40]
À l'audience, la demanderesse a témoigné que sa sœur aussi avait été victime de violence conjugale en Bolivie et qu'elle avait essayé de dénoncer cette violence, mais que la police n'avait pas voulu accepter sa plainte. La demanderesse soutient que la SPR n'a pas tenu compte de ce témoignage lorsqu'elle a conclu qu'elle aurait dû se plaindre à un officier supérieur de la conduite du policier à qui elle avait parlé. Le traitement réservé à sa sœur par la police et la preuve documentaire présentée à la SPR montrent qu'il ne sert à rien de demander la protection de la police contre la violence conjugale en Bolivie.
La SPR n'a pas pris en compte le bon pays
[41]
La déclaration de la SPR selon laquelle « le Costa Rica a le contrôle efficient de son territoire et peut compter sur une force de sécurité efficace pour faire observer les lois et la constitution du pays » montre que la SPR a pris en considération des documents qui ne concernent pas le bon pays. En conséquence, sa décision est déraisonnable.
Les motifs sont insuffisants
[42]
Selon la demanderesse, comme la SPR a omis de tirer une conclusion concernant la question de savoir si la protection de l'État offerte en Bolivie était suffisante, les motifs de sa décision sont insuffisants. Lorsqu'elle a statué que la Bolivie reconnaissait ses problèmes et avait fait des progrès, la SPR a omis de déterminer si ces progrès ont résulté en une protection de l'État suffisante (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
La SPR n'a pas appliqué le critère approprié concernant la protection de l'État
[43]
La SPR a fondé sa conclusion relative à la protection de l'État en partie sur les lois de la Bolivie. La demanderesse affirme toutefois que la preuve documentaire présentée à la SPR démontrait que ces lois sont inefficaces en pratique. De plus, dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  le juge Douglas Campbell a statué au paragraphe 14:
On ne saurait dire que l'État fait de « sérieux efforts » pour protéger les femmes du seul fait qu'il prend certaines mesures préventives avec diligence, par exemple en instituant des commissions d'enquête chargées d'examiner la réalité de la violence contre les femmes, en créant des postes de médiateurs chargés de recevoir les plaintes de femmes contre l'inertie policière, ou en organisant à l'intention des policiers des séminaires destinés à les sensibiliser à l'égalité des sexes. De tels efforts ne prouvent pas que l'État
assure concrètement la protection des femmes
, en d'autres termes, qu'il est capable, à l'heure actuelle de les protéger [...] [Souligné dans l'original.]
[44]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  le juge Frederick Gibson a affirmé au paragraphe 15:
Non seulement le pouvoir protecteur de l'État doit-il comporter un encadrement légal et procédural efficace mais également la capacité et la volonté d'en mettre les dispositions en œuvre.
[45]
Bien que la SPR ait conclu que des services de counseling, de l'aide juridique et médicale et des refuges étaient offerts en Bolivie, ceux-ci ne satisfont pas à la norme de protection suffisante de l'État qui s'applique. Des lois boliviennes protègent les victimes de violence conjugale, mais il a été établi dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitées, que la législation seule ne suffit pas; la législation doit se traduire en protection suffisante sur le terrain. En ne déterminant pas si la protection de l'État était suffisante, la SPR a appliqué le mauvais critère. En conséquence, l'affaire doit être renvoyée pour faire l'objet d'un nouvel examen.
Le défendeur
La SPR a tenu compte de tous les éléments de preuve
[46]
Quoique la demanderesse ait prétendu que la SPR n'avait pas tenu compte du rapport du département d'État, le défendeur fait remarquer que la SPR a fait expressément référence à ce rapport aux paragraphes 10 à 12 de sa décision. Comme la SPR a pris en considération le rapport du département d'État, lequel allait à l'encontre de ses conclusions,
Cepeda-Gutierrez
, précitée, ne s'applique pas en l'espèce.
La demanderesse n'a pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État
[47]
Selon
Ward
et <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précités, la protection de l'État se présume et cette présomption ne peut être réfutée qu'au moyen d'une preuve claire et convaincante. La Cour d'appel a dit dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  qu'il ne suffit pas de démontrer que le gouvernement d'un État ne réussit pas toujours à protéger ses citoyens. En l'espèce, il y avait une preuve claire et convaincante que la Bolivie est une démocratie, de sorte que la demanderesse avait donc le lourd fardeau de réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État. Or, elle n'a pas réussi à le faire.
[48]
Il ressortait de la preuve dont disposait la SPR que la demanderesse avait tenté d'obtenir la protection de l'État à deux reprises et qu'elle ne l'avait pas obtenue la première fois qu'elle avait eu recours à la police. La deuxième fois qu'elle a fait appel à la police, une copie d'une plainte en bonne et due forme lui a été remise, mais elle a quitté la Bolivie avant que l'enquête policière ne soit terminée. Sur la foi de la preuve dont elle disposait, la SPR a conclu de manière raisonnable que la demanderesse n'avait fait que peu de démarches pour obtenir la protection de l'État. Son témoignage selon lequel ses parents avaient fait le suivi auprès de la police n'est pas étayé par l'affidavit de sa mère qui a été produit devant la SPR.
[49]
La preuve documentaire présentée à la SPR était suffisante pour conclure que la demanderesse n'avait pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État. La SPR a fait référence à des éléments de preuve qui démontraient que les BPF avaient traité 70 792 cas de violence conjugale jusqu'en 2010. Selon la demanderesse, ce chiffre révèle une protection insuffisante. Le défendeur souligne cependant que
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF), nous enseigne que la présomption de protection de l'État n'est pas réfutée par le fait que la protection est imparfaite.
[50]
Le défendeur s'appuie aussi sur la preuve présentée à la SPR pour affirmer que les BPF, auxquelles les victimes de violence conjugale et leur famille peuvent porter plainte, sont présentes dans de nombreuses régions de la Bolivie. La demanderesse a dit que des BPF n'existent pas dans toutes les régions, mais le défendeur fait valoir qu'elle n'a pas établi qu'il n'y en avait pas dans la région où elle vivait. Le nombre limité de BPF en Bolivie ne peut en soi réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État.
[51]
Par ailleurs, le gouvernement bolivien a adopté des lois pour lutter contre la violence conjugale. L'existence d'un cadre juridique est un indicateur valable des efforts d'un État de fournir une protection. La SPR a pris en considération non seulement l'existence des lois en question, mais également leur application.
[52]
Le défendeur reconnaît que la violence conjugale est répandue en Bolivie, mais il rappelle les propos suivants tenus par le juge Gibson au paragraphe 16 de
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> : <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Canada (ministre de l'Emploi et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  démocratiques et protéger les droits de la personne ne peut garantir à tous ses citoyens qu'ils seront toujours protégés. Dès lors, il ne suffit pas que le demandeur démontre que son gouvernement n'a pas toujours réussi à protéger des personnes dans sa situation. Le terrorisme au service d'une idéologie perverse est un fléau qui afflige aujourd'hui de nombreuses sociétés; ces victimes, bien qu'elles puissent grandement mériter notre sympathie, ne deviennent pas des réfugiés au sens de la Convention simplement parce que leurs gouvernements ont été incapables de supprimer ce mal.
On peut dire exactement la même chose au sujet du mal que représente la violence conjugale.
[53]
Par ses prétentions, la demanderesse invite la Cour à apprécier à nouveau la preuve. Or, ce n'est pas le rôle de la Cour. Comme la SPR a tenu compte de la preuve et a tiré une conclusion raisonnable, sa décision doit être maintenue.
Il incombe à la demanderesse de réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État
[54]
Malgré le fait que la demanderesse a soutenu que la SPR n'avait pas appliqué le critère approprié au regard de la question de la protection de l'État, le défendeur affirme que la SPR a bien énoncé le droit établi par
Ward
et <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précités, et par
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . La SPR n'avait pas l'obligation de tirer une conclusion sur la question de savoir si la protection de l'État était suffisante ou non. La demanderesse ne s'est tout simplement pas acquittée de son fardeau de réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État. La SPR a clairement appliqué le critère approprié lorsqu'elle a déterminé si la demanderesse avait réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État.
Le mémoire complémentaire du défendeur
[55]
Le défendeur soutient en outre que
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
, précité, et
Alberta (Information and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , établissent que la norme de la décision correcte s'applique seulement lorsque la question en litige revêt une importance capitale pour le système juridique et est étrangère au domaine d'expertise du décideur. La conclusion de la SPR concernant la protection de l'État étant assujettie à la norme de la raisonnabilité, le fait de ne pas mentionner des éléments de preuve qui contredisent cette conclusion ne rend pas la décision déraisonnable. La cour de révision doit plutôt se demander si, « lorsqu'on les examine à la lumière des éléments de preuve dont il disposait et de la nature de la tâche que la loi lui confie, on constate que les motifs du [t]ribunal expliquent de façon adéquate le fondement de sa décision » (
Newfoundland Nurses'Union
, au paragraphe 18).
[56]
En l'espèce, la décision de la SPR était raisonnable parce que celle-ci a étayé de motifs clairs et intelligibles sa conclusion selon laquelle la demanderesse n'avait pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État. Comme cette conclusion fait partie des issues décrites dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la Cour ne devrait pas intervenir.
La demanderesse n'a pas tenté adéquatement d'obtenir la protection de l'État
[57]
Le défendeur affirme qu'il ne fait aucun doute que la SPR a rejeté la demande d'asile de la demanderesse parce que celle-ci n'a pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État. La SPR a conclu que la protection de l'État était disponible après la deuxième plainte de la demanderesse, mais que celle-ci a prématurément mis fin à l'enquête sur cette plainte en ne fournissant pas une adresse exacte à la police ou en ne l'informant pas qu'elle quittait la Bolivie. La demanderesse n'a pas porté plainte à une instance supérieure en Bolivie au sujet de la conduite du premier policier à qui elle avait parlé et n'a entrepris que peu de démarches pour obtenir la protection de l'État.
La conclusion concernant la protection de l'État était une issue possible
[58]
La demanderesse n'a pas fait de suivi auprès de la police au sujet de l'enquête et son allégation selon laquelle sa mère s'en est chargée pour elle n'est pas étayée par l'affidavit de cette dernière. En outre, en soutenant que le fait que Manuel est encore en liberté montre que la protection de l'État est insuffisante, la demanderesse semble laisser entendre que la police bolivienne aurait dû emprisonner Manuel sans procès, en raison uniquement de la force de ses allégations.
[59]
Si la demanderesse avait raison lorsqu'elle a affirmé à l'audience que ses parents lui ont dit que la police les avait informés qu'elle ne pouvait rien faire au sujet de Manuel, cela étaye en fait la conclusion de la SPR selon laquelle le départ de la demanderesse a mis fin à l'enquête sur sa plainte. La police bolivienne ne pouvait rien faire sans le témoignage de la demanderesse. La conclusion de la SPR concernant la protection de l'État est étayée par la propre preuve de la demanderesse et, comme le dossier permet cette conclusion, la Cour ne devrait pas intervenir.
La SPR a tenu compte de la preuve de manière appropriée
[60]
La demanderesse se sert de la RDI de 2006 tout en contestant l'utilisation que la SPR en a faite. Elle a fait référence à ce document à l'audience (voir la page 206 du dossier certifié du tribunal), et elle ne peut pas maintenant se plaindre du fait que la SPR s'est appuyée sur lui. Comme ce document faisait partie du Cartable national de documentation de la CISR concernant la Bolivie, la SPR pouvait en tenir compte.
[61]
Dans sa décision, la SPR a fait référence à des éléments de preuve qui contredisaient ses conclusions. De plus, elle a explicitement reconnu que la Bolivie avait de la difficulté à régler le problème de la violence conjugale. La preuve objective dont la SPR disposait démontrait également que l'agression est un crime selon le code pénal bolivien; le deuxième incident signalé par la demanderesse était une agression interdite par le code pénal bolivien. Bien que des éléments de preuve semblent indiquer que les lois visant spécifiquement la violence conjugale ne sont pas appliquées, la preuve ne démontre pas que le code pénal bolivien n'est pas appliqué.
[62]
Même si la preuve démontrait que jusqu'à 70 % des femmes boliviennes sont victimes de violence conjugale, cela ne signifie pas que la protection de l'État ne peut pas être obtenue. Ces statistiques révèlent l'ampleur d'un problème social, mais n'indiquent rien au sujet de la capacité de la Bolivie de protéger ses citoyens. Il n'est pas clair que les lois sur le viol conjugal s'appliquaient dans le cas de la demanderesse puisque celle-ci n'était pas mariée avec Manuel.
[63]
Même si la mère et la sœur de la demanderesse ont peut-être été victimes de violence conjugale, leurs expériences ne permettent pas de conclure à une absence de protection de l'État en l'espèce. Outre le témoignage de la demanderesse, aucun élément de preuve n'indiquait que la sœur de la demanderesse avait demandé la protection de l'État et ne l'avait pas obtenue. La mère de la demanderesse n'a pas déclaré dans son affidavit que la protection de l'État lui avait aussi été refusée. Les expériences de la mère et de la sœur de la demanderesse ne constituaient pas la preuve claire et convaincante nécessaire pour réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État.
La SPR n'est pas tenue de mentionner tous les éléments de preuve
[64]
Le défendeur soutient que
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
, précité, est présumé avoir infirmé
Cepeda-Gutierrez
, précitée, et toute autre décision exigeant une conclusion ou une analyse particulière. Il souligne que
Cepeda-Gutierrez
était fondée sur
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  où la Cour avait statué que le fait de ne pas mentionner un rapport constituait une erreur de droit. Depuis
Alberta Teachers' Association
, précité, les questions de droit ne sont plus présumées être assujetties à la norme de la décision correcte. Cet arrêt établit plutôt que c'est la norme de la raisonnabilité qui s'applique en l'espèce; dans le contexte d'un examen de la norme de la raisonnabilité, la prétention de la demanderesse selon laquelle la SPR a omis de traiter d'éléments de preuve contradictoires est précisément le genre d'argument formaliste que la Cour suprême du Canada du Canada a rejeté dans
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
. Cet argument ne saurait soulever une erreur susceptible de contrôle.
[65]
Subsidiairement, le défendeur affirme que
Cepeda-Gutierrez
, précitée, n'établit pas ce que la demanderesse prétend. Dans cette affaire, le juge Evans a statué que la conclusion de la SPR concernant la persécution n'était pas entachée d'une erreur susceptible de contrôle, même si la SPR n'avait pas fait mention d'un élément de preuve contradictoire en particulier (voir le paragraphe 22). L'ensemble de la preuve établissait que les Cepeda-Gutierrez ne couraient pas le risque d'être persécutés. Si la SPR mentionne les éléments de preuve justifiant l'inférence qu'elle s'est référée à cette preuve, il n'y a pas d'erreur susceptible de contrôle (
Cepeda-Gutierrez
, au paragraphe 28). En l'espèce, la SPR a mentionné tous les éléments de preuve contradictoires qui lui avaient été présentés, de sorte que la Cour peut conclure qu'elle a tenu compte de l'ensemble de la preuve.
[66]
Le défendeur affirme en outre que, selon
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Cepeda-Gutierrez
, précitée, ne s'applique pas à la preuve relative aux conditions existant dans un pays.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  le juge Michael Kelen a statué aux paragraphes 20 à 22:
Il est constant en droit que les motifs exposés par la SPR ne doivent pas être examinés à la loupe par une cour de justice et que la SPR n'est pas tenue de faire état de chaque élément qui lui a été soumis et qui va à l'encontre de sa conclusion, ni d'expliquer le poids qu'elle lui a accordé: décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.C.W.S. (3d) 264 (C.F. 1reinst.), rendue par le juge Evans (maintenant juge à la Cour d'appel), au paragraphe 16. La SPR est présumée avoir examiné toutes les preuves, cependant, plus les preuves qui ne sont pas mentionnées explicitement et analysées dans les motifs de la SPR sont importantes, plus une cour de justice sera encline à en déduire que la SPR a tiré sa conclusion sans tenir compte de la preuve: décision
Cepeda-Gutierrez
, précitée, au paragraphe 17.
La demanderesse a énuméré plusieurs jugements récents de la Cour où les conclusions de la SPR sur la protection de l'État ont été infirmées parce que la SPR avait analysé d'une manière sélective, voire laissé de côté, la preuve qui attestait une insuffisance de la protection de l'État: décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  rendue par le juge O'Keefe, au paragraphe 38; décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  rendue par la juge Dawson, au paragraphe 15; décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  rendue par le juge Near, au paragraphe 17; décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  rendue par le juge Russell, aux paragraphes 70 et 71. Dans tous ces précédents, la SPR avait négligé d'expliquer pourquoi elle privilégiait certaines preuves documentaires plutôt que des preuves documentaires et testimoniales substantielles et dignes de foi qui attestaient les lacunes de la protection de l'État.
En l'espèce, la SPR a reconnu, au paragraphe 14 de sa décision, que la violence contre les femmes était endémique au Mexique et que le dispositif de répression mis en place contre les abuseurs était cruellement déficient:
¶14 Dans ses observations soigneusement préparées, la conseil a mentionné plusieurs manquements de la part des autorités mexicaines relativement au traitement de la violence fondée sur le sexe, dont la culture d'acceptation de cette pratique, même parmi les personnes chargées d'appliquer les lois contre cette violence, la culture d'impunité à l'égard des auteurs de tels actes et les obstacles à la protection, comme la corruption, la situation financière des femmes, la discrétion des juges lorsqu'ils décident des mesures à prendre, et les aspects pratiques, comme les ordonnances qui ne prennent pas effet avant d'être signifiées aux agresseurs. Il ressort manifestement de la preuve documentaire que le Mexique mène une lutte constante contre la violence faite aux femmes, le crime et la corruption. Même si la preuve documentaire corrobore certaines craintes de la demandeure d'asile, elle comprend également de l'information sur les efforts actuellement déployés par le Mexique pour lutter contre le crime, la corruption et la violence faite aux femmes.
Au vu de l'extrait susmentionné, il est impossible de dire que la SPR a laissé de côté la preuve contraire. Sans doute n'a-t-elle pas fait état de documents précis, mais il ressort clairement de ses motifs qu'elle a lu et étudié les conclusions écrites des demandeurs, ainsi que les références documentaires qui y apparaissaient.
[67]
En l'espèce, la SPR a tenu compte de l'ensemble de la preuve présentée par la demanderesse et a examiné toutes ses prétentions. Il n'y a donc aucune raison de conclure que sa décision est déraisonnable.
Il incombait à la demanderesse de réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État
[68]
Lorsqu'elle prétend que la SPR n'a pas établi le caractère suffisant ou l'efficacité de la protection de l'État, la demanderesse lui transfère à tort le fardeau de la preuve. C'est à la demanderesse qu'incombe en tout temps le fardeau de démontrer que la protection de l'État était insuffisante. La SPR a conclu que la demanderesse pouvait obtenir la protection de l'État sans restriction ni condition, et elle savait que le critère applicable à la protection de l'État est celui du caractère suffisant.
[69]
Selon
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
, précité, un tribunal n'a pas l'obligation de tirer une conclusion explicite sur chaque élément constitutif du raisonnement qui a mené à sa conclusion finale. Dans la mesure où les motifs permettent à la Cour de déterminer comment un résultat faisant partie des issues acceptables a été atteint, la décision doit être maintenue. La Cour ne devrait pas substituer sa propre opinion en qualifiant de fatales certaines omissions qu'elle a relevées dans les motifs (voir
Newfoundland Nurses' Union
, au paragraphe 16).
ANALYSE
[70]
La crédibilité ne posait pas problème en l'espèce et la SPR a fondé sa décision sur le fait que la demanderesse n'avait pas produit « des éléments de preuve clairs et convaincants quant à l'incapacité de l'État de lui offrir une protection ».
[71]
La SPR a conclu que la demanderesse n'avait pas accompli des démarches suffisantes pour obtenir la protection de l'État, de sorte que ses expériences ne démontraient pas qu'elle n'aurait pas obtenu une protection suffisante si elle avait raisonnablement tenté de l'obtenir. La demanderesse a toutefois fait valoir, en faisant référence à la preuve pertinente, que les femmes victimes de violence conjugale ne sont pas protégées en Bolivie et que l'État ne veut pas ou ne peut pas la protéger.
[72]
Afin de répondre à ces prétentions, la SPR a passé en revue les documents sur les conditions existant en Bolivie et a conclu ce qui suit:
La demandeure d'asile est demeurée aux États-Unis pendant les quatre années suivantes avant de présenter une demande d'asile au Canada, mais elle soutient que Manuel la cherche toujours. Elle craint que la police n'assure pas sa protection si elle retourne en Bolivie, parce que [traduction] « la police n'accorde aucune importance à la violence conjugale. C'est un comportement normal. » L'opinion de la demandeure d'asile est fondée en partie sur les expériences passées de sa mère et de sa sœur, qui ont été victimes de violence fondée sur le sexe. Je reconnais que la Bolivie a un passé peu reluisant en matière de protection des femmes victimes de violence conjugale et que, en plus, cette violence a déjà été socialement acceptée comme étant une réalité quotidienne. En revanche, comme cette demande d'asile est de nature prospective, je constate que la Bolivie montre une prise de conscience de ses problèmes passés et accomplit des progrès à cet égard en légiférant, en faisant appliquer ses lois et en poursuivant ses concertations entre le gouvernement, ses citoyens et d'autres pays au sujet des moyens à prendre pour corriger ses lacunes passées relativement à la violence conjugale.
[73]
À mon avis, la SPR a omis de déterminer si, nonobstant les initiatives gouvernementales mentionnées dans sa décision, la protection était suffisante en pratique. La SPR disposait assurément de nombreux éléments de preuve indiquant que le passé « peu reluisant » de la Bolivie en matière de protection des femmes victimes de violence conjugale n'avait pas changé. C'est pour cette raison qu'il était important qu'elle examine la situation sur le terrain et détermine si la présomption de protection de l'État avait été infirmée.
[74]
Plusieurs décisions récentes de la Cour portent sur cette question, mais je pense qu'il suffit de se référer aux indications données par le juge Mosley dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, aux paragraphes 13 et 16. Les propos qu'il a tenus dans cette affaire au sujet du Honduras peuvent s'appliquer en l'espèce:
La Commission a bien cerné les principes juridiques applicables aux demandeurs d'asile qui allèguent être victime de persécution aux mains d'acteurs non étatiques ainsi que la présomption de protection de l'État établis dans les arrêts
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, et
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] ACF no 399 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Le demandeur « doit produire une preuve pertinente, digne de foi et convaincante qui démontre au juge des faits, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que la protection accordée par l'État en question est insuffisante » ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, paragraphe 38). La protection de l'État n'a pas à être parfaite, mais elle doit être suffisante.
[...]
La Commission n'a fourni aucune analyse quant au caractère satisfaisant des efforts concrets déployés par le gouvernement du Honduras et par les acteurs internationaux pour améliorer la protection de l'État au Honduras. Bien que les efforts déployés par un État soient effectivement pertinents quant à l'analyse de la protection de l'État, ils ne sont ni déterminants ni suffisants (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no 816, paragraphe 75). Les efforts doivent avoir, dans les faits, « véritablement engendré une protection adéquate de l'État » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  SPR s'est appuyée sur la preuve de 2006, qui démontre comment la loi de 1995 sur la violence conjugale a été « réécrite », et sur le rapport de l'ACDI, dans lequel la SPR a relevé qu'un refuge allait être construit avec les fonds de l'ACDI et que les choses « [sont] sur le point de changer » en Bolivie. Le rapport du département d'État semble toutefois indiquer que la situation ne s'est pas améliorée et confirme:
1. que la violence contre les femmes est répandue;
2. que 70 % des femmes sont victimes de violence en Bolivie;
3. que le viol conjugal n'est pas un crime;
4. que le gouvernement a pris peu de mesures utiles ou concrètes pour lutter contre la violence conjugale;
5. que les BPF, qui sont censées aider les femmes, manquent de structures et de ressources financières et humaines pour donner suite aux plaintes et que la plupart des cas ne sont pas signalés.
[76]
Compte tenu de cette preuve, je pense qu'il était déraisonnable que la SPR ne se penche pas sur ce que le juge Mosley appelle « le caractère satisfaisant des efforts concrets » du gouvernement de la Bolivie avant de conclure que la demanderesse n'avait pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État. Si la SPR l'avait fait, son opinion sur les efforts de la demanderesse aurait bien pu être différente.
[77]
Les avocats conviennent qu'il n'y a aucune question à certifier et la Cour partage leur avis.
JUGEMENT
[78]
LA COUR STATUE
:
1. La demande est accueillie. La décision de la SPR est annulée et l'affaire est renvoyée à un tribunal de la SPR différemment constitué pour faire l'objet d'un nouvel examen.
2. Il n'y a aucune question à certifier.
[End of document]