[1]
Rouleau, J.
[Translation]: For many years the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs ("the Department") has received numerous complaints from members of the Kanesatake Community (Oka). The latter have been unable to reach agreement on the procedure for determining whether the band council should be chosen by election or in accordance with custom. In 1988, with the approval of all concerned, the Minister acceded to their request and was planning to hold a referendum in the band to determine by a consensus how to proceed in future in electing the chief of the Oka band.
[2]
The action at bar is to obtain a declaratory judgment that the referendum that was to be held by the Department on June 19 and 20, 1988 is unfair, arbitrary and unlawful.
[3]
Since 1969 the Department has recognized that the appointment of the Kanesatake band council is made according to custom, that is, an appointment by clan mothers. The said custom has been vigorously challenged by a group known as the "Comité pour le changement" [committee for change], which is represented by the intervenor Richard Gabriel. This group of Mohawks is calling for elections to elect the Kanesatake band council pursuant to s. 74 of the
Indian Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5.
[4]
In 1977 the Department wrote the chief the following:
"... the only guideline the Department has, in order to ensure that the majority of the people support one group or an individual, is by a vote, a referendum, a public meeting or a house to house survey."
[5]
From 1969 to 1973, after several requests, the government refused to intervene in the electoral dispute between the official band council and the Comité pour le changement. It considered that there was no basis for such an intervention: the challenging group did not have a majority in the band. Nevertheless, in November 1973 after repeated complaints departmental officials conducted a house-to-house survey at Oka. The principal objective of the survey was the method of electing the band council, that is, the same objective as in the case at bar. A majority of the Mohawks said they were in favour of "band custom". As this result was not accepted by some members, it was the subject of an action which was heard before me in 1982. My decision, rendered on January 7, 1983, was that custom would prevail in Oka in accordance with the preference of the majority of Oka Mohawks.
[6]
Following the court's decision in 1983, there was still among the members of the Kanesatake band a group which continued to make representations to the Department seeking changes in the election procedure. The Department again did nothing for several years. In 1987 Mr Frank Vieni, director general of the Department, who had been persuaded that he should once again go along with the wishes of the members of the Comité pour le changement, said the following in his letter of September 17, 1987:
"... the best way and possibly the only way in this case to find out if band members want a change in the manner of choosing their representatives is to consult the population by referendum."
[7]
On March 4, 1988, following, Mr. Frank Vieni again made his proposal for a referendum to the chief of the band council and indicated that his action resulted from the fact that 200 members had told him they wished to change the election procedure for appointing the band council. He said that this request and the various complaints brought to his attention in recent years were sufficient to justify the holding of a referendum. In the same letter it was also mentioned that if the people of Oka confirmed the existing system, the Department would recognize the procedure of election by custom, that is by clan mothers:
"If the population confirms the present system, then the Department will be satisfied that the present custom continues to prevail. On the other hand, if the population indicates a willingness for a change, then the Department would go through a series of steps that should lead to a declaration of the Minister."
[8]
Finally, in a letter of May 30, 1988, from the Minister to Chief Stanley Cree, the parties appear to be in agreement:
"Now, I understand that the present Band Council and the Comité du changement [sic] agree that the people should be allowed to decide what electoral procedure would be best. As a result of the
meeting of May 25 last with representatives of both groups, it was decided to hold a referendum at the earliest possible opportunity
..." (My emphasis)
[9]
Accordingly, with the cooperation of the various Kanesatake groups, the Department decided to hold a referendum at the federal school in Oka on June 19 and 20, 1988. The question put to the Amerindians of Oka was as follows:
"Do you wish the Kanesatake band council to be established by:
elections?
or
custom?"
[10]
On June 17, 1988, an application for an interlocutory injunction was submitted to the Federal Court to block the said referendum. This application was adjourned since the parties had reached agreement and decided to wait until the merits of the matter were heard by the court. The question before the court is thus whether the referendum which the Department wishes to hold is consistent with the requirements of the
Act
.
[11]
The arguments of the plaintiffs - the Six Nations Traditional Hereditary Chiefs and George Martin - are that:
"1. No federal legislation gives the government the right to hold a referendum;
"2. In organizing a referendum, the Minister is illegally delegating his powers to third parties, the voters;
"3. The judgment of Rouleau, J., in 1983 states '... that custom for the election of "Council of a Band" does prevail on the Oka Indian Reserve';
"4. Section 35 of the
Constitution Act, 1982
entrenches the aboriginal rights (customs) of aboriginal peoples. This section has been analyzed by the Supreme Court of Canada in
Sparrow
, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1075; 111 N.R. 241."
[12]
Before examining these allegations, let us look at the reasons leading the government to intervene in this dispute.
[13]
The plaintiff George Martin is the present chief of the band council and was appointed by the traditional hereditary Mohawk system, that is by nine clan mothers. Until there is a new order, this band council is still regarded as the only legal authority recognized by the federal government. It is also significant to note that the council administers several million dollars every year. As Mr. Gaétan Pilon, manager of band institutions, explained to the court, the Department's policy is not to interfere in band activities unless there is fraud, maladministration or a dispute between members.
[14]
As we mentioned above, on June 17, 1988 the band council sought an interlocutory injunction prohibiting the said referendum from being held. What happened to make the council suddenly change its mind? There is no indication in the evidence to explain this turn of events.
[15]
Now that we have listed the facts in chronological order, let us look at the plaintiffs' arguments.
1. No Federal Legislation Gives The Government The Right To Hold A Referendum
[16]
This allegation cannot long withstand the discretionary powers conferred on the Minister by s. 4 of the
Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-6:
"
Powers, duties and functions of the Minister
"4. The powers, duties and functions of the Minister extend to and
include all matters
over which Parliament has jurisdiction, not by law assigned to any other department, board or agency of the Government of Canada, relating to
(a) Indian affairs ..." (My emphasis)
Further, ss. 3 and 74 of the
Indian Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5, show that the government has a duty to ensure that Indian bands are properly administered:
"
Administration
"3(1) This Act shall be administered by the Minister,
who shall be the superintendent general of Indian Affairs
.
"
Elections of chiefs and band councils
"74(1) Whenever he
deems it advisable for the good government of a band, the Minister may
declare by order that after a day to be named therein the council of the band, consisting of a chief and councillors, shall be selected by elections to be held in accordance with this Act." (My emphasis)
[17]
In the plaintiffs' submission, the Minister cannot request the opinion of Oka aboriginal peoples as there is no legislation giving him the express power to hold a referendum.
[18]
The various sections of statutes cited above give the Minister quite broad discretionary powers. Further, the theory of administrative law is very clear on the point:
"There is a
discretionary power
'when in a given fact situation governmental authority is free to take a particular decision, may choose between certain decisions, in other words,
when its conduct is not dictated in advance by law
' ... While it is true that in many cases its representatives must still consider
what they may or should do
, increasingly one finds that their duty is
instead to consider what is in keeping with sound administration
." [see footnote 1] (My emphasis)
[19]
This passage exactly describes our case. The Minister has found that there is a problem at Kanesatake and simply wants to determine the Mohawks' wishes as to the election procedure they prefer for their band council. The referendum is only a means used to more clearly and objectively identify their opinions on this point. It also appeared from the evidence that the various polls taken by the band council or the Comité pour le changement indicated a large majority for the party organizing the poll. Neither of the two groups wishes to recognize its opponent's poll. Accordingly, it is this lack of objectivity or impartiality which has led the Minister to intervene in this dispute.
[20]
In one of its judgments, the Supreme Court of Canada has explained how the courts should interpret legislation. McIntyre, J., said:
"It is clear, then, in my view, that the Minister has been accorded a discretion under s. 8 of the
Act
. The fact that the Minister in his policy guidelines issued in the Notice to Importers employed the words: 'If Canadian product is not offered at the market price, a permit will normally be issued; ...' does not fetter the exercise of that discretion. The discretion is given by the Statute and the formulation and adoption of general policy guidelines cannot confine it. There is nothing improper or unlawful for the Minister charged with responsibility for the administration of the general scheme provided for in the
Act
and
Regulations
to formulate and to state general requirements for the granting of import permits.
. . . . .
"In my view, in dealing with legislation of this nature, the courts should, wherever possible, avoid a narrow, technical construction, and endeavour to make effective the legislative intent as applied to the administrative scheme involved ... Where the statutory discretion has been exercised in good faith and, where required, in accordance with the principles of natural justice, and where reliance has not been placed upon considerations irrelevant or extraneous to the statutory purpose, the courts should not interfere." [see footnote 2] (My emphasis)
[21]
I therefore conclude that the existence of federal legislation gives the government the right to hold a referendum. The discretionary authority it has is sufficient for it to have the right to go directly to the Kanesatake community. In a recent judgment, Strayer, J., even said that the holding of a referendum is not necessary when the Minister wishes to exercise his powers under s. 74 of the
Indian Act
. In his conclusion, he said:
"The power of the Minister to issue or repeal a declaration under present s. 74(1) with respect to bringing a band's election under the
Indian Act
is in no way conditioned on the holding of a referendum or the adoption of a band council resolution. While it is no doubt highly important that the Minister have regard to the views of the Band, to the extent that those can be ascertained, the Act in no way requires some formal expression of those views such as by referendum or band council resolution." [see footnote 3]
2. In Organizing A Referendum, The Minister Is Illegally Delegating His Powers To Third Parties, The Voters
[22]
This theory of administrative law - a decision made at the dictates of a third party - involves the illegal delegation of power. In the plaintiffs' submission, this delegation is illegal because the Minister did not rely on his personal judgment or personal sources in deciding to hold a referendum. After looking closely at this interpretation put forward by the plaintiffs, I cannot agree that the said referendum is a form of illegal delegation of power because it represents the opinion expressed by third parties, namely the voters. The ultimate purpose of the referendum is to provide the Minister with information on what the Oka Mohawks desire for their community. This procedure does not take away the Minister's discretion, for at any time "whenever he deems it advisable for the good government of a band, the Minister may declare ..." (s. 74(1) of the
Indian Act
).
[23]
By analogy we could compare a referendum to any "report" given to the Minister to inform him about a particular situation. Was the decision made for [sic] the Minister, based on information disclosed in the said report, one made at the dictates of a third party and so a form of illegal delegation? I do not think so. The Minister needs specific information if he is to exercise his discretionary authority as equitably as possible. The referendum is thus not a form of illegal delegation of authority [see footnote 4], it is a source of information like any other.
3. Decision Of Rouleau, J., On January 7, 1983
[24]
Rouleau, J.'s, judgment states "... that custom for the election of 'Council of a Band' does prevail on the Oka Indian Reserve". In that judgment rendered on January 7, 1983, the plaintiffs were alleging that elections on the Oka Reserve should be held in accordance with the system mentioned in s. 74 of the
Indian Act
, namely universal suffrage. The conclusion I arrived at, namely that custom should prevail, was justified by the fact that a house-to-house survey was conducted in Oka by the Department and the system preferred by band members was that in accordance with custom. It should also be noted that in my judgment I clearly said that:
"... custom for elections of 'Council of a Band' does prevail at Oka '
until the Minister deems it advisable
' to alter the procedure." [see footnote 5] (My emphasis)
[25]
It is therefore clear that the Minister may alter the election procedure whenever he deems it advisable in the exercise of the discretionary authority conferred on him by s. 74 of the
Indian Act
.
4. Section 35 Of The
Constitution Act, 1982
Entrenches The Aboriginal Rights (Customs) Of Aboriginal Peoples. This Section Has Been Analyzed By The  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[26]
The final argument that the plaintiffs suggest as a basis for finding the said referendum unfair, arbitrary and unlawful is that the
Sparrow
judgment defined the following principles:
-	the customs of aboriginal peoples must be respected;
-	the government must act as a trustee for the aboriginal peoples;
-	the exercise of the sovereign power must be limited when aboriginal rights are infringed;
-	any ambiguity must be resolved in favour of aboriginal peoples.
[27]
These various principles are not, in my view, involved at any point in the Minister's decision to hold a referendum. The government's intention was not to override custom nor to act contrary to the interests of aboriginal peoples: on the contrary, it was trying to resolve a dispute that had persisted for over twenty years. Additionally, in
Sparrow
the following premise is stated:
"The first question to be asked is whether the legislation in question has the effect of interfering with an existing aboriginal right." [see footnote 6]
[28]
This question is premature in the case at bar, since the result of a referendum is only an opinion expressed by the aboriginal peoples, not an interference with aboriginal rights. There might have been an interference if an aboriginal right had declared that holding a referendum was illegal, but that is not the case.
[29]
As part of his obligation as a trustee, the Minister has a duty to ensure that the Kanesatake Reserve is properly administered and as such he must respond to the various complaints made to him. No "official" poll has been held in the Oka Reserve since 1978. The climate may have changed over the years and only a referendum will be able to indicate the true preference of the Oka community.
[30]
Further, in terms of evidence,
Sparrow
provides that:
"The onus of proving a prima facie infringement lies on the individual or group challenging the legislation." [see footnote 7]
[31]
The plaintiffs did not succeed in persuading me that custom would be infringed if a referendum were held. It is true that the
Constitution Act, 1982
entrenches the customs of aboriginal peoples, but if the latter decide that they will no longer elect the band council in accordance with custom, they cannot be accused of infringing their own customs. That would be illogical. In any case, as I said earlier, no decision was made by the Minister regarding the election procedure, and so the question of whether an aboriginal right has been infringed by the holding of a referendum is premature in the case at bar.
[32]
Finally, I would like to note that the Comité pour le changement which is the defendant-intervenor in the case at bar argued that the referendum was a form of expression protected by s. 2(b) of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. The
Charter
guarantees freedom of expression as a fundamental freedom and, in the submission of the Comité pour le changement, the band council cannot prevent this sounding of public opinion through a referendum.
[33]
In view of the conclusion I have arrived at that the holding of a referendum was neither unfair, arbitrary nor illegal, there is no need to consider the questions raised by the intervenor. Nevertheless, I feel it is relevant to set out part of the notice which the Comité pour le changement distributed to members of the Kanesatake band immediately before the referendum:
"We also like to remind you that the Committee for Change Members are not running for Chiefs on this referendum. The referendum is only to determine which method you prefer. Which ever you choose, both methods are recognized under the
Indians
[sic]
Act
."
[34]
This short passage is a clear and precise indication of the objective sought by the holding of a referendum. For all these reasons, the plaintiffs' action is dismissed with costs.
Action dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
Footnotes
1.	R. Dussault and L. Borgeat,
Traité de droit administratif
, Les Presses de l'Université Laval, 1984, 2d ed., tome 1, p. 305.
2.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 6 and 7 S.C.R.
3.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Ouellette,
Principes de contentieux administratif
, Les Editions Yvon Blais Inc., 1982, 2d ed., p. 199.
5.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .	Sparrow, at p. 1112.