[1]
Noël, J.
: Novopharm moves for leave to amend its notices of allegation filed on July 30, 1993 (T-2247-93) and September 15, 1993 (T-1946-93) respectively, under the
Patented Medicines Regulations
and to amend the schedule for the conduct of the proceedings accordingly.
[2]
These applications arise from an order of Strayer, J., made on May 24, 1994, in file T-1946-93, wherein he dismissed Novopharm's application to strike the originating notice of motion. In the course of his reasons, Strayer, J., invited Novopharm to bring forth the present motions in the following terms:
"(...) That is, Novopharm now argues that Eli Lilly's patents on the patent list in question do not contain claims for the medicine itself nor for the use of the medicine. However, in its notice of allegations concerning these patents Novopharm simply put an 'x' beside the ground stated in the form as follows:
'No claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by that person of the drug for which the submission for the notice of compliance is filed.'
"It's extremely brief 'statement of legal and factual basis' in respect to each patent was to the effect that the process used by Novopharm does not involve the use of the process claimed in the particular patent in question. In other words it appears from the notice of allegations that Novopharm is denying infringement of the process claims in Eli Lilly's patents because Novopharm's processes are different. Now Novopharm argues as the basis of its motion to strike that there is no infringement because Eli Lilly's patents contain no claims for the medicine itself nor for the use of the medicine: they contain only process claims. This is a significantly different issue. It is true that Eli Lilly has had some time to file evidence to refute this line of argument which commenced to be asserted by Novopharm some weeks after Lilly's originating notice of motion was filed. I am however unwilling to say at this point that Lilly has failed to confront in a timely fashion the evidence put forward by Novopharm.
"Indeed it appears to me that for Novopharm to attack Lilly's originating notice of motion in this fashion it must first amend its notice of allegations. While there is jurisprudence in this court seriously questioning the right of second persons to file new notices of allegations in a unilateral fashion, it would appear to me open to a second person to apply for leave to amend its notice of allegation and the court would then have to consider whether such an amendment could be allowed, and on what terms, in order to prevent prejudice to the other party."
[3]
I am willing to assume for purposes of these motions, without deciding the matter, that this court has jurisdiction to allow an amendment raising wholly new grounds in support of a notice of allegation issued under the
Patented Medicines Regulations
.
[4]
By analogy, the discretion to authorize such an amendment will be exercised by reference to considerations such as the length of the delay in bringing forth the new ground, the reasons therefor, the necessity for the amendment, and the extent of the prejudice caused to the parties in the event that leave be granted or denied. Regard must also be had in this particular instance to the scheme and purpose of the regulations under which the litigation arises.
[5]
In this regard, two observations are relevant, namely that the notice of allegation and the grounds therefor ought to reveal the factual and legal basis upon which the issue ought to proceed and be determined, and that the ultimate disposition of the matter should take place within the time frame contemplated by the
Regulations
. I would add that having regard to the statutory scheme and notwithstanding Novopharm's counsel's forceful argument to the contrary, both the first and the second person stand to be prejudiced by an unwarranted delay. As in all other litigation, delay bears greater prejudice on the party who is ultimately held to be successful. That is not a result which should be presumed upon at this stage of the proceedings.
[6]
In the case at hand, the applicant argues that it was only upon the decision of Jerome, A.C.J., being rendered in April 1994 in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) that the new ground in question came to light. This being new law, the applicant argues that the delay is, on the face of it, excusable. That is the only reason advanced. As I read the evidence, the factual origin of this new allegation is the expert evidence of Robert G. Hirons as to the extent and scope of the patents in issue which was only produced on January 28, 1994 in file T-1946-93, and on February 11, 1994 in file T-2247-93, some four months in the first instance, and six months in the second, after the notices of allegation were filed.
[7]
The notion that a second person could allege that its drug will not infringe a claim by reference to a given patent, without first having ascertained the scope and extent of the patent in issue, is on the face of it unacceptable and likely to give rise to vexatious proceedings. Granted, this is new law, but it is not so complicated as to justify a complete disregard for its obvious premises. Clearly, the
Regulations
never envisaged the issuance of pro forma of allegation. Regulation 5(3) makes it clear that it can only be issued once the factual and legal basis for the allegation have been ascertained.
[8]
It may be that Novopharm is, in these circumstances, entitled to issue a fresh notice correcting the initial flaw. If that be the case, the regulatory clock will again begin to run its course. This is a question which the Court of Appeal will eventually decide. But, having regard to the totally new and distinct ground which Novopharm now wants to assert, the absence of any reasonable excuse for not bringing it forth at the appropriate stage, the entitlement of the first person to be made aware of the case which it has to meet from the onset, and the expedited nature of the proceedings under the
Regulations
, I decline to exercise my discretion in favour of the applicant.
[9]
For these reasons, the application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/slm
[End of document]