[1]
Rouleau, J.
[Translation]: This is a claim for damages for a statutory delict; the plaintiff is also seeking reinstatement in a permanent position of primary products inspector.
Facts
[2]
The plaintiff was appointed to position 844-2806T on January 26, 1981, following a competition within the federal Public Service. The position was one of livestock inspector grader (now known as a primary products inspector) with the Department of Agriculture Canada, specifically at the abattoir at Saint-Charles de Bellechasse, Québec. This appointment took effect for a period of one year at the PI-01 level.
[3]
The plaintiff's term was subsequently renewed for consecutive periods of one year in 1982 and 1983. In 1983 his position was also reclassified to the PI-02 level. In 1984 the plaintiff's term was renewed to March 29, 1985, and his position was allocated to Saint-Henri. After two months he was summoned to Québec where Mr. Joncas, his superior, asked him to return to the Saint-Charles abattoir to replace Mr. Marcotte who was on sick leave and was shortly to retire. The plaintiff therefore replaced Mr. Marcotte temporarily and subsequently returned to his own position in Saint-Charles.
[4]
On March 29, 1985, the plaintiff's contract was renewed to September 30, 1985, and then without interruption to December 31, 1985.
[5]
During 1985 the plaintiff, who was fully acquainted with the federal government's policy of making contract employees who had completed five years permanent employees, discussed the matter with Mr. Leblanc, his immediate superior at the Saint-Charles abattoir, who confirmed that he would become a permanent employee "if everything goes as expected".
[6]
A strike occurred at the Saint-Henri abattoir on December 8, 1985, and as a result the volume at the Saint-Charles abattoir increased. In the circumstances, the Department sent Mr. Marcotte from the Saint-Henri plant to assist the plaintiff.
[7]
On December 18, 1985, Mr. Leblanc informed the plaintiff that his contract would not be renewed as of December 31, 1985, and he was then given a letter on December 19 confirming that his employment would terminate on December 31, 1985, due to departmental constraints. The plaintiff's employment accordingly terminated after four years, eleven months and two weeks. It should be noted that Miss Drouin, who held a similar position with the Vallée-Jonction abattoir, was simultaneously informed that her contract would not be renewed as of December 31, 1985.
[8]
The Department of Agriculture terminated the plaintiff's contract for the following three reasons. First, the federal Department of Agriculture in the Québec region in March 1985 had to undertake a reorganization of its permanent staff on account of the closure of an abattoir and a surplus of two person-years in the fields of poultry farming and dairy products. Second, in November 1985 the Department notified its Québec managers that 11.75 person-years would have to be deducted from staff in the Agricultural Inspection Division for the fiscal year beginning on April 1, 1986. Third, the reorganization of staff occasioned both by the strike and by departmental constraints as well as the person-years reduction affected certain permanent employees who had to take a transfer to a location some distance away. In accordance with collective agreements and various internal policies, it is customary in the Public Service Commission to protect permanent employees.
[9]
After the plaintiff left, Mr. Dumont, the second inspector at the Saint-Henri abattoir, was sent to replace him at Saint-Charles.
[10]
The strike at Saint-Henri ended on April 4, 1986. Mr. Marcotte was then reassigned to Saint-Henri while Mr. Dumont remained in Saint-Charles, where he was responsible for the training of a new employee.
[11]
On April 20, 1986, the plaintiff filed a grievance in connection with the travel expenses incurred by him during the period when he was working at Saint-Charles though formally assigned to Saint-Henri. His grievance was allowed on February 5, 1987, and he was paid the travel expenses in May 1987.
[12]
In the following year, namely October 14, 1986, after being unemployed for about nine months, the plaintiff was rehired and assigned to Saint-Charles. This contract was to terminate on June 30, 1987, but it was renewed to August 31, 1987, though with a reduction in working hours occasioned by the low volume of work at the Saint-Charles abattoir.
[13]
On July 13, 1987, the plaintiff filed a complaint with the Public Service Commission seeking a permanent appointment in view of his years of service and the policy that an employee appointed for a long term of contract employment became permanent.
[14]
In the meantime, in August 1987, the plaintiff applied for a position at the Vallée-Jonction abattoir for which he was unfortunately not qualified.
[15]
On August 20, 1987, Mr. Raymond Piché, counsel for the Department of Justice, acknowledged receipt of the plaintiff's application for permanent status and notified counsel for the plaintiff that his current contract would not be renewed at the end of August.
[16]
By a letter dated October 6, 1987, Mr. François Planté notified Mr. Jean Benoît, investigations chief for the Public Service Commission, that there had been an interruption in the plaintiff's service due to the cuts and to the strike which began at Saint-Henri on December 8, 1985. He explained that the Department had to protect its permanent employees who had become vulnerable and that it had been decided to abolish two positions, namely that of the plaintiff in Saint-Charles and that of Miss Drouin at Vallée-Jonction, and replace them by a single position.
[17]
The hearing of the plaintiff's complaint took place before Mr. Jean Benoît on November 24, 1987. In early 1989 he concluded that the nonrenewal of the plaintiff's contract in 1985 was not consistent with the departmental policy that an employee who had held the same position for five years of continuous service would become a permanent employee. He indicated that a strike in a neighbouring abattoir was not a sufficient reason for departing from that policy. As to the refusal to renew the plaintiff's term in 1987, the investigator dismissed the plaintiff's complaint. After rendering his decision, Mr. Benoît recommended that the Department undertake a conciliation process with the plaintiff.
[18]
In May 1989 the Department offered the plaintiff a choice between two positions, a PI-03 full-time position at Saint-Hyacinthe and another part-time position at Notre-Dame-du-Lac. The plaintiff took the full-time position subject to certain conditions. He asked for compensation for the trouble and loss of salary resulting from the Department's refusal to renew his contract. The Department rejected these conditions as it found them unacceptable.
[19]
Before analyzing the parties' submissions, I feel I should mention that none of the parties raised the question of prescription. Further, I should note that this court is in no way bound by the decision of the Public Service Commission investigator, Mr. Jean Benoît.
Plaintiff's Arguments
[20]
The plaintiff submitted that the Department's actions are contrary to the policy that persons hired on contract who have completed five years of continuous service should be made permanent and that they are an abuse of discretion and a failure to perform the duty of acting fairly. He further submitted that these actions disappointed the plaintiff's legitimate expectation of being made a permanent employee.
[21]
The plaintiff's position is based on failure to comply with the Treasury Board's administrative policy. The question that arises before any conclusion of law can be reached is as to the effect of that policy on the rules of administrative law. First, the plaintiff submitted that the policy should be considered in the same way as a regulation. Once a legislature authorizes an administrative tribunal to draft its regulations and adopt policies, they have the force of law and failure to comply with them is subject to judicial review. In other words, the Department had the duty of appointing the plaintiff to a full-time position and its refusal was illegal.
[22]
By his alternative submission in the matter the plaintiff argued that the existing policy was a quasi-regulation. According to precedent the exercise of such a discretionary power imposes a duty to act fairly. Apart from exceptional circumstances, the plaintiff acquired a right according to the principle of legitimate expectation. From the conversation he said he had with his immediate superior suggesting that "if everything went as expected" the plaintiff could expect to be hired permanently he could also anticipate that this promise would be fulfilled and that the policy would be uniformly and consistently applied. Counsel for the plaintiff therefore submitted that there was an abuse of discretion in the case at bar.
Defendant's Arguments
[23]
Counsel for the defendants submitted that the Treasury Board policy providing that a term employee with more than five years' continuous service should ordinarily be hired permanently is not at issue since the plaintiff did not accumulate his five years' continuous service. He added that even if the plaintiff's situation were to fall within this policy it conferred no executory or fundamental right.
[24]
He stated that the plaintiff was hired on a term basis and that this term was generally renewed annually. However, when the Department of Agriculture realized in March 1985 that certain problems would shortly arise in the management of its employees it decided to extend Mr. Girard's term for a six-month period, to September 30, 1985. He was sent a letter to this effect clearly indicating that his employment was on a term basis and he should not expect to have a permanent position in the Public Service. Subsequently this term was cautiously renewed again to December 31, 1985. Counsel referred to Mr. Bérubé's testimony stating that he had renewed Mr. Girard's term from September 30 to December 31, 1985, only because he had to hold a competition to determine who would be moved from Rimouski to Saint-Charles. Mr. Bérubé also testified that the Department was entirely satisfied with Mr. Girard's services and that if he had had the power to keep him he would willingly have done so, but he had no choice since he had to reassign a permanent employee. Further, as Miss Pasteris stated in her testimony, only the Public Service Commission in Ottawa had the power to appoint someone to a higher position without a competition.
[25]
Counsel submitted that the reasons for the nonrenewal of Mr. Girard's term in December 1985 were the following:
1. a reorganization by the Department of its permanent staff due to a rationalization of resources;
2. a proposed cut in person-years;
3. a strike occurring in an abattoir near that of the plaintiff.
He stated that in March 1985 the Department knew that a reorganization of its permanent staff had to be undertaken on account of the closure of an abattoir and a surplus of two persons in the fields of poultry farming and dairy products. In November 1985 the national authorities of the Department notified Québec managers that it was necessary to deduct 11.75 person-years from the staff of the Agricultural Inspection Division before the 1986 fiscal year. These cuts made a number of permanent employees vulnerable and the Department had a duty to protect them. Further, the strike which occurred at the Saint-Henri abattoir on December 8, 1985, prevented the Department's two permanent employees from doing their work. They accordingly had to be reassigned to the closest abattoir, the one where the plaintiff was working.
[26]
Counsel for the defendants therefore submitted that the nonrenewal of the plaintiff's contract was entirely legal, justified and not an abuse of discretion.
Conclusion
[27]
The House of Lords analyzed an important statement of the principle of legitimate expectation in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . That case concerned a government order prohibiting members of the Civil Service working in the communications headquarters, an important location for national security, from engaging in any union activity. The employees had been unionized since 1947 and the union was consulted on any important change affecting working conditions. The House of Lords upheld the applicants' argument that they had a legitimate expectation to be consulted before the order in question was made.
[28]
A legitimate expectation may exist as a consequence of a promise made by a public authority or as the result of a current practice which should be applied if it is reasonable to do so. Lord Diplock explained the concept as follows at p. 408:
"To qualify as a subject for judicial review the [challenged] decision must ... affect [a] person ... by depriving him of some benefit or advantage which either (i) he had in the past been permitted by the decision-maker to enjoy and which he can legitimately expect to be permitted to continue to do until there has been communicated to him some rational grounds for withdrawing it on which he has been given an opportunity to comment; or (ii) he has received assurance from the decision-maker that he will not be withdrawn without giving him first an opportunity of advancing reasons for contending that they should not be withdrawn."
[29]
The same principle of legitimate expectation was further explained by Sopinka, J., of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 134; 75 D.L.R.(4th) 385, at p. 1204 S.C.R.:
"The principle developed in these cases is simply an extension of the rules of natural justice and procedural fairness. It affords a party affected by the decision of a public official an opportunity to make representations in circumstances in which there otherwise would be no such opportunity. The court supplies the omission where, based on the conduct of the public official, a party has been led to believe that his or her rights would not be affected without consultation."
[30]
What is required is to define the nature of the remedy available in the circumstances where a legitimate expectation is claimed. Nevertheless, it is clear that the principle of legitimate expectation is nothing more than a restatement of the fundamental duty to act fairly. In the case at bar the plaintiff is not asking to be given an opportunity to submit comments on the nonrenewal of his contract but is instead arguing that he has acquired a fundamental right to a permanent position. He relies not only on the promise made to him but also on the administrative policy that a contract employee with more than five years of continuous service should automatically be given a permanent position: in his submission, this practice should have been applied to his situation.
[31]
However, it seems clear that Canadian courts have held that the only remedy open to the plaintiff is relief of a procedural nature. In
Reference Re Canada Assistance Plan (B.C.)
, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 525; 127 N.R. 161; 1 B.C.A.C. 241; 1 W.A.C. 241, Sopinka, J., concluded as follows at pp. 557-558 S.C.R.:
"There is no support in Canadian or English cases for the position that the doctrine of legitimate expectations can create substantive rights. It is a part of the rules of procedural fairness which can govern administrative bodies. Where it is applicable, it can create a right to make representations or to be consulted. It does not fetter the decision following the representations or consultation."
[32]
In view of this case law, since the remedy sought clearly involves a fundamental right this court cannot allow the application. Even if I were to allow the procedural remedy, that is, if I were to conclude that the plaintiff had a right to be consulted before the decision not to renew his contract was taken, that remedy does not meet the demands of the case since I am persuaded that the decision taken could not be altered.
[33]
In any case, the circumstances of this situation do not support a legitimate expectation. First, the promise that he would be made permanent to which the plaintiff refers was made to him by Mr. Leblanc, his immediate superior. This individual did not have the necessary authority to make such a promise. Only Dr. Guy Meilleur had the power to staff or create positions. Second, the Department was compelled not to apply the administrative policy for valid reasons. The staff reduction and the proposed cut of 11.75 person-years radically affected the Department's requirements. Their priority was to protect permanent employees who had become vulnerable. It is quite logical for term employees to be the first ones affected by staff reductions and cuts. Further, the fact that the austerity measures only took effect six months after the decision challenged by the plaintiff does not in any way affect the validity of the Department's action. It was essential for the Department, in performing the administrative duties incumbent on it, to take the necessary steps to deal with the eventual and inevitable reduction in its staff.
[34]
In view of the circumstances, therefore, the plaintiff could not reasonably have expected the administrative policy to be applied and to be given permanent status.
[35]
The plaintiff further argued that as the policy on permanent status was created under legislative authority it should be considered in the same way as a regulation and should have the force of law. He submitted that a departure from this policy is thus open to judicial review. I do not agree.
[36]
In
Martineau and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Supreme Court had to consider the nature and consequences that might result from a directive creating certain rules of procedure intended to apply to the imposition of penalties by disciplinary boards at the Matsqui Institution. As Pigeon, J., speaking for a majority of five judges, explained at p. 129:
"I have no doubt that the regulations are law. The statute provides for sanction by fine or imprisonment ...
"I do not think the same can be said of the directives. It is significant that there is no provision for penalty and, while they are authorized by statute, they are clearly of an administrative, not a legislative nature."
[37]
A directive or policy does not have the force of law because it lacks the essential features of a regulation. The courts clearly do not intervene to enforce a rule which they consider to be essentially administrative in nature and scope.
[38]
In the case at bar the administrative policy is simply an internal rule of conduct made by the Treasury Board. It was established under a general power enjoyed by the Board under s. 11(2) of the
Financial Administration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-11. Although s. 10(f) gives the Treasury Board the power to make regulations "for any other purposes necessary for the efficient administration of the public service of Canada", those concerned chose to proceed by way of a statement of policy.
[39]
For the foregoing reasons I conclude that this court should not review the administrative policy in question. Even if a departure from the said policy had some legal consequence, I would not grant any relief since it seems clear that the Department of Agriculture had good reasons for not complying with it.
[40]
Finally, I should note that representatives of the Department demonstrated good faith by offering the plaintiff a choice between two positions, one of which was at the same level and had responsibilities identical to those of the position claimed. In my view there was no justification for the plaintiff imposing his conditions on the Department's offer of employment, especially as I consider that the Department had no obligation to make such an offer.
[41]
The application is dismissed with costs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/nmg