Background:
[1]
Joyal, J.
: On November 16, 1983, the appellant filed an application in the Trademarks Office to register the trademark "Slow-Fluoride" for its intended use in Canada in association with a pharmaceutical preparation which is a source of therapeutic flouride in the treatment of osteoporosis. The application bears serial no. 512,519.
[2]
Subsequently, the respondent filed an opposition to the application on the grounds that the proposed mark was confusing with the opponent's registered mark which included "Slow-Fe, Slow-Fe Folic", "Slow-K", "Slow-Trasicor" and "Slow-Trasitensin" previously used in Canada by the respondent in association with pharmaceutical preparations.
[3]
The issue came up before the Trademarks Opposition Board and on November 30, 1988, the board member, Mr. David J. Martin, refused the appellant's application. The appellant disagrees with that decision and prays this court to reverse it and to allow the application to proceed to registration.
The Appellant's Position
[4]
The appellant's submission may be summarized as follows:
1. While it is true that the respondent's marks have the prefix "Slow" in common with the appellant's proposed mark, the prefix "Slow" affords the respondent only a narrow scope of protection. All of the marks being associated with pharmaceutical preparations suggest pharmaceuticals in slow-release tablet form which are injected into a person's system over a prolonged period of time.
2. With special reference to the respondent's trademarks "Slow-Fe" and "Slow-K", the appellant observes that the suffix "Fe" and "K" are chemical symbols for iron and potassium respectively and again afford the respondent only a narrow scope of protection.
3. Furthermore, the proposed mark "Slow-Flouride", in both appearance and sound, differs significantly from the respondent's marks and thus there is no basis on which one could reasonably conclude that the marks are confusing.
4. Although it is up to the appellant to prove that its proposed mark shows no reasonable likelihood of confusion, that burden of proof, on objective and determinative evidence, has been sufficiently met and the application for registration should be allowed.
The Respondent's Position:
[5]
Generally speaking, the respondent sees no reason to disturb the opposition board's decision. There is no palpable error in that decision and a court should be loath to reverse it on the simple grounds that the court, in its own opinion, might have reason to come to a different conclusion. In more specific terms, the respondent submits that:
1. The court is dealing here with a family of trademarks having the prefix "Slow", namely "Slow-Fe", "Slow-Fe Folic", "Slow-K", "Slow-Transicor" and "Slow-Trasitensin". These marks, in association with various pharmaceutical preparations, have been in use in Canada for many years and are now identified with the respondent's line of pharmaceuticals.
2. This process of identification and association provides the respondent's mark with a greater recognition factor which must be considered when an issue of a likelihood of confusion arises.
3. Any risk of confusion must be considered in the light of the therapeutic properties of the various pharmaceutical preparations involved. The proposed mark "Slow-Flouride", when indicated in a doctor's prescription, might very well be abbreviated to "Slow-Fl" and "Slow-Fl" in turn might be read by a dispensing pharmacist as "Slow-Fe" resulting in the wrong drug being administered to the patient with some potentially dangerous effects.
The Evidence:
[6]
The evidence produced by the appellant is contained in the affidavits of William T. Hough and Charles Y.C. Pak, M.D. There is also some evidence in a letter dated June 5, 1984, from the Ciba-Geigy U.S. trademark counsel to his opposite member, Mr. W.T. Hough, counsel for the appellant, bearing on the status of the trademark "Slow-Flouride" and "Slow-Fe" in the United States and indicating minimal risk of confusion.
[7]
The evidence in Mr. Hough's affidavit is that the contending products, namely "Slow-Flouride", "Slow-K" and "Slow-Fe" are not competing products, if the letter to which I have just referred to is to be given any weight. Furthermore, the proposed mark "Slow-Flouride" uses the word "Flouride" as distinct from the chemical symbols "K" and "Fe" in the respondent's marks. There is also evidence that since 1980, the appellant has sold to Canadian professional baseball teams, i.e., the Expos and the Blue Jays, a slow-release combination of sodium chloride and potassium chloride under the mark "Slo-Salt-K" without creating a disturbance of any kind. Finally, there is evidence that a sister trademark, "Slo-Salt", has been registered and used in the United States by the appellant with equal equanimity.
[8]
In the affidavit of Dr. C.Y.C. Pak, whose credentials list some 275 imperishable publications, there is outlined the therapeutic properties of sodium flouride which have been the subject of continuing test and evaluations in the U.S. since 1982 and which indicates that the product is always prescribed by its U.S. trade name "Slow-Fluoride". It would not be therapeutically correct, according to the witness, to use a generic designation "NAF" and totally incorrect to use any word other than the word proposed and which is now well identified with the appellant's products in the United States.
[9]
There is further affidavit evidence disclosing Canadian Registration No. 290,206 and No. 276,176 for "Slow-Bid" and "Slow-Peel" in association with a boncho dilator pharmaceutical preparation and a facial rubbing compound respectively, "Slow-Bid" itself having been used in Canada since January 24, 1984.
[10]
The respondent's evidence is from Terry E. Carrick, its National Sales Manager, as supplemented by a letter from the Canadian Pharmaceutical Association and a further affidavit showing the "family" of registered trademarks owned in Canada by the respondent and containing the prefix "Slow".
[11]
Mr. Carrick states that the trademark "Slow-K" has been used extensively in Canada since 1970. The volume of sales of this product prior to 1983 was in excess of $48 million. Another product bearing the mark "Slow-Fe" also enjoys long historical usage and a high volume of sales. Other products, under the marks "Slow-Fe Folic", "Slow-Trasicor", are also well-know in Canada.
[12]
Mr. Carrick also suggests that it is his belief from his conversation with one of the respondent's house doctors that grave health risks might very well result if a prescribing physician should abbreviate "Slow-Fluoride" to "Slow-F" or "Slow-Fl".
The Opposition Board's Decision:
[13]
The board's findings, on evidence which is substantially identical to the evidence before me, may be summarized as follows:
1. Both the trademark "Slow-K" and the proposed mark "Slow-Flouride" are not inherently strong. Both prefixes indicate a slow-acting or time released medication. Both suffixes have an element of descriptiveness, the letter "K" being the chemical symbol for potassium and the suffix "Fluoride" being the chemical compound found in the product.
2. The appellant's mark is a proposed mark which has not been used in Canada, in contrast to the respondent's marks which are well-known in Canada, a factor which clearly favours the respondent.
3. After acknowledging that the respective wares of the parties are not identical, the board member finds that both are pharmaceutical preparations in the nature of mineral supplements. The appellant's is sodium fluoride and the respondent's is potassium choloride. There would result an "overlapping" in the trades of the parties.
4. The board member also finds that there is a fair degree of resemblance between the competing marks. The prefix "Slow" is common to both. Given the possibility of the tendency to abbreviate and turn the word "Flouride" into "F", the chemical symbol for flouride, the potential degree of resemblance is even greater.
5. Applying the rule in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the extensive use of the respondent's marks in Canada, as evidenced by the sales of its "Slow-Fe", "Slow-Fe Folic" and other products, would lead the consumer to come to identify a product with a "Slow" prefixed mark as originating with the respondent.
[14]
After noting that the presence on the register, of the trademark "Slow-Bid", is no indication of the use of that mark and, after finding that an admission by the respondent's own counsel in the U.S. as to possible confusion is either irrelevant or inadmissible, the board member concludes that the appellant has failed to satisfy the onus on it to show that its proposed mark "Slow-Flouride" is not confusing with the respondent's mark "Slow-K".
Case Law:
[15]
There is first of all reference by counsel for the appellant to the comments of Cattanach, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  affidavit form which in fact do not stand the test of scrutiny. Counsel for the appellant suggests that this factor should be considered in assessing the weight to be given to the evidence of confusion or of health risks in determining the registrability of "Slow-Flouride".
[16]
Counsel further refers to the well-know Privy Council decision,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  prefix to indicate that it has been readily adopted in Canada to describe a slow-acting or slow-absorbing oral drug.
[17]
Counsel also quotes Fox in his text The Canadian Law of Trade Marks and Unfair Competition (3rd Ed. 1972), at p. 173, wherein words which are common or descriptive in meaning must be taken with their disadvantages. "No person", says the author, "is entitled to fence in the common of the English language and words of a general nature cannot be appropriated over a wide area".
[18]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the trademark "Thyrotrol" in the face of the registered mark "Thyrotron", the proposed mark being in association with a control serum used in vitro thyroid hormone tests and the opponent's in association with a pituitary thyrotrophic hormone. The hearing officer found that by reason of the nature of the wares and channels of trade, confusion would not likely occur.
[19]
The same view was taken by Hearing Officer Partington in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  register the mark "Dilone" by reason of the prior registration of "Dyclone", both in association with pharmaceutical preparations, stated the following:
"I fully appreciate counsel for the respondent's submission that one must be particularly careful in the pharmaceutical field as to what marks may co-exist on the register as the overriding consideration must always be the protection of the public and, of course, confusion in medicine must always be avoided. I can, however, see no possible danger in allowing both of these marks to be registered. I consider respondent's concern with regard to the protection of the public to be unconvincing having regard to the fact that it was quite content to allow both marks to co-exist and to be used side by side in the United States for a good number of years and apparently with no ill effects." [See footnote 6.]
[21]
The respondent's references to case law have their premise on two well-known and respected principles.
[22]
As underlined in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  unlikely with the respondent's trademarks.
[23]
The other principle is that the appellant has the onus of showing the decision of the opposition member is wrong. Such a decision carries considerable weight and should not be lightly set aside. Counsel for the respondent refers in this respect to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  or respected when no evidence is filed and the court must necessarily rely on the same evidence as was available at the Opposition Board level.
[24]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  with McDonald's Corp. fast food products, as in Egg McMuffin, MacSundae, McCheese, Chicken McNuggets, et al., and finds reason in that case to refuse the application for registration of the mark "McYogurt". At pp. 112-113, his Lordship says:
"I quite agree with the conclusion of the Chairman (Opposition Board) that a straightforward comparison of the trademark McYogurt with the trademarks Egg McMuffin, MacSundae, McCheese and McTreats individually leads to the conclusion that the trademarks are not confusing ..."
[25]
His Lordship adds, however:
"Thus when trademarks which have common characteristics are registered in the name of one owner ... that circumstance gives rise to the presumption that such marks form a series of marks used by the one owner and the registration of such marks is tantamount to a single registration combined of those several marks.
. . . . .
"The fact of the registration of trademarks giving rise to the presumption of a series of marks existing is a most material consideration which the Registrar of Trademarks must take into account upon an application for the registration of a mark embodying the common characteristics."
[26]
That same doctrine is expressed by Dubé, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  an earlier case to the effect that in the field of medical products great care must be taken to avoid confusion in the use of trademarks. This principle is repeated in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  before me. In respect of the various applicable doctrines supporting the appellant's side or the respondent's side, there exists a compendium of case law extending over hundreds of volumes and decades of experience. Nevertheless, the merits of each case must be respected and a judicial determination must be made one way or the other.
[29]
I should first of all attach a lesser degree of importance to the potential health risk should confusion between the two competing marks occur when prescriptions are written in abbreviated form or simply badly written. If there is a risk, the respondent itself has been living with it for some years and there is no evidence that product liability or professional negligence was ever attributable to it. Appellant's counsel underlined this element of the case in suggesting that "Slow-K" could be read as "Slow-F" or "Slow-Fe" or vice-versa.
[30]
In the same way, however, I should discount the weight to be given to the qualified admission of non-confusion contained in the letter dated June 5, 1984, from Ciba-Geigy Corporation to the appellant. Although I should not go as far as the board member to discount that qualified admission altogether on grounds that there is no evidence of a relationship between Ciba-Geigy Corporation and the respondent, or that it is inadmissible as to the truth of its contents, or that it is in breach of the best evidence rule and possibly irrelevant, that admission must nevertheless be considered in its content. In my view, it is evidence of the U.S. experience and of counsel's own personal view of the issue. I should think that this court cannot or should not dismiss it out of hand, especially when there is such an exchange, indeed a traffic, of trademark wares between the U.S. and Canada either by sale of common products or by border spillovers in T.V. advertising.
[31]
What diminishes the weight in that admission, in my view, is that the issue of confusion between one trademark "Slow-Fe" and the other "Slow-Flouride", cannot in the circumstances of the case, be viewed in isolation or simply on the basis of counsel's own opinion. There is absence of evidence, as far as the U.S. experience is concerned, as to what are the other marks on the U.S. register with similar prefixes and suffixes, what are the products with which they are associated, where is the evidence of market penetration, in brief, where is the evidence upon which the several indicia in section 6, especially section 6(5) of the Trade Marks Act, may be properly and judicially applied.
[32]
The latter, nevertheless, underlines in fairly clear terms the difficulty in exercising judgment in the case. Every thrust in the appellant's case may be said to be effectively parried by the respondent, and every argument by the latter, effectively countered by the former.
[33]
In such circumstances, what are the constraints on the court's exercise of its judgment? The constraints arise by reason of the initial burden on an applicant to prove that its proposed mark is not confusing with a registered mark and by reason of an opposition board member having already applied his own skills and experience to deciding the issue. I read again, in that connection, the board member's concluding paragraph in his decision which says:
"In applying the test for confusion, I have considered that it is a matter of first impression and imperfect recollection. In view of the foregoing, and particularly in view of the similarity in the wares, trades and marks of the parties and the opponent's use of its additional 'Slow'-prefixed marks, I find that the appellant has failed to satisfy the onus on it to show that its mark 'Slow-Fluoride' is not confusing with the opponent's registered mark 'Slow-K'."
[34]
It appears quite clear to me that this decision reflects an awareness of the several tests imposed by section 6 of the Act. Similarity of wares, of trades and of marks are considered. The existence of additional "Slow"-prefixed marks is also considered. The decision indicates to me the presence of a so-called family of trademarks which, as I view the jurisprudence, gives its owner a wider measure of protection than would otherwise be the case if the determination were exclusively made on the basis of etymological characterization of the competing marks.
[35]
There is also inferred in that decision, if read as a whole, a clear finding that the respondent's registered marks have become well-known in Canada, that its several products are recognized and have enjoyed over many years a substantial degree of market penetration. The converse of that inference, of course, is that the appellant's proposed mark does not enjoy that kind of dowager status and, if everything else being equal, an application of that nature should be refused.
Conclusion:
[36]
I must acknowledge that in the course of the hearing, in re-examining the evidence and in considering the able arguements advanced by counsel, I was more than once tempted to intervene and to apply my own judgment call in a manner more favourable to the appellant. Temptations of the nature, however, should be resisted especially when the impugned decision discloses no obvious error of law, no vexatious or inconsiderate findings of fact or no unwarranted or unjustified conclusions from these facts. In spite of appellant's very able argument on those issues, I am not persuaded that that decision should be disturbed.
[37]
I must therefore dismiss the appellant's appeal, with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/hlh
Footnotes
1. (1965), 46 C.P.R. 147, at p. 161.
2. (1942), 1 C.P.R. 293 (P.C.).
3. (1978), 45 C.P.R.(2d) 114.
4. (1989), 23 C.P.R.(3d) 189.
5. (1972), 8 C.P.R.(2d) 149.
6. Ibid. at p. 154.
7. (1950), 14 C.P.R. 19.
8. (1982), 61 C.P.R.(2d) 53.
9. (1968), 57 C.P.R. 1.
10. (1985), 6 C.P.R.(3d) 289.
11. (1989), 25 C.P.R.(3d) 408.
12. (1974), 21 C.P.R.(2d) 241.
13. (1974), 21 C.P.R.(2d) 144.
14. (1975), 26 C.P.R.(2d) 187.
15. (1986), 8 C.P.R.(3d) 303.
[End of document]