[1]
Nadon, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a negative decision of a visa officer dated 22 March 1995 which determined that the applicant is medically inadmissible to Canada pursuant to subpara. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the "
Act
").
Facts
[2]
The applicant, James Bruce Ludwig, is a citizen of the United States of America and the Director of Digital Services at a graphic design company, Total Graphics Inc., located in Vancouver. Mr. Ludwig has a B.F.A. (painting), a B.S.Ed. (art) and an M.F.A. (photography).
[3]
On 18 December 1993, the applicant completed an "Application for Permanent Residence in Canada" which was submitted to the Canadian Consulate General in Seattle, Washington. Mr. Ludwig applied as a principal applicant and indicated no family or close connections with Canada.
[4]
As part of his application for permanent residence, the applicant was required to undergo a medical examination. The applicant saw a Dr. Dorian Morris on 1 March 1994. Dr. Morris indicated that the applicant was myopic (wears glasses), has some hypertension for which he is currently under treatment, had a previous ear drum perforation which has now healed (the applicant's hearing is fine) and the applicant had a lesion on his lung which was under investigation. On 15 April 1994, Citizenship and Immigration International Service Health Program (OHP) forwarded a letter to the applicant indicating that additional information would be required before a final decision could be made about his permanent residence application. The applicant submitted to the required tests and on 5 August 1994, Dr. Morris forwarded a letter to OHP enclosing the results of the tests.
[5]
The applicant's chest x-ray revealed an abnormal density in the right apex of the applicant's lung, an area of about two centimetres in diameter. On 29 August 1994 the applicant underwent exploratory surgery. The surgeon, Dr. K.G. Evans, found an isolated tumour (cancer) on the right upper lobe of the applicant's lungs. The final diagnosis was a cancerous tumour, approximately 3.5 centimetres in diameter. The applicant asserts that the effective result of the surgery was that he was cured and that there would be no further treatment other than routine follow-up.
[6]
Of relevance to this application for judicial review is that on or around August of 1992, the applicant commenced a relationship with Laureen Mickleborough, a Canadian citizen, who is also employed by Total Graphics. She and the applicant moved in together in March of 1993 and have been living together ever since. They became engaged in December of 1994 and expected to be married after July of 1995 when Ms. Mickleborough's divorce became final. The applicant did not indicate this at any time during the application process.
[7]
Dr. Lothar Lichtenfeld, the first medical officer who reviewed the applicant's file, has had a medical practice lasting 32 years in several medical disciplines. Since 1977, he has been employed as a medical officer with Health and Welfare Canada. He is a qualified medical practitioner duly authorized and recognized by order of the Minister of National Health and Welfare (now Health) as a medical officer for the purposes of the
Act
. Dr. Lichtenfeld considered the following material and information in reviewing the applicant's file:
a)	Medical Reports (IMM1017) required of all applicants for immigration to Canada ...
b)	A report from Seymour Medical Clinic dated August 05, 1994, signed by Dr. D.V. Morris ...
c)	A letter from Dr. Kenneth G. Evans, including a surgical pathology report from Dr. R.R. Miller ...
d)	A true copy of the relevant guidelines contained in the Medical Officer's Handbook ...
e)	A true copy of the Employment and Immigration Canada Immigration Manual, Section 11 ...
f)	A true copy of all the factors listed in Section 22 of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978, SOR/78-172, as amended ...
According to Dr. Lichtenfeld, it would be necessary for at least five years to pass without a sign of cancer in order for a physician to conclude with some confidence that the applicant would not suffer a recurrence.
[8]
Dr. Lichtenfeld, in making his assessment, referred to section 4.3.4, Lung Cancer in the
Medical Officer's Handbook
, December 1992, which states:
"1.	The majority of lung cancer patients have metastatic disease at presentation and even 'curatively' resected bronchogenic neoplasms have a high frequency of recurrent and metastatic disease within five years depending on cell type and tumour stage.
2.
Only patients with small primary tumours (less than 3.0 cms. in greatest diameter) and negative bronchopulmonary nodes (pathological not radiological) have a greater than 70% chance of five year disease-free survival. These cases may be assessed as M3.
(a)
all other resected bronchogenic carcinomas should be assessed M5.
(b)	consideration should be given to a classification of M3, in patients with limited small cell lung cancer (tumour confined to primary site, mediastinum and ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodes) who have been treated by intensive chemotherapy over 4-6 months, loco-regional (primary site and regional lymph nodes) and brain irradiation, and who have achieved a complete remission and have remained disease-free more than 2 years from completion of treatment.
(c) 	all patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer and all patients with extensive small cell lung cancer should be assessed M7" (emphasis added).
[9]
According to the surgical pathology report of Vancouver Hospital, the size of the tumour was 3.5 X 3 X 2.5 cm. Hence, based on the size of the applicant's malignancy, the medical officer concluded that the applicant would, in all probability, suffer a significant recurrence of the disease and that he had less than a 70% chance of survival over a five-year period. This opinion was concurred in by a second medical officer, a Dr. James Beltran, upon a review of the same evidence. Thus, in accordance with the Guidelines, the applicant was classified as M5, defined as:
"Has a condition which might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services to the extent that the person is not at present admissible but for which the expected response to treatment is such that future admission could be considered."
[10]
Philip Lupul, a visa officer at the Canadian Consulate at Seattle, Washington, conducted a paper review of Mr. Ludwig's permanent residence application on 10 January 1994. Due to the applicant's permanent validated job offer, experience, and language ability, the visa officer awarded the applicant 76 units of assessment. Mr. Ludwig had thereby more than satisfied the selection criteria requirement of 70 units of assessment contemplated by subpara. 9(1)(b)(i) of the
Act
. A conditional positive selection was made, subject to receipt of positive medical, security, and criminal checks verifying that Mr. Ludwig was not inadmissible to Canada pursuant to any of the grounds listed in s. 19 of the
Act
.
[11]
Mr. Lupul reviewed Mr. Ludwig's file again on 22 March 1995 in light of the opinion of Drs. Beltran and Lichtenfeld and further considered whether there were any possible humanitarian and compassionate factors in Mr. Ludwig's case to warrant special consideration. Mr. Lupul noted that Mr. Ludwig applied for permanent residence in Canada as an "independent" applicant and had indicated no family or other close connection to Canada. Since Mr. Ludwig was an American citizen, the visa officer noted that any necessary medical treatment or services he may require would be available to him in the United States. Further, the visa officer determined that there were no national interest or other factors identified in Mr. Ludwig's case to justify special consideration or the issuance of a Minister's Permit.
[12]
Mr. Lupul was unaware at the time he considered Mr. Ludwig's application, that the applicant was engaged to Ms. Mickleborough. Mr. Ludwig conceded that, from the time he initiated his application for permanent residence until the present application for judicial review, he had never indicated to the visa officer that he had a permanent relationship in Canada.
[13]
On 22 March 1995, the applicant was refused permanent resident status in Canada as the visa officer determined that he came within the inadmissible class of persons described in paragraph 19(1)(a) of the
Immigration Act
. The text of the decision reads as follows:
"This refers to your application for permanent residence in Canada.
"I have now completed the assessment of your application. I regret to inform you that you come within the inadmissible class of persons described in paragraph 19(1)(a) of the
Immigration Act
, 1976, and that your application has accordingly been refused pursuant to paragraph 9(1)(a) of the
Immigration Regulations
and paragraph 19(2)(d) of the
Immigration Act
. Regretably [sic], your medical notidfication [sic] indicates that you are suffering from 'Squamous Carcinoma of Lung'. As a result of the nature, severity or probable duration of this condition, it is the opinion of a medical officer concurred in by at least one other medical officer, that your admission would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services. Specifically, the narrative from your medical notification reads as follows:
'This 49 year old applicant had cancer of the lung. It is probably that his general health will deteriorate and that he will require specialist care and hospitalization to an extent to make him inadmissible under Section 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Immigration Act
. Also has - Hypertension - Hypercholesterolemia.'
"I have also considered possible humanitarian and compassionate factors but have determined that there are insufficient grounds to warrant special consideration. I note that you are a citizen of the United States and I am satisfied that any medical treatment or services youmay [sic] require are available there. I note also that you have not indicated any family or other close connection to Canada.
"I realize that this decision will be a disappointment to you and regret that it could not be favourable."
Issues
[14]
The applicant challenges the determination that he is inadmissible on three grounds:
"1.	The refusal of the visa officer was not reasonable.
"2.	The medical officers improperly fettered their discretion by relying upon the
Medical Officer's Handbook
.
3.	There were sufficient humanitarian and compassionate considerations to justify the granting of special relief."
[15]
The respondent characterizes the first issue slightly differently:
"1.	The jurisdiction issue is whether the decision was made by a duly constituted authority acting in good faith, with objectivity, for reasons in accordance with the provisions of the
Immigration Act
."
[16]
In my view, the issues to be examined are:
1.(a)		Did the medical officer improperly fetter his discretion by relying on the
Medical Officer's Handbook
?
(b)	If not, was the medical officer's opinion reasonable?
2.	If the medical officer's opinion was reasonable, was the opinion of the visa officer reasonable?
3.	If so, did the visa officer err in his consideration of the humanitarian and compassionate grounds of the applicant?
1.(a) Medical Officer's Handbook
[17]
The applicant submits that the medical officer improperly fettered his discretion by relying upon the
Medical Officer's Handbook
and the Immigration Manual, neither of which are a part of the
Act
nor the
Regulations
. The medical notification is deficient, according to the applicant, because the medical officer relied upon the categorization outlined in the Handbook and the Manual without regard to the particular circumstances of the applicant.
[18]
The respondent submits that the medical officer did not fetter his discretion when he referred to the Medical Officer's Handbook. His opinion was based on a careful consideration of the particular circumstances of the applicant's case.
[19]
The
Medical Officer's Handbook
is provided to all medical officers as a guideline to the diagnosis of medical conditions of persons seeking admission into Canada. The Handbook is based on general scientific knowledge regarding various diseases and illnesses. The Handbook is not only a government policy statement but also a medical reference guide. In the case at bar, the applicant submits that the medical officer fettered his discretion in relying on the guidelines contained within the Handbook and in not referring to the particular circumstances of the applicant. The respondent argues that the medical officer applied the applicant's situation to the Handbook, a compilation of common medical knowledge, which was sufficient evidence on which to base his decision.
[20]
My colleague, Mr. Justice MacKay, very recently had occasion to consider whether medical officers fettered their discretion in relying on the Medical Officer's Handbook when considering whether or not an applicant is medically inadmissible, in a case that is factually similar to the case at bar.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), after examining the relevant jurisprudence, MacKay, J., concluded that:
"Medical officers may utilize and apply the rules set out in the Medical Officer's Handbook, but they must be flexible and look beyond the guidelines to decide whether an applicant is medically inadmissible on the basis of his or her individual circumstances. The medical officers must look upon the Medical Officer's Handbook as simply one element of evidence to be considered in assessing individual cases. The weight assigned to guidelines in the Handbook may vary from case to case in light of the circumstances of each case.
I agree entirely with MacKay, J. Medical officers must be careful not to apply the Handbook too rigidly; they must be flexible enough to look beyond the guidelines in the Handbook and to decide the admissibility of each applicant on the basis of that person's individual circumstances. If medical officers determine that they are bound by the Handbook and cannot diverge from its guidelines, that would be a fetter on their discretion. If medical officers recognize that they may be flexible in their application of the guidelines in the Handbook and determine the admissibility of each person on the basis of individual circumstances, however, then they will not have fettered their discretion.
[21]
It is also arguable that it would not be unreasonable for medical officers to place a great deal of weight on the Handbook. Unlike guidelines, which reflect government policy, the Handbook reflects common medical knowledge and practice. As such, it is similar to medical journals and textbooks. In the case at bar, for example, the fact that patients with tumours the size of the applicant's do not have a greater than 70% chance of five year disease-free survival is a matter of medical statistics, rather than opinion. Medical officers must therefore examine the applicant's particular circumstances in light of these guidelines.
[22]
Upon a review of the evidence, I am of the view that the medical officer did not fetter his discretion in applying the guidelines. It is clear that he used the guidelines as one element when considering the applicant's particular circumstances. His determination was supported by the guidelines set out in the Medical Officer's Handbook. Although the applicant's physician indicated that his prognosis was very good and that no follow-up was required, the medical officer was concerned with assessing the applicant's condition in light of the
Act
and the
Regulations
promulgated under the
Act
. In the course of their assessment, both medical officers used the guidelines, which are based on generally accepted medical experience. There is no evidence that either medical officer unduly fettered his discretion through their reference to these guidelines.
1.(b) Reasonableness Of The Medical Opinion
[23]
The applicant notes that in a follow-up letter dated 7 February 1995, Dr. Evans, the applicant's surgeon, advised that the applicant continued to do well following his surgery and that the applicant showed neither clinical nor radiological evidence for recurrence. The applicant submits that, according to the court's holding in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  fails to consider relevant reports then the medical opinion will not be reasonable and should be quashed. The applicant contends that the two medical officers, Dr. Lichtenfeld and Dr. Beltran, concurred in the opinion that it is probable that the applicant would suffer a recurrence of the signs of cancer during the five-year period from the time of his cancer surgery. The applicant submits that Dr. Evans makes no reference to the effect that it is "probable" that the applicant would suffer a recurrence of the signs of cancer. Indeed, the applicant submits that within a week of the surgery, Dr. Evans had opined that the applicant was ready to return to work and that no further treatment would be required. The applicant asserts that the evidence from the medical records relied upon by the medical officers indicated that the applicant's "squamous carcinoma has been successfully resected and that the applicant's long-term prognosis was good." The applicant concludes that the opinion of the medical officers was therefore unreasonable and invalid in law.
[24]
The applicant also submits that the medical officers failed to take into account all the factors set out in s. 22 of the
Regulations
and that, as a result, the medical opinion was not reasonable.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 241 (F.C.A.)
[25]
The respondent notes that subpara. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Act
provides that a person may be declared a member of an inadmissible class as a result of the expressed opinion of two medical officers, without providing for a different result if other doctors could be found who would be of a different opinion. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , ibid.). The respondent submits that the medical officers considered all of the medical evidence that was provided to them and applied their specialized medical knowledge. The medical officers concluded that it was probable when the medical notification was issued and when the application was refused by the visa officer, that the applicant could suffer a significant recurrence of the signs of cancer during the five-year period from the time of the cancer surgery. If that did occur as anticipated, the applicant's chances of being cured would be greatly reduced, thereby causing excessive demands on health services. The medical officers held the opinion they did because of the stage and size of the applicant's malignancy at the time it was surgically treated.
[26]
The respondent further observes that there is no evidence that the 7 February 1995 letter from Dr. Evans (the applicant's surgeon) to a Dr. Moore (the applicant's family physician) was provided to the medical officers. On the evidence, I find that Dr. Evans' letter was never sent to the medical officer by Dr. Moore's office. Thus, the medical officer did not consider Dr. Evans' letter because it was never before him. In any event, Dr. Beltran observes that, after cancer surgery, it would be necessary to monitor the applicant's health situation over at least a five-year period from the time of the surgery to gauge the rate of growth of cancerous tissue. Even if the medical officers had had the benefit of Dr. Evans' letter of 7 February 1995, it merely states that the applicant continues to do well after surgery, that there has been no evidence of recurrence, and that the applicant should follow up in four months or so. The letter does not speak to the applicant's five-year prognosis. The medical officer's opinion was reasonable, having addressed the relevant criteria set out in s. 22 of the
Regulations
. Finally, the respondent asserts that the medical officer's opinion was reasonable in that the applicant had had cancer surgery only three months prior to the issuance of the Medical Notification.
[27]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 306 (T.D.), Mr. Justice Dubé summarized the general principles regarding the competence of this court to review the medical evidence to determine whether the medical officer's opinion is reasonable in the circumstances of the case:
"The reasonableness of a medical opinion is to be assessed not only as of the time it was given, but also as of the time it was relied upon by the Immigration Officer, since it is that decision which is being reviewed or appealed. The grounds of unreasonableness include incoherence or inconsistency, absence of supporting evidence, failure to consider cogent evidence, or failure to consider the factors stipulated in s. 22 of the
Regulations
." (Ibid. at 318 Imm. L.R. This excerpt was quoted with approval most recently by Mr. Justice McKeown in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , McKeown, J., quashed the decision of the visa officer on the grounds that the determination was made without a determination as to the degree of mental retardation suffered by the inadmissible claimant. The matter was returned for a determination of the level of mental retardation suffered and a rehearing on the issue of excessive demand on social services.)
[28]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the Court of Appeal held that the entries on the medical certification form were "inconsistent to the point of incoherence" and could not, therefore, constitute the opinion of a medical officer concurred in by at least one other medical officer, as required by the
Act
. In that case, the Court noted that neither of the two boxes corresponding to subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of section 19 had been checked, which indicated to the court that a medical opinion had not been reached. Second, the court observed that there was an inconsistency between the medical notification which categorized the applicant as "M-5", while the medical profile categorized the applicant as "T-5". Finally, the court pointed out that neither the "M-5" nor the "T-5" entry was consistent with the statement on the form on which the visa officer relied.
[29]
In a later decision,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 66 (T.D.), Mr. Justice Pinard held that with respect to a medical diagnosis, the issue is not whether the diagnosis is accurate (which is a question of fact), but rather, whether the medical notification is clear and coherent. If so, then the medical officers could not be said to have erred in law.
[30]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Court of Appeal upheld a decision by the Board that the medical opinion was not reasonable. As Marceau, J.A., noted:
"The members of the Board do not have the expertise required to question the correctness of the medical diagnosis reached by the officers. In fact, I am of the view that, even with the help of medical witnesses, it is not the function of the Board to do so. The Board is not expected to make a choice between the written opinion of the medical officers and that of other doctors as to the diagnosis of a medical condition suffered by an applicant. One should not forget that the
Act
has made membership in the inadmissible class described in its s. 19(1)(a) the immediate consequence of the expressed opinion of two medical officers without providing for a different result if other doctors could be found who would be of a different opinion. I agree with the appellant that the Board was wrong in purporting to make the finding that, in the case of the father, the medical officers' diagnosis of mental retardation of moderate severity 'was erroneous' and 'incorrect'.
"However, this court has found that it is within the province of the Board to inquire into the reasonableness of the opinion of the officers ... [T]he Board is bound to assess that reasonableness as of the time when the visa officer made his decision." ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra para. 24 at 247 Imm. L.R.)
The position that the Board may not question the diagnosis of the medical officers but that it should enquire into the reasonableness of their conclusion was supported by the Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 1 (F.C.A.).
[31]
Finally, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Gibson, J., examined the meaning of the word "excessive" in the context of s. 19(1)(a)(ii) and noted that one of the meanings assigned to it is "more than what is normal or necessary". When this definition is applied to the criteria outlined in s. 22 of the
Regulations
, it is apparent that the necessity of monitoring the applicant's health situation over a five-year period, the probability that the applicant's cancer would recur, and the applicant's reduced chances of a cure, would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause, demands on Canada's health or social services that would be more than "normal or necessary". In
Jim
, Mr. Justice Gibson declined to set aside the determination by an immigration officer that an applicant for immigration to Canada was inadmissible on medical grounds. Gibson, J., found that the opinion of the medical officers was not unreasonable, that the applicant was a person suffering from a health impairment which, if admission to Canada were granted, would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services.
[32]
Upon reviewing the evidence of both Drs. Lichtenfeld and Beltran, it is clear that the medical officers did not fail to consider the factors enumerated in s. 22 of the
Regulations
. They considered not only s. 22 but also s. 11 of the Immigration Manual, the guidelines found in the
Medical Officer's Handbook
, the Medical Report (IMM1017) required of all applicants for immigration to Canada, a report from the Seymour Medical clinic dated 5 August 1994 and signed by a Dr. D.V. Morris, and a letter from Dr. K.G. Evans, which included a surgical pathology report from a Dr. R.R. Miller. They also considered, according to Dr. Beltran, medical literature on the subject. I am of the opinion that, upon a review of the evidence, there is no incoherence or inconsistency, absence of supporting evidence or failure to consider cogent evidence on the part of the medical officers. The medical officers have indicated that they considered all of the evidence, including the factors set out in section 22 of the
Regulations
, in reaching their decision. In my view, the determination of the medical officers cannot be said to be unreasonable.
2. Reasonableness Of The Visa Officer's Decision
[33]
The applicant submits that it was not correct for the visa officer to state that the applicant was actually suffering from "squamous carcinoma of the lung" since the applicant had been successfully treated and required no further treatment other than routine follow-up. The visa officer, in the applicant's submission, failed to consider the reasonableness of the medical officer's opinion. Finally, the applicant alleges that the visa officer's opinion was not reasonable in that it failed to consider the question of whether the applicant's condition would place excessive demands on health or social services.
[34]
The case law with respect to persons who have been deemed inadmissible under s. 19(1)(a)(ii) is relatively consistent.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), a leading case on the issue, the Court of Appeal found that an adjudicator in an inquiry as to whether a visitor was medically inadmissible had the power to determine the validity of the opinions of the medical officers. Such power stems from his/her responsibility to determine whether or not an applicant is a member of an inadmissible class. The power of the visa officer, on this point, is settled law. Despite the power of a visa officer to consider the validity of the medical officer's opinion, the visa officer is nonetheless obliged to consider whether the applicant's medical condition would place excessive demands on health or social services. The visa officer must also consider all of the available evidence. (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 1 (T.D.). The court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> noted that a medical condition alone is not necessarily evidence of a reasonable expectation of excessive demands on health or social services. Mr. Justice MacGuigan, writing for the court, stated:
"In the case at bar it seems clear to us that the Board did not enquire into the reasonableness of the medical officers' conclusion, but rather assumed from the sole fact of agreement as to the existence of mental retardation that the conclusion was reasonable. Contrary to the respondent's suggestion, we find ourselves unable to supply what is wanting to the board's analysis of the validity issue from its consideration of the humanitarian question.
"It should be obvious from <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that the mere invocation of mental retardation leads to no particular conclusion. Mental retardation is a condition covering a wide range of possibilities from total inability to function independently to near normality. The concept cannot be used as a stereotype, because it is far from an unequivocal notion. It is not the fact alone of mental retardation that is relevant, but the degree, and the probable consequences of that degree of retardation for
excessive
demands on government services. It was that assessment that the Board failed to make in the case at bar." ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra para. 30 at p. 5 Imm. L.R.).
[35]
More recently, my colleague, Mr. Justice Cullen, observed that:
"Although the decision in
Ahir
, supra, refers only to an adjudicator or the Appeal Board, it is only logical that the same power would be extended to a visa officer ...
"The Court of Appeal has clarified this power of inquiry and directed that a visa officer must also decide where there is a linkage between the evidence of the medical condition and the issue of whether the applicant might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services." (
Ismaili
, supra para. 34 at 16-17 Imm. L.R.).
[36]
Both
Ahir
and
Ismaili
stand for the proposition that a visa officer has a responsibility to consider the reasonableness of the assessment by the medical officers, but in those cases, there were circumstances which ought to have caused the immigration officer to question the reasonableness of the medical officer's opinion. In
Ismaili
, the visa officer's negative decision was set aside where it was said to have been based on medical grounds, but the medical report indicated that the child may need special education services. Mr. Justice Cullen referred the matter back to the visa officer for an assessment of the health and social service implications of the child's health circumstances.
[37]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, Mr. Justice Dubé stated, in the circumstances of that case, that fairness required that a visa officer inform the applicant of a negative assessment and provide an opportunity to respond to any concerns the medical officers may have before determining the applicant is inadmissible. In the circumstances of that case, the immigration officer was aware of the reports on health circumstances of the child of a prospective immigrant made prior to the negative assessment of the medical officers.
[38]
It is clear from the foregoing jurisprudence that the reasonableness of the medical opinion may be an issue for the visa officer where on the evidence the opinion is or may be unreasonable.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 14 (F.C.A.), Mr. Justice Stone stated:
"... [I]mmigration authorities concerned may properly act upon their assessment of the medical notification provided it is not tainted by any misconception of the law or any patently erroneous understanding of the opinion expressed by the medical officer." (Ibid. at p. 18 Imm. L.R.).
[39]
In my opinion, in the circumstances of the instant case, the visa officer acted on the basis of the opinion of the medical officers. In the circumstances of this case, there was no reason for the visa officer to question the reasonableness of that opinion on the record as it was before him.
[40]
I therefore conclude that the visa officer's decision was reasonable.
3. Humanitarian And Compassionate Grounds
[41]
The applicant submits that he has lived and worked continuously in Canada since April of 1992 and is currently employed as Director of Digital Services at Total Graphics Inc. at a salary of $70,000 per annum. The applicant notes that his employer has described him as a valuable asset to the company. Further, the only family the applicant has are two brothers who live in the eastern United States. Given his close relationship with Laureen Mickleborough, the applicant submits that his application should be approved on humanitarian and compassionate grounds. Finally, the applicant submits that his health has improved greatly, such that he would not now cause excessive demands on health or social services in Canada.
[42]
The applicant cites a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board (Appeal Division), which allowed the appeal (not, as in the case at bar, a judicial review) from the refusal of the sponsored application for landing of the sponsor's mother, who was suffering from cerebrovascular disease with cognitive dysfunction, diabetes, rheumatic heart disease and inactive tuberculosis. The Board noted that the sponsor's mother had improved from the time of her medical examination for the purpose of obtaining a visa and stated as follows:
"Since the reason for the impediment of her refusal is largely removed, the Appeal Division is satisfied, as indicated in the medical report submitted by the appellant, that with regular monitoring, by a family physician, of medication and exercise, the appellant's mother's prognosis is good and would not be a burden to cause excessive demands on the health or social services in Canada." (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  distinguishes the case of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (ibid.), cited by the applicant for the proposition that I can find that there exist humanitarian and compassionate grounds for granting the applicant's permanent residency. The respondent, rightly in my view, points out that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was a case heard by the Immigration Appeal Division, which heard cases as trials de novo. In a judicial review application, I can only determine whether or not the visa officer's decision was reasonable at the time the decision was made to refuse the application. Since the applicant had not indicated his marital status had changed and since he was applying as an independent applicant, the respondent contends that the decision was reasonable in that there was no unusual evidence before him to warrant humanitarian and compassionate consideration. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 91 (F.C.A.)). The respondent notes that there is nothing barring the applicant from reapplying for permanent residence in Canada at a future date and providing further evidence at that time regarding his medical situation to determine whether his condition will cause excessive demands on Canadian health services.
[44]
I prefer the respondent's position with respect to this issue. It is clear from the face of the applicant's permanent residence application and from the visa officer's evidence that the applicant indicated no humanitarian and compassionate grounds that the visa officer could consider. The applicant's engagement was not made known to the Minister. Further, there is nothing preventing the applicant from reapplying for permanent residence and stating that he is engaged to Ms. Mickleborough. As Mr. Justice Cullen noted in
Ismaili
, it is "trite law that only evidence that was before the decision-maker can be considered on judicial review".
[45]
For the reasons stated above, this application for judicial review must be dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Giovanni A. Merlini/vem
[End of document]