[1] Reed, J.
: The applicants seek an order quashing a decision of the Convention Refu­gee Determination Decision [Division] of the Immigration and Refugee Board ("the Board") which found that they were not convention refugees. The claim of the appli­cant Rui Bin Yun is based on that of her hus­band, Win Kee Kong.
[2]
I first of all note that it is clear that the Board's decision contains at least one sig­nificant error. The applicant Win Kee Kong claimed refugee status citing a number of reasons therefor. One of these was that he feared persecution in China as a result of his support of the pro-democracy movement prior to and around the time of the Tianan­men Square massacre. He stated that this support took the form of making a financial contribution to that movement, printing posters and other materials in support there­of, and participating in demonstrations.
[3]
The applicants operated a printing shop. They printed at their expense a number of flyers and posters in support of the pro-democracy movement.
[4]
At the time of the June 4th massacre, the male applicant was told by the individual, Wong Wai Ming, who had requested the printing of materials, not to print the posters which had at that time been ordered but to print instead a poster dealing with the mass­acre. The applicant did so. On June 6th, the applicant and his wife took the flyers to Wong at a demonstration site and helped distribute them.
[5]
On July 3, 1989, the applicant states that he received a telephone call from a friend and was told that Wong had been arrested and that he, Win Kee Kong, should be careful. The applicants went into hiding. They then learned that the security police were looking for them and subsequently they came to Canada.
[6]
In answering the questions posed by his counsel Mr. Kong stated:
"Q.	... in your Personal Information Form you make mention the printing 10,000 Tiananmen Massacre poster?
A.	Yes.
Q.	The other pamphlets you printed, do you remember how much of a run it was?
A.	The others, those were before June 4th. Approximately several hundred, sometimes a thousand. At those times it was in small quantity.
Q.	Do you know what Mr. Ming did with those other pamphlets?
A.	He had told me that some were given to students for their speeches, for use of their speeches.
Q.	Was there any repercussions by any government agency to your printing these pamphlets before June 4th?
A.	No.
Q.	Was your name, your business name, on any of these pamphlets?
A.	The flyers no. But the wrapping, yes.
Q.	Your business name or your license number or any other way you could be identified?
A.	Yes, the wrapping. There was a piece of paper wrapping those up. And the wrapping paper has my shop.
Q.	Your shop what?
A.	It's written with the Win Kee printing service and also the address.
Q.	Mr. Kong, I know that newspapers come in parcels and packets and they have wrapping around them in news­papers I'm familiar with. In your business, how many flyers were there to package and were all the packets -- did all the packets have your wrapping?
A.	Yes. Approximately 2,000. Two thousand pieces into one pack.
Q.	You say in your Personal Information Form that you printed 10,000 Tiananmen Massacre poster. Does the word poster also mean flyer?
A.	That piece reported about the truth of Tiananmen, what happened there. That they call it as the quick news. [see Footnote 1]
Q.	Would it be on a piece of paper about this size?
A.	Yes, approximately.
Q.	Do you recall what the dimensions were?
A.	Well, I couldn't remember because people just set it out as the type setting of characters. It's approxi­mately about the size of the paper.
Q.	Just for the record, I think it's 8½" x 11". Were your employees used to assist you and your wife to print out these 10,000 flyers?
A.	Yes.
Q.	By what means did you deliver the flyers to Mr. Wong?
A.	I use my motorcycle.
Q.	Did anyone -- on June 6th you say that you went back -- you aided in distributing the flyers. Between June 6th and July 3rd, did you operate your business as usual?
A.	I only helped him distribute on June 6th. I did not distribute anything on June 7th.
. . . . .
Q.	Third. What took place. The question is: What took place?
A.	July 3rd, right?
Q.	Yes.
A.	Well, on July 3rd around noon time I heard that Fung Kwok-Cheung -- this Fung Kwok-Cheung, he was together in the same university as Wong Wai Ming. He phoned me and said that Wong Wai Ming was arrested by the Chinese Public Security people. And then said that they searched and found my stuff. And told me to be careful. Just to stay away. Get away.
Q.	Did you know Mr. Fung Kwok-Cheung prior to his telephone call?
A.	Yes.
Q.	How did you know him?
A.	Because he is together with Wong Wai Ming in Chung Shan University, together study in Chinese -- the faculty of Chinese language. Because previously when they took the print­ing job, sometimes he took it over.
Q.	Did he tell you any of the details of Mr. Ming's arrest?
A.	He didn't say in so many things. He just said that Wong Wai Ming was arrested. He said that they found in the dorm -- dormitory, they found my -- I suppose it was those wrap­ping papers.
Q.	Did he say it was those wrapping papers?
A.	He didn't say. He just said they found these things that you printed [see Footnote 2]."
[7]
On cross-examination the following exchange took place:
"Q.	Now, you said that they found your stuff in the dormitory?
A.	Yes, because it was Fung Kwok-Cheung.
Q.	Was that -- why is it that they found your stuff? Had you not dis­tributed it at all?
Ms. Silverman: I don't understand the question? He was only one of the persons distributing the material. And how is it within his knowledge how they came to find it?
By Ms. Robinson:
Q.	Did you ever bring your poster -- your flyers or posters to the dormi­tory?
A.	No.
Q.	Do you have any idea how they got there?
A.	Because he came to pick things up.
Q.	Who is he?
A.	I mean sometimes it's Wong Wai Ming and sometimes it's Fung Kwok-Cheung. Either one of them, they would come and pick them up.
Q.	And do you have any idea how they -- those flyers would have got into the dormitory?
A.	As for this, I don't really know.
Q.	Well, did they distribute -- were all your flyers distributed as far as your knowledge goes?
A.	I don't know either.
Q.	So you have --
A.	But I -- when I went there I had seen some of my wrapping papers there because on the night of June 4th when I went to visit Wong Wai Ming I had seen some wrapping papers there.
Q.	Wrapping papers where?
A.	In his dormitory.
Q.	And these are the wrapping papers that you used to wrap up your flyers?
A.	Yes.
Q.	When you -- now you said that on June 6th you delivered -- you saw these wrapping papers. That was before June 6th?
A.	It was on the night of June 4th.
. . . . .
Q.	When you saw your wrapping paper in the dormitory, did you see any flyers or did you just see wrapping paper?
A.	I didn't really notice.
Q.	You didn't notice whether you saw flyers?
A.	No, I was just kind of taking a glance and saw that there was my shops brown paper there. [see Foot­note 3]"
[8]
The Board's decision reads in part:
"On July 3, 1989 Wong Wai Ming's class­mate phoned and claimant that the author­ities had searched and found the printed material, including the paper wrappers, in the dormitory.
. . . . .
"As for the incriminating evidence that allegedly led the PSB to the claimant, specifically, the paper wrapper with his business name on it, we note that the claimant's evidence is that he did not go to the dormitory with the pamphlets, but took them to the Square and distributed them with Wong Mai Ming. When the discrep­ancy was put to him, he replied that prob­ably the material was picked up by Wong Mai Ming or his classmate ...
"The panel notes that the claimant has provided for their consideration an ex­tremely detailed PIF which has been on the whole consistent with his oral testi­mony. We find the lack of information, such as the PSB finding an incriminating wrapper significant. It is even more sig­nificant is that these details were not in the PIF, did not come out in the examination-in-chief, but the RHO's cross-examin­ation. We therefore find that this evidence is not credible.
. . . . .
"Since we do not find credible the claim­ant's evidence as to the incriminating wrapper, we do not believe that the auth­orities would be out to arrest him."
[9]
In the first place, the applicant specifi­cally stated that Wong Mai Ming's classmate had
not
told him that the security police had found the wrappers in the dormitory. Sec­ondly, his whole evidence concerning how the police knew of his involvement, apart from the fact that he had been told that the police had found his stuff, was clearly only speculation on his part. He stated: "...
I suppose
(underlining added), it was those wrapping papers". The wrappers which he was talking about, which he had seen in the dormitory, on the evening of June 4th, were wrappers from materials which had been printed before the Tiananmen Square mass­acre. Counsel's questioning about whether he ever delivered flyers or posters to the dor­mitory, was not specifically in relation to the Tiananmen Square massacre posters but was a general question relating to all the posters and flyers the applicant had prepared.
[10]
The Board drew very damaging con­clusions from this evidence. Yet the evi­dence is consistent and not contradictory. The applicant did not know how the police found out that he was connected with the printing of the posters; he was told by the classmate of Wong that they "had found his stuff"; he did not know the details but assumed that the police must have found his wrapping materials. He himself had noticed wrapping paper from his bundles of papers in the dormitory on June 4th.
[11]
It is important to reflect on the type of question being put to the applicant. He was being asked how the police found out about his involvement. Clearly, he could not know that. He might speculate, as he did. He might have been told by others what they thought had occurred. He recounted what he had been told and this did not include any reference to the wrapping papers. Certainly on the basis of the evidence before the Board, counsel for the applicant was right to point out that the questions being put to the applicant related to matters about which he had no knowledge. What is more the Board in its reasons mixes up the applicant's answer concerning how the earlier flyers and posters were delivered (picked up by Ming or Kwok-Cheung) and how the Tiananmen Square Massacre posters were delivered (by the applicant and his wife on a motorcycle). Lastly, to find the applicant lacked credibil­ity because he did not mention the wrapping papers in his P.I.F. is completely unreason­able.
[12]
Counsel for the applicant raised a num­ber of other concerns about the Board's decision. Some are more compelling than others. I am not convinced, for example, that the Board misinterpreted the definition of the convention refugee. I am not persuaded that the Board erred in concluding that the appli­cants' friend Ming was in a different position from the applicant. There appears to be some basis for the Board's conclusion that it was implausible that the applicant would not know that his sister was in Toronto but just happen to meet her on the street. It seems unlikely that siblings so far away from home would not make it their business to be aware of each other's whereabouts and would only meet by chance. At the same time this con­clusion is not particularly strong since the Board did not raise its concerns in this regard with the applicant. He was not given an opportunity to explain this seeming im­plausibility.
[13]
In addition, the Board's conclusion that it was improbable that the applicant did not know who was looking after his child in China is not clearly supported by the evi­dence. The part of the transcript to which I was referred, as support for this conclusion, records questions, put by one of the Board members, relating to the day on which the applicant hurriedly left to go into hiding in Yan Mu. The applicant indicated that at that time he did not know whether his daughter was at his home or at his wife's mother's home because she was at day care. Earlier, during his examination-in-chief the appli­cants' counsel had asked the applicant:
"Q.	Could you explain why you left your daughter in China?
A.	Because at the time when I heard of the situation, these kind of situation I was very frightened. And so I couldn't take good care of the daughter.
Q.	Who is your daughter staying with?
A.	Now I don't know either."
[14]
The Board concluded:
"Also the panel finds improbable that the male claimant does not know who is look­ing after his child in the PRC especially when he sent his cousin to his home to get his identification documents."
[15]
The applicant was never asked whether he lacked knowledge of his daughter's whereabouts during the whole time since he left his home on July 3rd. He was not asked whether the cousin had made enquiries concerning the daughter or whether the applicant had been informed of her where­abouts at that time.
[16]
I also agree with the applicant that the Board's conclusion that the applicant would suffer no harsher treatment in China than anyone else because his family came from the landlord class was pure speculation, unsupported by the evidence.
[17]
At the same time the implausibilities found by the Board concerning the appli­cant's lack of knowledge of his sister's and daughter's whereabouts are not central to the applicant's claim. The finding that the appli­cant would not be subjected to harsher treatment because he came from the landlord class, also, in itself, is not an overriding error. It is necessary then to consider whether the misconstruction of the evidence concerning the wrapping papers is significant enough to vitiate the Board's decision.
[18]
It is necessary to quote from what I consider to be the core of the Board's deci­sion:
"The issue before the panel is to determine whether the claimants are Convention refugees as defined in s. 2(1) of the
Im­migration Act
6
. That definition reads in part:
'"Convention refugee" means any person who
(a) by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(i) is outside the country of the per­son's nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that coun­try...'
"In order for the claimants to be deter­mined Convention refugees, the evidence must establish that they have good grounds for fearing persecution for one of the reasons set out in the Convention refugee definition, should they return to the PRC.
"In the claimant's narrative, he refers to discriminatory act against his family as reasons for his anti-government feelings, and for this the panel can understand him wanting to help the pro-democracy move­ment. We find noteworthy that the claim­ant was not moved on his own initiative to join the movement., but sort of followed a group of demonstrating students and became involved. This indicates to the panel that his motivation stemming from his family background was not strong.
"The claimant testified that he subsequently volunteered printing, donated some money and demonstrated once again after the June 4th incident. The panel finds that such actions would not bring him to the attention of the authorities.
"The claimant was but one of many hun­dreds of thousands of participants in dem­onstrations in Guangzhou in the spring of 1989. He was not a leader, organizer, or spokesman for the pro-democracy move­ment. We find significant that in early days of the crackdown immediately after the June 4th incident in Beijing, the only persons arrested in the Guangzhou area were 'about a dozen people apparently unemployed labourers from the rural areas.'
7
"Considering further documentary evidence available, the panel finds that those par­ticularly at risk were leaders of the pro-democracy movement who were tried and given severe punishment. From the article
The Hunt for Dissidents in China
: we note that the claimant does not fall under any of the categories being at risk, specifi­cally:
'Ten categories of individuals among the most active in the demonstrations make up first target group to be fought, reformed or neutralized. Another nine categories, composed of those who have links with "counter-revolutionaries", who demonstrate anti-Party and anti-socialist attitudes or have supported the pro-democracy movement financially or otherwise, may be subject to close scru­tiny designed to correct their ideological position
8
.'
6
as enacted by R.S.C. 1985 (4th Supp.), c. 28, s. 1
7
Exhibit R-1, SCF, tab 15, Gave Bell, June 14, 1989
8
Exhibit R-1, #1, IRBDC, October 1990
"The claimant clearly does not fall under any of these categories. As for the incriminatory evidence that illegally lead the PSB to the claimant, specifically the paper wrapper ..."
(See para. 5 above for the continuation of this part of the Board's decision)
[19]
The core of Board's reasoning contains a nagging difficulty. The quotation cited from the article
The Hunt for Dissidents in China
states that those who "have supported the pro-democracy movement
financially or otherwise
may be subject to close scrutiny ..." (underlining added) The applicant gave evidence that he had supported the movement financially, yet the Board's decision states that the "claimant clearly does not fall under any of these categories". It may be that the Board intended to refer only to the first part of the quotation which refers to the "ten categories of individuals among the most active in the demonstrations ...". It may be that the Board did not consider the categories of individuals who were described as being "subject to close scrutiny designed to correct their ideological position" to be convention refugees, but the Board did not couch its decision in either of these terms. It uses the quote from the article as evidence that there is no objective basis to the applicants' claim and relies on it as identifying the categories of individuals at risk. It then goes on to say finds that the applicant does not fall into any of the described categories, when the evidence set out in the Board's reasons indicates otherwise.
[20]
What is more, although the record which was sent to the court is certified as a true copy of all the material which was before the Board, I can find no copy of the article from which the quote was taken included therein. Thus, I cannot consider the context from which the quote was taken. It would appear from one of the indexes on the file that there is more material than just this one article which is missing from the certified record. A certified record should include all the evidence which was before the Board. The absence of such can itself be grounds for a reversal of the decision.
[21]
In light of all the circumstances of this case I have decided that the appropriate disposition is to quash the decision and return it for rehearing.
Application allowed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/saf
Footnotes
1. Transcript pp. 10-11
2. Transcript pp. 13-14
3. Transcript pp. 22-23
[End of document]