[1]
Rouleau, J.
: The applicant Ken Martin was charged that he fished for salmon with a gill net, the web of which contained single filaments that weighed more than 50 grams per 9000 meters of filament (50 deniers) contrary to s. 26 of the Pacific Commercial Salmon Fishery (P.C.S.F.) Regulations. As a result, on June 30, 1987, the respondent John Ball, an enforcement officer for the respondent Minister of Fisheries and Oceans, seized the gill net and attendant lines, floats and weights as well as a quantity of fish from the net and boat of the applicant. All this, as alleged by the applicant, because of a change of policy directed by the Minister.
[2]
This motion by the applicants is brought pursuant to ss. 18 and 44 of the Federal Court Act seeking an order in the nature of certiorari setting aside the seizure by Fisheries officer John Ball; quashing the decision of the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans of adopting a policy of relying on micrometer measurements to determine whether a gill net may be seized pursuant to s. 58 of the Fisheries Act; further seeking an order quashing the decision of the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans of pursuing a policy that when seizing nets to also take into custody the attendant lines, floats and weights pursuant to s. 58 of the Fisheries Act; a declaration that the seizure of the gill net belonging to the applicant Ken Martin by Fisheries officer John Ball was unreasonable and unlawful; an order that the Minister return the net; and, finally, an order that the respondents be prohibited from relying solely on the micrometer measurement of the net as the sole determinant of seizure under s. 58 of the Fisheries Act.
[3]
It is agreed by the parties that Mr. Ball measured the diameter of the filament of the net using a micrometer and determined that the net was in breach of the Act and Regulations. Mr. Ball states in his affidavit of September 12, 1987 that he was conducting a general check of the length, depth, monofilament and proper marking of the gear. He took nine different measurements of the net at three different places which ranged from 89 to 92 microns. Based on the results of the filament tests, which exceeded the limits under the Regulations, Mr. Ball took two samples of the net for testing and also seized the net to prevent further breaches of the Regulations and to provide the Minister with evidence in his prosecution.
[4]
The remaining applicants have joined in this matter as they are unhappy with the policy adopted by the Minister and are generally not satisfied with the use of a micrometer measurement as the sole determinant for seizure. The policy affects the types of net which may be sold and, as a result, affects the interests of gill net fishermen as a whole.
[5]
Subsection 58(1) of the Fisheries Act provides as follows:
"58(1) A fishery officer
may
seize any fishing vessel, vehicle, fishing gear, implement, appliance, material, container, goods, equipment or fish where the fishery officer on reasonable grounds believes that
(a) the fishing vessel, vehicle, fishing gear, implement, appliance, material, container, goods or equipment has been used in connection with the commission of an offence against this Act or the regulations;
(b) the fish or any part thereof have been caught, taken, killed, transported, bought, sold or had in possession contrary to any provision of this Act or the regulations; or
(c) the fish or any part thereof have been intermixed with fish referred to in paragraph (b)." (My underlining)
[6]
Subsections 26(1) and (2) of the Pacific Commercial Salmon Fishery Regulations provide:
"26(1) No person shall fish for or catch and retain salmon with a gill net the web of which contains any single filament that weighs more than 50 g per 9000 m of filament (50 deniers).
"(2) The weight referred to in subsection (1) shall be determined in accordance with Canadian General Standard Board Standard CAN2-4.2-M77."
[7]
The Minister formulated a new policy of enforcement in the spring of 1987. As a result the applicant argues that the respondent Ball acted unlawfully and exceeded his authority when exercising his duty pursuant to the policy adopted by the respondent Minister. It is argued that the Minister, in adopting a policy to seize all nets violating the Act and Regulations, acted unlawfully and in excess of his jurisdiction when he fettered the discretion of the enforcement officers provided for in s. 58 of the Fisheries Act. More specifically, the applicant argues that when the legislators enacted s. 58(1) they chose to use the word "may" in relation to seizure instead of "shall"; and that by instituting a new stringent policy of seizure, the Minister has removed the discretion afforded the enforcement officer and he now must seize the net if it offends the Act and Regulations.
[8]
The applicant is also dissatisfied with the procedure followed by the respondent for measuring the net. Mr. Martin states in his affidavit of July 17, 1987 that when this occurred, the net was encrusted with ocean deposits and the officer refused to clean it before taking measurements.
[9]
Since the applicant was not pleased with the method of measurement, he took it upon himself to obtain a new net identical to the type that was seized and met with fishing officials to observe remeasurements which results were less than those obtained in the field but still greater than the dimensions permitted under the Regulations. At the meeting he demanded the return of his net which was denied.
[10]
The crux of the matter revolves around the policy for seizure under the Act and Regulations. It is argued by the applicant that previous enforcement policy tolerated infringement of the Act and allowed considerable discretion to the field officer; but the new policy communicated to the fishermen and retailers of nets sometime in the spring of 1987 took away any discretion the field officer may have had.
[11]
To understand the change in policy, I must look to the affidavits of Alan Gibson, the Chief Conservation and Protection Officer of the Pacific Region in the Department of Fisheries and Oceans, dated August 10 and September 10, 1987. According to Mr. Gibson, monofilament nets have been banned in salmon gill net fishing on the Pacific Coast since 1956. The ban came about because the nets were allegedly too efficient in catching fish. The Minister banned the nets in an attempt to distribute the catch more equally amongst all fishermen as well as ensuring that the fish stocks would not become depleted because of an increased catch.
[12]
According to Mr. Gibson, previous to this particular incident, the United Fishermen and Allied Workers' Union which represents gill net fishermen conducted a referendum in March 1987 to determine if the fishermen supported the retention of s. 26 of the P.C.S.F. Regulations. A copy of the result of the referendum is attached as Exhibit "A" to the affidavit of September 10, 1987 and indicated that the fishermen voted 63.3% in favour of retaining the Regulation.
[13]
Prior to 1987, the Minister had developed a lenient attitude towards nets which were marginally illegal. However, after receiving a number of complaints from fishermen regarding the use of illegal gill nets, the Minister decided to rigorously enforce the Regulations commencing in the spring of 1987.
[14]
A formal notice of the change in policy was sent to fishermen and net salesmen in the industry advising them that enforcement would be more stringent and nets violating the Regulations, i.e. in excess of 80 microns, would be seized. The notice, dated June 17, 1987, reads as follows:
"
Circular to the Fishing Industry and Net Sales
"This notice is to remind fishermen of the prohibition against the use of monofilament salmon gill nets. And to notify the net sales industry that the maximum filament diameter of 80 microns is firm with no tolerance provided for.
"Any fishermen who have purchased salmon gill net web that exceeds 80 microns per filament can expect to have their gill nets checked during the salmon fishery. Any illegal monofilament nets will be seized and used as evidence in court.
"The fact that some net sales people may have advised fishermen of a tolerance in measurement of nets will not be recognized as an excuse for the use of nets that exceed the maximum allowable filament size. In such cases fishermen are urged to return these nets to the supplier for an exchange of refund.
"DFO is willing to co-operate with net suppliers in checking the legality of certain brand names. For instance 'SUPERSTAR 19' has been checked and is not in compliance with the Regulations."
[15]
Consequently Mr. Gibson instructed his Fishery officers, including John Ball, to seize any net used in fishing found to be over 80 microns.
[16]
John Ball, acting pursuant to this policy, seized Mr. Martin's net. At the time a statement was taken from Mr. Martin. This is set out in Exhibit "B" of Mr. Gibson's affidavit of September 10, 1987. From this statement it is clear that Mr. Martin had measured his net prior to the seizure and obtained measurements of 83, 84 and 85 microns. The applicant knew that the maximum was 80 microns, however, he chose to continue his use of the net. Apparently Mr. Martin had been advised by the retailer that the net would shrink by five microns with use.
[17]
Mr. Gibson stated in his affidavit of August 10, 1987 that when a net has been seized on the grounds of violation of s. 26(1) of the P.C.S.F. Regulations, a sample of the net is sent to Toronto for testing. This has been standard practice since August 1986 and prior to this practice the Vancouver Crime Lab performed the tests.
[18]
A sample of Mr. Martin's net was sent to the Ontario Research Foundation Centre for Textiles and Clothing to be tested in accordance with the Canadian General Standards Board Standards as provided in the P.C.S.F. Regulations. Dr. Peter Cashmore, a highly qualified expert in this area, used sophisticated equipment to measure the net according to CAN2-4.2-M77.
[19]
This expert has provided evidence on numerous occasions in relation to seizure of nets pursuant to the Fisheries Act regarding density and the nature of fabrics. A copy of the test results is included as Exhibit "B" to Mr. Gibson's affidavit of August 10, 1987; it states that the filament denier of the applicant's net was 73.5 which is equivalent to approximately 94 microns. Both parties have provided this court with copies of transcripts of Dr. Cashmore's evidence in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  1987). The transcripts set out Dr. Cashmore's method of measurement of the net according to the Canadian General Standards Board Standards (C.G.S.B.S.). Among other things, he states that a wide range of tests may be used to determine compliance with the standards; in fact there are 60 methods of testing to choose from and the method he has chosen is in accordance with these standards. May I point out that there is no evidence to dispute Dr. Cashmore's findings or the accuracy of his test.
[20]
The Regulations precisely provide that the weight of the filament must not exceed 50 grams per 9,000 meters of filament or 50 deniers. Apparently the denier is an expression of weight per unit length, its linear density.
[21]
The respondent Minister argues that he has not fettered the discretion of the Fisheries officers pursuant to s. 58 of the Fisheries Act by imposing an overriding general policy which must be followed. It is submitted that he simply decided to strictly enforce the determination under the statute and Regulations and he alone decides.
[22]
The applicant refers me to the decision of Bouck, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), where Bankes, L.G., said at p. 184:
"There are on the one hand cases where a tribunal in the honest exercise of its discretion has adopted a policy, and, without refusing to hear an applicant, intimates to him what its policy is, and that after hearing him it will in accordance with its policy decide against him,
unless there is something exceptional in his case
... if the policy has been adopted for reasons which the tribunal may legitimately entertain, no objection could be taken to such a course. On the other hand there are cases where a tribunal has passed a rule, or come to a determination, not to hear any application of a particular character by whomsoever made. There is a wide distinction to be drawn between these two classes."
[23]
The applicant argues that this case is an exception.
[24]
The respondent refers me to the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 401 where Freedman, C.J.M., stated:
"The other point is that nothing here stated is intended to curtail or affect the matter of prosecutorial discretion. Not every infraction of the law, as everybody knows, results in the institution of criminal proceedings. A wise discretion may be exercised against the setting in motion of the criminal process. A policeman, confronting a motorist who had been driving slightly in excess of the speed limit, may select to give him a warning rather than a ticket. An Attorney General, faced with circumstances indicating only technical guilt of a serious offence but actual guilt of a less serious offence, may decide to prosecute on the latter and not on the former. And the Attorney General may in his discretion stay proceedings on any pending charge, a right that is given statutory recognition in s. 508 [am. 1972, c. 13, s. 43(1)] and s. 732.1 [enacted idem, s. 62] of the Criminal Code. But in all these instances the prosecutorial discretion is exercised in relation to a specific case. It is the particular facts of a given case that call that discretion into play. But that is a far different thing from the granting of a blanket dispensation in favour of a particular group or race. Today the dispensing power may be exercised in favour of Indians. Tomorrow it may be exercised in favour of Protestants, and the next day in favour of Jews. Our laws cannot be so treated. The Crown may not by Executive action dispense with laws. The matter is as simple as that, and nearly three centuries of legal and constitutional history stand as the foundation for that principle."
[25]
After a thorough review of the circumstances and the authorities, I am unable to accept the submissions of the applicant. It is clear on the facts that the net exceeded the measurement allowed by s. 26 of the P.C.S.F. Regulations and the applicant knew that his net exceeded the allowable limit.
[26]
It is the Fisheries Act and the P.C.S.F. Regulations which define what is an illegal net, not the Minister. The Minister is responsible for enforcement of the Act. In each case, either the net complies with the Regulations or it does not. The Minister has a latitude in determining the method of measurement to be used by his officers in the enforcement of the Act provided the method complies with recognized standards. I find no reason to question the use of the micrometer to determine measurement for the purpose of seizure. This is a quick and efficient method of measurement which can be used by an officer when in the field. It cannot be expected that he transport equipment to perform more sophisticated tests on location. I am satisfied from the evidence of Mr. Ball that this is a very effective means of measurement. In fact, the applicant Ken Martin was the first person Mr. Ball had determined to be contravening the Act since he began conducting tests in June 1986.
[27]
The fact that the officer had been instructed to seize the net if it measured in excess of 80 microns does not mean that his discretion has been removed. The circular was not prohibitive. The field officer could still elect not to seize if the measurement was within a close margin of 80 microns.
[28]
I am of the opinion that the officer acted lawfully when he seized the net, attendant lines, floats, weights and fish of the applicant. Paragraph 58(1)(a) states that the officer may seize goods or equipment used in connection with the commission of the offence; this includes in s. 58(1)(b) any fish which have been caught contrary to the Regulations.
[29]
In this instance, the officer determined that he should seize the net and related equipment to prevent the continuation of the offence. It is important to note s. 60 of the Act which reads as follows:
"60. Should any nets, seines, or other fishing apparatus be set or used in violation of this Act or any regulation for more than one day, then each day during which such seines, nets, or other fishing apparatus remain so set or used constitutes a separate offence, and may be punished accordingly; and should any other violation of this Act, or of any regulation, continue for more than one day, then each day during which such violation continues constitutes a separate offence, and may be punished as such."
[30]
The decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 44 N.R. 354 (approving LeDain, J., of the Federal Court of Appeal [1981] 1 F.C. 500; 114 D.L.R. (3d) 634; 42 N.R. 312) is authority for the proposition that a Minister may indicate types of considerations as a general guide in the exercise of discretion but he cannot fetter the discretion by treating the guidelines as binding and exclude other valid reasons for the exercise of discretion. LeDain, J., said at pp. 513-514:
"The Minister may validly and properly indicate the kind of considerations by which he will be guided as a general rule in the exercise of his discretion (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 169-71; 36 C.P.R.(2d) 1), but he cannot fetter his discretion by treating the guidelines as binding upon him and excluding other valid or relevant reasons for the exercise of his discretion (see Re Hopedale Developments Ltd. and Town of Oakville (1964), 47 D.L.R.(2d) 482, [1965] 1 O.R. 259)."
[31]
I am satisfied that the Minister has the authority to alter or amend policy from time to time, and more so especially where the parties affected by the change have been notified and even voted on the issue. The courts should not interfere with the exercise of discretion by a statutory authority where it has been exercised in good faith and is not based upon irrelevant or extraneous considerations. Barring flagrant impropriety, the court should not be interfering in the administration process of the Minister. As McIntyre, J., said in Maple Lodge (supra), [1982] 2 S.C.R. 2, at pp. 7-8:
"In construing statutes such as those under consideration in this appeal, which provide for far-reaching and frequently complicated administrative schemes, the judicial approach should be to endeavour within the scope of the legislation to give effect to its provisions so that the administrative agencies created may function effectively, as the legislation intended. In my view, in dealing with legislation of this nature, the courts should, wherever possible, avoid a narrow, technical construction, and endeavour to make effective the legislative intent as applied to the administrative scheme involved. It is, as well, a clearly-established rule that the courts should not interfere with the exercise of a discretion by a statutory authority merely because the court might have exercised the discretion in a different manner had it been charged with that responsibility. Where the statutory discretion has been exercised in good faith and, where required, in accordance with the principles of natural justice, and where reliance has not been placed upon considerations irrelevant or extraneous to the statutory purpose, the courts should not interfere ..."
[32]
I am of the opinion that the discretion has been given to the officers by statute and the adoption of a policy to enforce the statute does not restrict this discretion. For the foregoing reasons the application is dismissed.
[33]
Costs to the respondent Minister.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]