[1] MacKay, J.
: In this application for judicial review the applicant seeks an order setting aside the decision, dated March 17, 1993, by the Convention Refugee Determination Division ("the tribunal") that the applicant is not a Convention refugee within the definition included in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
. In addition the applicant seeks an order declaring the applicant to be a Convention refugee, or in the alternative an order referring the matter back for reconsideration by a differently constituted panel of the tribunal. As I indicated when the matter was heard, the declaratory relief sought is not within the jurisdiction of this court to award in an application for judicial review, either under the
Immigration Act
or the
Federal Court Act
, s. 18.1(3).
[2]
The applicant is a male citizen of Sri Lanka, a Tamil from the Jaffna area, who was 40 years of age at the time of the tribunal's decision. Until early in 1990, he had lived his life in the Jaffna area, mainly in Mannar. His story is one of a series of difficulties for him and his family, commencing in 1984, including arrests and physical mistreatment at the hands of Sri Lankan Army and police authorities, the Indian Peace Keeping Force and its Tamil supporters, the EPRLF, and harassment or worse at the hands of the LTTE, the Tigers, all in the northern Jaffna area. These events took place while the area was the scene of bitter insurrection by the LTTE and efforts to suppress that by Sri Lankan authorities and the army, subsequently when it was under supervision of the IPKF through a period of truce between LTTE and Sri Lankan authorities, and after the IPKF left in 1990 and fighting between the LTTE and the Sri Lankan Army again erupted.
[3]
In January 1990, following the killing of his assistant in a VCR and video rental business venture, by the LTTE, who had warned the applicant not to do business with the IPKF though the latter had demanded that he do so, he fled to Colombo. There he lived in a lodge for nearly five months. In May he was arrested at the lodge by police who detained him, in the course of a round up or sweep of Tamils following the murder of a politician. During his detention he was physically mistreated but he was released after 24 hours upon intervention of a relative who served in the police forces. After he was released he was required to report to police twice a week. He did this on four occasions, and on three of these he was mistreated or harassed by the police. Then fearing the police and that LTTE representatives, who had reportedly been looking for him after he left Mannar, would kill him even in Colombo, he arranged through an agent to leave Colombo, which he did in mid June, arriving in Canada on June 21, 1990 where a week later he claimed refugee status. Since he left Mannar, his family had been harassed by the LTTE, a younger brother had been taken by the LTTE to serve in its fighting force and had only been released after interventions and payments of funds by his parents. The family home had been destroyed in fighting between LTTE and Sri Lankan Forces and the family had been living in a refugee camp in northern Sri Lanka for some 18 months.
[4]
The decision of the tribunal is relatively brief, some five and a half pages of text of which one page is an introduction and three and a half pages review evidence from the PIF and testimony of the applicant (two pages of which quote from the narrative portion of the claimant's PIF). The tribunal made no comment on the credibility of the claimant or his evidence, adduced to establish that he falls within the definition of a Convention refugee, and it then set out its reasons and conclusions in the following six paragraphs.
"Documentary evidence states that young Tamils are subject to harassment and may be detained as a result of sweeps by the authorities in Colombo and elsewhere in their search for suspected members of the LTTE. The claimant is 40 years old and the panel is not persuaded that he would meet the profile, in that he doesn't qualify as a young Tamil.
"The claimant's evidence is that he was arrested in a sweep by the authorities. According to the claimant's testimony, the sweep would appear to have been a particularly thorough one due to the recent murder of a member of the Sri Lankan parliament. The panel notes that the claimant was released within twenty four hours of his arrest by the intercession of his uncle. The claimant gave no evidence that he had asked for or sought protection or help from his uncle. The panel feels that the claimant suffered no specific persecution at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities or members of the LTTE.
"While the claimant may have experienced some physical harassment during his brief detention, the panel feels that this did not amount to persecution. The panel is satisfied that the claimant's treatment at the hands of the LTTE and the Sri Lankan authorities did not amount to persecution. Further, the panel is satisfied that what the claimant might face on his return would not amount to persecution.
"The claimant travelled from the North of Sri Lanka to Colombo without any difficulty. He applied for and was issued a Sri Lankan passport in April of 1990 in a normal manner, through the services of an agent. His departure from Sri Lanka was without incident.
"For the reasons stated above and after careful consideration of all the evidence adduced at this hearing, the panel is not satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that the claimant has good grounds for fearing persecution by reason of any of the grounds set out in the Convention refugee definition.
"The Refugee Division determines, therefore, that Rayappu Alfred is not a Convention refugee."
[5]
The decision is questioned in this application on several grounds under two main topics, that the tribunal erred in misconstruing "persecution" as elaborated by jurisprudence in light of the facts of this case, and that the tribunal erred in law by ignoring and or misconstruing the evidence before it.
[6]
At the hearing, counsel for the respondent conceded that the tribunal erred in its statements that "the claimant suffered no persecution at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities or members of the LTTE" (in the second paragraph quoted) and that "while the claimant may have experienced some physical harassment during his brief detention, the panel feels that this did not amount to persecution" (in the third paragraph quoted). At least so far as the first of these statements related to any experience outside Colombo, it was conceded the tribunal erred, though the respondent argued that conditions in Colombo were very different from those in the northern Jaffna area. I note that the tribunal made no reference to an internal flight alternative, nor did it give any clear indication that it considered the applicant's case with reference to different circumstances prevailing in Colombo and in the Jaffna region.
[7]
For the respondent reference was made to portions of the transcript of the hearing and to the documentary evidence before it which would warrant the conclusion that the findings of the tribunal were reasonable. As I indicated at the hearing the court must review the decision as rendered by the tribunal, not the evidence, to which the decision itself makes no specific reference, which would warrant the conclusions reached by the tribunal if it had expressed reasons relying upon the evidence. In my view, it is not sufficient to say, as the tribunal here did, that its decision was reached "after careful consideration of all the evidence adduced at this hearing", when its decision makes little or no reference to the principal bases of the applicant's claim.
[8]
I am persuaded that this application should be allowed for the following reasons.
(1) The tribunal made no assessment of the applicant's evidence of incidents of alleged persecution, which was not questioned as to its credibility, except with reference to the final incident of his arrest in Colombo. It did not assess the cumulative effect of the incidents as evidence of persecution ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on his evidence of harassment of persecution of himself or members of his family by the LTTE.
(2) The tribunal did not assess the physical mistreatment of the applicant by Colombo police in terms of persecution. Under the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Articles 7 and 4 make clear that no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment even in times of public emergency.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Mr. Justice Linden made clear that punishment or treatment even under a law of general application that is so draconian as to be completely disproportionate to the objective of the law may be viewed as persecutory, as may treatment under the law which clearly violates recognized international standards of human rights.
(3) Without assessing the applicant's evidence that in his experience he had been treated as a young male Tamil, despite his age, because he was single and without family responsibilities of his own, the tribunal concluded he would not meet the profile of a young Tamil, because of his age, and thus would not be the target of Sri Lankan authorities in their efforts to suppress LTTE activities. It appears to have relied upon its own perception of the applicant, not the perception of Sri Lankan authorities. See Mr. Justice La Forest, speaking for the Supreme Court, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 85, at p. 127 (S.C.C.). Moreover, it appears to have assumed that only young Tamils were the object of Sri Lankan police and security operations, a narrow perception inconsistent with much of the documentary evidence.
[9]
For these reasons an order goes allowing the application, setting aside the decision of the tribunal and referring the matter back for reconsideration by a differently constituted panel of the Convention Refugee Determination Division.
[10]
At the end of the hearing of this matter, counsel for the parties each indicated that no serious question of public importance arises from this case for consideration and certification pursuant to s. 83 of the
Immigration Act
. No question is certified.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jean Merlini/saf
[End of document]