[1]
Strayer, J.
: The applicant seeks an order for certiorari setting aside the order of transfer and the transfer of himself from the R.C.M.P. Training Academy, "Depot", Regina to "F" Division, also in Regina, such certiorari being requested "pending the resolution of the grievances filed herein".
[2]
I will only observe in passing that in my view it is not possible to grant a temporary or interim order of certiorari. For the reasons which follow, however, I do not think that in any circumstances certiorari or other remedy should be granted.
[3]
The essential basis for this application is that the respondent, acting directly or through his delegates, has made the decision for this transfer through an abuse of discretionary power, the decision being made on grounds which are not relevant to the exercise of that authority. It is also argued that the decision is made in violation of s. 31(5) of the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act
(R.S.C. 1985, c. R-10), which provides as follows:
"31(5) No member shall be disciplined or otherwise penalized in relation to employment or any term of employment in the Force for exercising the right under this Part to present a grievance."
In support of the argument that the transfer has been ordered for irrelevant reasons, the applicant relies heavily on the provisions of the Commissioner's own standing orders on
Succession/Transfer Planning
, s. C.9 of which provides as follows:
"C.9 A member may be permitted to remain at his/her present location provided:
a. his/her wish is known,
b. his/her performance remains satisfactory,
c. the position is not required for the placement/development of someone else, and
d. there is no operational requirement for the member's service elsewhere."
In support of this proposition it is argued that this transfer does not comply with the provisions of s. C.9 because by that section a member of the Force is to be permitted to remain at his existing location unless certain conditions obtain, none of which it is said obtained in this case. With respect to C.9.a it is known that he wishes to stay in his present position. In respect of C.9.b he says that his performance in that position has remained satisfactory and he cites the good performance evaluation made of him. The applicant says that his transfer is not justifiable under C.9.c because his position is not required for the placement or development of someone else, and it does not meet the requirements of C.9.d because there is no operational requirement for his services in Division "F".
[4]
I am not satisfied by the evidence before me, however, that the applicant has established an abuse or excess of the Commissioner's discretionary authority. Under s. 5(1) of the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act
, it is said that the Commissioner
"... under the direction of the Minister, has the control and management of the Force and all matters connected therewith."
This is a very broadly stated power and on its face leaves the Commissioner with almost unlimited discretion in the matter of transfer of members of the Force as long as the decision can somehow be related to the "control and management" of the Force.
[5]
The applicant contends, however, that the Commissioner's discretion in the matter of transfers has been very considerably restricted by his own standing order on
Succession/Transfer Planning
, particularly s. C.9 thereof as quoted above. Upon further examination it appears to me that the Federal Court of Appeal has recognized that the standing orders of the Commissioner have the force of law and as long as they are in force they legally control the exercise of authority by the Commissioner and his officers (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 341, 350-351 F.C.). Such binding effect was assumed by my colleague Rouleau, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  has clearly violated the requirements of s. C.9. Even when that section is examined in isolation, a violation is not obvious. The section starts out with the words "A member
may
be permitted to remain at his/her present location ...". It does not say that he "
shall
be permitted to remain ...". One condition of allowing him to remain is, according to paragraph b., that "his/her performance remains satisfactory ...". In his most recent performance evaluation, the applicant received an overall evaluation of 92%, a result which Chief Superintendent Spring, officer in charge of the R.C.M.P. training academy in Regina, describes as "a normal average score". I am not convinced at this point, however, that the Commissioner was obliged to ignore, in the application of C.9.b. when making a decision as to the transfer of the applicant, that over a year and one-half after being appointed to the position of Division Sergeant Major the applicant had not yet fulfilled one of the conditions upon which he was appointed: namely that he move onto the base into a house provided for him by the Force. Further, it seems to me also possible that C.9.d. could have been relied upon by the respondent in ordering the transfer, on the basis that there was an operational requirement for a Division Sergeant Major to be in residence at the training depot and that in the circumstances this operational requirement had to be met by the applicant being "elsewhere".
[6]
Moreover, one cannot look at s. C.9 in isolation. Within the same standing order itself, there are other provisions such as the following:
"C.1 The
primary purpose
of transfers shall be to enable the R.C.M.P.
to meet its objectives
.
"C.2 While the needs of the R.C.M.P.
are uppermost
, the member's development, personal circumstances and aspirations
shall also be considered
.
"C.3 Careers of members, and therefore transfers, shall be treated on an individual basis
to meet the needs of the R.C.M.P.
"C.4 A member shall be subject to transfer anywhere in Canada.
. . . . .
"C.6 A member shall not be transferred
unless a valid reason exists
to do so." (Emphasis added)
These sections clearly give a priority to the "needs of the R.C.M.P." and its objectives and imply that if there are valid reasons for a transfer in terms of the needs of the Force then the concerns of the member must be considered subject to those needs. Counsel for the respondent also referred to s. 71 of the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police Regulations, 1988
(SOR/88-361), which states
"71. The Commissioner may authorize the provision of suitable living accommodation for a member and, when so provided, the member shall reside therein, unless the member's appropriate officer directs otherwise."
The respondent relies on that section as the authority for requiring the applicant to live in the house provided for him at the training depot. I am not satisfied that s. C.9 of the standing order on transfers must be interpreted, as the applicant contends, in a manner by which a member of the Force can circumvent the requirements of s. 71 of the
Regulations
by insisting that he be entitled to reject a transfer from a position to which s. 71 applies even though he is not complying with s. 71.
[7]
As a result, I believe that the facts of this case are clearly distinguishable from those in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, (supra), where Rouleau, J., quashed a transfer decision in part because it was made in clear disregard of the standing order. Nor could he find anything in the applicant's conduct in that case that was contrary to the
Regulations
.
[8]
The standing
Order
and
Regulations
aside, I am unable to characterize the decision of the respondent as clearly irrelevant to the proper exercise of his general authority under s. 5(1) of the
Act
. The Commissioner and his senior officers have concluded that the Division Sergeant Major at Training Depot should live at the Depot in a house provided for that purpose. They have concluded that such residence should be a real and full-time residence involving the occupation of the house by his family as well and not a residence of convenience where his family would remain off the base in circumstances where, it is assumed by the respondent, the applicant would regularly absent himself from the base when not on active duty there. It is not necessary for me to conclude that the decision of the Commissioner is correct or wise or just, and I decline from doing so. But I am unable to say that it is a decision clearly unrelated to the purposes for which the Commissioner has been given the management and control of the Force.
[9]
The applicant has also failed to satisfy me that what has been done here amounts to the applicant being "disciplined" or "penalized" because he has presented a grievance, something which is prohibited by s. 31(5) of the
Act
as quoted above. The transfer which was finally ordered on May 27, 1991, had its origins in decisions taken two years ago to the effect that the person appointed Division Sergeant Major was to live in housing provided on the base. This requirement had been regularly communicated to the applicant long before he filed a grievance.
[10]
I would also exercise the discretion against granting certiorari here even if conditions otherwise existed for its grant. It is open to me to consider the conduct of the applicant in exercising that discretion (See e.g., Mullan,
Administrative Law
(1979) at p. 3-202). In this case the applicant was warned before his application for this post was processed that it would involve moving to the house on the base should he be the successful candidate. He indicated in an interview that he accepted this condition, although he said he would want to sell his house in Regina before moving and he would still seek an exemption from this requirement. Subsequently on at least one occasion he said he would accept a demotion if such an exemption was not granted. Over one and one-half years elapsed and the applicant had still not sold his house and it was open to the Force, in my view, to decide that he had had all reasonable opportunities for selling his house. At that point a decision was made that he must make the move. The applicant's conduct has been far from responsible in the face of the consistent position taken by the Force that he must move onto the base and this requirement was well known to him before he proceeded with his application for the position as Division Sergeant Major. In these circumstances I would exercise my discretion against granting the remedy of certiorari.
[11]
Further, it is also open to me to exercise such a discretion where there is another remedy available. The applicant has filed a grievance in respect of his transfer and such grievance is now being processed. His only concern in coming to this court is that although the grievance is being processed the transfer is going ahead with the possibility that his previous post as Division Sergeant Major may be filled before the grievance is decided. He also is concerned that inadequate remedies are provided under the grievance process. It is not suggested that there has been a failure to obey the requirements of the
Act
with respect to grievances and I do not think that this court should sit in judgment on the adequacy of the remedies provided by Parliament in the grievance process. The grievance process is much better designed to determine what are appropriate personnel decisions for the good management of the Force than is this court.
[12]
The application for certiorari is therefore dismissed.
[13]
I might add that I considered whether I should treat this application for an interim order of certiorari as an application for a stay of the order of transfer made in respect of the applicant. It is now well established that in applications for interim stays of administrative orders a court should apply the same criteria as in respect of interim or interlocutory injunctions (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241; 18 C.P.C.(2d) 273; 38 D.L.R.(4th) 321). In reflecting on this possibility, I was satisfied, for the reasons given by my colleague MacKay, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), that the applicant has not demonstrated irreparable harm pending either the determination of his grievance or the completion of his action commenced in this court on June 6, 1991 seeking, inter alia, a declaration of the invalidity of his transfer. He has not been demoted and presumably will suffer no financial loss. Nor has he been required to relocate: he is still working in Regina and I understand on the same base although being posted to a different Division.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]