[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: In this appeal brought pursuant to ss. 56 and 59 of the Trade Marks Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, (R.S.C. 1970, c. T-10 as amended), the appellant appeals the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks dated December 31, 1987, refusing in part Application No. 496,475 filed by the appellant for the registration of trademark "Detroit Tigers & Design". The matter came on for hearing in Toronto, Ontario on February 28, 1989. For reasons given orally from the Bench, I allowed the appeal and indicated that these written Reasons would follow.
[2]
On December 20, 1982, the appellant filed an application for the registration of the trademark "Detroit Tigers & Design" based on its use in Canada since 1952 in association with the performance, presentation and promotion of baseball games rendered live and by radio and television; and based on its proposed use in Canada in association with a wide range of wares including clothing, baseball equipment, footwear, glassware, jewellery, bed and bathroom linen, rugs and mats, plastic cups, stickers, decals and heat transfers, souvenir items and candy. The application was advertised for opposition in the Trade Marks Journal on July 11, 1984. The respondent, Tiger Brand Knitting Company Ltd. filed a statement of opposition on November 26, 1984. Tiger Brand maintained that the trademark sought by the appellant was not registrable because it was confusing and not distinctive from their own registered and unregistered trademarks in use with respect to women's and men's clothing, knitted underwear, athletic wear, sleepwear, and bathing suits. The appellant responded that the "Detroit Tigers & Design" trademark was distinctive and registrable in accordance with the provisions of the Trade Marks Act.
[3]
On December 31, 1987, the Registrar of Trademarks issued a decision refusing the appellant's application in relation to boys' and mens' clothing, ladies' sleepwear and leisure suits, girls' sleepwear, infants' pyjamas and toddlers' jackets. He found that the appellant had not discharged its legal burden of establishing that its mark was not confusing with the opponent's in respect of the above clothing items within the meaning of s. 6 of the Trade Marks Act. That section reads as follows:
"6(1) For the purposes of this Act a trademark or trade name is confusing with another trademark or trade name if the use of such first mentioned trademark or trade name would cause confusion with such last mentioned trademark or trade name in the manner and circumstances described in this section.
"6(2) The use of a trademark causes confusion with another trademark if the use of both trademarks in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with such trademarks are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not such wares or services are of the same general class.
"6(3) The use of a trademark causes confusion with a trade name if the use of both the trademark and trade name in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with the trademark and those associated with the business carried on under such trade name are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not such wares or services are of the same general class.
"6(4) The use of a trade name causes confusion with a trademark if the use of both the trade name and the trademark in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with the business carried on under such trade name and those associated with such trademark are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not such wares or services are of the same general class.
"6(5) In determining whether trademarks or trade names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
[4]
The main thrust of the appellant's argument in appeal from this decision is that the Registrar did not consider the totality of their trademark "Detroit Tigers & Design" as against the totality of the respondent's trademark "Tiger Brand & Tiger Head Design" in that he only took into account the use of the words "Tigers" and "Tiger" and considered that both trademarks represented a growling tiger. It is contended that by omitting such features of the appellant's trademark as the word "Detroit" and the outer ring the Registrar restricted his consideration to certain portions of the marks and erroneously conducted the test of confusion. For the reasons which follow, I found the argument persuasive.
[5]
In reaching this conclusion, I have kept in mind two important factors. The first is the respect to be accorded to those of regular experience in this kind of dispute, in this case, the learned Opposition Chairman. The second is that the primary focus must be on the likelihood of confusion and the motive of any party is never more than a minor or secondary consideration. In the final analysis, however, no judgment can be made without an appreciation of the manner in which the competing parties intend to market their products. Evaluation of the likelihood of confusion cannot be done in a vacuum. The marks and the products have to be viewed through the eyes of the ordinary consumer which brings into play the intention of the parties in terms of channels of distribution and marketing strategy. The learned Chairman made a proper analysis of his obligation not to dissect the market piece by piece, but rather to examine it as a whole, but his failure was to do that very thing. The basis of his decision is in fact a dissection and fails to recognize that the appellant will never put its "Tiger" emblem into play in the absence of the word "Detroit" or the circular symbol. In reality, the most important ingredient in this case is the fact that if the appellant does not distinguish itself from other users of the mark "Tiger" and reinforce the association with the Detroit Tigers Baseball Club, its whole marketing strategy will be a failure.
[6]
It is perhaps useful to make a brief reference to two earlier decisions in the Federal Court. Mr. Justice Thorson put it quite precisely in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 136, where the two words in dispute were "Posturopedic" and "Searsopedic" with the common element being "pedic":
"... It is not a proper approach to the determination of whether one trademark is confusing with another to break them up into their elements, concentrate attention upon the elements that are similar and conclude that, because there are similarities in the trademarks, the trademarks as a whole are confusing with another. Trademarks may be different from one another and, therefore, not confusing with one another when looked at in their totality, even if there are similarities in some of the elements when viewed separately. It is the combination of the elements that constitutes the trademark and it is the effect of the trademark as a whole, rather than that of any particular part in it, that must be considered.
"Thus the fact that both the respondent's trademark 'Sears-O-Pedic' and the appellant's registered trademark 'Posturepedic' both contain the suffix '-pedic' does not determine that the respondent's trademark was, either as at April 18, 1956, or as at August 7, 1957, confusing with the appellant's registered trademark 'Posturepedic'. If the two trademarks are looked at in their totality it is, in my opinion, clear beyond dispute that the respondent's trademark was not and is not confusing with the appellant's registered trademark."
[7]
I followed that reasoning in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Apple". The Registrar focused on the word "apple", the sole similarity, and found that a consumer seeking footwear bearing the trademark "Apple Pie" could easily conclude that such footwear originated from the same source as "The Big Apple" footwear because of the existence of the word "apple" in both names. I found that the Registrar's concentration on the word "apple" was an error:
"... I simply don't believe that a consumer shopping for shoes, either sneakers or sandals, and seeing the words 'The Big Apple' on one product and 'Apple Pie' on another would be led to assume that these products came from the same source. Even accepting the Registrar's hypothesis of the consumer with imperfect recollection, I do not believe it is enough to satisfy the tests in s. 6 to say that the shopper would not look at the marks carefully or analyse them scientifically. I just do not think that the words used in these marks are so similar that the average consumer could not instinctively differentiate between them."
[8]
Use by two marks of a generic term such as "apple" or "tiger" is not enough to result in confusion, especially if there are other distinguishing aspects such as different meanings of the two phrases, or other words necessary to the mark. The singular common element here is the word "tiger", and so long as this is the only similarity and there are other distinguishing features in the competing marks, the protection of the statute cannot be invoked. By separating out the word "tiger", the Opposition Chairman ignored other elements of the marks and fell into the trap of a dissectional analysis.
[9]
The learned Opposition Chairman failed to recognize that these are different looking logos, pitched to different consumers in different settings and with different channels of distribution. By failing to give adequate consideration to all of these elements, the Opposition Chairman did not set the proper background and ultimately reached the wrong conclusion. Accordingly, on February 28, 1989, I set aside his decision and allowed the appeal with costs. The matter will be referred back to the Registrar for appropriate action.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]