I.
OVERVIEW
[1]
Phelan, J.
: The Applicant, See You In - Canadian Athletes Fund Corporation (SYI Fund), had used and filed for trademark applications marks using the words "SEE YOU IN TORINO", "SEE YOU IN BEIJING" and "SEE YOU IN VANCOUVER". Despite these pending registrations, the Registrar of Trademarks decided that the Respondent Canadian Olympic Committee (COC) was a public authority under s. 9 of the
Trade-marks Act
(the
Act
) and to publish several
official
marks in the Trade-marks Journal in COC's name. These official marks also used the words "SEE YOU IN TORINO", "SEE YOU IN BEIJING" and "SEE YOU IN VANCOUVER". This is the judicial review of the Registrar's decision to publish the notice of the official marks which effectively granted the official marks to the COC.
II.
BACKGROUND
[2]
The SYI Fund was created in 1997 as the "See You In Sydney" fund. It later incorporated in Ontario on October 25, 2002 under its current name. It raises money to support Canadian athletes in international competitions.
[3]
Since 1997, SYI Fund and its predecessor organization have raised more than $2 million in campaigns such as "See You In Sydney", "See You in Salt Lake" and "See You in Athens".
[4]
On October 24, 2003, the SYI Fund filed four trademark applications:
(a) SEE YOU IN ATHENS (Serial Number 1,193,872)
(b) SEE YOU IN TORINO (Serial Number 1,193,873)
(c) SEE YOU IN BEIJING (Serial Number 1,193,874)
(d) SEE YOU IN VANCOUVER (Serial Number 1,193,875)
[5]
Ten months later, on August 2, 2004, the COC requested that public notice under s. 9 of the
Act
be given to certain marks. These were:
(a) SEE YOU IN TORINO (File # 916,057)
(b) SEE YOU IN BEIJING (File # 916,058)
(c) SEE YOU IN VANCOUVER (File # 916,059)
[6]
On October 13, 2004, the Registrar gave public notice pursuant to s. 9(1)(n)(iii) in the Canadian Trade-marks Journal of the adoption and use of the official marks above.
[7]
In support of COC's request, the COC filed with the Registrar substantive evidence that COC was a public authority. As to adoption and use, it filed nothing more than a letter from its counsel stating that the respective mark "has been adopted and used as an official mark by the Canadian Olympic Committee for wares and services in Canada".
[8]
The effect of publication by the Registrar is to preclude registration of the previously adopted and used marks of the SYI Fund trademark applications. To the extent that SYI Fund used the trademarks as of the publication date, it could continue to do so in association only with the same wares and services but would not be able to secure a trademark or expand the use to other wares and services. In practical terms, if the mark was used on pens as of the publication date, SYI Fund could continue to use the mark on pens but not on key chains (as an example).
[9]
The decision at issue is the Registrar's decision to publish notice of COC's official mark. The publication is the only written evidence of the decision.
[10]
There are five major issues in this judicial review:
1. Can the Applicant bring forward evidence not before the Registrar?
2. Can the Court (and should the Court) draw an adverse inference from the COC's failure to answer relevant questions, particularly as to adoption and use?
3. Has the COC adopted and used the COC marks other than as a licensee?
4. Is the COC a licensee (agent or trustee) of the IOC and if it is, has it adopted and used the marks?
5. Is the COC a public authority?
III.
ANALYSIS
A.
Legislation/Practice
[11]
The pertinent provision of the
Act
is s. 9(1)(n)(iii) which reads (the whole of section 9 is attached in the Annex at the end of these Reasons):
"9(1) No person shall adopt in connection with a business, as a trademark or otherwise, any mark consisting of, or so nearly resembling as to be likely to be mistaken for,
. . . . .
(n) any badge, crest, emblem or mark
. . . . .
(iii) adopted and used by any public authority, in Canada as an official mark for wares or services,"
"9(1) Nul ne peut adopter à l'égard d'une entreprise, comme marque de commerce ou autrement, une marque composée de ce qui suit, ou dont la ressemblance est telle qu'on pourrait vraisemblablement la confondre avec ce qui suit:
. . . . .
n) tout insigne, écusson, marque ou emblème:
. . . . .
(iii) adopté et employé par une autorité publique au Canada comme marque officielle pour des marchandises ou services,"
[12]
In most instances, decisions of the Registrar are governed by s. 56(1) of the
Act
:
"56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the Court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months."
"56(1) Appel de toute décision rendue par le registraire, sous le régime de la présente loi, peut être interjeté à la Cour fédérale dans les deux mois qui suivent la date où le registraire a expédié l'avis de la décision ou dans tel délai supplémentaire accordé par le tribunal, soit avant, soit après l'expiration des deux mois."
[13]
In respect of the Office of the Registrar, it is its practice to accept unsworn, unsubstantiated statements of adoption and use without any further inquiry but to probe more deeply the question of whether the entity is a "public authority".
B.
Standard of Review
[14]
The standard of review is well set out by Décary, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at paragraph 8:
"8. Decisions of the Registrar, whether of facts, law or discretion, within his area of expertise, are to be reviewed on a standard of reasonableness simpliciter, which is synonymous to 'clearly wrong'. Where additional evidence is adduced in the Trial Division that would have materially affected the Registrar's decision, a judge must come to his or her conclusion as to the correctness of the Registrar's decision (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), per Rothstein, J.A., at page 168:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  J.A., at paragraph 10;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  are made in respect of any appeal from the Registrar, not in respect of judicial review.
[15]
Therefore, the standard would normally be reasonableness except where additional evidence is admitted at the Federal Court, in which event, it is correctness.
[16]
For reasons given later, I have concluded that the evidence which the Applicant attempted to introduce is admissible. However, in this case, it does not matter whether the standard of review is correctness or reasonableness, the result is the same.
C.
New Evidence
[17]
As part of the Applicant's case, it filed an affidavit of its officer Jane Roos. The affidavit addresses issues principally as to its use of the "See You In" trademarks, its interest in this proceeding and other information about the corporation. It also attaches as exhibits evidence related to COC as a "public authority" including the Olympic Charter, the COC's General By-law and a copy of the multi-party agreement between COC and different governments.
[18]
The Applicant did not seek leave to file the affidavit in accordance with Rule 312 until the hearing of the judicial review. However, the Respondent filed a rebuttal affidavit and the parties conducted cross-examinations without reserving any objection to the evidence.
[19]
At the hearing of this judicial review, the Respondent sought to strike the affidavit evidence while the Applicant argued that it was necessary, proper and sought leave to adduce the evidence under Rule 312. I reserved judgment on the motion to strike and proceeded to hear the judicial review on the basis that all the evidence was admitted.
[20]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 417 (F.C.A.), relied on by the Respondent, Evans, J.A., discussed the difference between a judicial review and an appeal under s. 56 of the
Act
. From paragraphs 27 to 32 the Court of Appeal discusses the differences between s. 56 appeals and judicial review under the
Federal Courts Act
. However, the Court of Appeal did not hold that a person who was not a party before the Registrar has no rights of redress under s. 56 or by judicial review. The s. 56 proceeding was converted to a judicial review by the Applications Judge, a procedure which the Court of Appeal held to be correct (paragraph 39).
[21]
On the specific issue of the admissibility of evidence not before the Registrar, the Court of Appeal did not conclude that such evidence could not be adduced on judicial review. At the most, the Court suggested that such evidence would be admissible on issues of procedural fairness and jurisdiction with leave of the Court.
[22]
In the subsequent case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 328 (F.C.A.), the Court of Appeal commented further on the right to adduce evidence and specifically concluded that in a judicial review, the party seeking judicial review may adduce evidence that the official mark was not adopted or used.
"8. In determining whether the statutory criteria are met, the Registrar is entitled but not bound to rely on the representations submitted with the request for publication. If the Registrar decides to give the public notice as requested, a person who seeks judicial review of the Registrar's decision may adduce evidence that the official mark was not adopted or used. In that event, the party that requested the public notice has the burden of proving that the official mark was adopted and used by the date of the public notice."
[23]
This Court, in subsequent decisions, has admitted evidence in respect to both adoption and use (
Canadian Rehabilitation Council for the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 370 (F.C.), at paras. 11-12) and in respect of public authority status (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 219 (F.C.)).
[24]
The effect of the Registrar's decision to give public notice is to curtail the ability to use the marks which a third party has used to date. These third parties have an interest (if not a right) in the Registrar's decision and a legitimate right to challenge that decision.
[25]
It would be unfair to prevent them from putting forward evidence which challenges the conclusions of the Registrar particularly where they had no prior ability to do so.
[26]
If one examines that affidavit evidence, firstly it addresses the procedural unfairness of the Registrar's process by which the Registrar gives only the most cursory consideration of the issue of a requestor's adoption and use and no consideration of the use by third parties. Secondly, that evidence also highlights just how devoid of real evidence of adoption and use the Registrar's decision is - an issue as to jurisdiction of the Registrar. Thirdly, the evidence puts the Respondent's actual adoption and use in issue.
[27]
In my view, that evidence addresses the issues upon which new evidence may be admitted under both the
Ontario Association of Architects
decision and the
FileNET Corp.
decision.
[28]
Leave to file such evidence should have been obtained. However, the parties proceeded without reservation to deal with the affidavit evidence of the Respondent. This is an appropriate case where leave to adduce this evidence should be granted.
[29]
The Registrar's anomalous procedures regarding official marks invites the very type of issues dealt with here. In regard to "public authority", it is the Registrar's practice to inquire into that matter and to require some evidence. As to "adoption and use", the Registrar makes no inquiry and relies solely on an unsworn statement of counsel that the mark has been adopted and used. The legislation does not create a reason for such differential treatment nor a justification for such differentiation.
[30]
If the "public authority" issue deserves some inquiry, similarly so does "adoption and use". The potential effect on third parties of the Registrar's decision to publish certainly justifies some better level of diligence.
D.
Adverse Inference
[31]
The Respondent's witness stated in his affidavit that the COC employees and consultants used the marks verbally in correspondence, e-mails and memoranda. In addition, the witness stated that the marks were used on promotional items such as pens and flashlight gifts. An invoice for the pens and flashlights was attached to the affidavit indicating an order date of August 31, 2004.
[32]
In cross-examination the Respondent's witness indicated that the marks were used internally starting in January 2004 by COC personnel for strategic and business planning discussions.
[33]
On the instructions of counsel, the witness refused (a) to produce any other invoices for other promotional items; (b) to produce any correspondence, e-mails or memoranda evidencing use of the marks; (c) to indicate what the wares or services were on which the marks were used or to which they were associated; and (d) the number of promotional items actually used outside COC.
[34]
These were relevant questions. As Sharlow, J.A., held  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Corp.
, where an applicant for judicial review adduces evidence that the official marks were not adopted or used, the other party has the burden of proving that the official mark was adopted and used by the date of the public notice.
[35]
The timing of the order for the pens/flashlights is sufficient to highlight the importance of the questions. The order was placed two days before the request for publication was made to the Registrar. The Applicant suggests that based on the notations on the invoice, the items were received around November 5, 2004, a few days after the publication of the notice, which is the date by which the marks had to be adopted and used.
[36]
The Applicant asks this Court to draw a negative inference from the Respondent's refusal to answer questions which are so germane to the issue of "adoption and use".
[37]
In my view, this case is similar to that of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), where the issue was the adoption and use of an official mark after publication. The Court recognized that it was far easier for a respondent to bring forward evidence of use than for an applicant to prove that a respondent had not used or adopted the mark. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the Court held that "a negative inference could be drawn from the respondent's failure to provide details pertaining to the adoption and use".
[38]
The negative inference is that if the Respondent had produced the information, it would have shown that the Respondent had not adopted and used the marks by the publication date.
[39]
If it were necessary to draw a negative inference, I would. However, this issue can also be resolved in terms of the burden of proof referred to by Sharlow, J.A.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Corp.
The absence of any evidence of adoption and use, save for the unsupported assertion of the witness, adversely affects the Respondent's ability to meet that burden.
E.
Adoption and Use
[40]
The issue of "adoption and use" by the Respondent can be approached from two perspectives. The first is whether there was evidence before the Registrar upon which it could conclude that the Respondent had adopted and used the marks. The second is, given the evidence now available, could or should one reach the same conclusion.
[41]
As to this "evidence" before the Registrar, it consisted solely of a statement of the Respondent's counsel:
"This mark has been adopted and used as an official mark by the Canadian Olympic Committee for wares and services in Canada."
[42]
This is in sharp contrast to the consideration of whether the COC is a "public authority". There, the Registrar received hundreds of pages of material to establish this criterion. The Registrar entered into an inquiry of the facts and engaged the Respondent in a dialogue to justify the contention that it was a public authority.
[43]
As indicated earlier, if a requestor for an official mark is required to establish that it is a "public authority", it must also establish its "adoption and use". The Registrar is not simply a rubber stamp in the process of securing an official mark by way of adoption and use.
[44]
Not only was there insufficient evidence before the Registrar upon which to conclude that COC had adopted and used the mark, the Registrar had four trademark applications from the Applicant using the words "See You In …", two of which were identical to the official marks sought - "SEE YOU IN BEIJING" and "SEE YOU IN TORINO".
[45]
At the very least, this should have led the Registrar on a chain of inquiry on this issue. Therefore, the Registrar's decision to publish notice was neither correct nor reasonable.
[46]
As to the evidence which subsequently was available through this judicial review, the Applicant says that it does not establish adoption and use. The Respondent counters that its use of the pen and flashlight kits as well as the unsubstantiated internal use in correspondence, e-mails and memoranda is sufficient to establish adoption and use.
[47]
The
Act
does not define "adoption" or "use" in regards to official marks under s. 9. There is a definition in respect of trademarks as follows:
"3. A trademark is deemed to have been adopted by a person when that person or his predecessor in title commenced to use it in Canada or to make it known in Canada or, if that person or his predecessor had not previously so used it or made it known, when that person or his predecessor filed an application for its registration in Canada.
"4(1) A trademark is deemed to be used in association with wares if, at the time of the transfer of the property in or possession of the wares, in the normal course of trade, it is marked on the wares themselves or on the packages in which they are distributed or it is in any other manner so associated with the wares that notice of the association is then given to the person to whom the property or possession is transferred.
"(2) A trademark is deemed to be used in association with services if it is used or displayed in the performance or advertising of those services.
"(3) A trademark that is marked in Canada on wares or on the packages in which they are contained is, when the wares are exported from Canada, deemed to be used in Canada in association with those wares."
"3. Une marque de commerce est réputée avoir été adoptée par une personne, lorsque cette personne ou son prédécesseur en titre a commencé à l'employer au Canada ou à l'y faire connaître, ou, si la personne ou le prédécesseur en question ne l'avait pas antérieurement ainsi employée ou fait connaître, lorsque l'un d'eux a produit une demande d'enregistrement de cette marque au Canada.
"4(1) Une marque de commerce est réputée employée en liaison avec des marchandises si, lors du transfert de la propriété ou de la possession de ces marchandises, dans la pratique normale du commerce, elle est apposée sur les marchandises mêmes ou sur les colis dans lesquels ces marchandises sont distribuées, ou si elle est, de toute autre manière, liée aux marchandises à tel point qu'avis de liaison est alors donné à la personne à qui la propriété ou possession est transférée.
"(2) Une marque de commerce est réputée employée en liaison avec des services si elle est employée ou montrée dans l'exécution ou l'annonce de ces services.
"(3) Une marque de commerce mise au Canada sur des marchandises ou sur les colis qui les contiennent est réputée, quand ces marchandises sont exportées du Canada, être employée dans ce pays en liaison avec ces marchandises."
[48]
While an official mark is not used for commercial purpose or in the course of trade, ss. 3 and 4 assist in the interpretation of those words. A common feature of both "use" and "adoption" is that there is an element of public display, of which there was none established in this case.
[49]
If internal discussion, memoranda, etc. which preceded a request for publication constituted adoption and use, the phrase would be meaningless because, in that instance, no request could be sent in without the mark being deemed to be previously adopted and used; the very act of requesting or the internal correspondence on whether to request publication would, theoretically, constitute "adoption and use".
[50]
In the present case the Respondent refused to even establish internal use except for the pen and flashlight ordered for which there was no evidence of use.
[51]
Therefore, the Registrar erred in concluding that there was adoption and use and further such a conclusion was unreasonable.
F.
Public Authority
[52]
In respect of the issue of whether the COC is a public authority, the Registrar conducted a substantial inquiry. The inquiry as to its status goes back to at least November 2002 (but not in respect of these official marks). There is also substantial case law which has recognized COC's status: ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 59 (F.C.A.)).
[53]
The Registrar inquired into whether COC was beneficial to the public and whether there was sufficient degree of control by the government to reinforce the public character of the entity.
[54]
In the course of making a determination as to "public authority", the Registrar engaged in a balancing of factors, some favourable to COC, some not so. It is the very type of activity, when done properly, for which the Registrar is entitled to deference.
[55]
The Applicant has argued that, even if there was adoption and use, it was not done by a "public authority" because COC is a licensee of the IOC and therefore the use is by or for the benefit of the licensor; that IOC cannot be a "public authority" because it is not a Canadian public authority; that COC is not sufficiently controlled by government or otherwise operated for the public benefit. However, the overriding issue is the reasonableness of the Registrar's conclusion that the COC is a public authority.
[56]
There are features of the COC-IOC relationship which are in the nature of a licensor-licensee relationship, most particularly the IOC's ownership of all property rights to the Olympic Games, the requirement imposed on COC to obtain the benefit of protection of those property rights for the IOC, and the requirement that the COC use those rights as instructed by IOC (see Rule 7 of the Olympic
Charter
and By-law to Rule 7-14). However, there are features which are not consistent with a licensor-licensee relationship. Rule 7 specifically reserves to IOC the right to license all or part of those rights -
no such license was granted
, indicating an absence of intent to grant the COC a license either expressly or by implication.
[57]
While the precise categorization of the right to adopt or use (if it had occurred) is difficult to determine, any adoption and use would have been authorized, if authorization were necessary. The relationship is somewhat like trustee/beneficiary, with IOC as the beneficiary. It is sufficient to conclude that there would have been no illegal use by COC such as to vitiate the legal effect of the use/adoption. The more fundamental question remains whether COC is a public authority.
[58]
If the adoption and use was in reality or in law that of IOC, then COC could not obtain a notice. Quite apart from this is the issue of whether a non-Canadian entity can be a public authority. There are conflicting decisions in this  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 267 (T.D.), decided before the Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 284 F.T.R. 221 (F.C.)).
[59]
The Federal Court of Appeal in
Ontario Association of Architects
, at paragraph 50-51, has set out a two fold test for determining whether the relevant organization is a "public authority":
• there must be a significant degree of public control; and
• the organization must exist for the public benefit.
[60]
The test of public control was not an "absolute control" test, it required a finding of "sufficiently significant degree of government control". The test does not specify whether such control be direct or indirect.
[61]
In reaching its conclusion, the Registrar examined such key documents as the Program of the COC, the Contribution Agreement, the MOU specifying areas of cooperation, the Multiparty Agreement and the Covenants of Canada, British Columbia, City of Vancouver and Whistler. The financial result, quite apart from areas of input from government, is that 30% of the funding for the Olympic Games comes from government. Obviously, absent government, the Games would not be viable.
[62]
The Registrar was also aware of past decisions of this Court and the Federal Court of Appeal in respect of other circumstances but where the COC's activities and the level of government involvement have not significantly changed. In those decisions, the Courts confirmed not only the public benefit but the "significant degree of control".
[63]
The fact that the government funding goes to the Organizing Committee rather than the COC does not alter the issue of control. Control is both a legal and factual matter exercisable both directly and indirectly. Given the covenants, the cooperation, the funding and the overall involvement of government, the element of control exists at the COC level even if it is exercised more directly in other related organizations. More importantly, it was not unreasonable for the Registrar to reach its conclusion that there was a sufficiently significant degree of control.
[64]
I can find no basis for concluding that the COC does not exist for the public benefit even if it were arguable that certain of its actions were not beneficial to the public; such as attempting to take away the Applicant's trademark rights. The COC as an organization must be considered more globally and certainly no private benefit (as opposed to public benefit) has been identified as governing the COC.
[65]
The Applicant cannot succeed on this aspect of its judicial review.
IV.
CONCLUSION
[66]
For the reasons given in respect of the finding of "adoption and use", this judicial review is granted and the Registrar's decision to publish is quashed; the public notice is of no force and effect. The Applicant shall have its costs at the usual level on a party and party basis.
JUDGMENT
[67]
IT IS ORDERED THAT
this application for judicial review is granted and the Registrar's decision to publish is quashed; the public notice is of no force and effect. The Applicant shall have its costs at the usual level on a party and party basis.
Application allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/clh
APPENDIX
Trade-marks Act
, R.S. 1985, c. T-13
9(1) No person shall adopt in connection with a business, as a trademark or otherwise, any mark consisting of, or so nearly resembling as to be likely to be mistaken for,
(a) the Royal Arms, Crest or Standard;
(b) the arms or crest of any member of the Royal Family;
(c) the standard, arms or crest of His Excellency the Governor General;
(d) any word or symbol likely to lead to the belief that the wares or services in association with which it is used have received, or are produced, sold or performed under, royal, vice-regal or governmental patronage, approval or authority;
(e) the arms, crest or flag adopted and used at any time by Canada or by any province or municipal corporation in Canada in respect of which the Registrar has, at the request of the Government of Canada or of the province or municipal corporation concerned, given public notice of its adoption and use;
(f) the emblem of the Red Cross on a white ground, formed by reversing the federal colours of Switzerland and retained by the Geneva Convention for the Protection of War Victims of 1949 as the emblem and distinctive sign of the Medical Service of armed forces and used by the Canadian Red Cross Society, or the expression "Red Cross" or "Geneva Cross";
(g) the emblem of the Red Crescent on a white ground adopted for the same purpose as specified in paragraph (f) by a number of Moslem countries;
(h) the equivalent sign of the Red Lion and Sun used by Iran for the same purpose as specified in paragraph (f);
(h.1) the international distinctive sign of civil defence (equilateral blue triangle on an orange ground) referred to in Article 66, paragraph 4 of Schedule V to the Geneva Conventions Act;
(i) any territorial or civic flag or any national, territorial or civic arms, crest or emblem, of a country of the Union, if the flag, arms, crest or emblem is on a list communicated under article 6ter of the Convention or pursuant to the obligations under the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights set out in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement stemming from that article, and the Registrar gives public notice of the communication;
(i.1) any official sign or hallmark indicating control or warranty adopted by a country of the Union, if the sign or hallmark is on a list communicated under article 6ter of the Convention or pursuant to the obligations under the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights set out in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement stemming from that article, and the Registrar gives public notice of the communication;
(i.2) any national flag of a country of the Union;
(i.3) any armorial bearing, flag or other emblem, or any abbreviation of the name, of an international intergovernmental organization, if the armorial bearing, flag, emblem or abbreviation is on a list communicated under article 6ter of the Convention or pursuant to the obligations under the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights set out in Annex 1C to the WTO Agreement stemming from that article, and the Registrar gives public notice of the communication;
(j) any scandalous, obscene or immoral word or device;
(k) any matter that may falsely suggest a connection with any living individual;
(l) the portrait or signature of any individual who is living or has died within the preceding thirty years;
(m) the words "United Nations" or the official seal or emblem of the United Nations;
(n) any badge, crest, emblem or mark
(i) adopted or used by any of Her Majesty's Forces as defined in the National Defence Act,
(ii) of any university, or
(iii) adopted and used by any public authority, in Canada as an official mark for wares or services,
in respect of which the Registrar has, at the request of Her Majesty or of the university or public authority, as the case may be, given public notice of its adoption and use;
(n.1) any armorial bearings granted, recorded or approved for use by a recipient pursuant to the prerogative powers of Her Majesty as exercised by the Governor General in respect of the granting of armorial bearings, if the Registrar has, at the request of the Governor General, given public notice of the grant, recording or approval; or
(o) the name "Royal Canadian Mounted Police" or "R.C.M.P." or any other combination of letters relating to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, or any pictorial representation of a uniformed member thereof.
(2) Nothing in this section prevents the adoption, use or registration as a trademark or otherwise, in connection with a business, of any mark
(a) described in subsection (1) with the consent of Her Majesty or such other person, society, authority or organization as may be considered to have been intended to be protected by this section; or
(b) consisting of, or so nearly resembling as to be likely to be mistaken for
(i) an official sign or hallmark mentioned in paragraph (1)(i.1), except in respect of wares that are the same or similar to the wares in respect of which the official sign or hallmark has been adopted, or
(ii) an armorial bearing, flag, emblem or abbreviation mentioned in paragraph (1)(i.3), unless the use of the mark is likely to mislead the public as to a connection between the user and the organization.
9(1) Nul ne peut adopter à l'égard d'une entreprise, comme marque de commerce ou autrement, une marque composée de ce qui suit, ou dont la ressemblance est telle qu'on pourrait vraisemblablement la confondre avec ce qui suit:
a) les armoiries, l'écusson ou le drapeau de Sa Majesté;
b) les armoiries ou l'écusson d'un membre de la famille royale;
c) le drapeau, les armoiries ou l'écusson de Son Excellence le gouverneur général;
d) un mot ou symbole susceptible de porter à croire que les marchandises ou services en liaison avec lesquels il est employé ont reçu l'approbation royale, vice-royale ou gouvernementale, ou sont produits, vendus ou exécutés sous le patronage ou sur l'autorité royale, vice-royale ou gouvernementale;
e) les armoiries, l'écusson ou le drapeau adoptés et employés à toute époque par le Canada ou par une province ou municipalité au Canada, à l'égard desquels le registraire, sur la demande du gouvernement du Canada ou de la province ou municipalité intéressée, a notifié au public leur adoption et leur emploi;
f) l'emblème de la Croix-Rouge sur fond blanc, formé en transposant les couleurs fédérales de la Suisse et retenu par la Convention de Genève pour la protection des victimes de guerre de 1949 comme emblème et signe distinctif du service médical des forces armées, et utilisé par la Société de la Croix-Rouge Canadienne, ou l'expression " Croix-Rouge" ou " Croix de Genève";
g) l'emblème du Croissant rouge sur fond blanc adopté aux mêmes fins que celles mentionnées à l'alinéa f) par un certain nombre de pays musulmans;
h) le signe équivalent des Lion et Soleil rouges employés par l'Iran aux mêmes fins que celles mentionnées à l'alinéa f);
h.1) le signe distinctif international de la protection civile - triangle équilatéral bleu sur fond orange - visé au paragraphe 4 de l'article 66 de l'annexe V de la Loi sur les conventions de Genève;
i) les drapeaux territoriaux ou civiques ou les armoiries, écussons ou emblèmes nationaux, territoriaux ou civiques, d'un pays de l'Union, qui figurent sur une liste communiquée conformément à l'article 6ter de la Convention ou en vertu des obligations prévues à l'Accord sur les aspects des droits de propriété intellectuelle qui touchent au commerce figurant à l'annexe 1C de l'Accord sur l'OMC et découlant de cet article, pourvu que la communication ait fait l'objet d'un avis public du registraire;
i.1) tout signe ou poinçon officiel de contrôle et garantie qui a été adopté par un pays de l'Union, qui figure sur une liste communiquée conformément à l'article 6ter de la Convention ou en vertu des obligations prévues à l'Accord sur les aspects des droits de propriété intellectuelle qui touchent au commerce figurant à l'annexe 1C de l'Accord sur l'OMC et découlant de cet article, pourvu que la communication ait fait l'objet d'un avis public du registraire;
i.2) tout drapeau national d'un pays de l'Union;
i.3) les armoiries, les drapeaux ou autres emblèmes d'une organisation intergouvernementale internationale ainsi que son sigle, qui figurent sur une liste communiquée conformément à l'article 6ter de la Convention ou en vertu des obligations prévues à l'Accord sur les aspects des droits de propriété intellectuelle qui touchent au commerce figurant à l'annexe 1C de l'Accord sur l'OMC et découlant de cet article, pourvu que la communication ait fait l'objet d'un avis public du registraire;
j) une devise ou un mot scandaleux, obscène ou immoral;
k) toute matière qui peut faussement suggérer un rapport avec un particulier vivant;
l) le portrait ou la signature d'un particulier vivant ou qui est décédé dans les trente années précédentes;
m) les mots " Nations Unies", ou le sceau ou l'emblème officiel des Nations Unies;
n) tout insigne, écusson, marque ou emblème:
(i) adopté ou employé par l'une des forces de Sa Majesté telles que les définit la Loi sur la défense nationale,
(ii) d'une université,
(iii) adopté et employé par une autorité publique au Canada comme marque officielle pour des marchandises ou services,
à l'égard duquel le registraire, sur la demande de Sa Majesté ou de l'université ou autorité publique, selon le cas, a donné un avis public d'adoption et emploi;
n.1) les armoiries octroyées, enregistrées ou agréées pour l'emploi par un récipiendaire au titre des pouvoirs de prérogative de Sa Majesté exercés par le gouverneur général relativement à celles-ci, à la condition que le registraire ait, à la demande du gouverneur général, donné un avis public en ce sens;
o) le nom "Gendarmerie royale du Canada" ou "G.R.C.", ou toute autre combinaison de lettres se rattachant à la Gendarmerie royale du Canada, ou toute représentation illustrée d'un membre de ce corps en uniforme.
(2) Le présent article n'a pas pour effet d'empêcher l'adoption, l'emploi ou l'enregistrement, comme marque de commerce ou autrement, quant à une entreprise, d'une marque:
a) visée au paragraphe (1), à la condition qu'ait été obtenu, selon le cas, le consentement de Sa Majesté ou de telle autre personne, société, autorité ou organisation que le présent article est censé avoir voulu protéger;
b) composée de ce qui suit, ou dont la ressemblance est telle qu'on pourrait vraisemblablement la confondre avec ce qui suit:
(i) tout signe ou poinçon visé à l'alinéa (1)i.1), sauf à l'égard de marchandises identiques ou de marchandises semblables à celles à l'égard desquelles ce signe ou poinçon a été adopté,
(ii) les armoiries, drapeaux, emblèmes et sigles visés à l'alinéa (1)i.3), sauf si l'emploi de la marque est susceptible d'induire en erreur le public quant au lien qu'il y aurait entre l'utilisateur de la marque et l'organisation visée à cet alinéa.
[End of document]