[1]
Rouleau, J.
: These are my reasons for the order and comments from the Bench made by me on May 10, 1988 in the above styled action. The defendant, Canadian Union of Postal Workers, assisted by the defendant, Union Communications, appeared before me to argue that the statement of claim should be struck in its entirety pursuant to rule 419(a) of the Federal Court Rules as disclosing no reasonable cause of action within the jurisdiction of this court.
[2]
The defendants alleged that the complaint of the plaintiffs as outlined in the statement of claim sounded in tort, and that without a specific assignment of jurisdiction to this court in either the Federal Court Act, or any other federal enactment, the plaintiffs' claims could not be entertained by this court. The plaintiffs strongly resisted the motion, arguing principally that the relief that they sought was founded in two federal statutes and that this court had jurisdiction to issue an injunction to restrain a continuing breach of these statutes. The plaintiff's counsel indicated that the claim for damages in the statement of claim was merely ancillary to the main claim for an injunction.
[3]
As I stated in court, I am of the opinion that the defendants are correct, and the statement of claim has been struck pursuant to my order of May 10, 1988. As counsel appearing before me spent considerable time and effort in preparing and arguing their clients' cases, I indicated that I would deliver written reasons to explain how I arrived at my conclusion.
[4]
In order to fully appreciate the positions of the parties it is necessary to briefly review the statement of claim, and the facts of this case. I am of course mindful that for the purposes of this motion, all the facts in the statement of claim shall be taken to be true as pleaded.
[5]
The plaintiffs in this action are Canada Post Corporation, a Crown Corporation established under the Canada Post Corporation Act, S.C. 1980-81, c. 54, and four nonunionized employees of Canada Post Corporation ("Canada Post").
[6]
The defendants are two trade unions representing some of Canada Post's employees, namely the Canadian Union of Postal Workers (CUPW) and the Letter Carriers Union of Canada (LCUC); the Canadian Labour Congress (CLC), an organization of trade unions with which CUPW and LCUC are affiliated, and Mediacom and Union Communications, the agents of CUPW and LCUC for the trade unions certified as bargaining agents in respect of different bargaining units of Canada Post employees under s. 136 of the Canada Labour Code.
[7]
The plaintiffs allege that some 21,000 Canada Post employees are represented by unions other than CUPW or LCUC for collective bargaining purposes, and 3,500 of this number, like the individual plaintiffs, are not represented by any union at all.
[8]
In April 1988, advertisements started to appear in newspapers, on billboards and radio across the country which appeared to criticise the state of the mail service under the Mulroney Government, and in some cases expressed a lack of confidence in the leadership of the Prime Minister. The advertisements for the most part contained statements such as "Canada Post, it can deliver", "A message from the people who move your mail. Your Canada Post Employees" or in the French version, "Je veux un gouvernement auquel je puisse faire confiance. Brian Mulroney? Non, jamais!, Un message des gens qui s'occupent de votre courrier: Les employés syndiqués de postes Canada". It was admitted that these advertisements originated with CUPW, LCUC and CLC and not with the plaintiff, Canada Post.
[9]
The plaintiffs allege that these advertisements are false and misleading in that they do not represent the sentiments of either the plaintiffs or all the employees of Canada Post. At best, they allege, the advertisements only represent the views of some of the leaders of the defendant Unions. The plaintiffs allege that the individual employees of Canada Post have not given any mandate, express or implied to the defendant Unions to represent them in the political sphere, especially the 21,000 employees who are not even members of these Unions.
[10]
To appreciate the consequences in law which the plaintiffs allege flow from these facts, it is necessary to reproduce in full paragraphs 18 to 30 of the statement of claim:
"18. As appears from the Act, the use of the words 'Canada Post' is restricted to Canada Post Corporation and it is an offence to place the words 'Canada Post' on anything without the written consent of the Corporation;
"19. Canada Post has never consented to the use of its name on any of the advertisements referred to;
"20. The defendants Mediacom and Union Communications have participated in the mischief outlined above in allowing messages to be publicized that they knew or should have known were factually untrue and are at best propaganda, and, more particularly, in allowing advertisements to be seen and heard which purportedly represent the political views of the plaintiff Canada Post and/or the employees of Canada Post rather than the political views of the defendants C.U.P.W., L.C.U.C. or the C.L.C.;
"21. Under the Canada Labour Code all employees in the bargaining units represented by the defendants C.U.P.W. and L.C.U.C. are obliged to be represented by those organizations for collective bargaining purposes, whether they wish it or not, and are thus deprived of the right to bargain individually. However, they are deprived of none of their individual political rights, nor can these be usurped by the defendants C.U.P.W., L.C.U.C. or C.L.C.;
"22. The defendants C.U.P.W. and L.C.U.C. purport, in the purely political advertising referred to in paragraphs 6 to 15 hereof, to represent the political views of all the employees of the plaintiff Canada Post not merely those whom they represent for purposes of collective bargaining;
"23. The defendants C.U.P.W. and L.C.U.C. have abrogated the fundamental freedom of expression and freedom of conscience of the individual employees of the plaintiff Canada Post in purporting to speak politically in their names, a right that the defendants do not and cannot constitutionally have without a specific individual mandate to that effect from each individual employee whom they purport to represent politically;
"24. The texts used in the advertising campaign are likely to mislead, have misled and will mislead members of the public into believing that the said texts represent the views of the plaintiff Canada Post and/or of the plaintiff Canada Post's employees;
"25. It is submitted that the plaintiff Canada Post has suffered, is suffering and will continue to suffer damage to its reputation from an imputation of a course of conduct on the part of its employees which is incompatible with their duties as employees of a Crown Corporation;
"26. The misrepresentation in the advertisement that the message comes from the plaintiff Canada Post and/or the employees of Canada Post causes serious and irreparable prejudice to the Corporation and is fundamentally detrimental to the Corporation and is fundamentally detrimental to the Corporation's role of providing postal service to all Canadians, and its own freedom of speech. The defendants are not entitled to use the names of Canada Post Corporation or of Canada Post Corporation employees to embarrass the Corporation both politically and in the public eye;
"27. It is submitted that in view of the facts set out in paragraphs 1 to 20 hereof, the action of the defendants C.U.P.W. and L.C.U.C. constitutes an abuse of the right conferred upon them by the Canada Labour Code and the Act to represent certain employees of the plaintiff Canada Post for collective bargaining purposes;
"28. It is further submitted that the plaintiffs suffer prejudice in that the advertisements misrepresent the political position of the employees of the plaintiff Canada Post;
"29. The defendants C.U.P.W. and L.C.U.C. in the newspaper, billboard and radio advertisements are representing that the employees on whose behalf these defendants are purporting to act are in breach of the fundamental duty of loyalty called for by their employment and are engaged in a course of conduct incompatible with their duties as employees of a Crown Corporation;
"30. It is further submitted that no effective remedy exists other than by way of injunction for the wrongs suffered and being suffered and damages incurred and being incurred by the plaintiffs as set out in paragraphs 20 to 28 hereof;"
[11]
At first blush, from the manner in which this pleading is drafted, one could conclude that the remedy sought by the plaintiffs was in respect of something akin to defamation with an appropriate relief in damages. The plaintiffs naturally enough vehemently denied this proposition and chose to characterize their action very differently.
[12]
In fact, the corporate plaintiff alleges that the relief sought is based on their right to the exclusive use of the name "Canada Post" accorded to the Corporation under the Canada Post Act; as well as the abuses committed by the defendant Unions of their rights and obligations under the Canada Labour Code. On behalf of the individual plaintiffs it is alleged that they are harmed by the actions of the defendant Unions acting in breach of the Canada Labour Code, and more seriously that the fundamental freedoms of these individuals under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms have been abrogated.
[13]
In sum, it must be determined whether the matters alleged by the plaintiffs fall under the Canada Labour Code, the Canada Post Corporation Act and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, or under tort law. The latter action, presumably being something akin to defamation, could only be brought in the courts of the provinces, something which counsel for the plaintiffs did not seriously contest.
[14]
A solution must be found by a characterization of the causes of action asserted by the plaintiffs and an analysis of them in the light of the jurisprudence relating to the jurisdiction of this court.
[15]
I would like to say, at the outset, that the problem of the jurisdiction of the Federal Court is not principally a constitutional law problem requiring a determination of competing provincial and federal interests for its resolution. Regardless of one's personal vision of the possible role of a Federal Court as providing a cross-Canada forum, it must be remembered that this court, as currently constituted, is a statutory one, and the conditions under which a matter falls within its jurisdiction must be strictly construed within the terms of its founding statute, and any other enactment in which jurisdiction is assigned to it.
[16]
Once this threshold requirement is met, a closer examination of the cause of action before the court may reveal that the federal government, in legislating with respect to the particular subject matter at hand, has acted beyond its constitutional mandate pursuant to the separation of powers in the Constitution Act, 1982. This is, however, a different question, and not one which arises from the case before me.
[17]
It must also be emphasized that the jurisdiction of the Federal Court is not as broad as the sphere of legislative competence of the Federal government. Failure to distinguish between the two can lead to an assumption of jurisdiction by this court, where no jurisdiction exists.
[18]
The major source of this court's jurisdiction is of course the Federal Court Act. As the Court of Appeal noted in its recent decision, The College of Physicians and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[19]
The stringent requirements to be met are reflected in the Varnam case (supra) the court held that the jurisdiction of the Federal Court cannot be extended based on the convenience of the parties. The court stated at page 9 of the decision:
"I indicated earlier that it was with regret that I had concluded that Marshall was wrongly decided. That regret does not flow from any desire to expand this court's jurisdiction. Rather it has its source in a concern for the unenviable situation of the litigant who may, in some circumstances, find himself obliged to sue in two courts. That concern was well expressed by Reed, J., in Marshall. It was most eloquently stated by Collier, J., in Pacific Western Airlines, supra, where he described the situation as 'lamentable'. For my part however, while sharing those views, I can only echo the words of the Chief Justice in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
'... the convenience or advantage, if any, to be obtained is not a reason for extending the jurisdiction of the court beyond its statutory limits. (at page 513)'"
[20]
Furthermore, the court held that the fact that matters otherwise outside the court's jurisdiction may be causally intertwined with issues properly before the Federal Court, does not warrant an extension of jurisdiction. Under the same reasoning, it has also been held that in the case of multiple parties and multiple causes of action it is essential that each party and cause of action be independently within the jurisdiction of the court ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[21]
The most recent Supreme Court of Canada decision on the question of the Federal Court's jurisdiction is that of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Mr. Justice McIntyre held at page 766 of the judgment that a matter is properly brought before the Federal Court where the following three conditions are met:
"1. There must be a statutory grant of jurisdiction by the federal Parliament.
"2. There must be an existing body of federal law which is essential to the disposition of the case and which nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction.
"3. The law on which the case based must be a 'law of Canada' as the phrase is used in s. 101 of the Constitution Act, 1864."
[22]
I intend to deal with each of the three ITO requirements in turn, and in so doing, review the authorities on which the parties relied in support of their clients' respective positions.
1. There must be a statutory grant of jurisdiction by the Federal Parliament
[23]
This requirement is satisfied if there is jurisdiction given to the Federal Court either in the Federal Court Act, or in some other federal enactment.
[24]
The sections of the Federal Court Act on which the plaintiffs relied in their factum were ss. 17 and 23, although in oral argument, counsel for the plaintiff conceded that only s. 23 could give this court jurisdiction. There is no question that s. 17(1) to (3) are of no assistance as they speak only to instances where relief is sought against the Crown.
[25]
Section 17(4) reads:
"17(4) The Trial Division has concurrent original jurisdiction
(a) in proceedings of a civil nature in which the Crown or the Attorney General of Canada claims relief; and
(b) in proceedings in which relief is sought against any person for anything done or omitted to be done in the performance of his duties as an officer or servant of the Crown."
[26]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Federal Court of Appeal held that s. 17 of the Federal Court Act only refers to actions against the Crown eo nomine and that the section did not include an action by or against a Crown agency such as the Canadian Saltfish Corporation. None of the defendants are Crown officers or servants, and in my view, s. 17 does not therefore give jurisdiction to this court.
[27]
Section 23 reads:
"23. The Trial Division has concurrent original jurisdiction as well as between subject and subject as otherwise, in all cases in which a claim for relief is made or a remedy is sought under an Act of the Parliament of Canada or otherwise in relation to any matter coming within any following class of subjects, namely bill of exchange and promissory notes where the Crown is a party to the proceedings, aeronautics, and works and undertakings connecting a province with any other province or extending beyond the limits of a province, except to the extent that jurisdiction has been specially assigned."
[28]
The import of s. 23 was explored in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), where the court allowed the bringing of an action with respect to the loss of some goods carried by the defendant, only because the rights and obligations of the parties under the contract of carriage fell to be determined under the Carriage by Air Act a statutory re-enactment of the Hague Rules. Mr. Justice Pratte stated at page 577 of his judgment:
"Under that section [23], two conditions must be met in order for a claim to be within the jurisdiction of the court:
(1) the claim must be made 'under an Act of the Parliament of Canada or otherwise' and
(2) it must relate to a matter coming within any of the classes of subjects specified in the latter part of the section."
[29]
Therefore, the cause of action on which the plaintiffs are relying must come under one of the enumerated heads, i.e. the remedy must relate to a matter coming within "works and undertakings connecting a province with any other province or extending beyond the limits of a province". Can the mere fact that a complaint is made against a union representing some workers on a federal undertaking be considered sufficient to give jurisdiction to the Federal Court? I do not think it can, unless the remedy claimed by the plaintiffs is contemplated in a federal statute such as the Canada Post Corporation Act or the Canada Labour Code, the two federal enactments upon which the plaintiffs rely.
[30]
My preliminary review of the Canada Post Corporation Act and the Canada Labour Code do not reveal an express grant of jurisdiction. In fact, s. 22(5) of the former statute specifically provides that the Corporation may sue or be sued in the court that has jurisdiction over the subject matter of the suit. The section reads:
"22(5) Actions, suits or other legal proceedings in respect of any right or obligation acquired or incurred by the Corporation on behalf of Her Majesty, whether in its name or in the name of Her Majesty, may be brought by or taken by or against the Corporation in any court that would have jurisdiction if the Corporation were not an agent of Her Majesty."
[31]
As to the Canada Labour Code, jurisdiction is specifically assigned to the Canada Labour Relations Board in respect of a number of matters addressed in the Code. Even if the matter relates to one of the areas that is listed in s. 23, jurisdiction is lost if it is specifically assigned to another Tribunal.
[32]
The plaintiffs cannot hence claim an express statutory assignment of jurisdiction to the Federal Court unless it is clear that the plaintiffs' cause of action comes under either of these statutes or is part of the federal common law dealing with a work or undertaking described in s. 23.
2. There must be an existing body of federal law which is essential to the disposition of the case and which nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction
[33]
Even where there is a general assignment of jurisdiction to the Federal Court which might encompass the relief sought by the plaintiffs, the second requirement of the ITO test must still be satisfied. There must be a specific federal enactment expressly dealing with the subject in issue, and federal competence without legislative action is not sufficient, e.g.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . As Chief Justice Laskin stated at page 1057 S.C.R. of the Quebec North Shore case:
"Section 23 must be assessed initially under the terms of s. 101 of the British North America Act because it is that provision which alone authorizes the Parliament of Canada to establish courts of original and appellate jurisdiction in addition to authorizing the establishment of this court. Section 101 reads as follows:
'101. The Parliament of Canada may, notwithstanding anything in this Act, from Time to Time, provide for the Constitution, Maintenance, and organization of a General Court of Appeal for Canada, and for the Establishment of any additional Courts for the better Administration of the Laws of Canada.'
"The relevant words, for the purposes of the present case, are 'administration of the laws of Canada'. When s. 23 of the Federal Court Act speaks of a claim for relief or a remedy 'under an Act of the Parliament of Canada or otherwise', it cannot be given a construction that would take it beyond the scope of the expression 'administration of the laws of Canada' in s. 101."
Chief Justice Laskin continued at page 1065 of the decision:
"It is also well to note that s. 101 does not speak of the establishment of courts in respect of matters within federal legislative competence but of courts 'for the better administration of the laws of Canada'. The word 'administration' is as telling as the plural words 'laws', and they carry, in my opinion, the requirement that there be applicable and existing federal law, whether under statute or regulation or common law, as in the case of the Crown, upon which the jurisdiction of the Federal Court can be exercised. Section 23 requires that the claim for relief be sought under such law."
[34]
In my view, most of the jurisprudence cited by both counsel illustrates the principles laid out in the Quebec North Shore case at work, and serves to introduce important modifications which do not however, constitute an extension of the jurisdiction of this court. I understand for example that the case need not solely concern a federal statute, e.g.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the common law principle of subrogation was employed in a case where a contract governed by the Carriage by Air Act was under dispute. However, the rights and obligations of the parties must be founded on federal law, and owe their existence to the legislative enactment under consideration, e.g.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a duo of cases in which actions on a debt under the Prairie Grain Advance Payment Act and the Canada Student Loans Act were found to be within the jurisdiction of the Federal Court.
[35]
Once an examination of the question is undertaken of whether or not the action before the court is one which relates to a better administration of the laws of Canada, in my view, the issue becomes very clear. I therefore must review the claims of the plaintiffs in the light of this consideration.
[36]
Where do the rights and obligations of the parties arise in this case? The plaintiffs argue that as the defendant unions are certified as bargaining agents under the Canada Labour Code, all their rights and obligations fall to be determined under the statute and that this vests the court with jurisdiction over every activity in which the unions engage. I do not think that this is an accurate reflection of the situation of the defendant unions, because in my view, the jurisdiction of the court must arise out of the provisions of the Canada Labour Code itself, and not through the legal character of the unions.
[37]
The Code has a clearly defined area of application. If any problems arise out of the collective agreement between the corporate plaintiff and the unions, then I have no doubt that they fall to be determined under the Canada Labour Code. The Code has in itself a complete scheme for dealing with such a dispute, and the matter must be determined by the Canada Labour Relations Board. If either the union, the union members or the employer feels that any party has breached any of the prohibitions laid out in ss. 184 or 185 of the Code, the remedy is to lay a complaint with the Board. If the obligations fall outside the Code and yet are still a problem of labour relations, the Supreme Court of Canada has indicated that the parties must rely on the common law to determine their respective rights and obligations (Retail, Wholesale and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 174; [1987] 1 W.W.R. 577).
[38]
As an important aside, I note that in the Dolphin Delivery case, the appellant unions were also federally certified bargaining agents under the Canada Labour Code, and the matter came to the Supreme Court of Canada from the British Columbia Court of Appeal. Contrary to the argument made by the plaintiffs, the union thus certified suffered no disability in appearing before the provincial courts.
[39]
The plaintiffs have attempted to characterize the defendant unions' actions as a breach of the unions' obligations under the Canada Labour Code, and hence a matter within the sphere of federal labour relations. Despite the recitation of the Code, the plaintiffs were not able to point to any specific section in the Code, or any single authority that would suggest that the matter before me was a question of labour relations in the Post Office. There is no doubt that as between a union and its members all manner of enforceable obligations arise, however none of the plaintiffs were members of the defendant unions. I cannot, however accept that in these circumstances that the Corporation can come into this court purporting to speak for the membership of CUPW and LCUC, and claim that there is a labour relations matter to be adjudicated.
[40]
The Canada Labour Code does not provide any civil cause of action in the manner in which this action is framed. The question is not whether the defendant unions have improperly attempted to represent the individual plaintiffs in labour relations but rather that the defendants have falsely attributed untrue statements to the plaintiffs and have thereby caused them harm; these allegations clearly sound in tort, terms such as mischief appear in the statement of claim and these are not matters which fall to be determined under any federal statute, or are nourished thereby. The mere recitation of a federal statute does not meet the second requirement of ITO.
[41]
The plaintiffs have also alleged a civil cause of action based on a provision of the Canada Post Corporation Act which reads as follows:
"Use of postal marks
"52(2) Every person commits an offence who, without the written consent of the Corporation, places on any thing any word or mark suggesting that the thing:
a) has been duly authorized or approved by the Corporation;
b) is used in the business of the Corporation; or
c) is of a kind similar or identical to any thing used in the business of the Corporation."
Section 54 of the Act states:
"Punishment
"54. Every person who contravenes any provision of this Act or regulation or commits an offence under any of sections 42 to 53
(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for five years; or
(b) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction."
Section 55 further refers to evidence which may be called in any prosecution based on s. 58.
[42]
In my view, these sections describe a quasi-criminal offence which exists solely to prevent persons from holding themselves out as agents of Canada Post by using the name "Canada Post" or "Post Office". I cannot accept the assertion of the plaintiffs that these sections of a purely punitive nature are a sound basis for the court to extend its jurisdiction and hear the plaintiffs' civil suit with no clear grant of jurisdiction.
[43]
Is it open to me to presume that these sections enacted by Parliament contemplated both criminal prosecution and civil proceedings with respect to the activity prohibited in the sections of the Act cited above? Furthermore, can I find that a civil suit can be sustained under these sections and intertwine the reach of such activity and find within it a broader meaning than can be found in the express provisions of the Act? I suggest that the plaintiff is asking me to adopt an interpretation that the wording of the Act does not bear. As I see it, these sections are included in the Act for the purpose of prohibiting third parties from deceiving the public into thinking that mail delivery has been entrusted to entities other than Canada Post. How can I be persuaded to extend even further the meaning of these sections, not only to create a civil action, but to interpret them to include the prohibition of political propaganda? I do not believe that I can. The only relief contemplated by Parliament in the enactment of this provision is the laying of informations, and prosecution in the Provincial Courts.
[44]
Counsel for the defendants directed my attention to the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 9 Sask.R. 199 (Sask. Q.B.). Mr. Justice Noble made it clear that in his view, where the Broadcasting Act provided for the criminal offence, of broadcasting without a license, no civil cause of action was thereby created in favour of anyone injured by the breach.
[45]
I would also like to add that in my opinion, the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , clearly illustrates that there is no nominate tort based on the breach of a statutory provision alone, but rather that a cause of action must exist separate and apart under the law of tort. Without some indication in the Canada Labour Code or the Canada Post Corporation Act that such an action was contemplated in the statute, the breach of any provision of the Acts cannot be presumed to lead to a civil cause of action for the plaintiffs. Furthermore, in my view, the only underlying tort which could possibly exist in this case is that of defamation, or something comparable in the Quebec Civil Code which cannot be viewed by this court as necessary to the better administration of the Canada Post Corporation Act.
[46]
Counsel for the plaintiffs further argues that s. 13 of the Canada Post Corporation Act which allows Canada Post to engage employees for the purpose of carrying out the Corporation's business, brings this matter under federal court jurisdiction. None of the defendants are in fact employees of Canada Post, and I fail to see how this section avails the plaintiffs. This argument was part of Counsel's overall submission that as the corporate plaintiff is charged with the operation of the Post Office under a federal enactment, that anything that it does falls under the ambit of this statute and into the jurisdiction of the Federal Court. This may be true to some extent, but where the matter in issue is based on the publication of statements that the plaintiffs feel are false or misleading and harmful to their reputation and are being wrongfully attributed to them due to the prohibited use of the name "Canada Post", the matter is far removed from the question of the orderly movement of mail, which is the Corporation's major responsibility.
[47]
Finally, the plaintiffs allege that the defendant unions have abrogated the freedoms of association and expression enjoyed by the plaintiffs under ss. 2(b) and 2(d) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. I can find no fault with the plaintiffs' submission that these freedoms include the right not to associate, or to remain silent on any particular issue. I do not, however, agree with his conception of the application of the Charter to his case.
[48]
In an argument which I can only characterize as extraordinary, counsel for the plaintiffs alleged that the reason why the individual plaintiffs enjoy the protection of the Charter is that they are employed by a Crown Corporation. In my view, this argument is absolutely not tenable. The Charter protections exist to provide a safeguard for the rights of the individual against abrogation by the state and its emanations. The Charter obligations arise based on the character of the party in breach of these obligations, and not on the character of the victim.
[49]
In order to show that the Charter applies, the plaintiffs must first illustrate that the unions are in fact bodies who could owe a duty to the plaintiffs under the Charter. No facts have been pleaded which would allow me to conclude that this is a situation as occurred in the case of Lavigne and Ontario Public Service Employees' Union (1986), 55 O.R.(2d) 449 (H.C.J.), where such a duty was found. Absent any lien between the state and the victim such as Lavigne (where a government emanation had approbated a "mandatory check-off" clause in a collective agreement which governed the terms of employment of Mr. Lavigne), the Charter has no application in what must be viewed as a dispute between private parties. (See also Re Ontario English Catholic Teachers Association et al. and Essex County Roman Catholic School Board (1987), 18 O.A.C. 271; 58 O.R. (2d) 545 (Ont. Div. Ct.).
[50]
The mere fact that the defendant unions are certified under the Canada Labour Code in respect of bargaining units
other than the one to which the individual plaintiffs belong
, does not make this a Charter issue.
[51]
Even if the plaintiffs were able to meet this threshold test, it has been held that the Charter is not "existing and applicable Federal law", as it is not an enactment of the federal government ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Therefore, a bare declaration of invalidity of a federal statute, when not allied to another cause of action cannot be issued by the Federal Court. After the comments made by counsel for the plaintiffs during argument with respect to the application of the Charter, I feel that it is necessary to add, if any doubt exists, that the Federal Court will not hesitate to give full force and effect to the Charter rights of litigants when it has the jurisdiction to do so.
[52]
Counsel for the plaintiffs' also appeared to feel that my analysis of this matter indicated a doubt as to the power of the Federal Court to issue an injunction. Its power to do so is beyond question, but only where the court is seized with the adjudication of a matter within its jurisdiction. Section 3 of the Federal Court Act clearly does not countenance the issuance of an injunction in vacuo; injunctive relief is an adjunct to the power of the court to dispose of a matter within its jurisdiction ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[53]
In summary, this matter does not fall to be determined under either the Canada Post Corporation Act or the Canada Labour Code, the latter statutes do not govern the relationship between the parties with respect to the claims alleged. The plaintiffs are not attempting to enforce the provisions of any federal enactment, they are attempting to mount a civil action in a court which does not have jurisdiction to hear the matter.
[54]
For these reasons, I therefore find that the statement of claim does not disclose any cause of action that is within the jurisdiction of this court, on behalf of either the corporate plaintiff Canada Post Corporation or the individual plaintiffs. The statement of claim must therefore be struck in its entirety pursuant to rule 419(1)(a) of the Federal Court Rules.
[55]
The defendants CUPW and Union Communications are entitled to their costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]