[1]
Denault, J.
: This is an action for in­fringement of claims 1 to 6 of Canadian patent No. 1,150,616, titled "Sectional fold­ing closure", for a folding closure made in sections. The defendants denied infringing the patent and filed a counterclaim alleging that claims 1 to 6 of this patent are void and should be declared invalid on the grounds, inter alia, of lack of novelty, anticipation of the invention described and claimed therein, of obviousness of the invention and of the fact that the patent claims are wider than the invention described, contrary to s. 34 of the
Patent Act
(R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4, hereinafter "the
Act
").
[2]
The plaintiff Martinray Industries Ltd. owns patent 1,150,616, and Dynamic Closures Ltd. manufactures and distributes the folding doors made from this patent under the name "Dynamic". The defendants manufacture and sell a product known as "Dagendor". For these purposes, the plain­tiffs will collectively be referred to as "Dynamic", and the defendants will be designated "Dagendor", the names by which the parties market their respective products. I will refer to patent 1,150,616 by speaking of it interchangeably as "the patent" or "patent '616". Without admitting that the system described in the patent is an inven­tion, the defendants admitted that if the Court came to the conclusion that the cre­ation of this system was an invention, it was brought into being on November 13, 1978. The claim for a patent in Canada was filed on November 7, 1979, and the defendants, though they denied the validity of the patent, admitted that it was issued on July 26, 1983, and that it was held by the plaintiff Mar­tinray Industries Ltd.
[3]
The parties' place in the relatively limited world of folding door manufacturers must be examined. The chief protagonists, the presi­dents of their respective companies and expert witnesses for each one, known each other well. On the one hand, Robert Labelle (Patent 1,150,616 refers to him as Henri M.R. Labelle) the plaintiff's key person, has been in the business since at least 1968 when he was one of the founders of a com­pany that will be mentioned below, Dyna­flair Corporation, another manufacturer of folding doors. He eventually left this busi­ness and formed his own company, Dynamic, run by him. He holds U.S. patent 3,654,982 for a protective grill, a product he invented when he was working for Dyna­flair. He is also responsible for the patent which is the sub­ject of the instant proceed­ings, patent '616, known at Dynamic as the "quick-connect".
[4]
On the other hand, Robert Dagenais, the founder of Dagendor, has also been active in the manufacture and sale of suspended folding doors and grills, a field he has worked in since 1971 when he was working for Dynaflair and reporting to Robert Labelle. When the latter left the business in 1972, Robert Dagenais became its general manager and in addition to running the business looked after product development, manufacture of folding closures and sales. Inter alia, he designed a burglar-proof fold­ing door, patented by Dynaflair (U.S. patent No. 3,901,302). He left his position as presi­dent of Dynaflair in September 1978 and became exclusive distributor for two periods of two years each, separated by a period of a few months during which he distributed Dynamic folding closures made by the business then being started by Robert Labelle. Robert Dagenais set up his own business, Dagendor, in 1984 and, using his experience, designed a new suspended fold­ing closure, the Dagendor, described in his U.S. patent No. 4,660,613 issued on April 28, 1987. To this brief review of the facts I would add that one the defendants' principal witnesses, Denis Taillefer, was hired in 1972 by his cousin Robert Labelle, who was then employed by Dynaflair, and worked closely with Robert Dagenais in that business.
Patent 1,150,616
[5]
It appears from the description of the prior art contained in the patent that the folding door installers found serious pro­lems installing these folding doors because of their weight and size. Several men and the necessary equipment were required to instal these prefabricated doors. Part of the prob­lem was solved by breaking up the folding closures into sections which were first sus­pended on a tack and then joined together by the appropriate means on ad­jacent sides.
[6]
In order to clarify what follows, it is worth reproducing the text of the summary of the invention as it appears on page 2 of patent '616:
"
Summary Of The Invention
"It is the purpose of the present invention to provide an improved folding closure assembly which minimizes the above disadvantages. In accordance with the present invention there is provided a fold­ing closure assembly having a folding closure unit made in sections. The folding closure sections can be individually installed on the track when installing the closure. The sections are much easier to handle than an entire closure unit. Once installed, on the track, the sections are joined together to form a full, closure unit. Installation is fast and simple. Another advantage in making the closure unit from sections easily installed and joined together is that if the closure unit is damaged, only the damaged section need be replaced thus reducing repair and maintenance costs.
"In accordance with the present invention there is, provided a folding closure assem­bly having a folding closure unit made from a plurality of folding closure sections. Means are provided on the sides of the sections for use in quickly and easily joining the sections together after they have been individually installed in order to form a single closure unit.
"The invention is particularly directed toward a folding closure assembly for closing an opening. The folding closure assembly has a folding closure unit com­prising a plurality of closure sections, each closure section comprising a plurality of panels pivotably [
sic
] joined together. Means are provided on each section for use in suspending each section in the opening. Means are also provided for joining the sections together at their ad­jacent side edges when suspended in the opening.
"The folding closure assembly includes track means adapted to be mounted at the top of the opening. The sections are movably suspended from the track means by their suspending means. The track means includes a removable section for use in individually mounting the sections on the track means.
"The means for joining the sections together comprises a first member at one side edge of each section, and a second member at the other side edge of each section, the first member on one section joining with the second member on an adjacent section.
"The joining means also includes fastening means for: fastening the joined sets of first and second joining members together on the interior side of the closure."
[7]
In short, according to this summary patent '616 describes and claims an invention for solving the problem of installing folding doors. The patent applies to folding closures made of narrow panels pivoted on each other like an accordion and suspended from a track. To handle the problems of folding closures that were too heavy, this patent proposes a sectional folding closure installed individually on the track and eventually connected together to form a single folding closure. The patent also describes a connec­tion for joining the various sections together once they have been thus installed on the track. This connection (Figure 2 of the patent, illustrates the connecting strip (Exhibit D-59)) consists, first, of a connect­ing strip fixed on one side of each section, having a hook-shaped, curved longitudinal projection, and second, a post with a T-shaped slot opening towards the connecting strip, into which the curved projection of the connecting strip is fitted. Some form of attachment, such as a screw, holds the con­necting strip in position against the post.
"Claim 1: A folding closure assembly for closing an opening having: a plurality of closure sections; each closure section comprising a plurality of panels pivotably [
sic
] joined together; means on each clo­sure section for use in suspending it in the opening; and means joining the closure sections together at their adjacent side edges.
"Claim 2: A folding closure assembly as claimed in Claim 1 wherein the means joining the closure sections together includes a first joining member on one side edge of each section and a second joining member on the other side edge of each section firstjoining the member on one section joining with the second joining member on an adjacent section.
"Claim 3: A folding closure assembly as claimed in Claim 2 wherein the first join­ing member comprises a connecting strip with means on one side, near one edge, joining it to the side edge of a closure section; a flange projecting from the other side of the strip opposite the joining means, the outer end of the flange bent toward the one edge; the second joining member comprising a post; means on one side wall of the post for use in connecting it to the side edge of a closure section, and a cen­trally located T-slot in the other side wall of the post for receiving the flange when the strip is abutted against the side wall.
"Claim 4: A folding closure assembly as claimed in Claim 2 or 3 including fasten­ing means for fastening the joined sets of first and second joining members together on the interior side of the folding closure.
"Claim 5: A folding closure assembly as claimed in Claims 1, 2 or 3 including track means adapted to be mounted along the top of the opening, the suspending means on each closure section cooperating with the track means to movably suspend the closure sections from the track means, the track means including a removable section for use in mounting the sections on the track means to be movably suspended therefrom.
"Claim 6: A folding closure assembly as claimed in Claim 1 wherein each panel has a narrow, elongated shape, the length of each panel being generally equal to the height of the closure; hinge means on each side edge of each panel, the hinge means on adjacent panels cooperating to pivotably [
sic
] join the panels together; and a hanger member projecting up from the centre of the top end of each panel to form part of the suspending means."
[8]
In law, any action by a third party which constitutes interference with the rights con­ferred on a patentee by s. 44 of the
Act
is an infringement if it is done without the consent of the patentee, who may then claim dam­ages resulting from that infringement. It is trite law that infringement of the rights associated with patents is a mixed question of fact and law. It is for the Court to inter­pret first the claims of the patent - a ques­tion of law - and then decide whether the product manu­factured, sold and distributed by the defen­dant infringes that patent - a question of fact.
[9]
I will examine below the scope of each of the claims in relation to the product manufactured by the defendants, both as to infringement and the validity of each claim. It should forthwith be noted, however, that by the inventor's own admission the essential part of the invention described and claimed in patent '616 is the means by which the sections are joined together (see drawing in para. [7]), in an assembly (folding closure assembly) to make these sections a complete and homogeneous unit. Moreover, it is quite apparent both from considering the prior art and from the testimony of the two expert witnesses heard in the case at bar, and from another witness, André Cantara, a specialist in installing folding doors, that all the com­ponents of patent '616 were already known on the date of the invention, except for the connecting strip, more precisely described in claim 3 of the patent, by which the sections are joined together. Accordingly, I consider that the alleged problems which patent '616 is supposed to remedy, regarding the han­dling and installation of folding doors which have been completely assembled in the factory and sent to the place of installation in one piece, or which are assembled on the spot into one piece before being installed on the track, must be disregarded. People in the industry know how to instal very large doors in sections. The invention which is the subject of patent '616 therefore did not consist, as Robert Labelle admitted, in breaking up folding closures into smaller sections than in the past, but in a new method of joining together folding closure sections. The following passage from the examination on discovery indicates this (examination on discovery, February 4, 1988, pp. 109-110 - D-70):
"Q:	Alright [
sic
]. Well then, what it the problem that you solved by this par­ticular invention?
A:	You don't - but you may understand. I'll repeat. Every door closres [sic] are manufactured in sections not exceeding usually ten feet (10'). So, even if we use a by-part to have a sixty foot (60') opening at thirty foot (30') length, we still made the sec­tions in ten foot (10') lengths.
So, even is [sic] you used a by-part, the validity of a 'Quick-connect' is very important because each of those sections in-between the by part [sic] are installed in a vertical upright posi­tion on the track.
Q:
In other words, what you are saying to me, I suppose, is that your inven­tion really was in splitting folding closures in even smaller sections than before
?
A:
No. My invention was in connecting smaller sections in a different way than had been done before
." (my emphasis)
The author of this invention, Robert Labelle, also admitted at trial that claim 3 of the patent regarding the connecting strip by which the sections are joined together was in fact the only new component and the heart of the invention. This is indicated in the following passages from the evidence (cross-examination of Robert Labelle, June 3, 1991, p. 47):
"Q:	Each and every element shown here was known at the date of your in­vention, which is November 1978 except for element 241,
*
which is the connecting strip? (*The connecting strip identified as No. 241 in figure 8 is very similar to that having No. 85 in figure 2. The only difference between the two connecting strips, 241 and 85, is the following: con­necting strip 241 has a
T-slot
into which the T formation of the ad­jacent hinge slides, while connecting strip 85 has a
T formation
which slides into the T-slot of the adjacent hinge. The difference between these two connecting strips (241 and 85) thus depends simply on the type of hinge on which the connecting strip is installed. Apart from that, the two connecting strips are identical in all respects.)
A:	That is correct."
(pp. 48-49):
"Q:	If we now refer to figure 2 ... you will agree with me that again all of the elements shown in that figure were known at the date of the inven­tion, which is November 1978, except for this quick-connect here referred to in the patent as being element 85? (See * above and para. [7] for the illustration of this com­ponent 85.)
A:	That is correct."
And then at pp. 87-88:
"Q:	And what do you call the heart of the invention - the way these two pieces here are connecting, or the way these are connecting?
A:	It is the ability to be able to connect that section 85, the small centre piece that you had, to the post.
. . . . .
Q:	This is what you call 'the heart of the invention'?
A:	That is correct, that is what it is all about, yes."
It is also worth noting that at the time this action was brought in 1987, the plaintiffs had not alleged any infringement of claim 3 of patent '616, and it was not until April 1990 that they amended their statement of claim to add this claim to those which they alleged had been infringed. In short, whereas at the outset Dynamic did not think that the Dagendor product contravened claim 3 of its patent, it now considers there has been an infringement.
(A) Principal Application: Infringement
Of Patent
[10]
Before turning to consider the infringe­ment alleged by the plaintiffs, it is worth pointing out that the latter have the burden of establishing that the defendants' product which it is alleged infringed the patent contains all the components of each of the allegedly infringed claims.
[11]
I will therefore analyse each of the claims to see whether there is, first, a literal or textual infringement of each one, and if not, whether there is a substantive infringe­ment.
Claim 1
[12]
There are several parts to this claim, describing the invention briefly, that is, a folding closure having a plurality of sections, each one having several panels pivotally joined together; each section contains a means to suspend it in the opening and appropriate means on the adjacent side edges of two sections to join them together.
[13]
There is no doubt that the doors manu­factured by the defendant each contain the components of this claim. Though counsel for the defendant denied the infringement in his written pleadings, he did not renew this argument in court, simply challenging the limiting interpretation given by the plaintiffs to the word "section". The defendant would prefer to give it a broad interpretation so as to include under this heading the technique known as "bi-parts", which will be dis­cussed below in examining the counterclaim, thus making it part of the argument against the plaintiffs. The Court does not accept this broad interpretation suggested by the defen­dant for the word "section". The witness Dagenais admitted that, in this industry, a section had a different meaning from a part. Whereas a section is a part of a door with a series of panels linked together, terminating in a post on one side and on the other another member to join this section to its neighbour, an assembly in which there is an intermediary member between two "bi-parts" cannot be described as a section, but is a part.
[14]
The defendant also objected to the interpretation given by the plaintiffs to the words "joining means" as opposed to "fas­tening means" found in claim 4, arguing that the very definition of the verb "to join", far from ruling out the idea of the simple sup­porting of two surfaces on each other, sug­gests instead that this expression covers several ideas, including those of supporting, attaching, placing in contact, assembling, bringing together and so on. We will return to this point below.
[15]
Subject to further examination of claim 1 which I will undertake in the analysis of the counterclaim, I consider that this claim in patent '616 can be read on any folding closure consisting of at least two sections, each formed of panels pivoted on each other, and the sections equipped with means so they can be suspended from the track and other means so they may be joined to each other on their adjacent side edges. In this connection, I consider that the defendants' Dagendor closures infringe the components of this claim.
Claim 2
[16]
Let us now see whether Dagendor infringed claim 2 of patent '616. This claim provides for a means of joining the sections together, consisting of a first joining member located on the side of each section and a second joining member located
on the other side
of
each
section; the first joining mem­ber of a section is then attached to the sec­ond joining member of the adjacent section. On reading claim 2, it can be seen that the first joining member is always found on the same side of the section, as the second joining member is always to be found on the other side of the section.
[17]
In order to establish that the defendants infringed claim 2 of their patent, the plain­tiffs referred first to a "quick connect" instruction sheet for the defendant's product (P-7), then to the testimony of Robert Dagenais (examination of defendant on February 5, 1988, pp. 114-118, P-14), who they said admitted that there was "a means on each of these sections to join the section to its neighbour". This evidence does not suffice to persuade the Court that all the components of claim 2 were so brought together as to constitute an infringement of the claim. The physical exhibit, D-3, to which counsel for the plaintiffs also referred consisted of several components used by the defendants; these components are not mounted and do not establish an infringe­ment of claim 2.
[18]
The only physical evidence provided by the plaintiffs at trial to establish an infringe­ment by the defendant of its [sic] claim 2 consisted of two small-scale models (Exhibits D-51A and D-51B) of the Dagen­dor doors. It appears that the Dagendor folding doors are not made up of sections the first and second joining members of which repeat from one section to the other in the same order. In the door numbered D-51A, the two successive sections are in the following configuration: the first joining member in the first section consists of a post and the second joining member in that sec­tion consists of the Dagendor strap hinge, while for the second section the first joining member consists of a post just like the second joining member, and not the Dagen­dor hinge. Accordingly, it is apparent that the second joining member of the first section of Exhibit D-51A does not corre­spond to the second joining member of the adjacent section. Folding closure D-51B does not contain the same second joining member on
each
section, unlike the clear provision in claim 2 of the patent. The Dagendor post has on one side an opening into which the Dag­endor hinge is inserted (after individual installation of the sections on the track) and on the other side another type of opening into which the Dagendor hinge can only be inserted at the plant. While the first section ends in a hinge, the second ends in a post.
[19]
As there is no evidence showing that the defendants manufactured folding closures having the configuration which is the subject of claim 2 of the patent, if follows that that claim was not infringed.
[20]
As claim 2 was included by reference in any other claim of the patent which relates directly or indirectly to it, there was no infringement of claims 3, 4 and 5 to the extent that they depend on claim 2.
[21]
Despite the conclusions I have just come to, I must look briefly at claims 4, 5 and 6, though I will look more closely at the claim which, in the opinion of the experts, is the really new aspect of this invention, claim 3.
Claim 4
[22]
Claim 4 provides principally for the existence of a means for fastening together the first joining member and the second joining member, which are then joined sets, this means being located on the interior side of the folding closure.
[23]
There is no doubt that the Dagendor folding closures contain such means for fastening sections together. However, to the extent that claim 2 of the patent in suit was not infringed by the defendants, claim 4 obviously cannot be infringed since it depends on that claim, and in the same way on claim 3, as we will see below.
Claim 5
[24]
Claim 5, which also refers to claims 1, 2 and 3, provides for a track with a movable part, so each of the sections can be sus­pended in the opening. To the extent that claim 2 was not infringed, claim 5 where it depends on claim 2 cannot be infringed by the Dagendor folding closures. Insofar as claim 5 relates to claim 1, it is infringed by any folding closure, including the Dagendor folding closure, involving the use of a track and means for suspending sections on the track a part of which is movable: these components have been known for a long time, as indicated by patent '616 itself, and as will be shown below.
Claim 6
[25]
Claim 6 refers to claim 1 and proceeds to describe panels with a narrow, elongated shape and, on each side, a hinge allowing them to pivot against the adjacent panels. The final component of claim 6 is the requirement of a hanger member projecting up from the centre of the top end of
each
panel to suspend them in the opening. There is no doubt that apart from the final compo­nent, namely the existence of a member above each of the panels, claim 6 can be read in the folding closures which existed before the date of the invention that is the subject of patent '616 and in the Dagendor doors. The latter instead have, as a means of suspending the panels on the track, rollers on every second panel. Indeed, it was admitted by the plaintiffs that the generally applicable technique in the industry was to place rollers on every second panel, as they do them­selves with their Dynamic doors.
[26]
In view of the use of such clear and precise language requiring the presence of rollers on each panel ("a hanger member projecting up from the centre of the top of
each
panel"), I find it hard to believe that this is not an essential component of this claim. Accordingly, I strongly doubt that an expert reading claim 6 of the patent would understand that the fact of placing the hang­er member on every second panel rather than on each of them would have no effect on how the invention operates. I therefore consider that the plaintiffs have not pre­sented evidence that the defendants infringed claim 6 of the patent.
Claim 3
[27]
Let us now turn to claim 3 of the pat­ent. Insofar as this claim includes claim 2, which we have decided was not infringed, claim 3 cannot therefore have been infringed. Nevertheless, it is worth looking at this claim if only to see whether, apart from the reference to claim 2, the Dagendor product contains all the components of claim 3.
[28]
Claim 3 describes the connecting strip identified in the specification of the patent as part 85 of figure 2 (see para. [7]) or 241 of figure 8 illustrated in the patent.
[see printed version]
[29]
According to the admission of its in­ventor Robert Labelle himself, this claim describes the heart of the invention and is the only component that was not known on the date of the invention. I would further note that when the plaintiffs brought the proceedings at bar, they were not alleging that the defendants had infringed claim 3, and it was only by a subsequent amendment of the statement of claim that they made this allegation. In the notes and authorities which counsel for the plaintiffs submitted to the Court at the close of the hearing, they did not argue that the Dagendor connecting strip was a literal infringement of claim 3 of the patent. That would in any case have been a risky argument, as the two expert witnesses were agreed as to how the various compo­nents of claim 3 should be read, and they agreed that the expressions "side", "edge", "connecting strip", "strip", "flange", "joining means", "means on one side near the edge" and "T-slot" should be identified in accor­dance with the definitions. In short, the definitions of these terms found in claim 3, and which were agreed on by the experts, are not "read" in the Dagendor product. Instead the plaintiffs argued that they have proven that Dagendor infringed the substance of claim 3 and they submitted that the essence of the invention is in closing each of the sections by a tongue designed to be inserted in a slot in the post terminating an adjacent section, so as to join the sections; the purpose of the Dagendor system is the same and they argue that it is thus equiva­lent to the system described and claimed in claim 3 of patent '616. In their submission, equivalency can be defined as something performing a function, or attaining substan­tially the same ends, in substantially the same way as the thing which is claimed to be its equivalent: there must be identity of function and substantial identity of the way in which that function is performed.
[30]
Before seeking whether the Dagendor hinge is an equivalent of the connecting strip which is the subject of claim 3 of the patent, it is important to look at the development of this hinge, which as we will see is the result of a number of operations. The evidence disclosed that in 1984 Robert Dagenais created a hinge used to join the adjacent
panels
of the same section together. This invention is the subject of U.S. patent No. 4,660,613, issued on April 28, 1987. This hinge is made as follows (D-30A):
[see printed version]
Subsequently, Robert Dagenais found a means of fastening this hinge to a post so as to hook each section permanently to a post. He removed part of the original hinge, illus­trated above, and obtained the following hinge (item 30 of the Dagenais report and physical exhibit D-52):
[see printed version]
The inventor then built a post one side of which had an opening with a T projection, so that the hinge could be slid into the post as demonstrated in the following drawing, an operation which is done at the plant:
[see printed version]
Additionally, so as to create a "detachable connection" between the post and the adja­cent section, the other side of the post was modified, thus facilitating insertion of the hinge at the end of the adjacent section. The following illustration shows a post having on its right side a hinge inserted in the plant, while the left side shows the hinge that could easily be inserted at the post when the folding closure was installed:
[see printed version]
[31]
In strictly functional terms, the Dagen­dor hinge does not correspond to the con­necting strip described in claim 3 of patent '616; instead, it combines in a single mech­anism three components of the Dynamic system, namely a connecting strip and two demi-hinges, as illustrated by the following drawings:
[see printed version]
[32]
As the literal infringement of claim 3 has not been established, the question now is whether the plaintiffs have shown an in­fringement of the substance of claim 3 of the patent. In this regard, it should be noted that Robert Labelle admitted that he did not invent the connection of sections, but invented a
new way
of connecting them (see the passage from the examination on dis­covery reproduced in para. [9]).
[33]
The invention which is the subject of patent claim 3 in suit thus involves a new method of using a known principle, and it accordingly cannot be given an unduly wide interpretation. The plaintiffs' monopoly does not extend to all the methods by which two adjacent sections of a folding closure are connected, but to the method specifically claimed in the patent in suit, namely the use of the connecting strip known as a "quick connect" corresponding to component 85 on figure 2, or 241 on figure 8, of the patent in suit.
[34]
Before analysing whether there was an infringement of the substance of claim 3 of the patent, certain rules of interpretation must be noted.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the House of Lords proposed a functional approach to the interpretation of patents, the purpose of which would be to give claims a realistic as against a strict and narrow inter­pretation. Lord Diplock proposed a test in this connection, by which the question is whether the wording of the patent would lead an expert to conclude that a particular expression or word appearing in the claim at issue should, in the eyes of the patentee, be an
essential component
in the sense that even an insignificant variation would fall outside the monopoly claimed. To answer this question, the lack of concordance between the wording of the claim and the defendant's product could be disre­garded only in cases where it is quite clear to any person skilled in the field of the invention that the inventor could not have intended to limit his monopoly and exclude from it minor variations which he knew would be unimportant in the operation of the inven­tion.
[35]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1, the Federal Court of Appeal relying on <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, denied the patentee a liberal interpretation of the wording of the claims and dismissed the plaintiff's action. In that case the Court rejected the argument of infringement in substance and preferred to confine itself to the wording of the claims, all components of which are in principle essential. The Federal Court of Appeal there noted that unless the contrary is indicated every component of a claim is essential, and before concluding that a component is not essential, the court must be shown from the wording of the patent that the inventor was well aware that the proposed change would not in any way affect the operation of the invention. Speaking for the Court, Pratte, J.A., said the following (at p. 7, C.P.R.):
"A court must interpret the claims; it cannot redraft them. When an inventor has clearly stated in the claims that he con­sidered a requirement as essential to his invention, a court cannot decide otherwise for the sole reason that he was mistaken. I also wish to add that, as the court, in interpreting the claims, is merely trying to find out what was the invention of the inventor, it cannot conclude that strict compliance with a word or phrase used in a claim is not an essential requirement of the invention unless it be obvious that the inventor knew that a failure to comply with that requirement would have no material effect upon the way the invention worked."
Allowing the appeal, the court dismissed the action. This decision reaffirmed the essential part played by claims in questions of patent infringement, and emphasized the fact that the patentee himself chooses the wording of his claims and so in principle intends to confine himself to them. In particular, it noted that each of the components of a claim is presumed to be essential unless the con­trary is clearly indicated in the patent. In short, each component of a claim will be regarded as essential unless it is clear to one skilled in the art that the inventor knew that the failure to comply with this specific component would have no effect on the way the invention worked.
[36]
In the case at bar I consider that one skilled in the art, on reading claim 3 of patent '616, would conclude that the inventor intended that each of the components described therein should be necessary to operation of the invention. There is nothing to suggest, on reading this claim, that any of its components is not essential. On the con­trary, the purpose of this claim is clearly an accurate description of the first and second joining members which are first mentioned in very broad terms in claim 2 of the patent.
[37]
It is not the court's function to rewrite claim 3: it must simply interpret the latter by asking what one skilled in part would think the inventor regarded as being essential to this claim. Where there is no evidence from which it could be inferred that one skilled in the art would understand, on reading claim 3 of the patent, that the inventor did not regard one of its components as essential, the Court must conclude that they are all essential. The argument that the Dagendor system should be regarded as equivalent to the system described and claimed in claim 3 of patent '616 because of the fact that it performs the same function in the same way as the plaintiffs' connecting strip the Court cannot accept. The equivalency rule as a means of establishing infringement applies only with respect to the components of a claim regarded as not essential to it. (
Hughes & Woodly on Patents
, Butter­worths, p. 413:
"In considering infringement by the taking of the substance of an invention, one is considered to have infringed even if his act does not in every respect fall within the express terms of the claim defining the invention; it does not mater whether he omits a feature that is not essential or substitutes an equivalent for it;
however the patentee can resort to a doctrine of equivalency only in respect of a feature of an invention not essential to it
.")
The plaintiffs' argument based on the equiv­alency doctrine is accordingly dismissed inasmuch as all the components of claim 3 of the patent are essential.
Conclusion
[38]
In short, subject to analysis of claims 1 to 6 in connection with the counterclaim, the Court considers that the plaintiffs have proven an infringement of claims 1 and 5 when they depend on 1 of patent '616, but have failed to prove an infringement of claims 2, 3, 4, 5 when it depends on 2 and 6 or that patent.
(B) Counterclaim: Invalidity Of Patent
[39]
Mention must be made of certain rules regarding claims that a patent is invalid. Once issued a patent is "prima facie valid" under s. 47 of the
Patent Act
(R.S.C. 1970, c. P-4. I refer to the wording of the section as it stood when the patent was issued on 26/7/83. In the 1985 revision of the statutes this section, which became s. 45, was amended as follows: "shall thereafter, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, be valid ...", without in so doing altering the substance (cf. s. 6(e) and (f) of the
Statute Revision Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-20). It is now s. 43, since the 1987 amendment, c. 41, assented to on 19/11/87 and in effect on 1/10/89 (cf. R.S.C. 1985, 3rd Supp., c. 33)). This section has given rise to a number of cases in which the courts have imposed on those challenging the validity of a patent a very heavy burden which it has been noted is not always easy to discharge. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 420, at p. 456  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (at p. 44);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (at p. 77)). This approach has been the subject of criticism suggesting that the effect of this presumption was overestimated. In a recent judgment (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), the Federal Court of Appeal adopted the description of this presumption given by Pratte, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  section 'deals only with the incidence of proof, not with the standard of proof. It shows
on whom
the burden lies to satisfy the court, and not the degree of proof he must attain':
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  patent has intro­duced evidence, the Court, in considering this evidence and in determining whether it establishes the invalidity of the patent, must not take the presumption into account. It cannot be said that the pre­sumption created by s. 47 is, as a rule, either easy or difficult to overcome; in some cases, the circumstances may be such that the presumption will be easily rebutted, while in other cases the same result may be very difficult or even im­possible to obtain."
[40]
Like Décary, J.A., in
Tye-Sil
, supra, I consider that in keeping with the tests appli­cable to the grounds of invalidity raised by the counterclaimants (lack of novelty, antici­pation, obviousness), which are not easy to meet, the burden on them is of establishing "on the usual standard of balance of prob­abilities that the patent was invalid ...".
[41]
There is no doubt that the claims and specification of a patent are addressed to persons who are versed in the particular fields to which each patent applies, namely persons skilled in the art, and they must be looked at with this in mind.
Lack of Novelty
[42]
In support of its counterclaim Dagendor argued, first, that claim 1 of the patent is invalid in that it describes nothing new in comparison with the prior art (s. 2 of the
Patent Act
). To support its arguments it referred in particular to the "bi-part" tech­nique, generally known to persons skilled in the art and used in the field of folding clo­sures before November 13, 1978. This tech­nique is allegedly based on Robert Labell's U.S. patent No. 3,654,982 for a folding grill with an opening on the side. Sometimes provision may be made for an opening in the middle or several openings to increase the number of places of access, or to facilitate the operation of the folding closure. When the opening is located other than at one end of the folding closure, use is made at each opening of two joining members or posts, known as "bi-parts", one on each side of the opening, and a lock or bar of some kind to keep the two posts together when the folding closure is in a closed position. As many bi-parts as desired can be installed, and a clo­sure covering a 100 foot length would thus ordinarily contain three bi-parts 25 feet apart, dividing the folding closure into four parts of 25 feet each. This technique facili­tated installation on the track. It had been regular­ly used by Dynaflair since 1971 and was already well-known in Canada on the inven­tion date of patent '616.
[43]
The advantage for the defendants in referring to this bi-part technique lies in the fact that it has been on the market for some time. They argued that all components of claim 1 are contained in it and that this claim was accordingly not novel. Their entire argument turned on the broad and liberal interpretation they gave to the word "section" in claim 1. They maintained that a folding closure with at least one bi-part includes at least two sections, each of which consists of several panels pivotally joined together. These sections are joined together with their adjacent side edges by means of a bar or lock of some kind ("means joining the closure sections together at their adjacent side edges"). Each section also includes "rollers" supporting the folding closure in the opening ("means for use in suspending the section in the opening").
[44]
The entire argument turns on Robert Labelle's admission that the word "section" in its broad sense covers the door portions of a folding closure equipped with a bi-part. As I indicated earlier (at para. [13]), I do not think that the word "section" in claim 1 should be given such a board meaning. While it is true that in the broad sense of the word, as Robert Labelle admitted in response to a question by the Court, the two parts of a bi-part may be sections, in the language of the trade and those skilled in the art the word does not have the same meaning. The expert witness for the defendants, Robert Dagenais, himself admitted in cross-exam­ination that the separate sections of the bi-part become "parts composed of sections" (cross-examination of Robert Dagenais, June 6, 1991, pp. 118-119), but are, in short, parts. Thus, a door separated in the centre consists of parts and not sections. It must also be admitted that a bi-part is not used to join sections together so as to form a unit, but rather separates parts so as to ensure that the door will operate, not to facilitate its installation. In this context, a bi-part cannot be described as a means for joining sections. This technique therefore cannot be regarded as an anticipation of the invention of patent '616.
[45]
The witness Dagenais referred to another technique known as the "split rod", as a means of establishing that claim 1 of patent '616, involving the joining together of sections, was not novel and was used when he was working with Dynaflair. The expla­nations given by him are insufficient to establish lack of novelty, especially as that technique appears to have been only used for joining panels (D-87), not sections.
[46]
I therefore consider that insofar as the counterclaims rely on the lack of novelty of patent '616 because of the existence in the prior art of the bi-part and split rod tech­niques, this ground of invalidity must be rejected both with respect to claim 1 and to claims 2, 4, 5 and 6 against which it was advanced by Dagendor.
Plea Of Prior Art
[47]
The counterclaimants submitted two other arguments to suggest the invalidity of patent '616. One concerned the public use or sale in Canada over two years before November 7, 1979 (the date the application for a patent was filed in Canada) of the Modernfold Splen-Door, making patent '616 invalid under s. 27(1)(c) of the
Patent Act
. The other concerned the prior knowledge or prior use before the date of the invention claimed in patent '616, namely November 13, 1978, of a folding closure made by Dynaflair incorporating the "joint cleat", thus making the patent invalid under s. 27(1)(a) of the
Act
.
[48]
The courts have held that, in principle, the grounds of defence based on prior knowledge or use (27(1)(a)) and prior public sale or use (27(a)(c) are to be interpreted in the same way as those based on prior publi­cation (27(1)(b)). They are all grounds of defence based on the prior art, and "what is said with respect, for example, to anticipa­tion through prior knowledge is applicable, mutatis mutandis, to anticipation through prior publication". (
Tye-Sil Corporation
, supra, para. [39].)
[49]
The concept of anticipation was described by Hugessen, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 289, at p. 297:
"It will be recalled that anticipation, or lack of novelty, asserts that the invention has been made known to the public prior to the relevant time. The inquiry is directed to the very invention in suit and not, as in the case of obviousness, to the state of the art and to common general knowledge.
Also
, as appear from the pas­sage of the statute quoted above (Huges­sen, J.A., had earlier cited s. 28(1)(b) of the
Patent Act
,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  other published document; it is not enough to pick bits and pieces from a variety of prior publications and to meld them together so as to come up with the claimed invention. One must, in effect, to look at a prior, single publication and find in it all the information which, for practi­cal purposes, is needed to produce the claimed invention without the exercise of any inventive skill. The prior publication must contain so clear a direction that a skilled person reading and following it would in every case and without possibil­ity of error be led to the claimed inven­tion."
[50]
In the case at bar, the Court must look individually at each of the exhibits relied on by Dagendor in support of its plea of antici­pation, as all the points claimed in each of the patent '616 claims must be found in a single piece of prior art. Also, it is important to note that the invalidity of one claim does not affect the validity of the other claims (s. 58 of the
Act
).
-Modernfold Splen-Door
[51]
Dagendor submitted that claims, 1, 2, 4 (when dependent on 2), 5 (when dependent on 1 and 2) and 6 of patent '616 are invalid on the ground that the Modernfold Splen-Door incorporated all the aspects of this invention and was in public use or on sale in Canada over two years before November 7, 1979, the date on which the application for a patent in Canada was filed. These claims of Dynamic patent '616, it was suggested, are thus invalid under s. 27(1)(c) of the
Act
.
[52]
The evidence showed that the Modern­fold Splen-Door had been sold in Canada since at least 1970. The defendants called several witnesses, including a Modernfold salesman between 1970 and 1982 (Ken Jones) and a contractor (André Cantara) who installed several of these doors until 1973. The defendants located one of these doors installed in the CEGEP de St-Jérôme gym­nasium since 1972, purchased it, dismantled it and made a small-scale model of it as Exhibit D-44. The door originally measured 22 feet high by 120 feet long. The witnesses who dismantled this door and remade it as a smaller model testified, and the dismantling operations were filmed on video (D-43). The witnesses all admitted that Exhibit D-44 was a miniaturized version of the CEGEP de St-Jérôme folding closure, that is, a Modern­fold Splen-Door. Another witness (Gilles Tétreault), superintendent of the Massey-Vanier comprehensive at Cowans­ville since 1969, also identified by means of photo­graphs (D-42) a door similar to that entered in evidence as No. D-44, said to be installed at the comprehensive in the early 1970s. It was a Modernfold door.
[53]
The following drawing (D-63) illus­trates the junction of two sections of a Splen-Door folding closure, which were joined by screwing the connecting strip of one section to the intermediary post of the adjacent section:
[see printed version]
[54]
The evidence submitted by Dagendor clearly showed that the technique used in installing these doors by suspending sections on a track was well-known. André Cantara had installed at least twenty of them. He installed the sections individually on the track and then joined them together by bringing one against the other and screwing them together. Dynamic argued that the Splen-Door door could in no case be regarded as anticipating patent '616, since there was no means of joining the sections on their adjacent sides and the strips were inserted into each other on the top or bottom rather than being joined end to end on the spot. On examination Exhibits D-44 and D-45, it appeared that strip C could only be inserted in post B at the plant on the top or the bottom. The film taken when the CEGEP de St-Jérôme (D-43) door was dismantled showed, however, that removing the screws on the side of the post made it possible to easily detach this strip. Whether this was due to wear and tear the Court has no way of knowing. However, this point does not have to be established since in any case the Dynamic expert witness, Robert Labelle, identified each of the components of claims 1 and 2 of patent '616 in the miniature version of the Modernfold Splen-Door entered in evidence as No. D-44. As to claim 4 regarding a means for fastening together the first and second joining mem­bers, the metal screws used in the Splen-Door had the effect of firmly fastening the detachable connecting strip to the intermedi­ary post of the adjacent section of a folding closure, when the latter were joined together. Claim 5 (when dependent on 1 and 2) is also read in the Splen-Door folding closure to the extent that, like any other folding clo­sure, the latter was installed after a portion of the track had been removed. The compo­nents of claim 6 were not new and were to say the least obvious in light of the prior art and in public use or on sale in Canada over two years before November 7, 1979, insofar as the known technique involved placing a roller on every second panel. In short, I consider that all the components of claims 1, 2, 4 (when dependent on 2), 5 (when depen­dent on 1 and 2) and 6 were found together in the Modernfold Splen-Door present in the Canadian market over two years before the application for patent '616 was filed, and that in this respect the counterclaimants established their allegation of anticipation.
Dyna-Flair Folding Closure
Incorporating "Joint Cleat" Connecting
Strip
[55]
As an additional reason for invalidating claims 1 to 6 of patent '616, the defendants alleged prior knowledge, and in particular ss. 27(1)(a) and 61(1)(a) of the
Patent Act
. Sections 27(1)(a) and 61(1)(a) read as fol­lows:
"27(1) Subject to this section, any inventor or legal representative of an inventor of an invention that was
(a) not known or used by any other person before he invented it,
. . . . .
may, upon presentation to the Commis­sioner of a petition setting out the facts, in this Act termed the filing of the applica­tion, and on compliance with all other requirements of this Act, obtain a patent granting to him an exclusive property in the invention.
"61(1) No patent or claim in a patent shall be declared invalid or void on the ground that, before the invention therein defined was made by the inventor by whom the patent was applied for, it had already been known or used by some other person, unless it is established that
(a) that other person had, before the date of the application for the patent, dis­closed or used the invention in such manner that it had become available to the public ..."
For the purposes of these sections it should be noted that in the case at bar the invention was made on November 13, 1978, and the patent application on November 7, 1979. The defendants must first show that this inven­tion was "known or used by some other person" before it was made by Robert Labelle (27(1)(a)). They must further show that what was the subject of this knowledge or use was disclosed or used in such a man­ner that it had become available to the pub­lic before the date of the application for the patent (61(1)(a)).
[56]
In support of their allegation, the de­fendants referred to a piece of prior art identified as being the "joint cleat" connecting strip of Dynaflair Corporation Canada Inc. It is worth looking more closely at this allegation of invalidity because of claim 3, which it particularly concerns.
[57]
Considering the first condition neces­sary to support this plea of anticipation, namely prior knowledge, it should be noted that after the hearing Dynamic did not strongly dispute this point. Its counsel even admitted that the "design" part of the Dyna­flair joint cleat connecting strip had been proven by the documentation. Instead, it mounted a vigorous denial that the defen­dants were able to prove the second condi­tion necessary for this proof of anticipation, namely disclosure of the Dynaflair system, so as to indicate that the latter was accessible to the public before November 7, 1979, the date on which the application leading to patent '616 was filed. It is accordingly neces­sary to look again at certain points in the evidence regarding the design, and in par­ticular the disclosure, of the Dynaflair fold­ing closure incorporating the joint cleat connecting strip.
[58]
It will suffice to note that Robert Labelle and Robert Dagenais both worked for Dynaflair, the latter taking charge of the company in 1972 when the former left it. While Robert Labelle held the position of Dynaflair vice-president, his counsin Denis Taillefer began working there as an indus­trial and mechanical designer. In 1976 he worked in association with Rudy Stolpe, Dynaflair's production manager, who appar­ently designed the joint cleat connecting strip, while Denis Taillefer made the calcu­lations and designed the technical aspects. They produced the design (D-78) of the Dynaflair joint cleat connecting strip which the latter company submitted to Daymond Limited, an aluminium manufacturer, to have it made up in aluminium extrusions; this document bears the signature of Denis Tail­lefer, dated April 20, 1976. First, three pieces 100 ins. long were made (D-80), and later (June 23, 1976) they obtained an esti­mate for the cost of manufacturing 1,000 lbs. of extrusion for the Dynaflair connecting strip (D-81). Of the three 100-in. extrusion pieces received by Dynaflair from Daymond, one was installed on a grill section and assembled to a post in its plant warehouse in late 1976 or early 1977, for a period of over one year, while the operation of the joint cleat connecting strip could be examined by various people, including Dynaflair cus­tomers. The other two 100-in. extrusion pieces were kept in inventory.
[59]
The evidence concerning the disclosure or use of the Dynaflair joint cleat connecting strip so as to make it accessible to the public before the date of application for the patent rested essentially on Denis Taillefer's testi­mony. The credibility of this witness was questioned by counsel for Dynamic on the ground that he had already been involved in a legal action against his cousin Robert Labelle, the matters at issue dated from fifteen years before and the research he had done "to come up with something" at the request of Dynaflair, which was then con­fronting Dynamic in another case, did not take place until 1988.
[60]
I consider that, in the particularly diffi­cult circumstances of having to relate facts in a case where his two former bosses were adversaries, this witness demonstrated a reserve of goodwill and obvious good faith. His testimony was also largely supported by documentation which could not lie as to the date the design was made and the three experimental pieces purchased. This witness further indicated, supported on this point by the witness Dagenais, that a piece was pre­pared and displayed in the plant in late 1976 or early 1977 for a period of over one year so that the operation of the joint cleat con­necting strip could be examined by various people, including Dynaflair customers. This evidence was not in any way contradicted. Further, the sample folding closure incorpor­ating the joint cleat connecting strip was suspended on a track, and there it could be seen by installers, truck drivers, distributors and customers who had access to the open-air storage area where many persons not subject to confidentiality were in the habit of going. This fact suffices to show that, to the extent that the sample included the compo­nents of the claims in suit, the invention "became available to the public" within the meaning of s. 61(1)(a) of the
Act
. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  appear that Dynaflair ever sold any of these models, because of the vandalism problems this system could involve as the screws could be taken off from outside. The company made modifica­tions to the door before marketing it, after the Dynamic door, but those modifi­cations did not affect the mechanism. It should be noted that the witness Taillefer said, and he was not contradicted, that he himself showed the Dynaflair extrusions to Robert Labelle when he was working for the latter at Dynamic, even before Labelle had invented his "quick connect" connecting strip. The latter could thus hardly say that he did not "know of" this invention.
[61]
I therefore consider that Dagendor has proven prior knowledge before November 13, 1978, and disclosure before November 7, 1979 of the Dynaflair folding closure incor­porating the joint cleat connecting strip.
[62]
The question now is whether the com­ponents of claims 1 to 6 of patent '616 are contained in the Dynaflair doors incorporat­ing the joint cleat connecting strip, and in short, whether each of these claims can be "read" therein, as the counterclaimants con­tend.
[63]
The following drawing represents the way in which a section ending in a joint cleat connecting strip is joined to an adjacent section with a post (Exhibit D-65):
[see printed version]
Robert Dagenais, the Dagendor expert wit­ness, took some pains in his report and his testimony to show that the various compo­nents of claims 1 to 6 of patent '616 were contained in a Dynaflair folding closure incorporating the joint cleat connecting strip. For its part, Dynamic simply relied on the presumption of validity in its favour, merely establishing that the Dynaflair product was not marketed until after its own. Dagendor presented no natural or miniaturized exhibit of a Dynaflair door incorporating the joint cleat connecting strip and did not refer the court to any publication illustrating or ad­ver­tising this product. It simply entered in evidence the drawing (D-65) illustrated above and a physical exhibit (D-67) con­sisting of a post to which the joint cleat connecting strip was attached. In this regard, it is not possible on the evidence to deter­mine whether all the components of claims 1, 2, 5 and 6 exist in the Dynaflair folding closure incorporating the joint cleat connect­ing strip. A comparative analysis of each of the points in claims 3 and 4 of patent '616 with the Dynaflair joint cleat connecting strip filed as No. D-67 indicates that they are all substan­tially present, if not literally so.
Obviousness
[64]
Dagendor further relied on obviousness in support of its claim to invalidate patent '616.
[65]
A claim to invalidate based on obvi­ousness is quite different from one based on anticipation.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  anticipation from that of obviousness:
"They are, of course, quite different: obvi­ousness is an attack on a patent based on its lack of intensiveness. The attacker says, in effect, 'Any fool could have done that'. Anticipation, or lack of novelty, on the other hand, in effect assumes that there has been an invention but asserts that it has been disclosed to the public prior to the application for the patent. The charge is: 'Your invention, though clever, was already known'."
[66]
This claim to invalidate based on obvi­ousness requires the person making it to show, in view of the presumption of validity made in favour of the disputed patent, that the subject of the invention would have been obvious to a person skilled in the art but lacking in imagination. The test for this was suggested  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Canada
(supra, p. 294):
"The test for obviousness is not to ask what competent inventors did or would have done to solve the problem. Inventors are by definition inventive. The classical touchstone for obviousness is the techni­cian skilled in the art but having no scin­tilla of inventiveness or imagination; a paragon of deduction and dexterity, wholly devoid of intuition; a triumph of the left hemisphere over the right. The question to be asked is whether this mythical creature (the man in the Clapham omnibus of pat­ent law) would, in the light of the state of the art and of common general knowledge as at the claimed date of invention, have come directly and without difficulty to the solution taught by the patent. It is a very difficult test to satisfy."
Finally, it should be noted that obviousness, or lack of inventiveness, is a question of fact which must be determined having regard to all the circumstances of the case, bearing in mind that a mere spark of inventiveness will suffice to support the validity of a patent (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), and that as Décary, J.A., said in
Tye-Sil Corporation
, supra: "inventiveness can co-exist with easiness and simplicity".
[67]
In the case at bar, taking into account the common general knowledge of the prior art, and in particular the admission by the inventor himself that only the connecting strip described in claim 3 of the patent was a new component in the context of this patent, I consider that on the date of inven­tion, November 13, 1978, the components contained in claims 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 of patent '616 were obvious to a person skilled in the art, even one lacking in imagination. As to claim 3, though the principal components of this claim were achieved by making alter­ations to a part of the closed cleat (P-20 and D-85) already used by Dynamic before the date of the invention, I consider that the quick connect connecting strip which resulted from this alteration is very different and is not merely a workshop improvement on an existing product, but is the result of inventiveness.
Claims Broader Than Invention
Described
[68]
Dagendor further argued that claims 1 to 6 of patent '616 should be declared null and void because they are broader than the invention disclosed in the specification of the patent, or at least they concerned an invention different from the one described therein. The counterclaimants relied in par­ticular on a judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 193), where the Court said the following:
"While there can be no question that a patent must be fairly construed, if such fair construction reveals that an essential element (in this case a limitation) has not been claimed, the omission is fatal to the claim's validity."
[69]
In this connection, certain rules of interpretation I have just mentioned must be borne in mind. Thus, a patent is limited to what is stated in the claims, without covering what is described in the specifica­tion, and the courts are not required to redraft the claims of a patent: the inventor must bear the consequences if it is badly drafted. Further, in interpreting the claims of a patent, while reference may be made to the specification in order to understand the terms used in the claims, there is no reason to make such reference if the claim is worded in language that contains no ambiguity, and it will then be completely inappropriate to refer to the specification if in so doing the result is to alter the scope or ambit of the claims, as the Federal Court of Appeal noted in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 1:
"... in construing the claims in a patent recourse to the remainder of the specifica­tion is
a) permissible only to assist in under­standing terms used in the claims;
b) unnecessary where the words of the claim are plain and unambiguous; and
c) improper to vary the scope or ambit of the claim."
[70]
I would further note that when the essential components of an invention as described in the specification of a patent are not contained in one or other of its claims, that claim must be declared invalid, provided of course that it is written in clear language. The court may not, in order to avoid declar­ing the claim invalid, go by the fact that the inventor clearly intended to claim what he described in the specification of the patent and so try to interpret the claim in order to make it consistent with what is stipulated in the specification (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  bar indicates that the invention concerns a folding closure the sections of which are joined together
after being indi­vidually installed on the track
, as appears from the following passage from page 2 of the patent in suit:
"In accordance with the present invention there is provided a folding closure assem­bly having a folding closure unit made from a plurality of folding closure sections. Means are provided on the sides of the sections for use in quickly and easily joining the sections together
after they have been individually installed in order to form a single closure unit
."
The Court considers that this is an essential component contained in the specification but not referred to in any of claims 1 to 6.
[71]
In his expert report and at the hearing, the inventor Robert Labelle reiterated that the purpose of his invention was to join the sections of a folding closure after the latter had been individually installed on the track, but he admitted in cross-examination at the hearing that claims 1 and 2 of the patent contained nothing referring to the fact that the sections had to be joined together
after
being suspended on the track. In this con­nection, although it is tempting to assume that the inventor obviously intended to claim the invention he described in the specifica­tion of his patent, as a means of getting around the unfortunate consequences that may result from the rule that a claim is invalid if it does not contain an essential component of the invention as described in the specification, the courts have refused to countenance such an interpretation as being contrary to the rule that no reference to the specification can be made so as to alter the scope of a claim.
[72]
Claim 3, as worded, can be read in a folding closure sections of which are carried separately to the installation site and then assembled before being installed on the track, or the sections of which are carried as a unit to the installation site and then installed; but it does not include the essential component described above and must be declared invalid insofar as it covers a broader invention than the one described in the specification.
[73]
In the case at bar, I consider that a person skilled in the art, after reading claim 3 of patent '616, would conclude that the inventor thought each of the components described therein was essential for his in­ven­tion to work. On read­ing this claim, nothing indicates that any of the components is not essential to it. On the contrary, the specific purpose of this claim is to accurate­ly describe the first and second joining members, which are first referred to in very general terms in claim 2 of the patent.
[74]
It is not for the Court to rewrite claim 3; it must simply interpret it by asking what a person skilled in the art would think the inventor seemed to regard as being essential to the claim. Lacking any evidence from which it could be inferred that a person skilled in the art would understand, on read­ing claim 3 of the patent, that the inventor did not regard one to its components as essential, the conclusion has to be that they are all essential. As for regarding the Dagen­dor system as an equivalent of the system described in claim 3 of patent '616 because of the fact that it performs the same function in the same way as the plaintiffs' connecting strip, the court cannot accept this. The principle of equivalency as a means of establishing infringement applies only to components of a claim which are regarded as not essential (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  an invention, one is considered to have infringed even if his act does not in every respect fall within the express terms of the claim defining the invention; it does not matter whether he omits a feature that is not essential or substitutes an equivalent for it;
however the patentee can resort to a doctrine of equivalency only in respect of a feature of an invention not essential to it
.")
The plaintiffs' argument based on the equi­val­ency principle is accordingly dismissed as all the components of claim 3 of the patent are essential.
[75]
As claims 4, 5 and 6 of patent '616 contain nothing suggesting that the sections must be joined and attached together after being installed on the track, they are declared invalid.
The True Inventor
[76]
Finally, the counterclaimants submitted that claims 3, 4 (when dependent on 3) and 5 (when dependent on 3) are invalid on the ground that they are contrary to what is stated in the patent; Robert Labelle is not the true inventor as the design and implementa­tion was actually the work of his cousin Denis Taillefer.
[77]
In my opinion, this allegation cannot be supported by the evidence submitted at the hearing. In his testimony, Denis Taillefer said he explained to Robert Labelle how one had to go about making a connecting strip from a part which the Dynamic company was already using, namely the "closed cleat". He then allegedly filed off a foot of this part and made a hook that would eventually become the Dynamic quick connect con­necting strip. In this respect, the court is not persuaded that this operation by itself suf­ficed to make the connecting strip described in claim 3 of patent '616, more clearly illus­trated in Exhibit D-59. Additionally at the time he allegedly passed on the idea of this connecting strip to Robert Labelle, Denis Taillefer was working for him and to say that he was the author of this invention would be contrary to the rule that the employer owns any invention made by an employee in the course of his duties, pro­vided the invention relates to the employer's activities. Consequently, the court cannot accept this ground of invalidity relied on by the counterclaimants.
Conclusion
[78]
For the reasons stated in the principal action as well as the counterclaim, I con­clude that claims 1 to 6 of Canadian patent No. 1,150,616 are invalid, and that in any case the defendants did not infringe claims, 2, 3, 4, 5 (when dependent on 2) and 6 of that patent.
[79]
The principal action is accordingly dismissed and the counterclaim allowed, with costs to the defendants.
Action dismissed;
counterclaim allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slm