[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: On March 13, 1995, the defendants, Fraser River Harbour Commission (the "Harbour Commission") and the Corporation of the District of Pitt Meadows ("Pitt Meadows") brought on motions to strike out the statement of claim, pursuant to rules 419(1)(c) and (f), as being scandalous, frivolous, vexatious and an abuse of the court.
[2]
Counsel for the Minister of Transport Canada (the "Minister") also attended to submit that the Minister's situation was similar to that of the Harbour Commission. However, the Minister did not bring a motion.
Background
[3]
While the present action was commenced January 30, 1995, there is a lengthy history of litigation between Mr. Borley and the Harbour Commission, Pitt Meadows and Bains Trucking Ltd., arising out of the occupation, by Mr. Borley, of adjoining lands and water areas or water leases owned or controlled by these three defendants. The three defendants, at various times as plaintiffs, over the past half dozen years, have obtained removal orders and writs of possession.
[4]
During a period beginning in about 1987 and concluding last year, Mr. Borley, in turn, has brought three actions (1987, 1989 and 1994) against these three defendants and a number of other defendants, including municipal clerks, lawyers involved in the litigation and one of the judges who found against him, claiming damages, collusion and conspiracy, and seeking injunctions to prevent enforcement of the removal orders. All these actions, including one in which Mr. Borley applied to the B.C. Court of Appeal for a stay of one of the removal orders, were unsuccessful. As matters presently stand, the first and third of these conspiracy actions commenced by Mr. Borley were dismissed, while the second, commenced in 1989, was apparently never pursued.
Federal Court Action
[5]
The present action, in this court, alleges collusion, conspiracy and that the lands in dispute are actually owned by the Katzie Band Council, who laid claim to the area in some form of native land settlement proceedings. Mr. Borley seeks, among other things, injunctive relief to prevent the enforcement of the various orders requiring him to move his belongings and vessels from the land and water areas controlled by the first three defendants. This proceeding is, however, the first one in which the Minister has been named as a defendant. The claim against the Minister is that he has not acted in an honest and compassionate way in investigating and resolving Mr. Borley's problems.
Submissions By Counsel
[6]
The approach taken by the Harbour Commission and by Pitt Meadows to strike out the action is twofold. First, they say the action is redundant in that the claims and issues have been raised and disposed of in the previous B.C. Supreme Court actions, various applications and appeals. Second, they say that the action is a further attempt to delay the enforcement of valid B.C. Supreme Court removal orders and to generally vex and embarrass the defendants, and as such is scandalous, frivolous, vexatious and an abuse of the court.
[7]
Counsel for the Harbour Commission, in speaking for her client, presented a helpful analysis of the past litigation and of the present action, which is also applicable to the companion Pitt Meadows motion. This analysis breaks down the plaintiff's statement of claim into eight areas of allegation which may be paraphrased as:
"1. Government has been heavy handed and their authority questionable;
"2. The B.C. Supreme Court orders were obtained by false and misleading means;
"3. The Plaintiff has a lease of the property of Bains Trucking Ltd.;
"4. By the actions of Bains Trucking Ltd. and Pitt Meadows there has been some change of description of Crown land, to the plaintiff's detriment;
"5. Pitt Meadows agreed to sell property consisting of a long-dedicated road right-of-way to the plaintiff, in 1987, for a token payment;
"6. In any event the plaintiff has permission to occupy the area from the Katzie Indian Band who have reclaimed the lands for themselves;
"7. The Minister of Transport had agreed to settle the issues between the parties, but had not acted in an honest and compassionate way; and
"8. Bains Trucking Ltd. and Pitt Meadows have not made any attempt to negotiate an amicable settlement with the plaintiff."
Counsel contends that these issues and areas of allegation have been dealt with by the B.C. Supreme Court.
[8]
Counsel for Pitt Meadows touched on the history of the litigation and submitted that all or substantially all of the issues raised in these Federal Court proceedings, against the Harbour Commission and against Pitt Meadows, had either been dealt with in the several B.C. Supreme Court proceedings, and that any issues not previously canvassed ought to have been dealt with in those various proceedings and thus could not be relitigated now by reason of the doctrine of res judicata.
Submissions By The Plaintiff
[9]
Mr. Borley, who is faced with finding alternated moorage for a barge on which he has his home, indicated that he wished to have his day in court to solve what he referred to as an ongoing problem. However, he also conceded that Bains Trucking Ltd. should really be the only defendant in these proceedings, and in this regard referred to a 1988 affidavit of Kenneth Gordon Turner, sworn in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  sworn a false affidavit in a proceeding involving the removal of a lis pendens, filed by Mr. Borley against Bains Trucking Ltd. property.
Analysis
[10]
I should first deal with what might be a fairly serious allegation, that of a false affidavit. First, I would note that the false affidavit charge was raised by Mr. Borley in his February 16, 1989 action in the B.C. Supreme Court. Second, the false affidavit accusation appears to have nothing to do with either the Harbour Commission or with Pitt Meadows. Third, the allegation of a false affidavit seems to bear on a matter clearly beyond the jurisdiction of this court and within the jurisdiction of the B.C. Supreme Court in that it involves a lis pendens placed by Mr. Borley on property owned by Bains Trucking Ltd.
[11]
The claim of a false affidavit is not relevant in dealing with the present motions. The issue is whether the statement of claim, as against the Harbour Commission and Pitt Meadows, ought to be struck out because the claims and issues have been raised and disposed of in previous proceedings and as such, or as a result, are delaying tactics which are scandalous, frivolous, vexatious and an abuse of the court.
[12]
Few, if any, of the relevant issues raised by the plaintiff in the present proceedings, as against either the Harbour Commission or Pitt Meadows, appear to be new issues. Aside from several irrelevant issues, for example the allegation that the land in question has been reclaimed by the Katzie Indian Band and leased to Mr. Borley, which is an issue between Mr. Borley and the Katzie Indian Band, the remaining issues fit into the eight areas of allegation as submitted by counsel for the Harbour Commission and Pitt Meadows. Most, if not all, of the relevant issues appear, and were dealt with, in the B.C. Supreme Court actions and proceedings.
[13]
Mr. Borley, in his affidavit sworn March 13, 1995, and accepted at the hearing of these motions, raises a number of issues. Some are related to Bains Trucking Ltd. To the extent that others are related to the Harbour Commission and to Pitt Meadows they have, to at least a large extent, and perhaps entirely, been dealt with in the previous B.C. Supreme Court litigation, or are irrelevant. In any event, while this new affidavit of Mr. Borley's is something more than a submission, I do not attach great weight to what is set out in the affidavit.
[14]
The points raised in this litigation, as against the Harbour Commission and Pitt Meadows, have been either largely or entirely dealt with previously, but to the extent that they might not have been dealt with, they ought to have been dealt with in the voluminous B.C. Supreme Court litigation. This area of law is thoroughly canvassed in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.C.A.), at 748, in which Mr. Justice Hinkson, of the B.C. Court of Appeal, adopted what he believed to be a correct summary of the law of estoppel by record or res judicata:
"The doctrine of estoppel by matter of record or res judicata has been held to extend to any point whether by assumption or by admission which was in substance the ratio of and fundamental to a previous decision. The doctrine applies not only to matters actually in dispute, but to every point which properly belonged to the subject of a litigation in which the parties by exercising reasonable diligence might have brought forward at the time of the previous hearing. This doctrine is based upon the principle that there must be an end to litigation and that on every triable issue the whole of the case must be put to the court and not be dealt with piece meal in action upon action."
[15]
Mr. Justice Hinkson went on to point out that this summary of estoppel by record was based on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (P.C.), a decision of the Privy Council. The relevant passage, dealing with the defence of res judicata, is found at p. 425:
"The second defence is one of 'res judicata' ... the appellants invoke this defence in its wider sense, according to which a party may be shut out from raising in a subsequent action an issue which he could, and should, have raised in earlier proceedings. The classic statement of this doctrine is contained in the judgment of Wigram, V.-C., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . A recent application of it is to be found in the decision of the Board in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . It was, in the judgment of the Board, there described in these words:
'... there is a wider sense in which the doctrine may be appealed to, so that it becomes an abuse of process to raise in subsequent proceedings matters which could and therefore should have been litigated in earlier proceedings.' (p. 590)
"This reference to 'abuse of process' had previously been made in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  basis of the doctrine and it ought only to be applied when the facts are such as to amount to an abuse: otherwise there is a danger of a party being shut out from bringing forward a genuine subject of litigation."
[17]
In a more current context, Mr. Justice Strayer, now of the Court of Appeal, held in the "
Ueluelet Princess
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), that an action which on its face would involve many of the same facts and some of the same issues as were tried in an earlier action, was simply an abuse of process of the court and should be struck out.
[18]
In the present instance there is nothing of substance which has not been canvassed by the B.C. Supreme Court. This is an action which, by reason of the doctrine of estoppel by record or res judicata, is doomed to failure. It can only be a delaying tactic, wasteful of both time and taxpayer's money. It should therefore be struck out, as an abuse of process, so far as the defendants, the Harbour Commission and Pitt Meadows, are concerned.
[19]
I would also note, in passing, that the Federal Court of Canada, which must look to legislation for its jurisdiction, clearly has no jurisdiction over Maple Ridge. Maple Ridge is a provincial district. Just as the Crown in right of a province is not within the jurisdiction of this court, neither is a district or other similar municipal government entity. As Mr. Justice Mahoney pointed out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at 741, "... there is no question that pleading a cause of action that is beyond the court's jurisdiction to adjudicate is a clear abuse of its process".
[20]
As I noted earlier, counsel from the Department of Justice, representing the Minister of Transport Canada, attended on the hearing of the motion. He submitted that, on the basis of the argument made by counsel for the Harbour Commission and Pitt Meadows, the action ought to be struck out as against the Minister of Transport Canada.
[21]
Given that striking out an action is a drastic remedy, it would be proper for the Minister to set down a motion, with appropriate notice to the plaintiff, notwithstanding either that some of the same arguments used by the Harbour Commission and Pitt Meadows might apply or that the plaintiff may not have articulated a cause of action against the Minister.
Conclusion
[22]
The plaintiff has not brought forward genuine subjects of litigation against the defendants, the Harbour Commission and Pitt Meadows. Rather, the plaintiff's claims against these two defendants are an abuse of the process of the court, for the claims could not possibly succeed. No proper amendment can be made to give the relief sought, given the thorough canvassing of issues in the various B.C. Supreme Court actions. The statement of claim, as against the Harbour Commission and Pitt Meadows, is struck out, without leave to amend.
[23]
Neither the Harbour Commission nor Pitt Meadows have asked for costs. No costs are awarded.
Applications allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/slm
[End of document]