Jaballah, Re, [2006] F.T.R. Uned. 687 (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
In The Matter Of a certificate pursuant to Section 40.1 of the Immigration Act, R. S. C. 1985, c. 1-2, now deemed to be under s-s 77(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, S. C. 2001, c.27
And In The Matter Of the referral of that certificate to the Federal Court of Canada
And In The Matter Of Mahmoud Jaballah
(DES-04-01; 2006 FC 1058)
Indexed As: Jaballah, Re
Cite As: [2006] F.T.R. Uned. 687
Federal Court
Mackay, D.J.
May 8, 2006.
Counsel:
Counsel not disclosed.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Mackay, D.J.
:
THE COURT
: Good morning, all.
[2]
I will give you my decision orally, if I may, and then we will spend a bit of time, not very much, on where we go from here.
[3]
So far as the Applicant seeks an order postponing the proceedings pending determination by the Supreme Court of Canada of three cases to be argued some six weeks hence, I am not allowing the motion. That said, in the circumstances of this week it seems to me that some arrangements have to be made for further hearings.
[4]
Let me talk a bit about the major motion.
[5]
Mr. Jaballah applies for an order to postpone hearings arranged some six weeks ago, with agreement of his counsel, first to meet his request for leave to adduce evidence and then hearings arranged for the week of May 15 for argument addressing the reasonableness of the security certificate issued in August 2001. That certificate certified the opinion of the Ministers of the Crown concerned that Mr. Jaballah is inadmissible to Canada on security grounds. The certificate was then referred to this Court for determination of its reasonableness.
[6]
You may not like it, but I express some disappointment. This is the second or third scheduled hearing date for Mr. Jaballah to respond to concerns underlying the Ministers' certificate. It is at least the second time that his counsel has brought forward on less than appropriate notice motions that compel the Court in its concern for some fairness in the process to postpone hearing dates. It is at least the second occasion since last September, when counsel had in effect said, "Quite frankly, I am simply too busy with this and other responsibilities to properly serve my client's interest.'
[7]
I am disappointed as well, if I may note, that counsel, who were aware of the circumstances at least a week ago of Mr. Jaballah's removal from Toronto to Kingston, did not then, so far as I can judge, seek to discuss the matter with counsel for the Crown. I am not certain that that is right, but that is my impression from the manner in which correspondence was directed to me yesterday.
[8]
Going back to the motion, counsel are agreed, and I agree as well, that the three-step test concerning a stay of proceedings is the appropriate test to apply. In my opinion that test is not here met. I acknowledge that there are serious issues concerning the constitutional validity of the process applicable under IRPA. The constitutional validity of that process dealing with certificate cases is raised now in other cases before the Supreme Court of Canada. They may arise, but they have not yet been argued, in this case. I am always surprised at what may be argued in this case, so I am not speculating on what may be raised.
[9]
In a technical sense, there is not a serious issue yet in this case that is before this Court. Nevertheless, I acknowledge that it is likely that issues relating to this case are before the Supreme Court of Canada and will be discussed in the circumstances of other cases in the middle of next month.
[10]
The Applicant relies on YRI-York, a decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in 1988, which concerned a motion to stay investigatory processes leading to possible criminal proceedings under the Competition Act, which proceedings were undertaken pursuant to section 17 of the Combines Act which had not yet previously been dealt with in constitutional terms.
[11]
Here the Court is concerned with a process already upheld as constitutional and valid by the Federal Court of Appeal. Ahani and Charkaoui both dealt with that. That remains the law that I must apply and follow until the Supreme Court of Canada, or Parliament acting within its powers, determines otherwise.
[12]
Let me acknowledge that there are serious issues arising in this case, some of which will be dealt with, I assume, in the argument and hopefully addressed by the Supreme Court in other cases. I acknowledge that there are serious issues.
[13]
I turn to irreparable harm. As I read the decision in YRI-York, the principal concern there underlying the Court's decision to grant a stay of another tribunal's process, not the Court's own as is here sought, was its concern over the potential misuse of information obtained by investigatory processes that might later be found to be invalid.
[14]
Here the stay is sought to preclude testimony which Mr. Jaballah sought leave to adduce presumably to respond to the concerns of the Ministers as disclosed by the summaries released to Mr. Jaballah, by numerous public documents on the record, by public testimony cf officers of CSIS, and not about other matters. There is much evidence in the public record of this proceeding to which Mr. Jaballah simply has not yet responded.
[15]
If he does testify in this proceeding, he will have the benefit of secticn 13 of the Charter, and you know that that provides protection for a witness testifying in proceedings. They then have the right not to have any incriminating evidence so given used to incriminate that witness in any other proceeding except in a prosecution for perjury or for the giving of contradictory evidence. Admittedly, that applies in the criminal processes only hut, if necessary, this Court would order that any testimony given in this case by Mr. Jaballah not be used in any other proceedings, whether criminal, civil or immigration, apart from this case and apart from any prosecution for perjury in relation to the testimony given.
[16]
In any event, I am not persuaded that in the circumstances of this case there is any irreparable harm if the proceedings to hear Mr. Jaballah are not postponed.
[17]
In those circumstances and in light of the public interest, the speedy resolution of these proceedings, an interest that has been ignored by me until now, among others, I simply do not see that the balance of convenience favours Mr. Jaballah. Indeed, the balance favours the Ministers' position that the matter not be stayed.
[18]
That is my decision in relation to the application to postpone the hearing essentially indefinitely.
[19]
We are already in Tuesday of this week's scheduled hearing, and I have said that Mr. Jaballah would not be ordered to be present in the court except on at least two clear days' notice, so there is cne day left at the end of :his week. am not sure, in light of what I know -- and it is very little -- about the arrangements made for access by counsel to Mr. Jaballah at the moment, whether that be in Kingston or Toronto. I am not sure what those arrangements are.
[20]
In the circumstances it seems to me, unless counsel have a better idea, that we ought to ensure that Mr. Jaballah is available for at least the time that he might have been available had he not been removed from Toronto in the five days from April 24 to April 29 before this hearing commenced, so that counsel have an opportunity to finish their preparations. I would like counsel to give me some estimate of how much time they anticipate they would have with Mr. Jaballah in that period of time.
[21]
In any event, I want to leave it to counsel for both parties, if I may, to work out arrangements for Mr. Jaballah to be able to be present for this testimony to be given to the Court, if he wishes to testify, in the week of May 15, a week we have held for further hearings in this matter. We have yet to find a time for hearings in relation to the argument on the reasonableness of the certificate.
[22]
I would like to complete this matter as quickly as I can. I am prepared to say that, if that has to be after the Supreme Court and before the end of June, we will do it then.
[23]
Counsel may want to talk about this. I do think counsel can work out co-operative arrangements for dealing with Mr. Jaballah's circumstances now so that he can testify 10 days from now, or almost two weeks from now, satisfactorily. He has to determine whether he wishes to do that. If he does, I can't believe that counsel can't work it out.
[24]
MS JACKMAN:
Maybe we should have a break to talk about it.
[25]
THE COURT:
I think so. I invite you to canvass when you might hear argument on the matter. I assume that a number of you may be involved before the Supreme Court. I am not asking.
[26]
MR. NORRIS:
On this side, yes.
[27]
THE COURT:
We will break for 15 minutes.
--- Short Recess at 10:15 a.m.
[End of document]