[1]
MacKay, J.
: This application, originally filed for leave to appeal a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board, is deemed an application for judicial review pursuant to the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 as amended, and Directions of the Chief Justice of this court made pursuant to the
Act
. The decision questioned, made December 30, 1992, found the applicants not to be Convention refugees.
[2]
The applicant, Afua Nkrumah, is a citizen of Ghana, and is the mother, and for purposes of the proceedings before the C.R.D.D., was the designated representative, of the applicant, Nana Akua Sika, an infant, who is the daughter of Ms. Nkrumah. Their claims to be Convention refugees were based on their claimed well-founded fear of persecution in Ghana by reason of their political opinion. The daughter's claim is dependent upon that of her mother. The application for judicial review, to set aside the decision of the C.R.D.D., and these reasons deal primarily with the decision in relation to the first applicant, with whose claim the decision is principally concerned.
[3]
The two issues raised by this application concern the board's negative findings of credibility and its finding of changed circumstances in Ghana which led the board to conclude that "there is not more than a mere possibility the claimants would face persecution if they were to return to their country of nationality". Certain material aspects of the principal claimant's testimony were found not to be credible or trustworthy and the panel found that Ms. Nkrumah had failed to discharge the burden of proof required of her to establish a well-founded fear of persecution in Ghana. Since the claim of the infant daughter is dependant on the evidence presented by her mother, both applicants were found not to be Convention refugees.
[4]
The finding of the panel in relation to credibility was not based on inconsistencies in the evidence presented by the applicant Ms. Nkrumah. Rather, it is based on inferences which the panel drew, based on its perceptions of plausibility from that evidence.
[5]
The applicant's claim to fear persecution by reason of her political opinion was entirely based upon her participation, in a leadership role, in a public demonstration mounted by women vendors from a market to demonstrate against the actions of soldiers in harassing their market activities in their selling stalls, and in taking goods from their stalls without payment. That demonstration was mounted, after a series of meetings, assisted by a representative of the Movement for Freedom and Justice ("MFJ"), a fledgling and, at the time, unlawful political movement in Ghana. The demonstration, initiated at a public place near the market in Accra, is said to have had 400-500 persons in attendance and the applicant was one of three who spoke to the crowd. Perhaps 300 or more of those persons then marched for two to three hours to a military barracks where more speeches were made, including the applicant as a speaker. The media was in attendance. Nothing was done to disrupt the demonstration and at its conclusion those involved dispersed peaceably. Thereafter, the applicant continued to operate her stall in the market, without reported incident of significance, until one week after the demonstration when she travelled to Kumasi to see her mother who was ill. Later that same day a friend who had followed her to Kumasi told her that her name, with the names of two other women instrumental in leading the demonstration a week before, was read in a radio announcement advising that the three named were to report to authorities not later than 6 p.m. that day. Later, on the same day she had arrived at Kumasi, a second friend advised her that the two other women were arrested and detained after they had failed to report as directed. The following day the applicant moved to another area, away from her mother's home in Kumasi in order to avoid arrest; she remained out of sight of authorities for two weeks, then crossed to the Ivory Coast, and from there travelled to Canada on the passport of a friend who reportedly had a visa to travel to Canada. After her arrival in Canada, through arrangements made by a friend and her family, her infant daughter arrived in Canada. She believed that the two women who had been arrested for their part in the demonstration were still in detention when she last heard from her mother some two or three months before the hearing of the C.R.D.D. panel.
[6]
In assessing the evidence of the applicant the panel in its decision states, in part
"The panel notes that during the rally the soldiers reacted as passive observers to the speeches made directly to them concerning their behaviour toward the market women. If they considered the women to be a threat to the military or the government, why would they not take immediate action to punish the participants (especially the speech-makers) at the time of the rally? ... the speeches made by the claimant and her colleagues were received with such indifference by the military; it does not seem reasonable that the soldiers or the police would be likely to arrest them at all. If the three women who had made speeches went back to work in the market why were they not arrested there? Why was it necessary to put out an announcement requesting them to report to the police? The panel finds these events unnaturally coincidental and cannot accept this aspect of the claimant's testimony as credible.
. . . . .
"... While it can be argued that taking such a stand in a military regime could be considered risky, no retaliatory actions were taken by the soldiers or the police during the actual rally. Specifically, no action was taken against the claimant as a consequence of her speech. It would seem logical that if the claimant and her colleagues were regarded as significant threats to the government or the military, some type of repressive actions would have been taken at the time of the rally. Thus, the panel is of the opinion that the claimant and her group posed no threat to the Ghanaian government nor were they considered to be of interest to the authorities because of their opposition to it."
[7]
I accept submissions of the applicant that the principal consideration of the panel, in concluding that her evidence was not credible, is that no action was taken at the time of the rally. In the decision no reference is made to the applicant's testimony that probably no action was taken at that time because there were so many women involved in the demonstration and because the media was present. I accept as well that questions here raised by the panel in its decision were not raised in the course of examination or cross-examination of the applicant during the course of her testimony. Of course the panel may draw inferences from the evidence presented. In my view, however, where the panel's inferences are based on what seemed to be "common sense" or rational perceptions about how a governmental regime in another country might be expected to act or react in a given set or circumstances, there is an obligation, out of fairness, to provide an opportunity for the applicant to address those inferences on which the panel relies. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.))
[8]
Thus, I am persuaded that the panel, in its decision, erred in failing to provide fair opportunity for the applicant to address the major inferences they draw from the evidence and upon which they relied in concluding that material evidence upon which the claimed refugee status is based is not credible.
[9]
This finding does not, of course, determine this application. Even if the applicant's testimony were accepted as credible the further finding of the panel, concerning changing conditions with Ghana, is sufficient to support the conclusion that the claimants are not now Convention refugees.
[10]
In relation to this matter the panel's decision states:
"In its consideration of the forward-looking nature of the Convention refugee definition, and in light of the recent political changes that have occurred in Ghana, the panel does not believe that the government would have much interest in persecuting these market shop keepers given the legislation [query - whether this word was intended to be 'legalisation'?] of the MFJ and the more democratic approach to human rights. ... [the decision then refers to certain documentary evidence before it] ... In light of the Ghanaian government's progress towards democratization and its willingness to indicate to the International Community that it is becoming less repressive, the panel is not persuaded that there is a more than a mere possibility the claimants would face persecution if they were to return to their country of nationality. ..."
[11]
For the applicant, it is urged that the decision ignores and makes no reference to whether the applicant's testimony at the time of the hearing that she believed that conditions within Ghana had not changed, and it also makes no reference to numerous portions of the documentary evidence which raise questions as to the actual changes within Ghana, as opposed to the promises for change made by the government. While oral and documentary evidence differing from that cited by the panel is not specifically mentioned in its decision, that is not in itself an error for which this court should intervene. (See Heald, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).) I have reviewed numerous references to documentary evidence before the panel which counsel in argument before me suggested should be considered. Having done so I cannot say that the board did not have before it evidence that would support its conclusion, even if I were, on review of the documentary evidence, to come to a different result. There is clearly evidence on which the panel could base its decision. Counsel urged that the proper test for assessing changed conditions within a country where a government has been once known to be repressive should be the establishment of fundamental and significant changes, particularly in terms of democratic institutions and processes as we may know them. I am not persuaded that that is the test to be applied or that the panel here erred, on the basis of the evidence that was before it, in finding that changing conditions within Ghana were such that for the applicant here, in the circumstances in which she was involved, there was not more than a mere possibility of persecution should she return to her country of nationality. (See per  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).) That finding, which does not support the claim to be a Convention refugee, based on the evidence before the panel at the time of its decision, cannot be said to have been made without regard to the evidence before the panel.
[12]
For these reasons, I am not persuaded that the decision here questioned should be set aside. Thus, an order has gone dismissing the application.
Applications dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/sms
[End of document]