[1]
McKeown, J.
: The applicant, a citizen of Argentina, seeks judicial review of a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board) dated June 15, 1992, wherein he was found not to be a Convention refugee. The issue is whether the Board denied the applicant a fair hearing when it denied him the opportunity to be represented by counsel at the continuation of his oral hearing.
Facts
[2]
The circumstances under which this case arises are appalling. During the hearing the applicant was represented by counsel. After the applicant's counsel had finished examining the applicant, the refugee hearing officer (RHO) commenced her examination of the applicant. The RHO asked questions as to why evidence indicating that a particular person was persecuting the applicant was not contained in the personal information form (PIF). Counsel for the applicant objected that the line of questioning was getting into the area of solicitor-client privilege. Counsel stated that what was contained in the PIF was determined by her. She told the Board that it should not question the applicant as to why certain information was not in the PIF because, as counsel, she was the one who made that determination. The Board nevertheless allowed the questions.
[3]
After a heated exchange between counsel and the Board, counsel informed the Board that she was withdrawing from the case. The exchange continues at pages 37-38 of the Transcript:
"Presiding Member: All right, then you may step out.
Counsel: I'll step out, but I'll just explain to Mr. Castroman that he has a right to have counsel present, and I think this case is finished.
Member Corley: Not as far as I'm concerned, Counsel. That's for us to decide.
Presiding Member: For you it is finished."
[4]
Before counsel withdrew from the hearing, the Board agreed to allow her an adjournment to discuss procedures with her client, but not specific evidence since the applicant was in the middle of cross-examination. The hearing resumed at p. 39 of the Transcript:
"Presiding Member: We will continue with this hearing, Mr. Castroman, despite the fact that your counsel has just withdrawn."
[5]
The Board did not ask the applicant if he was prepared to continue without counsel nor did it offer to adjourn in order that the applicant could seek new counsel. The Board then permitted the RHO to complete her cross-examination, which was quite brief. The presiding member then asked a couple of questions. The Transcript continues at page 42:
"Claimant: I have a headache.
Presiding Member: I don't blame you. It's been a long morning. Lot's of questions asked of you. We'll be finished soon.
We have completed all our examination of you, Mr. Castroman. This is a time that we receive documentary evidence, and what I intend to do is to receive whatever documents the Refugee Hearing Officer wants to submit to us. We also give the opportunity to both the Refugee Officer or your counsel , or your representative, or in this case yourself ...
Claimant: I don't have one.
Presiding Member: ... to give submissions of your case."
[6]
The Board then gave the claimant one month to make written submissions. The applicant completed the hearing by stating at page 47 of the Transcript:
"Claimant: I know that you're going to be impartial. I can see it in your faces. Thank you very much."
Analysis
[7]
The PIF is a form the Immigration and Refugee Board requires claimants to complete as a part of their initial claim for Convention refugee status. The object of the form is to provide the claimant with an opportunity to tell his or her story early in the process. One of the primary ways that the Board tests a claimant's credibility is by comparing the PIF with the claimant's oral testimony. It is intended that all questions concerning the PIF, directed to the claimant, should be answered fully. In my view, it is not proper for a lawyer to interfere with the RHO's or a member's questioning of a claimant with respect to his or her PIF. The lawyer cannot attempt to shield the client from questioning as to why certain matters were omitted from the PIF, on the basis of solicitor-client privilege. If the lawyer seeks to do this, then the Board would be entitled to give very little weight to the client's credibility.
[8]
Notwithstanding the applicant's kind works at the conclusion of the hearing, the applicant has been ill-served by the improper conduct of his counsel and the intransigence of the Board in this matter. Counsel's conduct was so reprehensible in this matter that the Board should have considered informing the Law Society of her behaviour. Counsel is not at liberty to leave a client in the middle of a case simply because he or she does not agree with a ruling of an administrative tribunal. Counsel is perfectly entitled to make objections to rulings and to take whatever proceedings are required at the conclusion of the case to have the matter reviewed or appealed as the circumstances may dictate. Although the frustration of the members of the Board is understandable in this case, the Board was still required to act in accordance with basic principles of administrative law. It was not for the Board to encourage counsel to take the steps that she did, but rather the Board should have alerted counsel to her responsibility to her client. Furthermore, as a very minimum, the Board should have asked the applicant if he wished to continue after counsel left, or whether he wished an adjournment to seek other counsel.
[9]
Not all decisions to proceed without providing the applicant the benefit of counsel result in reviewable error. However, in this case the Board compounded the denial of natural justice when it refused to offer the applicant the right of re-examination after completion of the cross-examination. This failure meant that the applicant had no opportunity to explain any of his answers given in cross-examination. To make the matter worse, the Board misled the applicant into thinking he had no right of re-examination by stating that the next stage in the hearing was to receive documentary evidence.
[10]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 502 (F.C.A.), Chief Justice Thurlow set out the criteria for determining whether a Board has properly exercised its discretion to disallow counsel. He refers to Webster, J.'s , reasons in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Div. Ct.) and then states at page 514 that there are:
"... six matters for consideration in exercising such a discretion. They included:
1. the seriousness of the charge and of the potential penalty;
2. whether any points of law are likely to arise;
3. the capacity of a particular person to present his own case;
4. procedural difficulties;
5. the need for reasonable speed in making the adjudication;
6. the need for fairness as between prisoners and as between prisoners and prison officers."
[11]
The sixth category is of no relevance in the matter before me. Joyal, J., expanded further on the test in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) when he states at page 62:
"A right to counsel is not more absolute than the right of a tribunal to determine its own process. In the event that there is a conflict between the two, I believe that for the right to counsel to predominate over the other, regard must be had to surrounding circumstances to determine if in fact an applicant has suffered any prejudice. In my view, the right to counsel is but an adjunct to the doctrine of natural justice and fairness, to the rule of 'audi alteram partem'; to the rule of full answer and defence and to similar rules which have long developed to assure that the rights and obligations of any person subject to any kind of enquiry are to be adjudged and determined according to law. Unless there be found a breach of any such rule, resulting in some prejudice to a person, it cannot be said that a refusal to adjourn deprives a tribunal of its jurisdiction or is grounds to quash its decision."
[12]
In the matter before me, the question as to whether the applicant is a refugee or not is an indication of the seriousness of the matter, and the potential penalty is very serious since he could be returned to his home country where it is alleged that his life may be in danger. The question of solicitor-client privilege has arisen as a point of law in this matter and this question clearly requires counsel. This applicant did not have the capacity to present his own case. The right to a fair hearing takes precedence over the need for a quick and speedy hearing.
[13]
In addition, in this case, prejudice can be found. The panel relies on one of the applicant's answers given in cross-examination when it states at p. 3 of the reasons:
"Furthermore, the claimant's testimony regarding who or how many in the military had heard the rumour was vague."
[14]
By not providing for re-examination, the Board did not allow the applicant the opportunity to explain or clarify his answers in this respect. He needed counsel to assist him. Also, the stress experienced by the applicant by having his lawyer walk out on him in the middle of the hearing should not be overlooked.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 239, Décary, J.A., dealt with a situation where unreliable counsel failed to appear. The adjudicator refused to allow an adjournment. Décary, J.A., states at p. 243 [Imm. L.R.]:
"It is clear, when one reads the transcript, that the applicant was being penalized by the Adjudicator for the previous poor behaviour of her counsel, of which she was not aware and which she had no reason to suspect."
[15]
Décary, J.A., then quoted with approval Justice Le Dain in
Cardinal and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.(3d) 35; [1986] 1 W.W.R. 577; 23 C.C.C.(3d) 118; 24 D.L.R.(4th) 44, where he states at p. 661  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that:
"... the denial of a right to a fair hearing must always render a decision invalid, whether or not it may appear to a reviewing court that the hearing would likely have resulted in a different decision. The right to a fair hearing must be regarded as an independent, unqualified right which finds its essential justification in the sense of procedural justice which any person affected by an administrative decision is entitled to have. It is not for a court to deny that right and sense of justice on the basis of speculation as to what the result might have been had there been a hearing."
[16]
This is not a case where the administrative tribunal offered the person an opportunity to obtain counsel and the person declined the offer and decided to continue on his or her own. Furthermore, there is no evidence in the matter before me to show that the applicant had any prior knowledge of his counsel's proposed action. The applicant acted reasonably when his lawyer took it upon herself to leave the hearing.
[17]
The applicant has been denied a fair hearing by the Board. The application is allowed, the decision of the Board is set aside and the matter is returned to the Board for redetermination by a newly constituted panel in a manner not inconsistent with these reasons.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/dlr
[End of document]