[1]
Walsh, J.
: Applicant applies for certiorari to question a decision dated November 25, 1987, by defendant releasing applicant from the Canadian Armed Forces which is sought on the following grounds:
(1) that in purporting to address the question asked it, the defendant failed to give the applicant an opportunity to be heard in breach of its duty of fairness to the applicant;
(2) that the respondent failed to put the applicant on recorded warning or counselling or probation before releasing him and therefore the respondent was without jurisdiction to make the subject decision to release.
[2]
This matter was previously before the court and on December 20, 1989, Justice Cullen issued an order finding that the court had jurisdiction to hear the motion and that the decision of Colonel A.W. DeQuetteville made the 25th November 1987 discharging applicant from the Canadian Armed Forces be set aside. [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .]
[3]
The reasons for order of Justice Cullen sets out the facts. From September 30, 1980 until November 25, 1987 applicant served as a member of the Canadian Armed Forces and at the time of his release he was based in CFB Baden in Germany. He was honourably released on November 25, 1987 which applicant seeks to have reviewed and set aside.
[4]
The claimant had been advised that his behaviour would lead to "career action" and he was given notice of the grounds supporting the release recommendation and of his right to grieve the decision. Justice Cullen notes, however, that his release was a "fait accompli" before he was given an opportunity to respond to the evidence against him and been given the opportunity to be heard. It was also done without a recorded warning; nor was counselling and probation awarded. A regulation specifically states that normally these should precede any recommendation based on his shortcomings. While defendant states that this is not done in every instance, the judgment commented that perhaps this is not fair as the reason for the warning and counselling is to allow one to take steps to overcome these shortcomings.
[5]
The reasons continue that since the principle of procedural fairness is now recognized, applicant should have full opportunity to reply to the case before him, including correcting any relevant information which he feels to be incorrect.
[6]
Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth John Noonan was applicant's Commanding Officer at the base from August 1986 to November 1987. On May 18, 1987, he agreed to applicant's request for an interview relating to a recorded warning levied upon him by Captain J.C. Lawrence as provided in the
Code of Service Discipline
set out in the
National Defence Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-5, as amended. This is an administrative measure to deal with a member whose performance or conduct is not of an acceptable standard. After meeting applicant, Noonan wrote a note to file and later met with Lawrence and two noncommissioned officers to discuss the matter, being advised of numerous administrative and attitudinal problems of applicant with respect to which he had been orally counselled. He gave applicant the benefit of the doubt however, and had the recorded warning removed from his file. He met again with Diotte and Lawrence, however, before the decision advising applicant of his concerns with his failure to fulfil alert recall duties, warning him strongly that future divergence would be unacceptable and that in future a recorded warning and other career action could result. Other financial and administrative problems of applicant were also brought to his attention by Lawrence and incorporated in a confidential memo to Noonan dated May 27, 1987.
[7]
In July 1987, Noonan had some concerns about applicant's suitability for employment in the Canadian Forces and prepared a letter to Dr. D.J. MacKay, Chief of Psychiatry at the Canadian Armed Forces Hospital in Europe, which was however, never sent as applicant himself had apparently sought and had an interview with Dr. MacKay. In August, Dr. MacKay telephoned Noonan to advise that in his opinion applicant's psychiatric condition had deteriorated significantly and recommended further psychiatric tests at National Defence Medical Centre in Ottawa. The tests in Ottawa found no psychiatric disability but that any and all behaviourial aberrations were secondary to applicant's personality style. Dr. MacKay then recommended that consideration be given to administrative release.
[8]
Applicant had requested to join a particular unit training at Camp Borden, Ontario, and arrangements were made for him to take this course, but on arrival there he refused, affidavit evidence indicating his reasons were not substantiated.
[9]
On October 6, 1987, applicant had requested the appointment of Lieutenant Morgan as his Assisting Officer and Lieutenant Colonel Noonan arranged this. On October 9, Noonan received from Lawrence a memorandum recommending compulsory release of applicant from the Canadian Forces. Some time in October 1987, Morgan requested a meeting with Noonan respecting applicant indicating that he would be willing to take him permanently into his unit. Despite this Noonan advised Morgan that the apparent current good behaviour of applicant while temporarily assigned to Morgan's unit was in his view of a temporary nature, but that applicant's history of aggressive, belligerent behaviour towards peers and superiors was detrimental to the unit's good order and discipline, that he was an administrative "headache" and unsuitable for continued service.
[10]
Morgan did not convince Noonan that applicant should be placed on recorded warning or on counselling and probation. Noonan gave Morgan his reasons for supporting the recommendation that applicant be released, and told Morgan that he would formally advise him of his recommendation once he had completed his report to the Base Commander, which report was forwarded on October 22, 1987, the final decision having to be made by Base Commander DeQuetteville.
[11]
Justice Cullen reviewed all that Noonan did and found he had been completely unbiased and fair to applicant, having acted throughout in an honest, forthright and reasonable fashion. However, he found that the Base Commander should have permitted applicant and his Assisting Officer Morgan to make representations before his final decision, and that his failure to do so was a breach of procedural fairness.
[12]
No grievance procedure was brought by applicant, nor any review pursuant to s. 18 of the
National Defence Act
, firstly because of erroneous legal advice given to him, but Justice Cullen concludes that the availability of that procedure does not overcome the procedural unfairness of the Base Commander which he has found, and accordingly issued the certiorari.
[13]
This order was appealed by respondent and on December 2, 1990 under No. A-631-89, the Court of Appeal rendered a judgment finding that Colonel DeQuetteville should have been joined in the proceedings as a respondent, to defend the propriety of the procedure he adopted. The Court of Appeal joined him. The judgment of the Trial Division of December 20, 1989 was set aside. [See 134 N.R. 71.]
[14]
The notice of motion was further amended so as to read after the word "certiorari":
"to question a decision dated November 6, 1987, made by respondent DeQuetteville releasing the applicant from the Canadian Armed Forces and to further question the applicant's release of November 25, 1987 and the certificate of service dated December 9, 1987, which is requested on the following grounds."
[15]
It is the motion which is now before me for decision on the merits, with respect to which the Court of Appeal made no findings.
[16]
While a number of issues have been raised in this motion, some of them can be readily disposed of before dealing with the main issue which is, in my view, whether defendant failed to give applicant an opportunity to be heard in breach of his duty of fairness to him.
Certiorari
[17]
Respondent submits that certiorari cannot be against the Crown. Cullen, J., dealt with this, stating at p. 187:
"Certiorari is available as a general remedy for the supervision of the machinery of government decision making. The basis for broad reach of the remedy lies in the general duty of fairness resting on all public decision makers (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.R.). Since this decision of the Supreme Court ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) it is law that certiorari is not confined to decisions required to be made on a judicial or quasi-judicial basis but that it applies whenever a public body has the power to decide any matter affecting the rights, interests, property, privileges or liberties of any person."
[18]
He concluded that the writ should issue since there was a breach of procedural fairness by failing to permit applicant and Morgan, as his Assisting Officer, to make representations before the final decision was made by the Base Commander to discharge applicant from the Canadian Forces.
[19]
The Court of Appeal also dealt with this issue, stating that appellant's counsel submits that "Colonel DeQuetteville ought to have been joined, and that certiorari cannot lie against the Crown. It does seem evident that the decision to release was in fact made by Colonel DeQuetteville on November 6, 1987. Between that date and the release on November 25, 1987, the necessary administrative paperwork had obviously to be attended to pursuant to the direction contained in paragraph 3 of Colonel DeQuetteville's decision." [p. 73 N.R.]
[20]
Although the issue of joining him had not been raised in the proceedings below it was ordered that he should be joined, and the notice of motion amended as indicated. In reaching this decision the Court of Appeal stated at p. 74:
"Colonel DeQuetteville is entitled to an opportunity to defend the propriety of his decision and his authority to make that decision in the manner it was made."
[21]
Even if there were any doubt, therefore, as to whether certiorari could issue against the first named respondent, the adding of Colonel DeQuetteville as an additional respondent makes it clear that certiorari was in issue if the facts warrant it.
Jurisdiction Of The Court
[22]
This issue was also dealt with both in the Trial Division and the Court of Appeal. The appeal judgment reads at p. 73:
"The jurisdiction of the Trial Division to grant the relief requested was put in issue and was resolved in favour of the respondent by the Court Motions Judge. He found that jurisdiction existed under s. 17(6) ([sic] this should read s. 17(5)) of the
Federal Court Act
:
'The Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine every application for a writ of habeas corpus ad subjiciendum, writ of certiorari, writ of prohibition, or writ of mandamus, in relation to any member of the Canadian Forces serving outside Canada.'"
Necessity For Recorded Warning
Or Counselling And Probation
[23]
On the facts of the present case, the order to release applicant was made without first giving him a recorded warning or counselling and probation.
[24]
These procedures are provided for in
Canadian Forces Administrative Order
(
CFAO
) 26-17. They are administrative devices designed to raise a member's performance or conduct to an acceptable standard. Section 2(d) reads:
"Normally, an R.W. and C. & P. should precede any recommendation for release that is based on a member's shortcomings."
[25]
The use of the word "normally" indicates that exceptions to the general rule can be made.
[26]
In the present case, applicant had a long record of aggressive and threatening conduct to his superiors and other members of the Canadian Forces. He was on one occasion given a recorded warning which was later withdrawn from his record, concerning a conviction and $250 fine for an assault. He was repeatedly warned and counselled about his conduct, disregard of duties, and other matters including financial problems, lies about the course to which he had been sent at Camp Borden, assaults on and insults to a female member of the Forces, threatening to go to the newspapers with complaints about his officers, and so forth. These are set out at great length in exhibits to the affidavit of Lt. Col. Noonan and it is unnecessary to summarize all of this. It appears evident however that the normal procedure for recorded warnings and even more counselling or probation would have had no effect on his ungovernable conduct. He was well aware of his problem but apparently could not control his temper or arrogant attitude, although on occasion his conduct would be polite and respectful. I conclude that in this case no useful purpose would have been served by giving him a recorded warning or counselling and probation. This was usual, and desirable in most cases but the use of the word "normally" in the directive indicates that it is not mandatory.
[27]
I am supported in this conclusion by the affidavit of Colonel Raymond Hurley who at the relevant time was Director, Personnel Career Administration Other Ranks (DPCAOR) at headquarters staff of the Chief of Defence Staff in Ottawa, which pursuant to s. 18 of the
National Defence Act
has the ultimate authority as to whether a C.F. member should be released or whether a former C.F. member who has been released by a C.F. authority subordinate to the Chief of Defence Staff should be reengaged.
[28]
In paragraph 13 of his affidavit he states:
"The fact that Mr. Diotte was not accorded either a 'recorded warning' or put on 'counselling and probation' does not render his release improper. While these administrative measures are normally utilized prior to a release decision being taken, such is not mandatory. From my experience as DPCAOR I am aware of numerous involuntary releases that were not preceded by either of these administrative measures."
Involuntary Release Procedure
[29]
Section 1.13(3) of the
Queen's Regulations and Orders
(
QR&O
) provides that:
"An officer not below the rank of colonel serving outside Canada may, with the approval of the Minister, exercise and perform any power or right that by QR&O is vested in, and any act or thing that by QR&O is required to be done or may be done by the Chief of the Defence Staff."
[30]
It was pursuant to this that Colonel DeQuetteville as Base Commander at C.F. Baden in Germany was delegated to recommend the release.
[31]
Section 15.01 of
QR&O
dealing with release of officers and men states that this can only be done in accordance with that article and table thereto.
[32]
Applicant was released pursuant to s. 5(f) of the table as being "Unsuitable for Further Service". This results in an honourable release.
[33]
The table states it:
"Applies to the release of an officer or noncommissioned member who, either wholly or chiefly because of factors within his control, develops personal weaknesses or behaviour or has domestic or other personal problems that reasonably impair his usefulness to or impose an excessive administrative burden on the Canadian Forces."
[34]
Administrative Order
CFAO
15-2 in Table 2 provides for the release pursuant to s. 5(f) of corporals and privates who have nine years or less of service, (applicant is in that category) - the release authority being the Base Commander or C.O. (with exceptions not applicable here).
[35]
Section 10 of
CFAO
15-2 of which Table 2 is part states, inter alia:
"A designated release authority shall not delegate such authority. The designated release authority must personally approve the release in writing. The document authorizing the release must contain a statement of factors and/or circumstances which culminated in the decision to approve the release."
[36]
Colonel DeQuetteville's order for the compulsory release of applicant, dated November 6, 1987, reads:
"1. I concur with the recommendations submitted in ref. A.
"2. It is clearly evident that Capt. Diotte has a total disregard for the
Regulations
and
Orders
that govern the Canadian Armed Forces. His performance and attitude have deteriorated to a point where he can no longer be considered salvageable as a member of the Canadian Armed Forces. The absence of formal action to place the member on recorded warning and counselling and probation is acknowledged but considered understandable in these circumstances. The ample time spent by senior staff members in personally counselling Capt. Diotte is felt to more than compensate for the formal counselling requirement.
"3. In view of the above, the B.P. Admn. O. is directed to take the necessary action to administratively release Capt. Diotte under
QR&O
15.01 item 5(f)."
[37]
While the reasons given are brief, I consider this to be sufficient to comply with the s. 10 (supra) requirement that the factors and circumstances culminating in the decision to approve the release must be given, especially as applicant was well aware of the many complaints which had been made with respect to his conduct and attitude.
[38]
In Colonel DeQuetteville's affidavit he states that he recalls receiving a copy of Noonan's memorandum of October 22, 1987 with attachments and reading their contents.
[39]
During the first hearing of this motion before Cullen, J., the position taken was that as Base Commander it was he who made the recommendation for Diotte's release. Lt. Colonel Noonan however in his affidavit refers to the "recommendation" as his and his memorandum of October 22, 1987 to Col. DeQuetteville is headed "Recommendation for Release". I do not believe much turns on this - it is rather a question of semantics. In effect he recommended to Col. DeQuetteville that the latter as Base Commander should recommend the release as required by Regulation 15.01.
[40]
It was certainly Noonan who made this investigation in depth. As a matter of fact, Noonan had, on July 25, 1986, been named as Commanding Officer Canadian Forces Base Baden - Soellengin by Major General J.L. Sharpe, Commander Canadian Forces Europe. The order refers to having been made by authority granted by the Chief of Defence Staff and for the purpose of proceedings under the
Code of Service Discipline
and forfeitures and deductions and that he may exercise his powers over those of lower ranks under his supervision and control as Commanding Officer at the Base. He cannot be said therefore to have been delegated by Col. DeQuetteville, himself delegated as Base Commander, and therefore incapable of delegating authority to make his decision to Lt. Col. Noonan.
[41]
Defendant now takes a somewhat different position as a result of Col. DeQuetteville's affidavit. He states that as Base Commander of a base with over 5,000 personnel it was not possible to attend to all the details of the administrative services he had to provide so had to delegate responsibility to subordinate officers in accordance with the chain of command. Diotte was in a section of the Base Technical Services Unit, the officer in charge being Captain J.C. Lawrence, the unit being commanded by Lieutenant Colonel K.J. Noonan. Experience indicates that it is the section officer (Lawrence) who is involved with his subordinates on a day-to-day basis who should deal with personnel problems in his section, though always accountable to his own superior officer, the Officer in Command (Noonan) who is dependent on section officer's input. In some matters, in particular in discipline, the Commanding Officer takes effective charge of the matter. Powers are reposed in the appropriate level of the hierarchy of command and in the case of Noonan, as already stated, he had already been delegated as Commanding Officer for proceedings under the
Code
of Service Discipline
, and it fell to him to deal with questions of release also.
[42]
The affidavit states that it was Noonan's responsibility to come to a decision whether or not applicant ought to be released, which would take the form of a recommendation to himself (DeQuetteville) to be dealt with by him. He therefore states that his main duty was not to inquire into and test the truth of the allegations made by Lawrence and acted on by Noonan. He states: "I took it for granted, as in fact was the case, that Noonan had spoken with the applicant, given him his reasons for his recommended cause of action and that the applicant had been given an opportunity to reply and give his side of the story."
[43]
He adds: "I was not concerned with the merits of the recommendation, but mostly to ensure that Noonan had acted within his powers." He had to determine whether the absence of formal writing and counselling had been properly compensated for by sufficient personal counselling and on reading Noonan's memorandum and attachments, he concluded that the ample time spent by senior staff members in personally counselling the applicant more than compensated for the formal counselling requirement in the
C.F.A.O.
's, and therefore directed that action be taken to administratively release him under
QR&O
5.01 Item 5(f).
[44]
His affidavit concludes, in paragraph 22:
"That based on my knowledge and experience, once Noonan had made his recommendation that the applicant be released it would have been improper for me to have interfered with that recommendation on grounds other than failure to comply with the relevant policies and procedures amounting to an excess of jurisdiction in the exercise of Noonan of his powers, I say as a fact that it was Noonan who made the decision, and my job was merely to review the decision in the terms referred to."
[45]
While Col. DeQuetteville's view that as Base Commander he cannot personally investigate all matters of discipline requiring a decision by him, and must rely on the investigation being done and recommendations made by officers at a lower level in the chain of command is understandable, it is nevertheless clear that it is he who had to make the decision in this case. In doing so, he had to apply
QR&O
15.01, Item 5(f) (supra) and conclude that applicant "because of factors within his control, develops personal weaknesses or behaviour or has domestic or other personal problems that seriously impair his usefulness to or impose an excessive administrative burden on the Canadian Forces".
[46]
This clearly involves conclusions of fact going into the merits of the allegations against applicant which led to the recommendation that he be released. It is not enough for him to say that he only had to look into the relevant policies and procedures amounting to an excess of jurisdiction in the exercise of Noonan of his power, or that it would be improper for him to have interfered with his recommendation. There is nothing in the
Regulations
or directives allowing him to make this distinction. He is not in the position of a judge considering the issue of certiorari who looks for procedural deficiencies or lack of jurisdiction in the making of the order under attack without going into its merits. To make the recommendation for release properly he must look at the facts on which the recommendation for release was made. While he does state in paragraph 9 that he received Noonan's memorandum dated October 22, 1987 and read same with attachments and considered their contents, it is clear from subsequent paragraphs that he directed his mind principally to the issue as to whether it was proper in the circumstances to dispense with formal counselling and not whether a recommendation for release should be made by him, based on the facts disclosed in the documents.
[47]
While this by itself might be sufficient to dispose of the present motion, there are a few other issues to deal with and which require some reference to the facts in the record.
Facts
[48]
It is unnecessary to go into the details of Lt. Col. Noonan's dealings with Diotte. After a number of interviews and verbal warnings during May 1987 without any improvement  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's conduct, including his refusal to take the P.E.R.I. (Physical Education and Recreation Instructor) course at CFB Borden in July which he had requested and to which he was sent, Lt. Col. Noonan considered sending him to Dr. T.J. MacKay, Chief of Psychiatry, Canadian Forces Hospital, Europe, but Diotte saw Dr. MacKay on his own initiative. The latter on August 11 advised Noonan that Diotte's psychiatric condition had deteriorated significantly and that he should undergo further testing at National Defence Medical Centre, Ottawa. Diotte's conduct became so serious and violent that his refusal to obey orders led to the necessity of placing him under close arrest. He was taken to Canada for further psychiatric tests, which as previously stated, proved negative. I mention this again because, as a result, in September Diotte filed a grievance against this. This grievance has now passed through two stages of hearings and been dismissed at both and a third level hearing has been refused by the Chief of Defence Staff. As a result of the medical reports received from Ottawa, Dr. MacKay recommended consideration be given to administrative release. This was initiated in a memorandum from Captain Lawrence dated October 29, 1987.
[49]
It might be noted that, far from it being offensive to Capt. Diotte to be required to undergo psychiatric assessment, it might have been to his eventual advantage had he been found to have a psychiatric problem and been released for medical reasons.
[50]
Meanwhile, orders had come from NDHQ Ottawa that Diotte be remustered to the Vehicle Technician Trade 411. This was necessary as he had previously been in this trade, but had been remustered to P.E.R.I. at his request, but on refusal to take the course, now was remustered to his former trade.
[51]
In August 1987, Diotte was temporarily transferred to 128 Air Defence Battery, his new commanding officer being Major Stowell. Lieut. Morgan was acting commanding officer and was assigned as Assisting Officer to Diotte. That is how he came into the picture. I refer to his affidavit of June 27, 1989 filed in connection with the motion before Cullen, J. (which was of course not before Lt. Col. Noonan or Col. DeQuetteville in 1987), but was referred to in argument on the present motion, in which he states in paragraph 10:
"In my view, based on my observation of the applicant from August to October 1987 and on military exercises during a week in May 1986, and conversations with other soldiers, that the applicant had great enthusiasm for the military, approached his tasks with 'super enthusiasm' and made a fine field soldier."
[52]
Produced with Diotte's affidavit is a memorandum from Major Stowell, which states, inter alia:
"His performance to date has been outstanding. He works well with his peers and gets things done with perfection. The Maintenance N.C.O. has stated that 'Capt. Diotte is the "best man on the job to date"'."
[53]
He states that he has been working on weekends and after hours repairing vehicles urgently required. The other vehicle technicians enjoy working with him and his experience has been extremely helpful. He concludes:
"Capt. Diotte's dedicated effort has been an asset towards the operational status of the Battery. The Battery Sergeant Major and all Snr. members of 128 AAD Bty. would appreciate having Capt. Diotte's employment with the Bty. extended for as long as possible."
[54]
The provisions of
QR&O
Regulations,
C.F.A.O.
Directives, and grievance procedures provide a very complete protection for any officer or member of the Canadian Forces from any unfair abuse of power from his superiors if properly applied and taken advantage of. There is no doubt that Captain Lawrence, his Commanding Officer, who had suffered most from the many complaints against applicant and had personally experienced his insubordination, felt strongly that he should be released as unsuitable for further service and that further recorded warnings or counselling would not change his conduct, and wrote a strong memorandum to this effect.
[55]
Lt. Col. Noonan, however, did a very thorough investigation, including many meetings with Diotte and subsequently with him and his Assisting Officer, then Lieutenant Morgan. While he listened to their representations it is evident that he had already made up his mind. When advised by Lt. Morgan of Diotte's excellent behaviour while on temporary assignment to his unit, he expressed the view that this must be of a temporary nature in view of their past experience with him. He advised Lt. Morgan that as soon as he had completed his memorandum to the Base Commander, Diotte would be advised. He completed it on October 22, 1987 and met with Diotte and Morgan at his office, reading the memorandum to them and hearing their answers to the charges and arguments, which he considered added nothing new. He advised that Diotte was free to present a grievance against any decision to release him but that he might be a civilian before it was resolved. He had his memorandum and bulky attachments reproduced and delivered them to Morgan. In the intervening period to November 6 when Col. DeQuetteville made his memorandum concurring with Lt. Col. Noonan's recommendation there was no further communication with Diotte or Lt. Morgan.
[56]
Quite aside from any considerations of comity of judges, I see no reason, after reviewing all the material in the record, to disagree with Cullen, J.'s conclusions that Noonan had dealt fairly with applicant. He and his representative had had a full opportunity to present their arguments before Noonan's recommendation was sent to Col. DeQuetteville for action on it. Although admittedly they were talking to someone whose mind was already made up, they were unable to persuade him to change his views. Not yielding to persuasion is not an indication of unfairness, provided the representations made are permitted and listened to.
[57]
The problem arises, however, from the fact that neither applicant, nor his representative, made any attempt to communicate with Col. DeQuetteville in the period between October 22, 1987 when they were aware of the recommendations of Lt. Col. Noonan, having been given a copy of his memorandum, and November 6, 1987 when Col. DeQuetteville acted on it. They apparently believed that they would hear from him and be invited to make representation, but he was under no obligation to do this. Had they made written or oral representations to him, he no doubt would have taken them into consideration.
[58]
For example, although Major Stowell's lavish praise of Diotte's conduct while temporarily serving under him appears in a document dated October 30, 1987 attached to Diotte's affidavit in connection with these motions and therefore would not be in Lt. Col. Noonan's report, they could have obtained a similar endorsement from him at that time. There is also reference to Lt. Morgan's willingness to have him remain in his unit to which he had been temporarily assigned. Neither was there any mention of the recommendations made by Captain Lawrence and Lt. Col. Noonan in December 1986 and March 1987 that he was an excellent soldier. It was of course largely after that that his conduct rapidly deteriorated.
[59]
These were favourable factors which might have been brought to Col. DeQuetteville's attention before he made his recommendation. Whether they would have had any effect in view of the long history of behaviour resulting in him being found to be a disruptive influence and detrimental to the operations of his unit in Germany, is another matter.
[60]
Furthermore, no grievance proceedings were taken prior to Col. DeQuetteville's recommendation. Although Col. DeQuetteville made his decision on November 6, 1987, the actual release was not made until November 25. The Court of Appeal in its decision comments on the fact that in the interval the necessary administrative paperwork had to be attended to.
[61]
It is not clear whether applicant was made aware of the November 6 decision until after his release was finalized but in any event no grievance was made during this period nor apparently any enquiries as to whether a decision had been reached. Applicant decided instead to proceed in civil court, whether because in view of the outcome of his grievance respecting his close arrest he felt that he would not succeed in any grievance against his recommended release, or because he had been discouraged by Lt. Noonan's statement that in any event any such grievance would have to be dealt with as a civilian. This is perhaps unfortunate as it is preferable that such matters be dealt with by the military authorities, ample opportunities for presentation of grievances being given. However, it has been determined that in this case the court does have jurisdiction, so applicant was entitled to proceed in this manner.
[62]
Col. DeQuetteville's recommendation for release was also subject however to a further review by the military. Col. Hurley, at the time Director, Personnel Career Administration Other Ranks at headquarters of the Chief of Defence Staff, whose affidavit has already been referred to, had a staff of officers under him to study redress of grievances respecting such releases, which can only be filed before the effective date of the release. Despite this, Col. Hurley states that this did not restrict the ability of his office to review the matter, when a letter was received from Diotte on March 14, 1988. His staff went into the record thoroughly, and he concluded that the release order should be sustained. His letter to Diotte respecting this goes into considerable detail and concludes that applicant has been dealt with very fairly and leniently.
[63]
In his judgment, Cullen, J., states at p. 190:
"Although we are assured that this is a very comprehensive procedure, and I have no doubt that Col. Hurley and his people were very thorough, this s. 18 review cannot and does not overcome the procedural unfairness of the Base Commander who did not permit the applicant and his Assisting Officer to make representations before the Base Commander's final decision was made."
[64]
I agree with this conclusion which is amply supported by the jurisprudence. Despite there appearing to be very good grounds for the release, and the likelihood that the result would have been the same even if applicant and his Assisting Officer had had an opportunity to make further representations to Col. DeQuetteville before he completed his decision, applicant must succeed in the present proceedings on this issue of procedural fairness. What will happen as a result of this is not for the court to decide on this motion, but for the military authorities to deal with.
Jurisprudence
[65]
Among the cases referred to is an Irish case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the importance necessarily attached to the rank in the Defence Forces, care should be taken to ensure that the person whose discharge is recommended should be given due notice of the recommendation and the opportunity to be heard. For example, human nature being what it is, a noncommissioned officer or officer, due to personal dislike or a personality difference, could make life almost unbearable for a person of lower rank and treat him unfairly by what is called 'leaning on him'. It would be most unjust if the member being treated unfairly could be discharged from the Defence Forces on grounds based on reports from such superiors and without being given the opportunity of showing that he was singled out for special treatment when, if allowed to make a case in his own defence, he might well be able to establish that the reports made of him were unfair ..."
[66]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(3d) 28, although dealing with a court martial on a criminal charge it was held that the applicant must have "direct access to the mind or conscious understanding of the decider, the adjudicator". Where the decision maker accorded the applicant no opportunity to make submissions except through a subordinate, applicant and his counsel were confronted with an officially invented unfair process. The decision states:
"the appellant/applicant's right to fair procedure, its fundamental justice to benefit of
audi alteram partem
are simply denied in this procedure, in which he is obliged to make his submissions to the decision maker through the offices and judgment of the decision maker's subordinate assistant official. Honourable as the [subordinate] is, as one would surely expect, at least most of the time, he or she is distinctly not the appellant's advocate. In acting as the [subordinate] does in such matters, he argues effectively obstructs the appellant from direct access to the [decision maker] who is, in turn, blocked from hearing from the appellant although designated to make the ultimate decision ..."
[67]
In the case of
Cardinal and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice Le Dain states at p. 661:
"I find it necessary to affirm that the denial of a right to a fair hearing must always render a decision invalid, whether or not it may appear to a reviewing court that the hearing would likely have resulted in a different decision. The right to a fair hearing must be regarded as an independent unqualified right which finds it is essential justification in the sense of procedural justice which any person affected by an administrative decision is entitled to have. It is not for a court to deny that right and sense of justice on the basis of speculation as to what the result might have been had there been a hearing."
Conclusion And Costs
[68]
The Court of Appeal ordered that the relief sought in the motion be amended, and the order for issue of certiorari will therefore be amended accordingly. The appeal judgment discussed the question of costs but made no order. It was pointed out that had Col. DeQuetteville been joined in the first instance the matter would have been decided at the first hearing, no appeal being necessary, on the issue of nonjoinder. While this was the fault of applicant it was not wholly so, as respondent should have raised the issue at the time of the motion. In my discretion as to costs, I find that no costs should be allowed in the appeal, but that applicant is entitled to costs in the Trial Division. The fact that there have been two hearings there, the second of which would have been unnecessary had Col. DeQuetteville been joined to commence with was primarily the fault of applicant, though respondent is also partially to blame for not raising this issue to commence with, leads me to conclude that applicant should be allowed only one-half of the costs of the second hearing.
[69]
While applicant seeks costs on a solicitor and client basis, and there is no doubt that his counsel has been extremely diligent and that a vast amount of time has been spent in preparing volumes of exhibits, many annexed to affidavits being duplicated, and extensive research of jurisprudence in many areas, only some of which was actually referred to or necessary, this in itself does not justify awarding costs on this basis. Much of applicant's costs have been brought about by himself, and decisions made by him and his advisors not to undertake grievance proceedings against the decision complained of and not to join Col. DeQuetteville as a respondent initially, and respondent cannot be blamed for this or for prolonging the litigation. Costs will therefore be on the usual party to party basis.
Application allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/blk
[End of document]