[1]
Rothstein, J.
: These reasons apply to all three files in the style of cause. In the originating notices of motion, the applicants seek review of the decisions of the respondent, pursuant to s. 41 of the
Access to Information Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1, not to release certain information. The matters before me are interlocutory motions for interim orders allowing designated counsel for the applicants access, on a confidential basis, to the documents and information to which the applicants have been refused access, subject to an undertaking of nondisclosure and counsel obtaining the appropriate level of security clearance. The position of applicants' counsel is that he requires access to the information in order to be able to argue the access case on its merits.
[2]
The applicants have requested information from the archival records of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) concerning the Canadian Union of Postal Workers (CUPW). The court has inspected the documents. About 4,000 pages of information have not been disclosed pursuant to ss. 13(1), 15(1), 16(1), and 19(1) of the
Access to Information Act.
Each of these subsections deals with a different exemption:
(a) Section 13(1) provides that the head of a government institution shall refuse to disclose information obtained in confidence from a foreign state, international organization or from a province.
(b) Section 15(1) provides that the head of a government institution may refuse to disclose information, the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to be injurious to matters such as the conduct of international affairs, defence or the detection, prevention or suppression of subversive or hostile activities.
(c) Section 16(1) provides that the head of a government institution may refuse to disclose information obtained or prepared by an investigative body pertaining to matters such as the detection, prevention or suppression of crime and the enforcement of laws.
(d) Section 19(1) provides that the head of a government institution shall refuse to disclose personal information as defined in section 3 of the
Privacy Act.
[3]
Counsel for the applicants first addressed the disclosure of the material for which exemption was claimed under ss. 13(1) and 15(1) of the
Act
. He argued that the material which was claimed to be confidential by virtue of s. 15(1) was subject to a lower standard of confidentiality than the information claimed to be confidential under s. 13(1). His argument was that the necessity for confidentiality under s. 15(1) was subject to an "injury test", as opposed to a s. 13(1) claim which he called a "class claim".
[4]
I do not accept counsel's submissions. Section 52, which governs applications for documents claimed to be confidential under ss. 13 and 15, provides counsel for the respondent an opportunity to make in camera and ex parte representations. Section 52 reads:
"52(1) Any application under section 41 or 42 relating to a record or a part of a record that the head of a government institution has refused to disclose by reason of paragraph 13(1)(a) or (b) or section 15 shall be heard and determined by the Associate Chief Justice of the Federal Court or by such other judge of the court as the Associate Chief Justice may designate to hear such applications.
"(2) An application referred to in subsection (1) or an appeal brought in respect of such application shall
(a)
be heard in camera
; and
(b) on the request of the head of the government institution concerned, be heard and determined in the National Capital Region described in the schedule to the National Capital Act.
"(3) During the hearing of an application referred to in subsection (1) or an appeal brought in respect of such application, the head of the government institution concerned
shall, on the request of the head of the institution, be given the opportunity to make representations ex parte
." (emphasis added)
Section 52 makes no distinction between ss. 13 and 15. The necessary implication is that the information is not to be disclosed to counsel for an applicant for the purposes of argument. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at 205.) Disclosure is only to take place if, after a hearing on the merits, a decision is issued ordering access to the documents.
[5]
In contrast to the absolute requirement in respect of ss. 13(1) and 15(1) confidentiality claims, the claims for confidentiality pursuant to ss. 16(1) and 19(1) of the
Act
are to be considered in light of s. 47. It provides:
"47(1) In any proceedings before the court arising from an application under section 41, 42 or 44, the court shall take every reasonable precaution, including, when appropriate, receiving representations ex parte and conducting hearings in camera, to avoid the disclosure by the court or any person of
(a) any information or other material on the basis of which the head of a government institution would be authorized to refuse to disclose a part of a record requested under this Act; or
(b) any information as to whether a record exists where the head of a government institution, in refusing to disclose the record under this Act, does not indicate whether it exists.
(2) The court may disclose to the appropriate authority information relating to the commission of an offence against any law of Canada or a province on the part of any officer or employee of a government institution, if in the opinion of the court there is evidence thereof."
[6]
The requirement for confidentiality under s. 47 is not as strict as under s. 52. While the court may conduct proceedings in camera and/or ex parte, there is no mandatory requirement to conduct hearings in camera and no right conferred on the Government to make ex parte representations. While the court has an obligation to take reasonable precautions to avoid disclosure, access to counsel on a confidential basis has been permitted in some instances. In
Hunter
, supra, at page 211, Décary, J.A., writing for the majority, stated that s. 47 should be interpreted as giving counsel, if not access, at least enough relevant information to enable him or her to argue the application. However, in
Hunter
, the Court of Appeal determined that counsel need not have access to declarations filed by the Prime Minister, cabinet ministers and senior officials pursuant to the Government's conflict of interest and post-employment guidelines; it was sufficient for counsel to know of the type of information which these documents contained, without knowing the details disclosed therein.
[7]
As a general rule, counsel should have access to all relevant documents in the interests of fairness. Where the court is deciding a matter based upon the contents of documents, it seems to me that there is a very low standard for counsel to meet in arguing that he or she requires access to the information in order to effectively represent his or her client. Documents in an access to information matter, however, must be viewed somewhat differently from other cases. Where disclosure of the documents is the very issue before the court, the threshold that counsel must satisfy is higher.
[8]
I think counsel has some obligation to explain to the court why disclosure of the information for the purposes of making effective argument is necessary. Section 47 imposes a clear duty on the Government, and this court, to keep confidential information confidential. In reconciling this duty of nondisclosure with the duty of fairness, I think that the court must consider the explanation of counsel as to why the information is necessary to make effective argument and the kind of information in question. Counsel will know the sections of the
Access to Information Act
under which confidentiality is claimed. He should be given some idea of the nature of the documents in issue so that he can explain why disclosure is necessary for the purposes of argument on the merits. Depending on the circumstances of the case, it may be that nothing further need be provided for counsel to have a fair opportunity to advance his case. These comments, I think, are consistent with the dicta of Décary, J.A., in
Hunter
, supra.
[9]
I turn now to the documents for which confidentiality claims are based on ss. 16(1) and 19(1) of the
Act
and over which there is a discretion to be exercised as to whether disclosure should be ordered to counsel for the purpose of making argument on the merits.
[10]
Respondent's counsel was heard ex parte and in camera. It became apparent during the course of argument that very few pages of the material in issue were sought to be kept confidential by reason of ss. 16(1) and 19(1) of the
Act
. However, the pages to which these sections applied had not been isolated. The court therefore adjourned and reconvened on April 15, 1996, at which time counsel for the respondent had separated, from all other pages, the pages to which ss. 16(1) and 19(1) applied. There were a total of 36 pages in this category.
[11]
The documents which the respondent seeks to keep confidential are a membership list of CUPW, other lists of names generated by the Government or its agencies and names appearing on other documents. The respondent submitted that the names of the individuals constituted personal information to which the
Privacy Act
applies and, accordingly, should not be disclosed pursuant to s. 19(1) of the
Access to Information Act
. With respect to certain names on some of the lists, however, the respondent also invoked s. 15(1). On other pages, s. 15(1) was invoked with respect to the titles of persons while s. 19(1) was invoked with respect to the names of the persons holding the title. If on a membership list, a few names were designated as confidential under s. 15(1) and the balance confidential under s. 19(1), allowing disclosure of the names to which s. 19(1) applied would, by exception, disclose the names to which s. 15(1) applied. Likewise, disclosing a name to which s. 19(1) applied, would disclose the title to which s. 15(1) applied. Given my finding regarding the absolute prohibition against disclosure to counsel when s. 15(1) is invoked, where disclosure of information sought to be kept confidential under s. 19(1) would result in disclosure of information to which s. 15(1) applies, I should exercise my discretion not to allow disclosure of the s. 19(1) information.
[12]
Following the ex parte, in camera proceedings, I indicated to counsel for the respondent that she should contact counsel for the applicants and provide him with an overview of the confidential pages for which ss. 13(1) and 15(1) were not invoked. Applicants' counsel was then invited to make further submissions as to why it was necessary for him to obtain the material, i.e., names, in order to make his argument for access on the merits.
[13]
The hearing reconvened on May 6, 1996. Applicants' counsel was informed by the court that, essentially, the material withheld under ss. 16(1) and 19(1) of the
Act
was composed of the names of individuals. He was told that a number of the pages constituted a CUPW membership list and the balance of the pages constituted internal government documents. He was asked to explain why disclosure of the names was necessary for purposes of arguing the main application.
[14]
Applicants' counsel suggested that if any of the persons named had been dead for more than twenty years, their names would not be subject to confidentiality under the
Privacy Act
. Accepting such a proposition for the sake of argument, I am not satisfied that knowing specific names would assist counsel in making his argument. He is aware of the sections upon which the Government is relying and that names are not being disclosed. As in
Hunter,
that information alone is sufficient for him to make an effective argument for access. Further, the access request involves many thousands of pages. The focus of the request is not to obtain the names of a few persons who might be dead for over twenty years. Counsel for the applicants did not satisfy me that it is necessary that he have access, on a confidential basis, to the undisclosed documents in order to effectively argue the case on the merits for his clients. More importantly, counsel's argument does not address the problem that to disclose the names sought to be kept confidential under s. 19(1), would result in disclosure, by exception, of names and titles claimed confidential under s. 15(1).
[15]
Disclosure cases are difficult since the respondent will always have more information than the applicant. This difficulty can be alleviated by giving counsel for the applicant access on a confidential basis, as was sought here. Disclosure to counsel, however, is neither permitted nor necessary in every case. That is the situation in the case at bar as it was in
Hunter
, supra. Counsel for the applicants will be required to make his argument on the merits without access to the undisclosed documents.
[16]
The interlocutory motions are dismissed.
Motions dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/slm
[End of document]