[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: The plaintiff, Newfoundland Processing Limited, filed a statement of claim in the Federal Court Registry on March 9, 1988, claiming special and general damages against the defendant, the owners and all others interested in the Ship "South Angela" as a result of alleged oil spills on March 5, 1988 and March 7, 1988. Plaintiff filed, on May 19, 1988, an amended statement of claim concerning the above mentioned oil spills correcting a technical irregularity.
[2]
On June 29, 1988, a defence and counterclaim was filed by Belleview Inc. as Demise Charterer of the M.V. "South Angela". A reply to the defence and counterclaim was filed on August 22, 1988.
[3]
Plaintiff, on September 2, 1988, filed a notice of motion returnable on September 8, 1988, in Ottawa requesting leave to examine parties out of the jurisdiction and to conduct an inspection of the vessel in the within action. The request for examination of witnesses outside of the jurisdiction was made pursuant to rule 465(12) of the Federal Court Rules. This motion was withdrawn by letter dated September 7, 1988.
[4]
On September 9, 1988, plaintiff submitted, pursuant to rules 465 and 324 of the Federal Court Rules a notice of motion that the plaintiff be permitted to examine in discovery proceedings seven named persons, namely:
1. Captain G.G. Sampy of Bombay, India
2. Chief Officer L.A. D'Costa of Bombay, India
3. Second Officer A. Kaila of New Delhi, India
4. Third Officer S. Mitra of Kharagpur, West Bangal, India
5. Chief Engineer B.D. Deshpande of Bombay, India
6. Third Engineer A.C. Fernandes of Bombay, India
7. Welder A. Membreno of Honduras
"at a convenient time to be arranged by counsel upon their attendance at St. John's, Newfoundland during September 1988".
[5]
With the above motion was the affidavit of Kenneth A. Templeton a member of the law firm representing the plaintiff. In his affidavit, Mr. Templeton states that he is informed by a Mr. John R. Sinnott, counsel for the defendant that the above mentioned persons, Sampy, D'Costa, Kaila, Mitra, Deshpande, Fernandes and Membreno, all persons residing out of Canada and all crew members of the Ship "South Angela" would be in St. John's, Newfoundland "on or before September 21, 1988, to participate in the trial on the quasicriminal offences". He further states that he requested Mr. Sinnott to make all of the crew members available for discovery while they are in Newfoundland. Mr. Sinnott refused the request but agreeing to one person, selected by the plaintiff, to be made available for discovery.
[6]
As to the reason for making the request to examine the above seven individuals, Mr. Templeton states, in paragraph 8 of his affidavit:
"8. THAT in this case, I submit that a distinction is required to be recognized between the evidence that might be given by an individual representing the corporate owner of the vessel, i.e., 'The Master', and the better evidence available from the seven eyewitnesses to the events, each providing the court with their own firsthand account and each of them giving their evidence from a particular expertise associated with their varied roles and duties on board the vessel."
[7]
It would seem that what the plaintiff wishes is to examine "seven eyewitnesses to the events" and not have a discovery for the allegations made in the statement of defence.
[8]
Counsel for defendant opposed the rule 324 motion by submitting on September 13, 1988, "Representations of the Defendant" in which the defendant states:
"7. In the within case, the Party Defendant is the Ship 'South Angela'. The Ship cannot file a Defence, pursuant to Rule 1002(8) and a Defence has been filed by the Demise Charterer, Belleview Inc.
"8. There is no right of Examination for Discovery of nonparties, other than under Rule 465(5), which has no Application in the instant case.
"9. The Rules do not provide for Discovery of Witnesses which is what the Plaintiff seeks, but provide for Discovery of a Party and if the Party is a Corporation or any body or group of persons empowered by law to sue or be sued, Discovery is by questioning any Member or Officer of such Corporation, body or group. It is not the individual, however, who is examined, but rather it is the Party who is being examined.
"10. By virtue of Rule 465(19), the Court may, for special reason, in an exceptional case, in its discretion, order a further Examination for Discovery after a Party or Assignor has been examined for Discovery under this Rule. The Court has no jurisdiction to order seven Discoveries of the Party Defendant at this time or at any time.
"11. With reference to Paragraphs 8 and 9 of the Affidavit of Mr. Kenneth A. Templeton in support of the Plaintiff's Application wherein reference is made to evidence provided to the Court and deflecting the best evidence away from the Court, there appears to be some confusion on the part of the Plaintiff as to the purpose of Discovery. The purpose of Discovery is not to provide evidence to the Court. When and if this matter goes to trial, either Party can call whichever Witnesses it may wish in order to establish their respective cases and to present the best evidence to the Court. Discovery is not intended to take the place of Court evidence, nor is it intended as a vehicle to allow a Party to question any and all Witnesses who may be potential Witnesses."
[9]
On September 21, 1988, the senior prothonotary issued the following order:
"The following individuals:
1. Captain G.G. Sampy of Bombay, India
2. Chief Officer L.A. D'Costa of Bombay, India
3. Second Officer A. Kaila of New Delhi India
4. Third Officer S. Mitra of Kharagpur, West Bangal, India
5. Chief Engineer B.D. Deshpande of Bombay, India
6. Third Engineer A.C. Fernandes of Bombay, India
7. Welder A. Membreno of Honduras
are ordered to attend for the purpose of being examined in Discovery proceedings at St. John's, Newfoundland during September 1988 at a particular date, time and place to be arranged between Counsel, following Collier, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In this judgment, what Mr. Justice Collier states, and it is only this statement that can have any application to the request of the plaintiff in the present instance, is found at page 449:
"The tendency in the courts of this country in recent years has been to provide all litigants with full and complete discovery prior to trial and to remove as much as possible what used to be known as the 'ambush' tactics of the adversary system. In my view that is the general intention of the Federal Court Rules. Purely as an illustration, I refer to rule 482 dealing with evidence to be given by expert witnesses. This is a form of pre-trial discovery still not found in the rules of many of the provinces."
[11]
With due respect, I believe that the senior prothonotary erred when he relied on the decision of Mr. Justice Collier as authority to allow a party to a proceeding the right to examine seven persons on discovery pursuant to rule 465.
[12]
An examination on discovery is governed by rule 465 of the Federal Court Rules. The relevant sections of this rule, with regard to the present appeal, are:
"
Rule 465. Examination for Discovery
"(1) For the purpose of this rule, a party may be examined for discovery, as hereinafter in this rule provided,
(a) if the party is an individual, by questioning the party himself,
(b) if the party is a corporation or any body or group of persons empowered by law to sue or to be sued, either in its own name or in the name of any officer or other person, by questioning any member or officer of such corporation, body or group,
(c) if the party is the Crown, by questioning any departmental or other officer of the Crown nominated by the Attorney General of Canada or Deputy Attorney General of Canada or by order of the court, and
(d) in any case, by questioning a person who has been agreed upon by the examining party and the party to be examined with the consent of such person,
"(3) After the defence has been filed, the plaintiff may be examined for discovery by a defendant.
"(15) Upon examination for discovery otherwise than under paragraph (5), the individual being questioned shall answer any question as to any fact within the knowledge or means of knowledge of the party being examined for discovery that may prove or tend to prove or disprove or tend to disprove any unadmitted allegation of fact in any pleading filed by the party being examined for discovery or the examining party.
"(17) In order to comply with paragraph (15), the individual being questioned may be required to inform himself and for that purpose the examination may be adjourned if necessary."
[13]
Rule 465(1)(c) is not applicable to the facts in the present case. Rule 465 governs the entire matter as to examinations on discovery. It states who may be examined on discovery, when the discovery may be held and before whom it may be held. Rules 465(1), (3) and (5) deal with who may be examined. Rule 465(5) is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
[14]
Mr. Justice Strayer, in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  states:
"It is in the interests of justice that examination for discovery should be complete and this implies that the questioning should be as relevant as possible. The object is to explore fully the issues raised by the pleadings, to understand the position of the party being examined and to gain admissions from him. This is all in furtherance of the goal of narrowing the issues and reducing as much as possible matters to be determined at trial." (paragraph 5)
"An examinee is not necessarily giving 'evidence' of his personal knowledge and observations as does a witness at trial, but rather is there to state the position of the party he represents. In doing so he may be giving purely hearsay evidence. The purpose of the examination is not to obtain disclosure of the intended evidence of the particular examinee but rather of facts relevant to the pleadings which are within the knowledge of the other party. These considerations in my view reduce considerably the relevancy of concerns about witnesses to a particular incident being able to 'tailor' their evidence in the light of knowledge of each other's evidence." (paragraph 6)
[15]
It is most important to note from the above "The purpose of the examination is not to obtain disclosure of the intended evidence of the particular examinee but rather the facts relevant to the pleadings ...". What the plaintiff in the present case is attempting to do is to have an examination of witnesses to a particular event. Plaintiff is attempting to question witnesses outside of the trial by means of a discovery. An examination on discovery is not to be made into a fishing expedition examining six or seven different witnesses as to the events in an incident. It is meant to examine a person knowledgeable about the facts in the pleadings and who has the authority to bind the party if the party for whom he is replying is a corporation (rules 465(1)(a) and (b)).
[16]
Madame Justice Reed in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  examined and not individuals who might be called as witnesses at the trial.
"An ex-Minister cannot be examined on discovery, because under the Federal Court Rules it is the party who is examined, not individuals who might be called as witnesses at trial."
[17]
In the present case the defendant is a ship. Pursuant to rule 1002(8) the statement of defence was filed in the name of the demise charterers.
"
Rule 1002. Actions in Rem and in Personam
"(8) For greater certainty, it is hereby declared that no defence may be filed in an action in rem in the name of the ship or other thing shown by the title of action as the subject of the action; but every defence in an action in rem shall be filed by a person who claims to be the owner thereof or to be otherwise interested therein and shall otherwise comply with rule 407. (The Registry shall not accept for filing a defence that is not filed by or behalf of a specified person)."
[18]
In that the statement of defence was filed in the name of the demise charterers, rule 465(1)(b) would apply, the defendant is to be considered as a corporation. The person to be examined, if there is agreement as to the person to be examined, shall be the one chosen by the examining party, such person must be knowledgeable as to the facts pleaded ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[19]
Counsel for plaintiff submits that he interprets rule 465(1)(b) in such a manner that it would allow him to examine "any member or officer of such corporation, body or group". He submits he is not restricted to any one individual but may examine any one of the members of the corporation, body or group. He was unable to submit any jurisprudence to support this submission.
[20]
I cannot accept the submission of counsel. What he is in fact stating is that he would have a right to question any number of members or officers of the corporation which would enable him to go on a most extensive "fishing expedition". That is, in my opinion, not the purpose of the rule. The rule was formulated to allow the examination of a knowledgeable individual of the corporation or group, not all of the members or officers of the corporation or group. If the person examined is not knowledgeable, then the court may allow for the examination of a second person who has the necessary knowledge.
[21]
The appeal is maintained with costs.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]