[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for an order in the nature of certiorari to quash a decision of the Commissioner of Corrections referring the applicant's case to the Chairman of the National Parole Board for a hearing, and also for an order prohibiting that Board from hearing the matter. The purpose of the hearing, commonly called a detention hearing, if it were to proceed, would be to consider a recommendation of the Commissioner that the applicant continue to be detained in an institution for the balance of the term to which he was sentenced, without opportunity for release under mandatory supervision.
[2]
When the motion was heard in Halifax on January 9, 1990, counsel for the applicant advised that the order of prohibition was not being pursued since it was understood that the National Parole Board had determined that the matter would not be heard, pending the outcome of this application. Counsel for the Attorney General of Canada representing the respondents, the Commissioner of Corrections and the National Parole Board, advised that the Board had convened a hearing but had adjourned until mid-February 1990 in anticipation this matter would be disposed of by then. He further advised that the Board would not be proceeding with the hearing if certiorari were granted. Thus, prohibition, which it was anticipated could only issue if certiorari were granted, was unnecessary in the circumstances of this case.
[3]
After hearing counsel on the motion I reserved judgment. Now, having carefully considered the argument presented, I dismiss the application, for the reasons which follow.
[4]
The application arises out of actions taken in relation to the applicant Ford, under provisions of the Parole Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-2, s. 21.3 as amended in 1986 by R.S.C. 1985, c. 34 (2nd Supp.), s. 5. That section, reproduced below, provides for consideration by the National Parole Board of cases referred to it where the Correctional Service or the Commissioner of Corrections considers that a prison inmate, due for release in light of remission earned, is likely to commit an offence causing death or serious harm to another before expiry of his full sentence. In such a case the Board considers whether the inmate concerned should continue to serve an extended time beyond his or her presumptive release date, up to the time of termination of the sentence of imprisonment being served by the inmate.
[5]
At relevant times for this application Ford was serving sentences at Springhill Institution for various offences, which sentences terminate June 23, 1995, his warrant expiry date. He was last released from prison in July 1980, on mandatory supervision. On November 21, 1980, he was convicted of indecent assault on a female, assault causing bodily harm and forcible confinement. He was then sentenced to a term to be served concurrently with earlier sentences still outstanding, he was returned to prison and his mandatory supervision term was cancelled.
[6]
Under the Parole Act Ford's presumptive release date is March 27, 1990, whereupon in light of remission earned through his served sentence under the Penitentiary Act, he is to be released from imprisonment unless the National Parole Board after hearing any case concerning him which is properly referred to the Board, directs that he not be released (Parole Act, supra, s. 21.1 as enacted R.S.C. 1985, c. 34 (2nd Supp.), s. 5). The relevant provisions of the Parole Act include the following:
"21.1 Remission is credited, in accordance with the Penitentiary Act and the Prisons and Reformatories Act, against the sentence being served by an inmate and entitles the inmate to be released from imprisonment prior to the expiration of the sentence according to law unless the Board directs pursuant to paragraph 21.4(4)(a) that the inmate shall not be so released.
"21.2(1) In this section and sections 21.3 to 21.6,
. . . . .
'inmate' means a person sentenced to imprisonment in or transferred to any class of penitentiary before or after the coming into force of this section;
'presumptive release date' means, in respect of an inmate, the earliest day on which the inmate may be entitled to be released from imprisonment;
'serious harm' means severe physical injury or severe psychological damage;
. . . . .
"21.2(2) For the purposes of sections 21 to 21.6, a reference to the expiration of a sentence of an inmate according to law shall be read as a reference to the day on which the sentence expires, without taking into consideration any remission standing to the credit of the inmate.
"21.3(1) The Commissioner shall cause the case of an inmate to be reviewed by the Service, before the presumptive release date of the inmate, where the inmate is serving a term of imprisonment that includes a sentence imposed in respect of an offence mentioned in the schedule that had been prosecuted by indictment.
"21.3(2) Where the Service, after reviewing the case of an inmate pursuant to subsection (1), is of the opinion that
(a) the inmate is serving a term of imprisonment that includes a sentence imposed in respect of an offence mentioned in the schedule that had been prosecuted by indictment,
(b) the commission of the offence caused the death of or serious harm to another person, and
(c) there are reasonable grounds to believe that the inmate is likely to commit, prior to the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is then serving, an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person,
the Service shall, not later than six months before the presumptive release date of the inmate, refer the case to the Board together with all information that, in the opinion of the Service is relevant to the case.
"21.3(3) Where the Commissioner believes on reasonable grounds that an inmate who is serving a sentence imposed in respect of any offence, whether or not that offence is mentioned in the schedule or caused the death of or serious harm to another person, is likely, prior to the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is then serving, to commit an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person, the Commissioner shall refer the case to the Chairman of the Board, together with all information in the possession of the Service that, in the opinion of the Commissioner, is relevant to the case, as soon as practicable after the belief is formed, but not later than six months before the presumptive release date of the inmate unless
(a) the Commissioner formed the belief on the basis of
(i) behaviour by the inmate that occurred within those six months, or
(ii) information obtained within six months; or
(b) any of the sentences included in the term of imprisonment the inmate is then serving has been reduced or a conviction in respect of any such sentence has been quashed on appeal.
"21.4(1) The Board shall, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the regulations, review the case of every inmate referred to it by the Service pursuant to subsection 21.3(2) or referred to the Chairman of the Board pursuant to subsection 21.3(3).
"21.4(2) Notwithstanding section 17, in reviewing a case pursuant to subsection (1), the Board shall
(a) cause to be conducted all such inquiries in connection therewith as it considers necessary; and
(b) subject to subsections 21.3(6) and (7), hold a hearing at the time and in the manner prescribed by the regulations.
"21.4(3) Where the case of an inmate is referred to the Chairman of the Board during the six months immediately preceding the presumptive release date of the inmate, the inmate is not entitled to be released from imprisonment prior to the rendering of the decision of the Board in connection therewith.
"21.4(4) On completion of the hearing and review of the case of an inmate pursuant to this section, where the Board is satisfied that the inmate is likely to commit, prior to the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is then serving, an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person, the Board may, by order,
(a) direct that the inmate shall not be released from imprisonment prior to the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is serving at the time the order is made, or
(b) impose, subject to subsection (6), as one of the conditions of the release subject to mandatory supervision of the inmate, residence in a community-based residential facility,
and, where the Board is not so satisfied, the Board shall make an order declaring whether, at the time the case was referred to the Board, the inmate was serving a term of imprisonment that included a sentence imposed in respect of an offence mentioned in the schedule that had been prosecuted by indictment and whether, in its opinion, the commission of the offence caused the death of or serious harm to another person."
[7]
Counsel for the applicant submits that these provisions of the Parole Act, enacted in 1986 by R.S.C. 1985, c. 34 (2nd Supp.), s. 5, were intended to avoid a practice, commonly known as "gating", previously followed by the Correctional Service but not approved by the Supreme Court of Canada. Under that practice prisoners who were released in accord with mandatory release dates provided by law in light of remission earned were almost immediately rearrested and returned to prison with mandatory release cancelled because prison authorities believed they were likely to cause death or serious harm to other persons. Against the background of this understanding of the purpose of the 1986 amendments argument for the applicant was presented in this application by counsel.
[8]
Under s. 21.3 there are three circumstances by which cases may be referred to the National Parole Board for consideration for a so-called detention hearing, that is, to consider whether the inmate due for release but with outstanding sentence to serve should continue to serve that sentence in an institution. Under s. 21.3(2) the Correctional Service shall refer to the Board the case of an inmate serving a sentence for conviction of designated crimes of violence, where it is of the opinion that criteria (a), (b) and (c) set out in this subsection (2) are met. It shall do this not later than six months before the presumptive release date of the inmate. In Ford's case that six month deadline meant that the Service, if it were to act under s. 21.3(2), would do so before September 27, 1989.
[9]
The second circumstance, under s. 21.3(3), is where the Commissioner believes on reasonable grounds that an inmate serving any sentence in an institution, regardless of the offence which led to his incarceration, is likely prior to the expiration date of the sentence he is then serving to commit an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person. In that event the Commissioner shall refer the case to the Chairman of the Board and he may do this at any time up to six months before the presumptive release date of the inmate, i.e., in this case, September 27, 1989.
[10]
The third circumstance, also under s. 21.3(3), is where, not having referred the matter to the Chairman of the Board prior to six months in advance of the presumptive release date of the inmate, the Commissioner after that date forms the same serious belief on reasonable grounds based on behaviour of the inmate occurring within those six months or on information obtained within those six months. It was in this last circumstance that the Commissioner referred the applicant's case to the Chairman of the Board.
[11]
On behalf of the applicant it is urged that the Commissioner of Corrections here exceeded his jurisdiction in referring the case to the Chairman of the Parole Board for it is submitted that there was no new information, that is information other than could have been reasonably expected to be within the knowledge of the Commissioner or the Service earlier than six months before the applicant's presumptive release date, i.e., by September 27, 1989. It is also urged that the Commissioner failed to properly exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon him in the exceptional circumstances provided for in s. 21.3(3) in that he did not independently assess whether the applicant's case should be referred to the Board for a detention review hearing.
[12]
The referral in this case was by memorandum addressed to the Chairman of the National Parole Board from the Commissioner, Ole Ingstrup, but signed for Ingstrup by James A. Phelps, Deputy Commissioner. The memorandum, dated November 27, 1989, advised that Ford's case was being referred to the Chairman pursuant to s. 21.3(3) for purposes of a detention review, and it set out the conclusion of the Commissioner in these terms:
"I conclude that there are reasonable grounds to believe that this inmate is likely to commit an offence causing death or serious harm prior to expiration of his sentence. This conclusion is based on the facts that all three criteria are met and new information received within the six month deadline supports criterion (c)."
The memorandum attached documentation relating to the case. The reference to criteria appears related to the criteria outlined in s. 21.2 of the Parole Act, and the new information referred to related to the report from Dr. Akhtar, a forensic psychiatrist, received by the Service at Springhill on October 20, 1989, after the significant six month deadline date, here September 27, 1989.
[13]
There is a somewhat tortuous chronology of actions leading to the recommendation of the Commissioner. It may be useful to summarize these events.
[14]
On July 18, 1989, a Progress Summary - Appraisal and Recommendation form relating to Ford's case was completed by Colin Topshee, section supervisor at Springhill Institution, reporting conclusions and recommendations of the case management team responsible for Mr. Ford's case. The report included reference to the three criteria referred to in s. 21.3(2), noting that in relation to criterion (b), that is, that the latest offence in 1980 had caused serious harm to another, was difficult to assess on the information available to the team but that the team was convinced that despite Ford's confinement to a wheelchair as a paraplegic they still believed that he was a very dangerous person and recommended that he be detained throughout the period of his mandatory supervision following his presumptive release date. A copy of that appraisal and recommendation report was forwarded to Ford and a copy also went forward to regional supervisors in Nova Scotia and for Atlantic Canada. Steps were initiated soon after that report, on July 31, to arrange for examination of Ford by Dr. Syed Akhtar, a forensic psychiatrist, who had last examined Ford in 1977 prior to his last release on mandatory supervision and prior to commission of the crimes of violence for which he was sentenced in 1980. At that time Akhtar had concluded that Ford's "dangerousity" had decreased, in large part because he was at that time confined to a wheelchair as he has been since. The further examination and report was sought from Dr. Akhtar in 1989 to have full information available for consideration by the National Parole Board which the case management team assumed would be considering the case. Arrangements for Akhtar's examination and report were concluded in August, with the examination to take place on October 2. At that time those concerned with Ford's case, the case management team, apparently did not consider Akhtar's report as likely to be of particular importance though it would complete the picture for the National Parole Board hearing.
[15]
On September 18, Philip C. MacNeil, a paralegal penitentiary representative of Nova Scotia Legal Aid, having discussed the appraisal and recommendation of July 18 with Ford, made representations to Colin Topshee at Springhill to the effect that there was no information that would support conclusions in the report that one of the criteria for referral of a case to the Parole Board, was met, i.e., criterion (b) as set out in s. 21.3(2) of the Parole Act. Apparently on the following day, September 19, Topshee received advice from regional officers that on the basis of the appraisal and recommendation of July 18 the criteria outlined in s. 21.3(2) appeared to be met and the case should be referred directly to Topshee to the National Parole Board for consideration. This was subsequently done before September 27 and thereafter the Board advised that a hearing on the matter was scheduled for November 16, 1989.
[16]
On October 2, after the six month deadline for direct referral by the Service to the Parole Board, Dr. Akhtar interviewed Ford in Halifax. He thereupon completed a report dated October 4 which was received by the Service at Springhill on October 20. In this report Dr. Akhtar indicates that he has changed his assessment in regard to the inmate and his sexual offences from that expressed in his earlier report of 1977. His 1989 opinion is that the offences arose from twin pathologies, one characterized by the use of force, and further, his opinion is that in spite of physical disabilities the inmate harbours a high potential for causing physical as well as psychological harm to others in the near future. The earlier report of 1977 did not include either of these opinions.
[17]
Earlier in October, on the 4th, Topshee had received transcripts of preliminary hearings and other documents related to the offences for which Ford had been convicted in 1980. He reviewed these, concluded they did not clearly show serious harm to the victim, and having consulted with legal officers of the Correctional Service, on October 24 he withdrew the recommendation he had previously made to the Parole Board. He apparently advised the Board that he would be recommending that referral of Ford's case be made by the Commissioner. This he did through a further Progress Summary - Appraisal and Recommendation Report completed October 25, 1989, which recommended that the Commissioner refer Ford's case to the Chairman of the National Parole Board. On behalf of the case management team Topshee indicated their strong belief that Ford is likely to commit an offence causing death or serious harm to another if released prior to termination of his sentence and that belief was reinforced by the report from Dr. Akhtar which the team considered to be new information not available prior to the six month deadline for referrals by the Service directly to the Parole Board. On October 24 Topshee informed MacNeil, as Ford's representative, of the withdrawal of the direct referral to the Parole Board and his intention to seek referral through the Commissioner. A copy of the appraisal and recommendation report of October 25 was forwarded to Ford.
[18]
Topshee's report was apparently then forwarded to Regional Officers and by the Deputy Commissioner Atlantic it was forwarded to the Commissioner of Corrections with the recommendation that Ford's case be referred to the Chairman of the Parole Board by the Commissioner pursuant to s. 21.3(3) of the Parole Act. That recommendation from the Deputy Commissioner Atlantic was received in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Correctional Programs and Operations, James A. Phelps. The recommendation and supporting documents were referred to the Legal Services Branch of Correctional Services and with the supporting recommendation of that branch, Phelps' staff prepared for his signature a recommendation to the Commissioner that the latter refer Ford's case to the Chairman of the National Parole Board for a detention review. In his recommendation to the Commissioner Phelps reviews the criteria set out in s. 21.3(2) of the Act, concludes that all three criteria are met and that there is new information recently received (the report of Dr. Akhtar) indicating there is a likelihood that should the inmate be released prior to the end of his sentence term he would commit an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person. That recommendation dated November 27 was signed by James A. Phelps and addressed to the Commissioner. On the same day James A. Phelps, as Deputy Commissioner, acting in the stead of the Commissioner who was away, signed a memorandum using his own name above the typed name of Ole Ingstrup, the Commissioner, to the Chairman of the National Parole Board referring Ford's case for a hearing by the Board. It is that recommendation which gives rise to these proceedings.
[19]
On behalf of the applicant counsel urges that the referral to the Board by the Commissioner was without jurisdiction since there was no new information (or any other basis) as required in s. 21.3(3) for extraordinary action by the Commissioner after September 27, 1989. It is said that the information provided by Dr. Akhtar's report, dated October 4, did not constitute new information in the sense intended by the statute. It could have been available before September 27 had appropriate arrangements been made with Dr. Akhtar but through the summer the case management team had not thought that his report would be important. Moreover, it is said the information was not "new" in the sense it was available prior to that date. Indeed, it simply reinforced the conclusion reached by the case management team and implicitly by the Service and the Commissioner, prior to September 27 when, on behalf of the Service, Topshee had directly referred Ford's case to the Board for a hearing.
[20]
Reference was made to Re Robert Cunningham, (unreported, Supreme Court of Ontario, Court File No. 241, August 2, 1989) where an endorsement dismissing a habeas corpus application includes the following:
"... 'information obtained within those six months' ... allowing that the Service and the Commissioner (both to a considerable extent being one and the same) must tighten their procedure if the return of the abhorrent and draconian practice of 'gating' is to be avoided, a procedure which the amendments were in part designed to eliminate ...
"I agree with the applicant ... that for the new statutory provisions and the scheme they were meant to inaugurate to make sense, the words 'information obtained' must be made to refer to new information that is information not reasonably expected to have been within the knowledge of the Commissioner or the Service he heads and represents. Any other interpretation merely invites political pressure and interference of the kind which was present here and opens the door to arbitrariness and abuse of power."
[21]
Both this endorsement in Re Cunningham and my colleague Mr. Justice Collier in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 222-223 (F.C.T.D.), comment that the exceptional authority of the Commissioner ought not to be utilized as an alternative route to seek a detention hearing where the regular processes of the Service, which are expected to be followed under s. 21.3(2), have somehow failed.
[22]
In argument counsel for the applicant suggested that it appeared from the two reports which Topshee completed, copies of which were forwarded to Ford, that those concerned with his case, the case management team, appeared to favour recommendation by the Commissioner to the Chairman of the Board at the time of their original report in July. Thereafter they were instructed otherwise by their supervisors and Topshee referred the case directly to the Board on behalf of the Service acting under s. 21.3(2). When, after the six month deadline had elapsed on September 27, it appeared that it might be difficult to establish one of the criteria for referral by the Service, and one of the necessary findings of the Board under s. 21.4, that serious harm to another person had been caused in previous offences, the referral by the Service was withdrawn. In their determination that Ford's case be reviewed by the Board, it was suggested the Service turned to Dr. Akhtar's report as a basis for the action by the Commissioner under the exceptional authority provided for him to refer the case after September 27. Counsel for the respondents urges that each of the steps taken was appropriate and proper under the legislation in light of the circumstances apparent at the time each decision was made.
[23]
There is no clear evidence of the intention of those concerned in the Service or of the Commissioner other than appears from the affidavits and supporting documents. I can draw no conclusion other than if this case is at all typical of the administrative process of the Service for which the Commissioner is ultimately responsible, the process is less effective and efficient than it should be.
[24]
In the circumstances of this case the authority of the Commissioner to act after September 27 is related to his forming the belief on reasonable grounds on information obtained after that date that, prior to the expiration of the sentence he is now serving, Ford is likely to commit an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person, if I may paraphrase s. 21.3(3) (a)(ii).
[25]
The statute does not specify that the information be "new" in any particular sense. It does specify that the belief be formed, in a case like this, on the basis of information obtained after September 27. The word "obtain" is defined in the Concise Oxford Dictionary as "acquire, have granted to one, get", and in Black's Law Dictionary as "to get hold of by effort; to get possession of; to procure; to acquire, in any way". Neither these definitions nor the text of the statute imply that the information be created or that it originate or be commissioned or requested in the six months prior to the presumptive release date. It seems to me that it is the content of the information that must be obtained within that period; it must be "new" in the sense that the content be unknown both to the Commissioner and to the Service for which he is responsible prior to the six month period; it should come into their possession for the first time during that period. If it were otherwise and the Commissioner after the crucial date could rely on information previously known by the Service or the Commissioner, then the procedural safeguard provided by the six month period, which is intended to provide due notice to the inmate in all but exceptional circumstances, would be meaningless.
[26]
In both Pierce and Re Cunningham, referred to above, the courts concerned demonstrated judicial deference to administrative decision making. In Pierce, Collier, J., said (at 13 F.T.R., p. 222):
"It is not for this court to substitute its opinion for that of the Commissioner, and hold the information, leading to his belief there should be a referral, existed before the six month deadline.
"A court may interfere, by way of certiorari, if there was no evidence to support the Commissioner's conclusion the information was obtained only after the six month stipulation ..."
In Re Cunningham the endorsement disposing of the application notes:
"... I have ... not been persuaded that the Commissioner has acted illegally in the sense of not forming his opinion on the basis of information obtained within the six months. I will not second guess the Commissioner who decided to refer this matter to the Parole Board on the basis of an updated R.C.M.P. report and a psychiatric as well as a new - psychological report both dated January 1989."
[27]
In this case I am not persuaded that the Commissioner was without any basis to form a belief on reasonable grounds, based on Dr. Akhtar's report which was obtained by the Service after the crucial date, that would support his referral under s. 21.3(3) to the Chairman of the Board. It is said for the applicant that report merely supported or confirmed the view or opinion already reached, as early as the report of July 18 by the case management team and in this sense the information was not new or obtained within the six month period. Yet Dr. Akhtar's report is open to a different interpretation, that goes beyond mere support for the conclusion of service officers for it does provide a professional opinion, of a forensic psychiatrist, of the psychiatric condition of the applicant and the tendencies to particular conduct this may generate, and that opinion is different from the opinion given by the same psychiatrist some 12 years earlier. The earlier opinion was known to the Service, the later one was not known for Dr. Akhtar had not yet examined Ford before the important date here, September 27.
[28]
Further, there is no evidence in this case that the Commissioner had ever formed any opinion, about the likelihood of the applicant committing an offence causing death or serious harm to another, at any time prior to the recommendation here made to him on November 27. There is no evidence that the earlier referral to the Board, by Topshee on behalf of the Service, was brought to the attention of the Commissioner, but even if it were, through routine reports or otherwise, there is no evidence that the Commissioner had formed any belief about the matter until a full report including a copy of Dr. Akhtar's report was directed to him with a recommendation in late November.
[29]
In these circumstances I am not prepared to intervene by grant of certiorari. I conclude that there was a possible reasonable basis for the Commissioner forming his belief after September 27 about the likelihood of further serious offences by Ford, based at least in part on information obtained after that date from Dr. Akhtar's report.
[30]
The second major argument on behalf of the applicant Ford relates to the exercise of authority in making the referral to the Board, in this case by action of the Deputy Commissioner Phelps acting in the absence of the Commissioner. Counsel for the applicant submits that s. 21.3(3) of the Parole Act authorizes the Commissioner to act, as persona designata so that unless he specifically delegates that authority to another in accord with s. 24(1)(c) of the Interpretation Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-21, then there is no lawful authority for the referral here, signed for the Commissioner by Phelps. The same conclusion would be supported by the argument, also advanced for the applicant, that the Parole Act requires an independent decision by the Commissioner or his deputy acting on his behalf, an independence lacking here where Phelps as Deputy Commissioner signs a recommendation addressed to the Commissioner and apparently at the same time signs a referral to the Board Chairman implementing that recommendation for the Commissioner. Finally, the applicant notes that in signing the memorandum of referral to the Chairman of the Board over the typed name of the Commissioner there is only the word "for" written in by hand after Phelps' signature and no reference to his acting as Commissioner of Corrections.
[31]
In his affidavit, sworn January 3, 1990, Phelps states:
"4. That on November 27, 1989, in addition to my position as Deputy Commissioner, as a result of the absence of the Commissioner of Corrections and pursuant to subsection 24(4) of the Interpretation Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-21, I was acting as Commissioner of Corrections.
"5. That on November 27, 1989, acting in my dual capacities I reviewed a summary of the case for referral of Edward Donald Ford prepared by Julie Levesque of my staff based on the documentation presented by the Deputy Commissioner (Atlantic) and a legal opinion prepared by C. McKinnon, counsel to the Correctional Service. I then signed a letter prepared by Julie Levesque for my signature to the Commissioner of Corrections recommending that the applicant be referred to the National Parole Board and a letter from the Commissioner of Corrections to the Chairman of the Board referring the case pursuant to section 21.3 of the Parole Act. ..."
It might be clearer to all outside the Service, including the Chairman of the National Parole Board to whom the referral here signed by Phelps is addressed, for all such correspondence signed in the exercise of official duties of the Commissioner by others but on his behalf, to clearly identify the capacity of the signatory. The appropriate process, however, is ultimately for the Commissioner to determine. In this case, the facts of Phelps' signature, and his status in acting as Commissioner of Corrections in the absence of the Commissioner, sworn to in Phelps' affidavit, are not contradicted.
[32]
For the respondents, counsel for the Attorney General of Canada argues that the action by Phelps acting as Commissioner of Corrections is authorized by s. 24(4) of the Interpretation Act, supra. That Act includes the following provisions:
"24(1) Words authorizing the appointment of a public officer to hold office during pleasure include, in the discretion of the authority in whom the power of appointment is vested, the power to
(c) appoint another person in the stead of, or to act in the stead of, the public officer
"24(4) Words directing or empowering any public officer, other than a minister of the Crown, to do any act or thing, or otherwise applying to the public officer by his name of office, include his successors in the office and his or their deputy."
[33]
Section 24(1), referred to by counsel for the applicant, in my view is not relevant to the issue of the exercise of authority on behalf of the Commissioner here. That subsection provides that the authority in whom is vested the power of appointment of a public officer holding office during pleasure may appoint another person to replace or to act in the place of the original appointee. In this case the relevant authority is the Governor General-in-Council who under the Penitentiary Act has authority to appoint the Commissioner of Corrections to hold office during pleasure (Penitentiary Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-5, ss. 5, 10(1)).
[34]
Section 24(4) is relevant to this situation. I conclude that it authorizes the action here taken by Phelps acting as Commissioner of Corrections. As deputy to the Commissioner the Interpretation Act authorizes his action. See  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , per Ryan, J.A., at 344 (F.C.A.) and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  supported by the clear inference to be drawn from s. 11 of the Penitentiary Act, supra, which provides:
"11. In the event that the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner are absent or unable to act or their offices are vacant, the senior Divisional Head at the headquarters of the Service has the control and management of the Service and all matters connected therewith, and for those purposes the senior Division Head may exercise all the powers of the Commissioner under this Act or any other Act of Parliament."
[35]
This provision is entirely consistent with the application of s. 24(4) of the Interpretation Act as authorizing the Deputy Commissioner to act with all the powers of the Commissioner and it makes provision for the situation when both the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner are absent, unable to act or their offices are vacant. Together these statutory provisions support the conclusion that the authority of the Commissioner under s. 21.3(3) of the Parole Act is not intended to be vested in him as persona designata in the sense that only the Commissioner may exercise that authority.
Conclusion
[36]
Thus, I conclude that the action taken by Phelps, acting as Commissioner of Corrections in referring the applicant's case to the Chairman of the Parole Board was a proper exercise of discretion vested in the Commissioner under the Parole Act, s. 21.3(3). Since I have concluded above that the referral here was within the authority of the Commissioner as defined in that subsection, the motion on behalf of the applicant for certiorari is dismissed.
[37]
In the circumstances no separate consideration is given to the motion originally made for prohibition directed to the National Parole Board, but I note for the record that it also is dismissed.
[38]
I add two comments. Counsel for the applicant urged that if there be ambiguity in the statute here in question it be resolved in the applicant's favour in light of the general rule of statutory construction when the liberty of the subject may be affected by the interpretation. I do not find the statute ambiguous. Nor does the outcome here directly impinge upon the liberty of the applicant. Only a decision of the Parole Board made pursuant to s. 21.4 of the Parole Act can do that.
[39]
Finally, I note that the outcome here is, in my view, consistent with one of the general purposes of the procedures established under ss. 21.1 to 21.4 of the Parole Act. That purpose is to provide appropriate notice to inmates with a record of committing crimes of violence of the processes to be pursued in assessing their prospects for release under supervision. Here the applicant knew from receipt of a copy of the report of July 18 that a detention hearing was being recommended. He knew from advice about a scheduled hearing by the Board that the process was under way. When the original referring officer, Topshee, decided to withdraw the case as originally referred to the Board and to seek referral by the Commissioner in part on the basis of information obtained from Dr. Akhtar's report received in late October, the applicant was again informed through his representative MacNeil. The recommendation from Topshee for such a referral by the Commissioner was also copied to the applicant.
[40]
In the circumstances, in my view there is no element of surprise or unfairness in notice to the applicant about a detention hearing even though the referral here was ultimately made by the Commissioner after the deadline for regular action but within his authority to deal with exceptional cases under s. 21.3(3).
[41]
In sum I conclude that there is no error in law and no procedural defect here that would support the exercise of discretion in granting certiorari or prohibition, which are both extraordinary discretionary remedies.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]