[1]
Pinard, J.
: This is an application pursuant to s. 18 of the Federal Court Act in order to obtain a writ of certiorari against the National Parole Board and the National Parole Board Appeal Division to quash a decision of the former made on January 6, 1989 and confirmed by the latter on June 14, 1989.
[2]
The decision was taken pursuant to s. 21.4(4) of the Parole Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-2, and amendments, directing that the applicant, an inmate in Cowansville penitentiary, not be released prior to the expiration of his full sentence of imprisonment.
[3]
The applicant also requests an order that he receive compensation for the breach of his rights guaranteed by s. 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. He further asks to be released on mandatory supervision and requests a declaration that the hearing of January 6, 1989, was unfair, the whole with costs.
[4]
The applicant was convicted of aggravated assault and assault causing bodily harm on January 17, 1985 and sentenced to six years' imprisonment. His crimes were committed over a lengthy period of time, against the three children of his common law wife. He was never granted parole as he had not demonstrated that he had overcome or taken serious steps to overcome his psychological problems, which were manifested in the aggressiveness against young children which gave rise to the charges for which he is now incarcerated.
[5]
Pursuant to s. 21.3 of the Parole Act, the case of the applicant was reviewed by Correctional Services. The relevant provisions of s. 21.3 state:
"21.3(1) The Commissioner shall cause the case of an inmate to be reviewed by the Service, before the presumptive release date of the inmate, where the inmate is serving a term of imprisonment that includes a sentence imposed in respect of an offence mentioned in the schedule that had been prosecuted by indictment.
"(2) Where the Service, after reviewing the case of an inmate pursuant to subsection (1) is of the opinion that
(a) the inmate is serving a term of imprisonment that includes a sentence imposed in respect of an offence mentioned in the schedule that had been prosecuted by indictment,
(b) the commission of the offence caused the death of or serious harm to another person, and
(c) there are reasonable grounds to believe that the inmate is likely to commit, prior to the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is then serving, an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person,
the Service shall, not later than six months before the presumptive release date of the inmate, refer the case to the Board together with all information that, in the opinion of the Service, is relevant to the case.
...
"(4) The Service shall, on the request of the Board, take all reasonable steps to provide the Board with any additional information that is relevant to a case referred pursuant to subs. (2) or (3)."
[6]
Subsequently, pursuant to s. 21.4 of the Parole Act, the Parole Board reviewed the case of the applicant referred to it by the Service pursuant to s. 21.3(2). Pursuant to s. 21.4(4) (a), the Board decided that the applicant should be detained until the completion of his full sentence. Section 21.4 of the Act states:
"21.4(1) The Board shall, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the regulations, review the case of every inmate referred to it by the Service pursuant to subs. 21.3(2) or referred to the Chairman of the Board pursuant to subs. 21.3(3).
"(2) Notwithstanding s. 17, in reviewing a case pursuant to subs. (1), the Board shall
(a) cause to be conducted all such inquiries in connection therewith as it considers necessary; and
(b) subject to s. 21.3(6) and (7), hold a hearing at the time and in the manner prescribed by the regulations.
"(3) Where the case of an inmate is referred to the Chairman of the Board during the six months immediately preceding the presumptive release date of the inmate, the inmate is not entitled to be released from imprisonment prior to the rendering of the decision of the Board in connection therewith.
"(4) On completion of the hearing and review of the case of an inmate pursuant to this section, where the Board is satisfied that the inmate is likely to commit, prior to the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is then serving, an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person, the Board may, by order,
(a) direct that the inmate shall not be released from imprisonment prior to the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is serving at the time the order is made, or
(b) impose, subject to subs. (6), as one of the conditions of the release subject to mandatory supervision of the inmate, residence in a community-based residential facility,
and, where the Board is not so satisfied, the Board shall make an order declaring whether, at the time the case was referred to the Board, the inmate was serving a term of imprisonment that included a sentence imposed in respect of an offence mentioned in the schedule that had been prosecuted by indictment and whether, in its opinion, the commission of the offence caused the death of or serious harm to another person.
"(5) For the purpose of determining the order to be made in respect of an inmate pursuant to subs. (4), the Board shall take into consideration any factor that is relevant to the case of the inmate and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
(a) a pattern of persistent violent behaviour established on the basis of any evidence and, in particular,
(i) the number of offences committed by the inmate causing physical or psychological harm,
(ii) the seriousness of the offence for which the sentence imposed is then being served,
(iii) reliable information demonstrating that the inmate has had difficulties controlling violent impulses to the point of endangering the safety of any other person,
(iv) the use of weapons in the commission of any offence by the inmate,
(v) explicit threats of violence,
(vi) behaviour of a brutal nature associated with the commission of any offence by the inmate, and
(vii) a substantial degree of indifference on the part of the inmate as to the reasonably foreseeable consequences, to other persons, of the behaviour of the inmate;
(b) psychiatric or psychological evidence that the physical or mental illness or disorder of the inmate is of such a nature that the inmate is likely to commit, prior to the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is then serving, an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person;
(c) reliable information the existence of which compels reaching the conclusion that the inmate is planning to commit, prior to the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is then serving, an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person; and
(d) the availability of supervision programs that would offer adequate protection to the public from the risk the inmate might otherwise present until the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is then serving.
"(6) The Commissioner or a person designated by the Commissioner must consent, in writing, to the residence in a penitentiary of an inmate in respect of whom an order is made pursuant to paragraph (4)(b).
"(7) The Board shall, after completing its review of the case of an inmate pursuant to this section, cause to be given to the inmate a copy of its decision and, where applicable, a copy of any order made pursuant to paragraph (4)(a) or (b) and of any other conditions imposed on the inmate, together with the reasons for the decision of the Board,
(a) where the case was referred to the Board not later than six months before the presumptive release date of the inmate, at least two months before the presumptive release date; or
(b) where the case was referred to the Board during the six months immediately preceding the presumptive release date of the inmate, as soon as possible after the completion of the review.
"(8) An inmate who is in custody pursuant to an order made under paragraph (4)(a) is not eligible for parole."
[7]
A review by the Parole Board of the decision made pursuant to s. 21.4(4)(a) was brought and the Parole Board review found that the original decision was well-founded.
[8]
The fundamental decision that is being attacked by the applicant is a purely administrative one, but there is no doubt that such a decision is still entirely subject to judicial review, its validity in law depending on jurisdictional as well as procedural conditions. In that context, I consider that the rules of natural justice and of fairness are common law rules that are flexible in the sense that they have to be applied on the circumstances of the particular case. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 630. Per Dickson, J.: "The content of the principles of natural justice and fairness in application to the individual cases will vary according to the circumstances of each case ...") With respect to the requirements of fundamental justice referred to in s. 7 of the Charter, La Forest, J., of the Supreme Court of Canada, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.S.R.(2d) 271; 207 A.P.R. 271, at p. 361, expressed the appropriate view as follows:
"It is also clear that the requirements of fundamental justice are not immutable; rather they vary according to the context in which they are invoked."
[9]
In the case at bar, where imprisonment and privilege of parole are involved, I am of the view that the administrative decision must not be interfered with by this court failing clear and unequivocal evidence that the decision is quite unfair and works a serious injustice on the inmate. This being said, I am in full agreement with the following view as expressed by Mr. Justice Strayer in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 744:
"While parole is not a right but a privilege, and therefore its revocation does not require the judicialtype process more commonly associated with the concept of natural justice, it does require at least an observance of fairness. In determining the requirements of fairness in any given situation I believe it is necessary to consider what the nature of the consequences is for the person who has allegedly been denied fairness."
[10]
At the hearing, counsel for the applicant made four submissions, each based on procedural grounds and related to the hearing that resulted in the original decision made by the National Parole Board pursuant to s. 21.4(4)(a) of the Act. The submissions deal with the recording or transcript of the hearing before the Board, the content of confidential reports considered by the Board, pictures of victim children's injuries viewed by the Board, and the fact that the Board was made up of non-English speaking persons.
[11]
With respect to the first point, counsel for the applicant submits that "no satisfactory recording or transcript of the proceedings at the hearing was kept as required by law".
[12]
Even though the voice recording made of the hearing of January 6, 1989, resulted in an incomplete transcript, I do not believe that such a failure automatically nullifies the decision reached by the Board.
[13]
Section 16.2 of the Parole Regulations states that the Board must keep a voice recording or a written transcript of a hearing such as that held on January 6, 1989. While it is important that all the regulations be observed in the course of a detention hearing, including the making of a satisfactory recording (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.)). I am not satisfied, here, that the applicant has established any prejudice. A mere broad allegation by the applicant of a poor recording of the proceedings at the hearing does not satisfy me that there is a serious possibility that a gap in the transcript deprived the applicant of a ground of review.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.S.R.(2d) 286; 227 A.P.R. 286; 48 C.C.C.(3d) 161 (S.C.C.), a criminal case, Mme Justice L'Heureux-Dubé, of the Supreme Court of Canada stated, at page 165:
"A new trial need not be ordered for every gap in a transcript. As a general rule, there must be a serious possibility that there was an error in the missing portion of the transcript, or that the omission deprived the appellant of a ground of appeal."
[14]
This is even more so in a case such as this one which involves only judicial review of an administrative decision, and not an appeal of a criminal conviction. Furthermore, I have read the transcript filed as an exhibit by the respondents and found that in spite of its gaps, it gives the flavour of the hearing, shows a good ventilation of the issues and gives the appearance of fairness.
[15]
As to the second point, counsel for the applicant argues that the hearing was not fair because her client was not given adequate information concerning the allegations being made against him, that is, "the content of confidential reports was not made known to him and he was thus unable to meet such evidence or information as the Board was relying on".
[16]
When Correctional Services assessed the applicant inmate pursuant to s. 21.3 of the Parole Act, it recommended that he be detained in custody until the expiration of his sentence. The applicant was informed of the reasons why the Services was of this view and all the information that it had was given to the applicant, except for certain information on the victim children and others who had significant relationships with the applicant prior to his charges. The latter information, alleged by the respondents to be merely confirmatory of what had already been indicated in the Progress Summary (exhibit S-4 filed in support of the affidavit of Pierette Soucy, criminologist, sworn on August 28, 1989) and previous reports, was considered confidential. It is information which, under s. 17(5) of the Parole Regulations, should not be disclosed on grounds of public interest because its disclosure:
- could reasonably be expected to threaten the safety of the informants (s. 17(5)(a)); and
- could reasonably be expected to be injurious to the conduct of lawful investigations or the conduct of reviews pursuant to the act of suspension, including any such information that would reveal a source of information obtained in confidence (s. 17(5)(e)).
[17]
In the light of the explanations given by the affiant Pierrette Soucy, in paragraphs 8 to 16 incl., 19, 20, 22, 23 and 24 of her affidavit, I am satisfied that the Board was not required to supply the confidential information that, in its opinion, ought not be disclosed on grounds of public interest pursuant to s. 17(5)(a) and (e) of the Parole Regulations. Those paragraphs of the affidavit state:
"8. En conformité avec l'article 21.3 de la Loi sur la libération conditionnelle, l'équipe de gestion de cas du détenu a étudié son cas en vue de déterminer s'il était opportun de permettre au détenu de sortir en surveillance obligatoire aprés avoir purgé les 2/3 de sa sentence;
"9. Comme partie intégrante de cette enquête, nous avons rencontré le détenu pour discuter de nos inquiétudes quant au risque élevé qu'il récidive et commette le même genre de violence et crime contre des enfants avec les conséquences physiques et psychologiques typiques à une telle situation, ainsi que les moyens que nous lui avons proposés de faire face à ses tendances abusives;
"10. Suite à cette étude, j'ai préparé un rapport au nom de l'équipe qui évaluait le cas du détenu à la lumière des critères mentionnées (sic) à l'article 21.3(2) de la Loi;
"11. Dans notre rapport adressé à la CNLC, nous avons conclu qui'il ne serait pas opportun de recommander sa libération en surveillance obligatoire, tel qu'il appert d'une copie du rapport daté du 14 juillet 1988 et produite comme Pièce S-4 à l'appui de mon affidavit;
"12. Dans la rédaction de ce rapport, j'ai fait référence à plusieurs rapports d'informations données à titre confidentiel;
"13. Ces informations ont été fournies par des personnes ressources impliquées avec les victimes des actes du détenu ainsi que par des personnes qui ont déjà eu un lien significatif avec le détenu;
"14. Ces informations ont confirmé, au moment de la commission des crimes pour lesquelles (sic) le détenu purge sa présente sentence, l'existence du schéma continuel de comportement violent mentionné dan mon rapport, à la lumière du degré de brutalité utilisé de façon répétée et qui a de toute évidence causé des blessures et des problèmes psychologiques aux enfants concernés;
"15. L'équipe de gestion de cas a décidé de ne pas remettre copie de ces documents au détenu ni de lui donner ces informations en détail parce que les personnes qui nous les ont fournies nous ont demandé de ne pas les fournir au détenu au motif que le détenu puisee savoir qui a décrit la situation vécue, puisse retracer ces informateurs et les enfants concernés ces informations et parce que n'ont eu pour effet que de confirmer ce qui était déjà divulgué au niveau du schéma continuel de comportement violent, le degré de brutalité utilisé, et les blessures physiques et psychologiques subies, dont mention a été fait (sic) dans le rapport S-4;
"16. Une copie de mon rapport (S-4) fut envoyée à la CNLC le ou vers le 14 juillet 1988 ainsi qu'au détenu;
...
"19. En vue de son audition devant la CNLC, le détenu fut rencontré et le partage des informations qu'on proposait de donner à la CNLC fut effectué notamment par la remise de la traduction anglaise de la Pièce S-4, rapport préparé en vue de l'audition sur l'opportunité de continuer sa détention après la date de sa surveillance obligatoire, et par l'offre de lui montrer les photos des blessures physiques des enfants prises au moment de l'enquête criminelle et qu'on proposait de verser de nouveau au dossier de la CNLC, mais il a refusé de les regarder;
"20. Par télex en date du 5 octobre 1988, j'ai confirmé au détenu ce que je proposais d'indiquer à la CNLC lors de son audition, le tout tel qu'il appert d'une copie de ce télex produite comme Pièce S-7 à l'appui de mon affidavit;
...
"22. Le 21 novembre 1988, le détenu a rencontré le Dr Jacques St-Hilaire, psychiatre; ce dernier a évalué le détenu et a rédigé un rapport en vue de son audition devant la CNLC, le tout tel qu'il appert d'une copie de ce rapport daté du 24 november 1988 et produite comme la Pièce S-8 à l'appui de mon affidavit.
"23. Le 22 décembre 1988, la traduction anglaise de ce rapport psychiatrique fut remis au détenu;
"24. Le 6 janvier 1989, le cas du détenu fut entendu par la CNLC en présence du détenu, tel qu'il appert de la transcription de cette audition produite comme la Pièce S-9 à l'appui de mon affidavit;"
[18]
It therefore appears that the applicant ought to have been well aware that the confidential information was related to the factors to be considered by the Parole Board, those factors being set out in s. 21.4(5) of the Parole Act and referred to extensively in the Progress Summary (exhibit S-4). In my view, the applicant was sufficiently informed as to the essence of the allegations under consideration by the Board and, in the circumstances, did not need to be given the specific information included in the confidential reports which would only have served to identify the sources of the information (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[19]
Consequently, I find that the procedure adopted by the Parole Board here did meet the standards of fairness appropriate to the situation. The applicant was adequately notified of the reasons for which the continuation of his imprisonment was being considered and given a fair opportunity to answer the essential allegations apparently taken into account by the Board.
[20]
As for the third point, counsel for the applicant submits that the Board viewed pictures of the victims' body parts "which beside being irrelevant at this hearing are also illegal evidence, because of their impact". I do not agree. In my view, this evidence is not inadmissible in a court of law, nor before an administrative tribunal. Moreover, the pictures, here, were made available to the inmate before the hearing of January 6, 1989.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Mr. Justice Martland of the Supreme Court of Canada stated, at page 293:
"... the exercise of a discretion by the trial judge arises only if the admission of the evidence would operate unfairly. The allowance of admissible evidence relevant to the issue before the court and of substantial probative value may operate unfortunately for the accused, but not unfairly. It is only the allowance of evidence gravely prejudicial to the accused, the admissiblity of which is tenuous, and whose probative force in relation to the main issue before the court is trifling, which can be said to operate unfairly."
[21]
In the present case, there is no doubt that the admissibility of the pictures as evidence is not tenuous and that their probative force in relation to the main issue before the Board is not trifling; their substantial probative value may operate unfortunately for the accused, but not unfairly. Indeed, this evidence can be related to any of the following factors that the Board had to take into consideration and that are set out in s. 21.4 (5)(a)(ii), (vi) and (vii).
[22]
Finally, with respect to the fourth point, the applicant merely states, in paragraph 9 of his affidavit sworn on July 20, 1989:
"The Board members were not English speaking members and I had a difficult time understanding everything that was said."
[23]
In my view, this broad allegation is totally unsubstantiated and is certainly not supported by any relevant complaints made prior to the original Board's decision against the applicant. In the transcript of the hearing before the Board, the applicant does not indicate anywhere that he did not understand what was being said to him. As a matter of fact, the transcript rather shows an intelligible discussion and ventilation of issues between members of the Board and the applicant. Indeed, there is no indication that the applicant ever mentioned before the original board that he was not understood during the hearing and/or that he did not understand what was said at that time.
[24]
I have also considered that all the relevant information given to the applicant was translated into English prior to the hearing before the Board. Under these circumstances, the submission that the Board's decision ought to be quashed as a result of such a subsequent unsubstantiated broad allegation cannot succeed either.
[25]
I must therefore conclude that the National Parole Board, in this case, acted fairly, in good faith, without bias and in a judicial temper, having also given the applicant the opportunity to adquately state his case. I consider also that the applicant has totally failed to establish that any of his rights or freedoms as guaranteed by the Charter have been infringed or denied. Consequently, the discretion as exercised by the Board in directing that the applicant not be released from imprisonment prior to the expiration of his full sentence of imprisonment ought not to be interfered with by this court, and an order is rendered dismissing the application with costs against the applicant.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slg
[End of document]