 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 879)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Manson, J.
September 15, 2014.
Counsel:
Mojdeh Shahriari, for the applicant, Vahid Ghannadi;
Caroline Christiaens, for the respondent, The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration.
Solicitors of Record:
Mojdeh Shahriari, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the applicant, Vahid Ghannadi;
William F. Pentney Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the respondent, The Minister of Citizenship and Immigration.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Manson, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of Refugee Appeal Division [RAD] member Douglas Fortney's decision to uphold a Refugee Protection Division [RPD] decision rejecting the Applicant's claim for refugee protection in Canada. The rejection was based on a finding that the Applicant was neither a Convention Refugee nor a person in need of protection under the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [IRPA].
I.
Issues
[2]
The issues in the present application are as follows:
A. Did the RAD breach procedural fairness in not accepting the new evidence presented before it?
B. Did the RAD err in finding that the RPD had not breached procedural fairness in not asking the Applicant about why he had not disclosed his sexual orientation at Port of Entry into Canada?
C. Was the RAD acting reasonably in accepting the RPD's findings against credibility and plausibility?
II.
Background
[3]
The Applicant is a 22 year old citizen of Iran.
[4]
He arrived in Canada on or about January 11, 2013, and claimed refugee protection status upon his arrival.
[5]
His Port of Entry [POE] interview based his claim on political persecution. He later recanted this reason and amended his Basis of Claim [BOC] dated January 28, 2013, to base his claim on his sexual orientation as a gay man.
[6]
Since the Applicant's arrival in Canada he has resided with the Jamali family in Port Moody, and then moved into Vancouver and shared an apartment with Cerrah Hosseinian (Ms. Jamali's daughter). The Applicant spent most of his time at home. The Applicant has discussed his sexual orientation openly with the Jamali family, and has shared his sexual orientation with his mother in Iran, since arriving in Canada.
[7]
On August 4, 2013, Ms. Husseinian took the Applicant to the gay pride parade in Vancouver.
[8]
The Applicant moved from Port Moody to Vancouver in November 2013. Since this move he has made contact with the Rainbow Refugee community group at least once.
[9]
The RPD rejected the Applicant's claim orally on October 8, 2013. Written reasons were provided with a notice of decision dated October 28, 2013.
[10]
Credibility was a significant issue for the RPD panel member, who found:
a. The Claimant lied about political activities being the reason why he was fleeing Iran, then later changed his BOC to state it was because of his homosexuality;
b. His mother made a statement under oath by phone that the Applicant had never been with a girl or had a girlfriend (after the Applicant had stated that his mother knew about his relationship with his ex-girlfriend  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  was referring to paperwork for answers;
d. The mother testified differently than the Applicant about his profession and work experience;
e. The Applicant and his mother further contradicted each other in describing the Applicant's most recent boyfriend Behnam;
f. The mother testified that the Applicant is at risk of being arrested and tortured by the Basiji but her testimony was found not-credible and only speculative at best;
g. There was no proof of the existence of the initial boyfriend and no evidence of attempts to contact the newest boyfriend;
h. The Claimant did not present evidence that he is a homosexual in Canada and further has not sufficiently proven he is a homosexual in Iran;
i. The only evidence is the Claimant's testimony that he went to a Gay pride parade with Ms. Husseinian in Vancouver. Any efforts to contact or be involved with the gay community in Vancouver was through Ms. Husseinian and the Applicant never followed up;
ii. There was no evidence of trying to contact anyone in the worldwide gay community online, or by phone.
[11]
Prior to the Appeal, the Applicant submitted two new pieces of evidence for the RAD to consider in his case: first, a letter from a Rainbow Refugee coordinator obtained after his first visit to the community group (after the RPD decision); second, the UNHCR Guidelines for refugee claims, based on sexual orientation, dated October 23, 2012.
[12]
The Applicant appealed the RPD decision to the RAD. The RAD affirmed the RPD decision and rejected the Applicant's claim on February 18, 2014.
III.
Standard of Review
[13]
The standard of review is correctness regarding the issues of natural justice of procedural fairness (
Canada (Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The standard of review for alleged errors of fact dealing with credibility and implausibility is reasonableness.
IV.
Analysis
A.
Did the RAD breach procedural fairness in not accepting the new evidence presented before it?
[14]
The Applicant provided information as to why he could not have reasonably been expected to present the letter prior to the RPD decision in his written statement; referencing his state of mind, the distance between where he was living (Port Moody) and the community group, as well as language barriers. It is also argued that the RPD and RAD did not consider the factors in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] sufficiently, in assessing the evidence.
[15]
Further, since the RAD admitted that the RPD relied heavily on the Applicant's lack of efforts to participate in the Vancouver gay community in its credibility assessment, the Applicant states that the new evidence is demonstrably relevant and material. The RAD also acknowledged the credibility of the letter's source.
[16]
The Applicant concedes he should have submitted the UNHRC evidence prior to the RPD decision, but his counsel at the time did not bring it to his attention. However, the Applicant argues that the decision not to admit the UNHCR guidelines was not supported by adequate analysis. It was only an unsupported statement by the RPD and monitored by the RAD that it does not meet the test for relevance and materiality, and there was no discussion of the source's credibility.
[17]
When considering whether new evidence should be admitted, the following factors should be considered: credibility, relevance, newness, and materiality, in addition to any express statutory provisions ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at para 14).
[18]
While the letter is arguably a new piece of evidence, it is reasonable to have expected similar evidence be presented at the RPD hearing. The credibility of the author is not in question, but the truth of the Applicant's self-identification as a gay Iranian refugee is. Since the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> factors are merely considerations to take into account, that the letter was material and relevant is not necessarily determinative of its admissibility. On the evidence before the RAD, it was reasonable for the RAD to maintain the refusal of the letter as evidence.
[19]
Despite alleged issues with his previous counsel the UNHCR guidelines could have been presented before the RPD hearing, therefore it was reasonable for the RAD to refuse their admissibility. While the lack of admissibility of these pieces of evidence lead the RAD to decide not to approve an oral hearing, their decisions on the matters do not constitute a breach of procedural fairness.
B.
Did the RAD err in finding that the RPD had not breached procedural fairness in not asking the Applicant about why he had not disclosed his sexual orientation at Port of Entry into Canada?
[20]
The Applicant submits that the RPD panel member conducting the interview made her credibility determination early in the interview when the Applicant's dishonesty at the POE interview was disclosed, and that this coloured the rest of her line of questioning and any other findings of credibility stemmed analytically from this initial finding. It is argued that the RPD member was required to put this concern to the Applicant at the hearing, since her findings of credibility were largely based on this issue. However, when the RAD reviewed the decision, they acknowledged that the RPD panel member had not questioned the Applicant directly on this issue, but found that the BOC adequately answered the issue.
[21]
Further, the Applicant submits that the aggressive questioning in the hearing was inappropriate and showed the RPD panel member was relying on unfair stereotypes to determine how the Applicant should have behaved if he were truly gay, and the RAD failed to adequately address this issue (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[22]
The Applicant's BOC is to be treated as sworn testimony. It did address the discrepancy between his POE interview and his current reason for claiming refugee status. If the Applicant was concerned about the RPD panel member's reaction to the discrepancy, he and his counsel could have addressed the issue at the hearing. The RAD correctly acknowledged the explanation in the BOC and found no breach of procedural fairness.
[23]
While the Applicant's dishonesty at the POE interview was certainly a factor the RPD panel member considered in her negative assessment of his credibility, it was not the only one. Her finding was based on a number of contradictions in the Applicant's testimony as well as that of his mother and roommate Ms. Husseinian, and the RAD's considerations and finding that there was no breach of procedural fairness is supported by the evidence and record before the RAD.
C.
Was the RAD acting reasonably in accepting the RPD's findings against credibility and plausibility?
[24]
The Applicant argues that the RAD committed reviewable errors by not considering certain established principles when reviewing the RPD's findings of fact and plausibility. For example:
a. When a witness swears to the truth of certain allegations, a presumption is created that they are true unless there are reasons to doubt them (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]);
b. A decision-maker is presumed to have reviewed all the evidence before them unless probative evidence directly contradicting the decision-maker's conclusions is not mentioned (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  157 FTR 35); and
c. A tribunal decision-maker ought not to replace and substantiate its own version of events without evidence to support its conclusions for that of the claimant (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[25]
The Applicant points specifically to the RPD's suggestion that the Applicant's mother was cheating during her testimony, and that the RAD does not address the RPD's finding at all in their reasons, contrary to <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[26]
Further, the Applicant argues that the RPD also failed to consider Facebook print outs that the Applicant provided as proof of his intimate relationship with Benham. The RAD went beyond its purview by adding to the RPD's finding of fact regarding the evidence and suggested it was not verifiable and therefore reasonably disregarded. However, verification of the evidence was not put to the Applicant as an issue at his hearing.
[27]
Finally, the Applicant states that implausibility findings should only be made in the clearest of cases, where facts presented portray unreasonable expectations, or there is contradictory documentary evidence. The RPD merely makes a blanket statement that "much of this claim is implausible or improbable", without supporting that finding. The RAD's failure to address the strength of the RPD's implausibility findings (as distinct from credibility findings) constitutes reviewable error and warrants intervention (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]).
[28]
The RPD panel member found that the Applicant was not credible on a number of fronts:
• Initial lie at port of entry;
• Contradictory evidence about relationship with Sarah (the Applicant's alleged ex-girlfriend);
• Contradictory evidence about occupation;
• Contradictory evidence about Applicant's (alleged) ex boyfriend Benham;
• Mother's claim to have told Basiji relative about Applicant's homosexuality not credible, or speculative at best;
• Implausibility and improbabilities
o It did not make sense that Benham would be locked up after the Applicant had been out of Iran for 16 months or more, and there were no charges;
o No evidence that any people the panel member would expect to be questioned in relation to rape allegations by Amir (the Applicant's former partner) were in fact questioned;
o Improbable Amir would tell police of a rape one and a half years before Benham was arrested in 2013;
o Made no sense that the Applicant had not made more effort to contact Benham;
• Applicant claimed it was impossible since he barely used a computer but Cerra Husseinian said he used her computer daily;
• Material omission and contradiction on efforts to contact Benham
[29]
The RAD was correct in identifying the RPD as a body deserving of deference in their findings of fact and credibility. While the Applicant submits the RAD ignored established principles in evaluating the reasonableness of the RPD's findings, I do not agree.
[30]
The RAD's finding with respect to the Applicant's mother's credibility was supported by evidence and impressions of the RPD panel member, who was present at the interview and in a better position to judge credibility. The presumption that a witness' testimony is true can be rebutted when there is evidence to suggest a lack of credibility. In the present case, the RPD panel member reasonably made a determination based on the lack of continuity in the witness' answers. The RAD's agreement in finding against the mother's credibility was reasonable.
[31]
With respect to the Facebook printouts included in the Applicant's record, the RPD panel member's reasons clearly show that she considered them in her decision-making; she did not, however, give them the weight the Applicant says is appropriate. The Facebook evidence was considered in conjunction with Ms. Husseinian's and the Applicant's testimony, which conflicted significantly with regard to the Applicant's usage of computers. The RAD was reasonable in accepting the RPD findings of fact as being reasonable.
[32]
Lastly, I agree that findings of implausibility should be treated differently than those of credibility; the findings of implausibility here were not reasonably made. While the panel member was able to question the credibility of the Applicant's testimony, and emphasize the lack of evidence before her to substantiate the narrative of Benham's arrest, this was not a "clear case" of implausibility ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above at paras 17 and 24).
[33]
Care must be taken when making plausibility findings not to impose cultural ideals on the situation at hand. As <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above at para 7, established "refugees come from diverse cultures, and actions which appear implausible when judged from Canadian standards might be plausible when considered from within the claimant's milieu." The plausibility findings of the panel member in this case fail to meet that standard.
[34]
However, the panel member's overall findings with respect to lack of credibility are reasonable and while she may have erred in using the term 'implausible' to question certain elements of the Applicant's story, the credibility issues, as referred to above, not implausibility issues, provide the foundation for much of her analysis and findings and for the RAD's decision on this issue.
[35]
The panel member based her findings on many contradictions within the Applicant's own testimony as well as that of his mother and roommate. There was very little evidence supplied to her to support credibility. The RAD was well within the limits of reasonability in deciding to reject the Applicant's claim.
JUDGMENT
[36]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The application is dismissed;
2. There is no question for certification.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire de la décision du commissaire Douglas Fortney de la Section d'appel des réfugiés [SAR] de maintenir la décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés [SPR] rejetant la demande de protection au Canada. Le rejet de la demande était fondée sur la conclusion selon laquelle le demandeur n'était ni un réfugié au sens de la Convention ni une personne à protéger aux termes de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, ch. 27 [LIPR].
I.
Questions à trancher
[2]
Les questions à trancher en l'espèce sont les suivantes:
A. La SAR a-t-elle manqué à l'équité procédurale en n'acceptant pas les nouveaux éléments de preuve qui lui ont été soumis?
B. La SAR a-t-elle fait erreur en concluant que la SPR n'avait pas manqué à l'équité procédurale en ne demandant pas au demandeur les raisons pour lesquelles il n'a pas divulgué son orientation sexuelle au point d'entrée au Canada?
C. La SAR a-t-elle agi raisonnablement en acceptant les conclusions défavorables de la SPR quant à la crédibilité et à la vraisemblance du récit du demandeur?
II.
Contexte
[3]
Le demandeur est un citoyen de l'Iran et est âgé de 22 ans.
[4]
Il est arrivé au Canada aux alentours du 11 janvier 2013 et a demandé l'asile à ce moment.
[5]
Lors de son entrevue au point d'entrée, il a fondé sa demande sur la persécution politique. Il s'est ensuite rétracté et a modifié le fondement de sa demande du 28 janvier 2013 pour invoquer son orientation homosexuelle.
[6]
À son arrivée au Canada, le demandeur a habité avec la famille Jamali, à Port Moody, puis est parti pour Vancouver où il a partagé un appartement avec Cerrah Hosseinian (la fille de Mme Jamali). Le demandeur passait la plupart de son temps à la maison. Il a discuté ouvertement de son orientation sexuelle avec la famille Jamali, et en a aussi informé sa mère, qui vit en Iran.
[7]
Le 4 août 2013, Mme Husseinian a emmené le demandeur à la parade de la fierté gaie à Vancouver.
[8]
Le demandeur a quitté Port Moody pour Vancouver en novembre 2013. Depuis son déménagement, il a communiqué avec le groupe communautaire Rainbow Refugee au moins une fois.
[9]
La SPR a rejeté la demande du demandeur de vive voix le 8 octobre 2013. Les motifs ont été énoncés par écrit dans un Avis de décision daté du 28 octobre 2013.
[10]
Le commissaire de la SPR a jugé que la crédibilité était un point de litige important et a conclu ce qui suit:
a. Le demandeur a menti en prétendant que c'est à cause de ses activités politiques qu'il a fui l'Iran, et il a ensuite modifié le fondement de sa demande d'asile (FDA) en invoquant son homosexualité;
b. Sa mère a déclaré sous serment par téléphone que le demandeur n'avait jamais eu de relations avec une fille et qu'il n'avait jamais eu de petite amie (après que le demandeur eut déclaré que sa mère était au courant de sa relation avec Sarah, une ancienne petite amie);
c. La mère a changé son récit plusieurs fois au cours de l'entrevue téléphonique et les bruits de fond donnaient à croire qu'elle se reportait à des documents avant de répondre;
d. La déclaration de la mère en ce qui a trait à la profession et à l'expérience de travail du demandeur a différé de celle de ce dernier;
e. La mère et le demandeur ont fait une description différente du dernier petit ami du demandeur, prénommé Behnam;
f. La mère a déclaré que le demandeur risquait d'être arrêté et torturé par les Basij, mais son témoignage a été jugé non crédible et, au mieux, fondé sur des spéculations;
g. Rien n'établissait l'existence du premier petit ami et rien n'indiquait que le demandeur avait essayé de communiquer avec le nouveau petit ami;
h. Le demandeur n'a présenté aucun élément établissant qu'il a une identité homosexuelle au Canada ni n'a présenté des preuves suffisantes de son identité homosexuelle en Iran;
i. Le seul élément de preuve réside dans la déclaration du demandeur selon laquelle il s'est rendu à une parade de la fierté gaie avec Mme Husseinian à Vancouver. C'est Mme Husseinian qui a contacté la communauté gaie de Vancouver pour le compte du demandeur, et lui-même n'a pas cherché par la suite à s'associer à la communauté;
ii. Rien ne permet de croire que le demandeur a voulu prendre contact en ligne ou par téléphone avec qui que ce soit de la communauté gaie de quelque partie du monde.
[11]
Avant l'audience de l'appel, le demandeur a présenté à la SAR deux nouveaux éléments de preuve: le premier consistait en une lettre du coordonnateur de Rainbow Refugee qui lui a été remise après sa première rencontre avec le groupe communautaire (postérieure au prononcé de la décision de la SPR), et la deuxième consistait en un exemplaire du 23 octobre 2012 des principes directeurs du Haut Commissariat des Nations Unies pour les réfugiés (HCR) sur les demandes d'asile fondées sur l'orientation sexuelle.
[12]
Le demandeur a fait appel de la décision de la SPR à la SAR. La SAR a confirmé la décision de la SPR et rejeté la demande du demandeur le 18 février 2014.
III.
Norme de contrôle
[13]
La norme de contrôle applicable aux cas de manquement aux principes de justice naturelle et d'équité procédurale est celle de la décision correcte (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 44). La norme de contrôle applicable aux erreurs de fait alléguées ayant trait à la crédibilité et à la vraisemblance est celle de la décision raisonnable.
IV.
Analyse
A.
La SAR a-t-elle manqué à l'équité procédurale en n'acceptant pas les nouveaux éléments de preuve qui lui ont été soumis?
[14]
Le demandeur a expliqué dans sa déclaration écrite pourquoi on n'aurait raisonnablement pas pu s'attendre à ce qu'il présente la lettre avant le prononcé de la décision de la SPR, invoquant son état d'esprit, la distance entre son lieu de résidence (Port Moody) et le lieu de rencontre du groupe communautaire, ainsi que les obstacles posés par la langue. Il a également prétendu que la SPR et la SAR n'ont pas suffisamment tenu compte des facteurs exposés dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] lors de leur examen de la preuve.
[15]
De plus, comme la SAR a reconnu que la SPR s'était largement fondée sur le fait que le demandeur n'avait pas déployé beaucoup d'efforts pour s'intégrer à la communauté gaie de Vancouver dans son appréciation de la crédibilité, le demandeur soutient que les nouveaux éléments de preuve sont manifestement pertinents et valables. La SAR a également reconnu la crédibilité de la source de la lettre.
[16]
Le demandeur concède qu'il aurait du déposer le document du HCR avant que la SPR ne rende sa décision, mais son conseil de l'époque ne le lui avait pas mentionné. Cependant, le demandeur allègue que la décision de ne pas admettre en preuve les principes directeurs du HCR n'a pas été fondée sur une analyse adéquate. Cette décision découle simplement d'une affirmation non étayée de la SPR et appuyée par la SAR que la preuve ne remplit pas le critère de pertinence et d'importance, et la crédibilité de la source n'a pas été soulevée.
[17]
Pour déterminer s'il y a lieu d'admettre de nouveaux éléments de preuve, les facteurs suivants doivent être pris en considération: la crédibilité, la pertinence, la nouveauté et le caractère substantiel, ainsi que toute disposition législative expresse (arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 14).
[18]
Bien qu'on puisse soutenir que la lettre constitue un nouvel élément de preuve, il aurait été raisonnable de s'attendre à ce qu'un élément de preuve semblable soit produit à l'audience de la SPR. La crédibilité de l'auteur de la lettre n'est pas en cause, mais la véracité de la déclaration du demandeur qui se prétend un réfugié iranien homosexuel l'est. Étant donné que les facteurs énoncés dans l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ne constituent que de simples considérations possibles, le caractère substantiel et la pertinence de la lettre ne sont pas forcément déterminants de son admissibilité. Selon la preuve dont elle disposait, il était raisonnable pour la SAR de maintenir la décision de ne pas admettre la lettre comme élément de preuve.
[19]
En dépit des difficultés qu'il dit avoir eues avec son premier conseil, les principes directeurs du HCR auraient pu être présentés avant l'audience de la SPR; il était donc raisonnable que la SAR ne les admette pas en preuve. Et s'il est vrai que la non-admissibilité de ces éléments de preuve a mené la SAR à refuser d'autoriser la tenue d'une audience, sa décision ne constitue pas un manquement à l'équité procédurale.
B.
La SAR a-t-elle fait erreur en concluant que la SPR n'avait pas manqué à l'équité procédurale en ne demandant pas au demandeur les raisons pour lesquelles il n'a pas divulgué son orientation sexuelle au point d'entrée au Canada?
[20]
Le demandeur fait valoir que la commissaire de la SPR qui a mené l'entrevue a tiré sa conclusion défavorable quant à sa crédibilité très tôt au cours de l'entrevue, en fait dès que le manque de franchise du demandeur au point d'entrée a été mis au jour, que cette conclusion a influé sur toutes les autres questions, et toute autre conclusion quant à sa crédibilité a découlé de la première. Il soutient que la commissaire de la SPR devait lui faire part de ses réserves au cours de l'audience, puisque ses conclusions quant à sa crédibilité étaient essentiellement fondées sur ce point. Cependant, lorsque la SAR a examiné la décision, elle a admis que la commissaire de la SPR n'avait pas interrogé le demandeur sur ce point précis, mais elle a estimé que le fondement de la demande d'asile suffisait pour trancher.
[21]
En outre, le demandeur soutient que le ton agressif qu'a pris la commissaire de la SPR pour l'interroger au cours de l'audience ne convenait pas et prouvait qu'elle avait des idées stéréotypées de la façon dont il aurait dû se comporter s'il avait été véritablement gai, et la SAR n'a pas convenablement traité la question (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[22]
La déclaration contenue dans le formulaire Fondement de la demande d'asile doit être considérée comme un témoignage fait sous serment. Elle explique les divergences entre sa déclaration au point d'entrée et la raison qu'il invoque maintenant pour demander l'asile. Si le demandeur se préoccupait de la façon dont la commissaire a réagi à ces incohérences, son conseil et lui-même auraient pu soulever la question à l'audience. La SAR a eu raison d'admettre l'explication contenue dans le formulaire Fondement de la demande d'asile et n'a pas estimé qu'il y avait eu manquement à l'équité procédurale.
[23]
Bien que la malhonnêteté qu'a commise le demandeur lors de son entrevue au point d'entrée ait certainement joué sur l'appréciation que la commissaire de la SPR a faite de sa crédibilité, ce n'était certes pas le seul facteur. La commissaire s'est fondée sur un certain nombre de contradictions relevées dans le témoignage du demandeur ainsi que dans ceux de sa mère et de sa colocataire, Mme Husseinian, et les considérations de la SAR et ses conclusions voulant que la SPR n'avait pas manqué à l'équité procédurale sont étayées par la preuve et le dossier dont disposait la SAR.
C.
La SAR a-t-elle agi raisonnablement en acceptant les conclusions défavorables de la SPR quant à la crédibilité et à la vraisemblance du récit du demandeur?
[24]
Le demandeur fait valoir que la SAR a commis des erreurs susceptibles de contrôle en ne tenant pas compte de certains principes établis dans son examen des conclusions de fait de la SPR et de la vraisemblance de son récit. À titre d'exemple:
a. Lorsqu'un témoin jure que certaines allégations sont vraies, cela crée une présomption qu'elles les sont, à moins qu'il n'existe des raisons d'en douter (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]);
b. Un décideur est présumé avoir examiné tous les éléments de preuve qui lui ont été soumis sauf si des éléments de preuve probants contredisant directement sa conclusion ne sont pas mentionnés (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  157 FTR 35);
c. Un décideur ne doit pas substituer sa propre version des faits à celle du demandeur sans invoquer d'éléments de preuve pour justifier ses conclusions (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[25]
Le demandeur évoque tout particulièrement la suggestion qu'a faite la SPR voulant que la mère du demandeur avait triché durant son témoignage, et soutient que la SAR n'a pas du tout examiné les motifs de la décision de la SPR, contrairement à l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[26]
En outre, le demandeur fait valoir que la SPR a également omis de tenir compte des imprimés du site
Facebook
qu'il a produits comme preuve de sa relation intime avec Benham. La SAR a outrepassé sa juridiction en appuyant la conclusion de fait de la SPR relativement à la preuve et en avançant que, comme elle n'était pas vérifiable, la preuve devait raisonnablement être rejetée. Cependant, à l'audience, elle n'a pas signalé au demandeur que la vérification des éléments de preuve était un point litigieux.
[27]
Enfin, le demandeur soutient que les conclusions relatives à l'invraisemblance ne devraient être tirées que dans les cas les plus évidents, lorsque les faits présentés donnent lieu à des attentes déraisonnables ou encore lorsque les éléments de preuve documentaire se contredisent. La SPR a simplement fait une déclaration générale selon laquelle « la plupart des faits relatifs à cette demande d'asile sont impossibles ou improbables », et ce, sans étayer sa conclusion. En n'examinant pas la valeur des conclusions relatives à la vraisemblance (par opposition aux conclusions relatives à la crédibilité), la SAR a commis une erreur susceptible de contrôle qui justifie l'intervention de la Cour (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]).
[28]
La commissaire de la SPR a conclu que le demandeur n'était pas crédible à plusieurs égards:
• Il a menti au point d'entrée;
• Il a présenté des éléments de preuve contradictoires au sujet de sa relation avec Sarah (sa prétendue ancienne petite amie);
• Il a présenté des éléments de preuve contradictoires au sujet de son emploi;
• Il a présenté des éléments de preuve contradictoires au sujet de Benham (son prétendu ancien petit ami);
• L'allégation de la mère voulant qu'elle ait divulgué aux Basij l'homosexualité de son fils n'est pas crédible, et elle est, au mieux, non fondée;
• Invraisemblance et improbabilités
o Il semble insensé que Benham ait été enfermé après que le demandeur eut quitté l'Iran depuis 16 mois ou plus, et aucune accusation n'a été portée contre lui;
o Rien n'indique que le tribunal a interrogé l'une ou l'autre des personnes qu'il aurait normalement dû interroger à propos des allégations du viol formulées par Amir (l'ancien partenaire du demandeur);
o Il est improbable qu'Amir ait informé la police d'un viol un an et demi avant que Benham ne soit arrêté en 2013;
o Il est insensé que le demandeur n'ait pas fait plus d'efforts pour entrer en contact avec Benham;
• Le demandeur soutient que cela lui était impossible étant donné qu'il ne faisait pratiquement pas usage d'un ordinateur, mais Cerra Husseinian a déclaré qu'il utilisait son ordinateur tous les jours;
• Le demandeur a négligé de mentionner des éléments importants et s'est contredit à propos des efforts qu'il avait faits pour entrer en contact avec Benham.
[29]
La SAR a eu raison de considérer qu'il fallait faire montre de déférence à l'égard des conclusions de fait et des conclusions relatives à la crédibilité tirées par la SPR. Le demandeur soutient que la SAR a fait fi des principes établis dans son appréciation du caractère raisonnable des conclusions de la SPR, mais je ne partage pas son avis.
[30]
La conclusion qu'a tirée la SAR en ce qui a trait à la crédibilité de la mère du demandeur était étayée par la preuve et les impressions de la commissaire de la SPR, qui était présente à l'entrevue et bien placée pour juger de la crédibilité. La présomption selon laquelle la déclaration d'un témoin véridique peut être réfutée lorsque la preuve indique un manque de crédibilité. En l'espèce, la commissaire de la SPR a pris une décision raisonnable au vu du manque de cohérence des réponses du témoin. La décision de la SAR de confirmer la conclusion défavorable quant à la crédibilité de la mère était raisonnable.
[31]
S'agissant des imprimés du site
Facebook
qui ont été versés au dossier du demandeur, la commissaire de la SPR indique clairement dans ses motifs qu'elle les a pris en considération avant de rendre sa décision; elle ne leur a toutefois pas donné l'importance que le demandeur aurait considérée comme adéquate. Ces éléments de preuve ont été examinés conjointement avec les témoignages de Mme Husseinian et du demandeur, lesquels divergeaient considérablement au sujet de l'utilisation de l'ordinateur. La SAR a agi raisonnablement en confirmant que les conclusions de fait de la SPR étaient raisonnables.
[32]
Enfin, je conviens que les conclusions relatives à la vraisemblance devraient être traitées différemment des conclusions relatives à la crédibilité. Les conclusions d'invraisemblance n'ont pas été tirées de façon raisonnable. S'il est vrai que la commissaire pouvait mettre en doute la crédibilité du témoignage du demandeur, et souligner l'insuffisance des éléments de preuve corroborant le récit de l'arrestation de Benham, il ne s'agissait pas là d'un « cas évident » d'invraisemblance ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, aux paragraphes 17 et 24).
[33]
Lorsqu'on tire des conclusions sur la vraisemblance, il faut veiller à ne pas projeter ses valeurs culturelles sur le cas étudié. Comme le juge l'a établi dans la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, au paragraphe 7, « les revendicateurs proviennent de cultures diverses et que des actes qui semblent peu plausibles lorsqu'on les juge en fonction des normes canadiennes peuvent être plausibles lorsqu'on les considère en fonction du milieu dont provient le revendicateur ». Les conclusions d'invraisemblance qu'a tirées la commissaire en l'espèce ne satisfont pas à ce critère.
[34]
Cependant, dans l'ensemble, la commissaire a tiré des conclusions raisonnables en ce qui a trait au manque de crédibilité, et bien qu'elle ait pu avoir tort de qualifier d'« invraisemblables » certains éléments du récit du demandeur, c'est le manque de crédibilité et non l'invraisemblance qui a servi de fondement à son analyse et à ses conclusions, ainsi qu'à la décision de la SAR en l'espèce.
[35]
La commissaire a fondé ses conclusions sur les nombreuses contradictions relevées dans le témoignage du demandeur ainsi que dans ceux de sa mère et de sa colocataire. Elle ne disposait que de très peu d'éléments pouvant prouver la crédibilité du demandeur. La décision de la SAR de rejeter la demande du demandeur s'inscrit bien dans les limites de la raisonnabilité.
JUGEMENT
[36]
LA COUR STATUE que
:
1. La demande est rejetée;
2. Aucune question n'a été proposée aux fins de certification.
[End of document]