[1]
Jerome, A.C.J. [orally]
: In this matter I heard argument this morning and indicated that I would come back at 2:45 this afternoon to deliver judgment. The facts are never simple in sentencing cases, but at least in this instance they are not in dispute and not overly complex. The background is set out in the applicant's affidavit found at page 5 of the motion record. The applicant's warrant expiry date on the current sentence is June 24, 1992, that being the seven year sentence. The applicant has earned sufficient remission to entitle him to release under mandatory supervision March 4, 1990.
[2]
Amendments to the Parole Act and the Penitentiary Act have the effect of empowering the respondents to refer certain cases for hearing by the Board in the place of what would be the ordinary release under mandatory supervision. It is admitted that this is one of the cases that falls under those recently-enacted provisions.
[3]
In the case of the present applicant he was notified properly some six months in advance, as required, and given a folio of documents consistent with the respondent's intentions to refer his case to the Board for consideration. The applicant's counsel acknowledges that all of that was done properly, so there is no claim of failure in the duty of fairness or of natural justice.
[4]
The claim is, to put it in simple terms, that as a result of the recent strike among officials in the custodial service that the following Catch-22 combination comes into play: the six month notice having been given, time is, of course, running: the fifteen day notice required in the legislation referred to in argument and identified in the record prior to the March 4 presumptive release date, was put in jeopardy or ignored because of the strike: the thirteen week period really is not jeopardized by any of these events. The argument, therefore, is that since the respondent can no longer abide by the strict letter of both the thirteen week period and the fifteen day notice period required in these circumstances that the respondent is caught, and the failure is of such a nature that it causes the Board to lose jurisdiction.
[5]
In support of this argument counsel refers me to a number of cases. Not surprisingly, all of them have one element or more of deprivation of the applicant's actual liberty, whether it be revocation, suspension, apprehension, return to custody and the post-suspension hearing that is mandated by the Regulations and the Act. All of them have one or another of those elements which counsel for the Crown argues, of course, is missing from the present case. Indeed, counsel for the applicant acknowledges that the reasoning in those cases ought to apply by inference. Where the liberty of the subject is at stake strict compliance is required. It follows, therefore, that strict compliance is required in the present case and, therefore, the failure to do so causes the Board to lose jurisdiction. That being so, the Board is powerless to interfere with the automatic operation of the Act which mandates that the applicant be released on March 4.
[6]
As against that, there are two arguments that are, I think, overpowering. The first is the question of principle as to whether this is penal legislation therefore requiring that strict compliance which goes with any jeopardy or any putting at risk of a subject's freedom. That question in principle, it seems to me, has been well settled in two courts. The Ontario Court of Appeal dealt with the matter in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 316 where Mr. Justice Robins said the following:
"The sections of the Parole Act in issue simply give the Parole Board the power to change the degree of supervision required in the case of those inmates referred to pursuant to the Act when the Board is satisfied (s. 15(4)(iv)(a) or (b)) that the inmate is likely to commit prior to the expiration of sentence he is then serving an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person. These sections do not change the sentence imposed on the inmate by the court that convicted him and consequently do not impose an additional penalty. In our opinion, they do no more than change the manner or condition under which certain inmates must serve the balance of their sentence." [Also reported sub. nom.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .]
In Shubley the Supreme Court of Canada addressed the same question and in the unreported version handed up by counsel, and again in the joint book of authorities at tab 14 at page 11, I note the following excerpt:
"I conclude that the sanctions conferred on the superintendent for prison misconduct do not constitute 'true penal consequences' within the Wigglesworth test.
"Confined as they are to the manner in which the inmate serves his time, and involving neither punitive fines nor a sentence of imprisonment, they appear to be entirely commensurate with the goal of fostering internal prison discipline and are not of a magnitude or consequence that would be expected for redressing wrongs done to society at large." [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .]
[7]
Thus, we have a clear declaration by the courts that in principle these provisions do not add to the penalty, but, in fact, simply address the question of whether the inmate, and in this case the applicant, will serve portions of the sentence in custody, at large and, if at large, under what circumstances and conditions. Both of these courts have said that those provisions are not penal in nature and, accordingly, the law, at least at that level, seems to run counter to that suggested by counsel for the applicant.
[8]
The second difficulty that I have with counsel's argument is the even clearer case of the decision of my brother Mr. Justice Addy who in Vancouver just very recently addressed precisely this situation in Milner which appears at tab 10 of the joint book of authorities. [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .] The precise point in issue here was in issue there. The only distinction really is that in that case the failure to observe the fifteen day notice period was as a result of an error and in the present case it was as a result of a strike. To decide that case Mr. Justice Addy had to address the very arguments put forward here and to determine whether as a result of the failure of the fifteen day notice by error the Board had lost jurisdiction. To do so Mr. Justice Addy had to address whether these provisions were mandatory so that the failure to observe them for any reason caused the Board to lose jurisdiction. He concluded that it did not. He concluded that the sections in issue were regulatory, rather than mandatory and, therefore, the failure to observe them did not cause the Board to lose jurisdiction.
[9]
I have no reason to disagree with my colleague of many years' experience and in fact I concur entirely in his reasoning for the reasons that I have just given. Accordingly, the application must be dismissed. I don't propose, unless demanded, to make -- it is a serious point obviously, having been decided recently and the strike is extraordinary, so I wouldn't propose to make any order as to costs unless demanded.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]