I. Background
[1]
Heald, J.
: By statement of claim filed April 19, 1996, the applicants commenced an action against the respondents claiming the respondents breached their fiduciary and trust obligations as owed to the applicants. These claims arise out of logging operations that have been conducted on the Stoney Reserve since 1992. The applicants further claim that as a result of the said breaches, they have suffered pecuniary loss and damage, individual and collective embarrassment and loss of respect and the loss of recognition of and adherence to Aboriginal Treaty and Constitutional rights. By way of relief, the applicants seek numerous orders and declarations as well as damages in the sum of $50 million dollars.
[2]
In this action, the applicants have brought an application seeking the following interim relief, by way of notice of motion filed April 19, 1996:
"(a) An Interim Order compelling the respondents to produce all authority and documentation under and by virtue of which the cutting, removal and sale of trees, including the logging and clean-up operations and the charging and collecting of royalties and stumpage have taken place and continue to take place on the Stoney Reserve since 1993;
"(b) An Interim Order compelling the respondents to account to the applicants for all funds and financial transactions related to logging, royalty, stumpage and clean-up activities from 1993 through to the present, including receipts and disbursements of funds and an accounting for all logs and debris felled, removed and sold and an accounting of the operations of the Morley sawmill;
"(c) An Interim Order appointing at the cost of the respondents an independent monitor, auditor, trustee or receiver-manager over the business affairs, property and assets of the Stoney Band to assist in the accounting and to report to the members of the Stoney Band under the direction of this Honourable Court;
"(d) An Interim Order compelling the respondents to conduct at the cost of the respondents a survey of logging and clean-up operations and environmental loss and damage to produce a forest management and environmental protection plan to protect and enhance the Band's assets for the future;
"(e) An Interim Injunction declaring all logging and clean-up activities other than that which is necessary and incidental to the proper clean-up of the prior logging cease until the activities are authorized in accordance with the tribal customs and laws of the Stoney Band;
"(f) Leave be granted to call further evidence, if required; and
"(g) Indemnification by the respondents for the applicants costs, including their solicitor and own client costs."
[3]
By an order of this court, dated July 10, 1996, all proceedings in this action, including this application, were stayed against Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada as represented by the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development and the Honourable Ronald Irwin, Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development (the "Crown"), pending final disposition of Federal Court Action T-307-96, or until further order of the court. Accordingly, any reference in these reasons to the respondents is not intended to refer to the Crown.
II. Issues
[4]
A. Does the court have jurisdiction to hear and determine this application as against the respondents Stoney Band Council, Mazubert and Morris?
[5]
B. If so, should the court grant the relief sought by the applicants herein?
III. Analysis
A. Does The Court Have Jurisdiction To
Hear And Determine This Application
As Against The Respondents Stoney
Band Council, Mazubert And Morris?
[6]
A preliminary issue raised by the respondents Stoney Band Council, Mazubert and Morris, that must be addressed before the merits of the applicants' application can be examined, is whether this court has jurisdiction to hear the application as framed by the applicants against the respondents. There are three categories of defendants in this action: (i) the Stoney Band Council; (ii) employees of the Stoney Band (Mazubert and Morris); and (iii) the Crown. With respect to the first category of defendants, the Stoney Band Council, the applicable jurisprudence [see footnote 1] clearly establishes that a band council is a federal board within the meaning attributed thereto in s. 2 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7. The second category of defendants are two individuals, Mazubert and Morris, who are claimed to have been, at all material times, employed in the positions of Stoney Tribal Administrator and Assistant Tribal Administrator, respectively, by the Stoney Band. In short, they were employees of the Band, and I therefore conclude they were not members of a federal board, commission or tribunal, as defined in the
Federal Court Act
. Finally, as was stated above, the action against the Crown has been stayed, pending the final disposition of Federal Court Action T-307-96, or until further order of the court.
[7]
The jurisdiction of the Federal Court is determined by reference to the three-part test enunciated by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 641. The following requirements are essential to a finding of jurisdiction in this court:
1. There must be a statutory grant of jurisdiction by the federal Parliament.
2. There must be an existing body of federal law which is essential to the disposition of the case and which nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction.
3. The law on which the case is based must be "a law of Canada" as the phrase is used in s. 101 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
. (p. 766)
Each of these criteria must therefore be analyzed in the context of the claims against these respondents to establish whether the court has jurisdiction to hear and determine this application.
1. Is There A Statutory Grant Of
Jurisdiction By The Federal Parliament?
[8]
The statutory grant of jurisdiction by the federal Parliament must be found in either the
Federal Court Act
or another
Act
of Parliament. An examination of the
Indian Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5, does not reveal a statutory grant of jurisdiction with respect to the claims made against these respondents. Since no other federal statute has been suggested as granting jurisdiction, I conclude that if the first element of the
ITO
test is to be satisfied, the statutory grant of jurisdiction must be found within the provisions of the
Federal Court Act
.
a. Section 17 Of The Federal Court Act
[9]
Section 17 of the
Federal Court Act
provides a statutory grant of jurisdiction with respect to several matters, all of which involve the Crown. Section 17(5)(b) grants the court jurisdiction with respect to relief sought in relation to an officer, servant or agent of the Crown. This section reads as follows:
"17(5) The Trial Division has concurrent original jurisdiction
. . . . .
(b) in proceedings in which relief is sought against any person for anything done or omitted to be done in the performance of the duties of that person as an officer, servant or agent of the Crown."
The Respondent Stoney Band Council
[10]
The question of whether a band council acts in the capacity of an officer, servant or agent of the Crown has been addressed by the courts. The Saskatchewan Court of Queen's Bench dealt with this issue, in the context of s. 17(5)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 26 Sask.R. 280 (Q.B.). In that case, the court questioned its jurisdiction to hear a case against an Indian band council. The court held that a band council
generally
does not act as an officer, servant or agent of the Crown, leaving open the possibility that a band council could, in some circumstances, act in that capacity.
[11]
This view was reiterated by Madame Justice Reed in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), [see footnote 2] wherein she held that a band council is not an agent of the Crown. She added, however, that in certain circumstances it could act as an agent of the Crown. (pp. 24-25). [See footnote 3]
[12]
The applicants in the case at bar have not alleged any facts in the statement of claim that would, if proven, establish that the respondent Stoney Band Council was acting at any material time as an agent of the Crown. Accordingly, I conclude that s. 17(5)(b) does not provide a statutory grant of jurisdiction with respect to the claims against the respondent Stoney Band Council.
The Respondents Mazubert and Morris
[13]
Similarly, the applicants have not alleged any facts in the statement of claim which, if proven, would establish that the respondents Mazubert and Morris were acting at any material times as officers, agents or servants of the Crown. It therefore follows, in my view, that s. 17(5)(b) does not provide a statutory grant of jurisdiction with respect to the claims against these respondents either.
b. Section 18 Of The Federal Court Act
[14]
Section 18 of the
Federal Court Act
reads as follows:
"18(1) Subject to section 28, the Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction
(a) to issue an injunction, writ of certiorari, writ of prohibition, writ of mandamus or writ of quo warranto, or grant declaratory relief, against any federal board, commission or other tribunal; and
(b) to hear and determine any application or other proceeding for relief in the nature of relief contemplated by paragraph (a), including any proceeding brought against the Attorney General of Canada, to obtain relief against a federal board, commission or other tribunal.
"(2) The Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine every application for a writ of 'habeas corpus ad subjiciendum', writ of certiorari, writ of prohibition or writ of mandamus in relation to any member of the Canadian Forces serving outside Canada.
"(3) The remedies provided for in subsections (1) and (2) may be obtained only on an application for judicial review made under section 18.1."
[15]
Section 18 was amended as of February 1, 1992. The amendments involved the addition of ss. 18(2) and 18(3). Prior to the amendments, due to the absence of s. 18(3) and by virtue of rule 603, [see footnote 4] which was repealed February 1, 1992, the relief set out in s. 18(1) could be obtained by way of an application for judicial review or by way of an action. However, since the February 1, 1992, amendments and pursuant to s. 18(3), the relief described in s. 18(1), which may be granted against a federal board, may only be obtained on an application for judicial review made under s. 18.1. There is no longer any provision in the
Federal Court Act
for an
action
to be commenced against a federal board.
The Respondent Stoney Band Council
[16]
The applicants submit that pursuant to s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
this court has exclusive original jurisdiction to hear this application with respect to the respondent Stoney Band Council, a federal board within the meaning of s. 2 of the
Act
. In support of this submission the applicants rely on several decisions of the Federal Court Trial Division and Court of Appeal. However, the jurisprudence cited is in relation to s. 18 as it read prior to the amendments of February 1, 1992: it is not applicable in view of these amendments.
[17]
The recent decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), clearly establishes that the relief against a federal board that is available under s. 18(1) of the
Federal Court Act
may only be obtained by an application for judicial review pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Act
. In that case, the plaintiffs sought a declaration that a band election was invalid and that a re-election should be ordered, as well as injunctive relief and a writ of quo warranto. The defendants brought a motion to strike the statement of claim and raised the issue of the court's jurisdiction to hear the matter. Justice Robertson stated the following:
"It is to be noted at the outset that the appellants do not dispute the jurisdiction of the court to address the issues herein. The respondents seek declaratory and injunctive relief, which in these circumstances essentially amount to a request for a writ of quo warranto. Quo warranto allows a challenge of an individual's right to hold a particular office: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.); and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). The court's jurisdiction to grant such prerogative relief is expressly provided for in s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 as amended, which reads in part as follows:
. . . . .
"There is no doubt therefore that there is jurisdiction per se, an Indian Band Council being a 'federal board, commission or other tribunal' within the meaning of ss. 2 and 18 of the
Act
: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.). Accordingly, this court has jurisdiction to address the issue but it can do so only in the context of a s. 18 application, not in the context of an action initiated by way of statement of claim. The appellants' motion under rule 419(1)(a) to strike the respondents' statement of claim, because in the context of an action the court could not grant the relief sought, is well-founded. It is also well-founded in another respect. There appears to be no possibility to convert an action into an application for judicial review in view of subsection 18.4(2) of the
Federal Court Act
, but even if the law were otherwise, the court would be denied jurisdiction to entertain the application. The 30 day limitation period prescribed by subsection 18.1(2) of the
Act
is long past due." (pp. 45-46)
[18]
In my view, the decision in
Lake Babine
, supra, is determinative of the issue: it is Federal Court of Appeal authority for the proposition that the relief set out in s. 18(1) of the
Act
may only be obtained on application for judicial review, and the court is without jurisdiction to hear and determine an action commenced for such relief [see footnote 5].
The Respondents Mazubert and Morris
[19]
These respondents are neither the Crown nor a federal board: they are simply employees of the Stoney Band. The statement of claim does not even allege they are members of the Stoney Band.
[20]
Even if the respondents Mazubert and Morris were members of the Stoney Band, s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
would not confer jurisdiction on this court with respect to claims against them. Justice Wetston in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), addressed the issue of the court's jurisdiction in similar circumstances. In that case the plaintiff and defendant were both members of an Indian Band: they were individuals and there was no involvement of the band or the Crown. The plaintiff sued the defendant in respect of payments made under a purchase and sale agreement of land situated on a reserve. Justice Wetston stated the following with respect to the first element of the
ITO
test, at page 60:
"As a general rule, the
Federal Court Act
or another federal statute must confer the jurisdiction over a particular matter. In order to satisfy the first branch of the
ITO
, supra, test, absent a specific statutory grant of jurisdiction in the
Indian Act
, I must look to the
Federal Court Act
, s. 17, which governs this court's jurisdiction in such matters." (p. 60)
[21]
Justice Wetston ultimately concluded that although the plaintiff may have had a common law right to bring an action for possession, this court was a statutory court and there must be a specific grant of jurisdiction in order for the court to hear the matter (p. 61). Since he found the court lacked a specific grant of jurisdiction, his Lordship dismissed the claim and counterclaim on the basis of lack of jurisdiction.
[22]
In the case at bar, there is no statutory grant of jurisdiction in relation to the claims made against the respondents Mazubert and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  statutory grant of jurisdiction in certain circumstances as follows:
"25. The Trial Division has original jurisdiction, between subject and subject as well as otherwise, in any case in which a claim for relief is made or a remedy is sought under or by virtue of the laws of Canada if no other court constituted, established or continued under any of the
Constitution Acts
, 1867 to 1982 has jurisdiction in respect of that claim or remedy."
I have examined this section of the
Act
because it is a statutory grant of jurisdiction in some situations. However, I am satisfied that it does not apply to the circumstances at bar.
The Respondent Stoney Band Council
[24]
The declaratory relief and orders in the nature of mandamus sought against the respondent Stoney Band Council may be obtained by an application for judicial review under s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
. Once such an application is commenced, the applicants could rely on s. 44 of the
Act
to seek an order for a receiver/manager [see footnote 6]. Damages cannot be awarded against a federal board pursuant to an application for judicial review, since only those remedies provided for in s. 18(1)(a) are available in such a proceeding. However an action for damages could be commenced in a provincial superior court. Similarly, the applicants could seek an accounting against the respondent Stoney Band Council in a provincial superior court. Accordingly, this is not a case in which the claim for relief or remedy sought may not be obtained in any other court established or continued under any of the
Constitution Acts, 1867 to 1982
, as is required by s. 25.
The Respondents Mazubert and Morris
[25]
Similarly, an action for the relief sought against the respondents Mazubert and Morris could be commenced in a provincial superior court. Therefore, s. 25 does not provide a statutory grant of jurisdiction with respect to these respondents either.
d. The Supreme Court of Canada decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  F.T.R. 161. In that case, the question of whether the Federal Court had jurisdiction to hear and determine a matter was in issue in both divisions of this court as well as in the Supreme Court of Canada. The Supreme Court of Canada ultimately concluded that the Federal Court was within its jurisdiction to hear the action.
[27]
The plaintiffs in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> were three named members of the Campbell River Indian Band suing on their own behalf and on behalf of all other members of the band. There were two categories of defendants: (1) the Crown; and (2) five named members of the Cape Mudge Indian Band sued on their own behalf and on behalf of all other members of that band (the "defendant CMIB"). In applying the tripartite jurisdiction test of
ITO
, supra, the difficulty arose with respect to satisfying the first element of the test in relation to the defendant CMIB. Although at that time, since it was prior to the February 1, 1992, amendments, an action could be commenced against a federal board, the defendant CMIB was not a federal board as it was not the band council but rather the entire band. Thus, s. 18, as it then read, did not grant jurisdiction with respect to this defendant.
[28]
With respect to the other defendant, the Crown, the Supreme Court held that the statutory grant of jurisdiction was found in s. 17(3)(c) of the
Federal Court Act
. This section has since been repealed and replaced by s. 17(4), which differs from its predecessor in that the Federal Court now has concurrent original jurisdiction with respect to the claims stated therein, rather than exclusive original jurisdiction, which was the case at that time [see footnote 7]. This difference is significant. Since the Federal Court had exclusive original jurisdiction to hear the case against the Crown, if it did not have jurisdiction to hear the case against the defendant CMIB, the claims would have to have been heard separately in different courts.
[29]
The Supreme Court adopted the Federal Court of Appeal's approach to interpreting and applying s. 17(3)(c), and held that if all the requirements for the provision to apply were satisfied, then the court had jurisdiction to hear and determine the matter with respect to all of the defendants involved. That is, if there was "(1) a proceeding, (2) to determine a dispute, (3) where the Crown is or may be under an obligation, (4) in respect of which there are or may be conflicting claims", then the court is granted jurisdiction to hear and determine the matter [see footnote 8]. I have examined s. 17(4), the predecessor to s. 17(3)(c), and have concluded that it does not apply to the circumstances at bar.
[30]
The Trial Division decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was decided on different grounds. Justice Joyal adopted the reasoning of Justice Reed in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), wherein she held that if the claims against the Crown were inextricably linked with the claims against a subject, then pursuant to s. 17(1) of the
Federal Court Act
, the court had jurisdiction not only with respect to the Crown but with respect to a defendant whose claims were so linked with those against the Crown [see footnote 9].
[31]
The Supreme Court of Canada in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, avoided ruling on the validity of this approach, since it found a statutory grant of jurisdiction in s. 17(3)(c), rather than s. 17(1). The Federal Court of Appeal overruled the decision in
Marshall
, supra, in its later decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) [see footnote 10].
[32]
In the case at bar, the statutory grant of jurisdiction with respect to the Crown is found in s. 17(1) of the
Federal Court Act
. Since the Federal Court of Appeal has clearly interpreted this section as not providing jurisdiction for any parties other than the Crown, it does not provide a statutory grant of jurisdiction with respect to the respondents Stoney Band Council, Mazubert or Morris.
[33]
Accordingly, and for all of the above reasons, I conclude that the
Federal Court Act
does not provide a statutory grant of jurisdiction with respect to the respondents Stoney Band Council, Mazubert and Morris. Therefore, it necessarily follows that the first element of the
ITO
test for jurisdiction has not been satisfied in relation to either the respondent Stoney Band Council or the respondents Mazubert and Morris. On this basis this court is without jurisdiction to hear and determine this motion, as against these respondents.
IV. Conclusion
[34]
This motion is dismissed against the respondents Stoney Band Council, Mazubert and Morris, on the basis that this court lacks jurisdiction to hear and determine the matters raised therein.
[35]
At the hearing of this motion and within the respondent's memorandum of fact and law, the respondents' counsel also requested that the court dismiss the
action
as against these respondents. However, the respondents have failed to comply with rule 401(c) of the
Federal Court Rules
[see footnote 11]. Accordingly, since no motion has been filed by the respondents seeking an order dismissing the action, no such order would be appropriate at this juncture.
[36]
The respondents Stoney Band Council, Mazubert and Morris are entitled to their costs, as against the applicants, on a party and party basis.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/slm
Footnotes
1.	 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
3.	See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), at 134.
4.	Rule 603, repealed on February 1, 1992, read as follows:
"Proceedings under section 18 of the Act for any of the relief described therein, other than a proceeding against the Attorney General of Canada or a proceeding for declaratory relief, may be brought either
(a) by way of an action under rule 400; or
(b) by way of an application to the court under rules 319 et seq."
5.	See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
7.	Section 17(3)(c), as it then was, read as follows:
"17(3) The Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine the following matters:
. . . . .
(c) proceedings to determine disputes where the Crown is or may be under an obligation, in respect of which there are or may be conflicting claims."
Section 17(4) presently reads as follows:
"17(4) The Trial Division has concurrent original jurisdiction to hear and determine proceedings to determine disputes where the Crown is or may be under an obligation, in respect of which there are or may be conflicting claims."
8. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at 329.
9.	Section 17(1) reads as follows:
"17(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act or any other Act of Parliament, the Trial Division has concurrent original jurisdiction in all cases where relief is claimed against the Crown."
10.	See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) at 239.
11.	Rule 401(c) reads as follows:
"401. A defendant may, by leave of court, file a conditional appearance for the purpose of objecting to
. . . . .
c) the jurisdiction of the court, and an order granting such leave shall make provision for any stay of proceedings necessary to allow such objection to be raised and diposed of."
[End of document]