[1]
Dubé, J.
: This motion pursuant to rule 344(6) and (7) is for directions to the taxing officer with reference to costs in this action (T-2698-87) and a parallel action (T-2109-87).
[2]
Both actions were heard together in Montréal over a period of nine and a half days in September and October 1990. The instant action was for patent infringement and passing-off whereas the other action (against these plaintiffs) was to invalidate the patent. On November 16, 1990 Walsh, D.J., released his judgment and reasons for judgment and granted 2/3 of the costs to the plaintiffs (the plaintiffs lost on passing-off but won on the other two heads of action). [See 39 F.T.R. 13]
[3]
The judgment rendered in T-2109-87 is brief and reproduced in full:
"Plaintiff's action is dismissed
with costs, limited to disbursements and costs incurred prior to joinder of this action with T-2698-87
on September 27, 1988. Counsel fees will be dealt with in T-2698-87." (Emphasis added)
[4]
The relevant portions of his judgment in T-2698-87 are the following:
"Plaintiff's claim against defendant for trademark infringement is dismissed, but the claim for patent infringement is sustained, Canada Patent 992590 having been found to be valid.
. . . . .
"Plaintiff's success in its action is divided but consideration should also be given to its successful defence of its patent in action T-2109-87.
While only one set of counsel fees or other fees arising from discoveries or other proceedings in the two actions is allowed as a result of their joinder. Plaintiff shall have two-thirds of such taxable costs.
" (Emphasis added)
[5]
While disposing of the issue concerning costs in his reasons for judgment, the judge wrote the following:
"The issue of costs is somewhat complicated by the joinder of the two actions for trial. S.L.M.'s action seeking a declaration of invalidity of the patent in suit or a declaration that it has not infringed it,
would have been dismissed with costs had it stood alone
. Noma's action to the extent that it is based on trademark infringement would also have been dismissed with costs had the allegation stood alone, but it has succeeded in its allegations of infringement by S.L.M. of its patent.
I believe it is entitled to two-thirds of its costs in its action T-2698-87 in which will be incorporated all disbursements and costs concerning both actions.
There will be no separate counsel fees attributable to Noma for its successful defence of S.L.M.'s action T-2109-87,
but Noma will be entitled to all disbursements and costs attributable in it up to the date of joinder of the two actions on September 27, 1988.
" (Emphasis added)
[6]
It is common ground that the new rules as amended in April 1987 now provide the court with considerably more discretion with respect to costs. The new tariff significantly increased the amounts provided for in the old tariff. In many instances the increases are two and a half times the amounts provided under the old tariff. Despite the fact that taxing officers now have a wider discretion, a special direction of the court is still required in order to exceed the set maximums.
[7]
Rule 344(3) sets out a list of 16 criteria which the court may take into account in exercising its discretionary power, the last one being very broad, namely "any other matter relevant to the question of costs". Thus, the instant motion is not a review of a taxation already carried out by a taxing officer, but a "pre-taxation" procedure in order to provide the taxing officer with special directions within which to exercise his own discretion.
[8]
The criteria relied upon by the plaintiffs for seeking the exercise of the court's discretionary power are subparagraphs 344(3)(a), (b), (c), (i), (j), (k), (l), (m) and (p) which read as follows:
"(a) the result of the proceeding;
"(b) the amounts claimed and the amounts recovered;
"(c) the importance of the issues;
. . . . .
"(i) the volume of work;
"(j) the complexity of the issues;
"(k) the conduct of any party that tended to shorten or to lengthen unnecessarily the duration of the proceeding;
"(l) the denial of or the neglect or refusal of any party to admit anything that should have been admitted;
"(m) whether any stage in the proceedings was,
(i) improper, vexatious, or unnecessary, or
(ii) taken through negligence, mistake or excessive caution;
. . . . .
"(p) any other matter relevant to the question of costs."
[9]
It is important to bear in mind that we are dealing with party and party costs, and that the parties cannot expect to recover all their costs from the tariff.
[10]
By their very nature, patent and trademark actions generate extensive work both in the preparation for and in the conduct of the trial. However, the volume of work and the inherent complexity of the issues involved in these actions do not automatically warrant an increase in the prescribed amounts under the tariff. The opinion of Teitelbaum, J., in
The "Duteous"
[see footnote 1], though expressed in the context of the old tariff, bears reproduction:
"Only rarely and only under most exceptional circumstances should the court allow extra costs to the attorneys conducting a trial."
[11]
Mr. Justice Muldoon, also of our court, while awarding reduced party and party costs because of the unacceptable conduct of Crown counsel, put it this way [see footnote 2]:
"... It requires great and exemplary merit on a party's part to induce the court to increase the award of costs and, by nature, such inducement is not easy to achieve.
"The matter may be contemplated from both sides, but the net effect is that the tariff is rarely exceeded. Thus, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , it was held that the apparent or real difficulty inhering in the litigation, or the volume of solicitors' and counsel's work, or even the recognized importance of the case do not provide an inevitable and certain basis for exceeding the tariff."
[12]
The affidavit of Immanuel Goldsmith, Q.C., plaintiffs' senior counsel, filed in support of this motion, leads me to believe these two actions commenced in late 1987, did indeed necessitate a heavy volume of work and addressed complex issues. As I was not the trial judge who heard the action, junior counsel for the plaintiffs took me painstakingly through the innumerable steps and proceedings taken in the course of these actions. Generally, it is my opinion that the taxation of these costs would better be left to be determined by the taxing officer who will have before him the actual bills of costs, supporting evidence and more detailed arguments from counsel. I am of the view, however, that special directions ought to go to the taxing officer respecting reasonable increases over certain amounts classified in Tariff B and respecting services rendered and disbursements incurred not included in that tariff.
[13]
So as to facilitate and expedite my directions, I will follow the nine classifications outlined in the notice of motion and indicate under each subparagraph my directions, followed with comments where indicated:
"(a) with respect to the services of counsel described in Tariff B, paragraph 1(1), the taxing officer is not bound by the maximum figures set out therein;
. . . . .
"(d) the taxing officer allow amounts under paragraphs 1(1)(h) and (i) of Tariff B for both senior and junior counsel;"
[14]
Paragraph 1(1) of Tariff B prescribes the amounts to be allowed on a party and party taxation for the services of counsel. The taxing officer already has the discretion to determine whether the presence of junior counsel at trial was justifiable under subparagraph 1(1)(i). However, I do direct that the presence of junior counsel at trial was indeed justifiable. The maximum amount allowed for junior counsel will be increased to that allowed for senior counsel and it is left to the taxing officer's own discretion to determine whether the maximum amount will be allowed or not. Under subparagraph 1(1)(h) the taxing officer must take into consideration that both senior and junior counsel were involved in the preparation for trial. The maximum amount allowed for senior counsel will also be applicable to junior counsel. However, it will be for them to show to the taxing officer whether the maximum amount should be allowed or not in each instance. The other maximum amounts remain unchanged.
"(b) the taxing officer allow an amount for the services of counsel relating to reviewing and responding to the written interrogatories by the defendant of the plaintiff Stiga Aktiebolag;
"(c) the taxing officer allow an amount for the services of counsel relating to: preparation and delivery of the trial records; preparation and delivery of the plaintiffs' Unilateral Applications For Time and Place for Trial and supporting material; reviewing defendant's motion material and memoranda with respect to the fixing of the trial date; and preparation for and attendance on a pretrial conference call with the Associate Chief Justice;
. . . . .
"(e) the taxing officer allow an amount for the services of counsel relating to interviewing and preparing for trial with planned plaintiffs' witness L. McIntosh and M. Lillie;
"(f) that the allowable disbursements by the plaintiffs include all those reasonable fees and expenses (including travel and accommodation expenses) that arose as a result of the efforts of the plaintiffs' potential witnesses M. Lillie and L. McIntosh in meeting with and assisting plaintiffs' counsel, preparing to testify, and travelling to Montreal to testify;"
[15]
In the course of his oral arguments in support of this instant motion, counsel for the plaintiffs stated that certain steps were taken by counsel that are not specifically enumerated in paragraph 1(1) of Tariff B. These steps are outlined in paragraphs 27 to 30, 32, 52 to 54, 65 and 66 of the affidavit of Mr. Goldsmith. The taxing officer may properly exercise his discretion as to any reasonable amounts that ought to be allowed for those services indicated in paragraphs (b), (c) and (e) of the notice of motion. The amounts allowed should reflect the general amounts allowed under the tariff. No special directions are given concerning the disbursements in paragraph (f).
"(g) the allowable disbursements by the plaintiffs in association with the fees and expenses of their expert witness at trial include all those reasonable fees and expenses (including travel and accommodation expenses) that arose as a result of his efforts in: meeting with plaintiffs' counsel; supervising the construction of trial Exhibit P22; drafting and executing his affidavit; reviewing the patent-in-suit, the prior art, the expert affidavits of the defendant and the material concerning Millis' activities; preparing to testify and testifying at trial both in chief and in reply; and including the time he spent in court during the trial when he was not testifying;"
[16]
Under the former Tariff B, in the absence of any special direction of the court, a party was only allowed to tax a maximum of a $100 with respect to an expert witness. Now, the taxing officer has the discretion to allow reasonable payments to an expert witness for services performed by him in preparing himself to give evidence and giving evidence without the necessity of any direction of the court. No special directions will be given to the taxing officer on this point.
"(h) the allowable disbursements by the plaintiffs include all those reasonable disbursements that arose as a result of the travel to the accommodation in Montreal of Robert Ernst in the period September 15 to October 2, 1990, inclusive; and
"(i) the taxing officer allow an amount for the cost to Noma of having one of his senior officers, Robert Ernst, substantially unavailable to perform his normal functions in the period September 15 to October 2, 1990, inclusive."
[17]
In his argument in support of the instant motion, counsel for the plaintiffs points out that the Vice-President of Finance of the plaintiff Noma Outdoor Products Inc. was present in court throughout the trial, but for the last day, and testified twice: once on behalf of the plaintiffs and once on behalf of the defendant. Counsel argues that he was essential during the trial as he assisted in liaising with out of town witnesses, participated in on-going factual research and physically transmitted materials for use during the trial. Counsel consulted with him and took their instructions from him throughout the trial. The taxing officer is hereby allowed to consider all evidence related to these allegations and to allow all reasonable reimbursements resulting from the travel and out of town accommodations of Mr. Ernst in the course of the trial and before the commencement of the trial in Montréal, where and when his presence and usefulness can be adequately justified.
[18]
Counsel for the plaintiffs also seeks directions for the taxing officer to reimburse the plaintiffs for the costs incurred by them as a result of Mr. Ernst being substantially unable to perform his duties as a senior officer during that period. They request that the taxing officer be permitted to receive evidence on this point and to exercise his discretion. I cannot allow that request. I know of no authority, and was given none, to the effect that a corporation may be compensated for the loss of services of a senior officer while attending trial as principal representative of that corporation.
[19]
Consequently, the order is partially granted as stated above. Costs of this motion to the plaintiffs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
Footnotes
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 214.
[End of document]