INTRODUCTION
[1]
Layden-Stevenson, J.
: On March 9, 1961, Duane Edward Worthington was born in Tacoma, Washington, United States of America. He was taken to the home of and adopted by Frank and Helen Charlotte Worthington. The adoption became final on March 20, 1962. Duane's birth certificate lists Mr. and Mrs. Worthington as his parents. Frank Worthington, now deceased, was a Canadian citizen, having been born in Grand Forks, British Columbia. Mrs. Worthington is also a Canadian citizen, having been born in Sandon, British Columbia. Both Mr. and Mrs. Worthington resided in the United States but neither of them ever acquired American citizenship.
[2]
The families of Frank and Helen Worthington live in British Columbia. Helen Worthington and - until his death on October 15, 2002 - her husband had intended to return to British Columbia some years ago. They didn't because their son, Duane, is serving a 35-year sentence in a medium security facility in Oxford, Wisconsin for robbery and drug-related offences. His scheduled release date is 2027. Mrs. Worthington - now 81 years old - wishes to relocate to British Columbia. Her son wants to serve the remainder of his sentence in British Columbia in order to be close to his mother and his extended family. To be eligible for the prison transfer program, Duane Worthington must be a Canadian citizen.
[3]
After corresponding with the Canadian Consulate General in Chicago (the Consulate) for some four months, Duane Worthington (whom I will henceforth refer to as Mr. Worthington), on July 4, 2002, submitted an application for citizenship. On July 3, 2003, the Honourable Denis Coderre, then Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, refused the "request for a grant of Canadian citizenship under subsection 5(4) of the
Citizenship Act
". In December, 2003, Mr. Worthington applied to the Federal Court for an extension of time within which to bring an application for judicial review of the Minister's decision. The respondent did not oppose the motion and by order dated January 7, 2004, Mr. Worthington was granted an extension of time. The application for judicial review, wherein Mr. Worthington and his mother are the applicants, was filed on February 2, 2004.
FACTS
[4]
On March 22, 2002, the senior program officer at the Consulate, presumably in response to an inquiry from Mr. Worthington, informed him that he (Worthington) had a possible derivative claim to Canadian citizenship. The Consulate also provided information regarding the process - the necessity to complete an application, provide the requisite supporting documentation, and pay the applicable fee. Mr. Worthington, in a letter dated March 27, 2002, indicated that he wished to proceed and inquired as to whether his incarceration constituted a bar to obtaining citizenship. Shortly after, on April 19, 2002, Mr. Worthington informed the Consulate that both parents were Canadian citizens - apparently he initially thought that only his mother was Canadian.
[5]
By correspondence dated April 29, 2002, the Consulate forwarded two applications for citizenship to Mr. Worthington indicating that he should complete the application for a citizenship certificate from outside Canada if his father was still a Canadian citizen at the time of his son's birth. If his father was no longer a citizen when he was born, and his mother remained a citizen, he was to use the application for Canadian citizenship, paragraph 5(2)(b). Mr. Worthington completed the application for a citizenship certificate from outside Canada. The form indicates that the application was made under s. 3 (of the
Citizenship Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29 (the
Act
)). In item 9 of the application, Mr. Worthington indicated that he was applying for delayed registration of birth abroad (as required by paragraph 3(1)(e) and subsection 4(3) of the
Act
).
[6]
Further exchanges of correspondence ensued but are largely irrelevant. They consisted primarily of questions from Mr. Worthington and responses from the Consulate regarding the completion of the application form. As noted earlier, the application was submitted on July 4, 2002, along with the supporting documentation and fee. By letter dated August 30, 2002, the Consulate acknowledged receipt of the application and noted that Mr. Worthington had previously failed to mention that he was the adopted child of a Canadian citizen. The Consulate advised that there was, recently, "new legislation to the
Act
" permitting adopted children of a Canadian parent to apply for citizenship. The adoption papers would be required as well as completion of a new application form. Enclosed was an application for Canadian citizenship - adults (18 years or older) under subsection 5(1).
[7]
Mr. Worthington completed the application as requested. Before submitting it, he forwarded further correspondence to the Consulate on September 11, 2002, in which he advised the Consulate that he was saddened when he learned that he may be regarded as "something less than the child of my parents because we do not share the same DNA". After providing a review of his immediate and extended family circumstances, he stated:
"Sir, it would be of great interest to me if you would please respond to this letter, and include the real possibilities and disappointment I may now face because my adoption is an issue. My mom's hopes have been greatly raised because of the seemingly real possibility I would receive Canadian citizenship and I wish to inforn (sic) her with actual facts as to this change of events.
"Also, is it possible I could receive the new legislation that applies to adopted children as it has been incorporated into the
Citizenship Act
, so that I may better understand what has occurred and when this change took place.
"Lastly, I'm curious as to why the new application you sent me does not include any references to my Canadian parents and thereby seems to exclude the substantial relationship and connection I have with Canada.
"Thank you for your time and support in this matter. I am prepareing (sic) the application you sent me and mom is looking for the adoption papers, I suspect roughly no more than two weeks will transpire before you receive the additional paperwork and $20."
[8]
The subsection 5(1) application form was submitted on September 17, 2002. Mr. Worthington received no response from the Consulate in relation to his September 11th correspondence. On September 17, 2002, Mrs. Worthington wrote to the Consulate and explained the underlying reason for the adoption (inability to have children). She also described the nature of her relationship with her son and her family's inability to view him as "different than a natural child in any sense".
[9]
On December 30, 2002, a case analyst at Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) wrote to Mr. Worthington and explained that special provisions were introduced in July, 2001, to deal with adopted children of Canadian parents. He stated that "[t]hese provisions were enacted to eliminate the distinction between natural-born children and adopted children contained in the
Citizenship Act
". He went on to say that for those whose adoptions took place between December 31, 1946 and February 15, 1977, the prohibitions set forth in s. 22 of the
Act
apply. After providing an explanation (not totally accurate) of the contents of s. 22, he informed Mr. Worthington that CIC could not proceed with his application for Canadian citizenship and requested that he sign and date the enclosed "request for withdrawal" form and return it in the self-addressed envelope.
[10]
Mr. Worthington did not sign the request for withdrawal. He wrote to CIC and expressed confusion regarding the CIC statement that the special provisions were introduced to eliminate the distinction between natural and adopted children, born outside of Canada of Canadian parents, yet he was evidently subject to prohibitions because of his adoption. He further questioned, at some length, the wisdom of the CIC statements. The essence of his correspondence dated January 12, 2003 is encapsulated in the following sentence:
"I find it difficult to believe that any governmental department would sanction the idea that adopted children must be forced to drink from a different citizenship water fountain than that of natural children."
No further communication occurred until Mr. Worthington received the Minister's correspondence dated July 3, 2003.
[11]
The record reveals that, in the interim, there was a flurry of activity at CIC over what to do. Several people were involved in what might aptly be termed brainstorming, some without the benefit of having seen the file. Most individuals, it appears, were operating on the assumption that Mr. Worthington had applied for citizenship under subsection 5(4) of the
Act
. There was some speculation about whether the matter should be referred to a citizenship judge. That was not done. There is no indication of consensus but the record does contain a recommendation, prepared by the integration branch, regarding Mr. Worthington's application for a special grant of citizenship under the interim measure on adoption (the recommendation). The recommendation provided a statement of the issue (whether the Minister should favourably recommend a special grant of citizenship to an applicant who applied under the interim measure on adoption while incarcerated outside Canada), the factors for consideration, and a recommendation.
[12]
The recommendation - a negative one - was relied upon by the individual who ultimately prepared a memorandum to the Minister (the memorandum). The memorandum followed the same format as the recommendation. It identified the issue then provided the background, considerations, an additional comment with respect to federal/provincial consultations, and a recommendation. Unfortunately, the memorandum omitted critical information - regarding the "considerations" - that had been contained in the recommendation. I cannot determine whether that omission was intentional or inadvertent. The synopsis, at the beginning of the memorandum states:
"Mr. Duane Edward Worthington is requesting a grant of citizenship under subsection 5(4) of the
Citizenship Act
, based on the interim measures implemented in July, 2001, for persons adopted by a Canadian citizen residing outside of Canada. Mr. Worthington is currently serving a 35-year sentence in Oxford, Wisconsin. He is requesting a grant of citizenship to allow him to be eligible for a prisoner transfer program, which may enable him to serve the remainder of his sentence in a prison in British Columbia. It is recommended that the Minister refuse this request, and that no recommendation be made to the Governor-in-Council for a grant of citizenship under subsection 5(4)."
[13]
Thus, the information presented to the Minister was to the effect that the application was one under subsection 5(4) of the
Act
. I reiterate that the "considerations" portion of the memorandum omitted critical information - the fact that Mr. Worthington does not come within the provisions of s. 22. Counsel for the respondent, prior to the hearing of this application, agreed that the information before the Minister was "erroneous" and that the application should be allowed and the matter remitted for redetermination based on correct information. The applicants' counsel took the position that redetermination is not good enough - Mr. Worthington wants, among other things, an order in the nature of mandamus requiring the Minister to grant Canadian citizenship to him.
ISSUE
[14]
The issue to be determined is the nature of the relief that ought to be granted.
THE RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS
[15]
To appreciate the arguments and analysis, the relevant statutory provisions are, for ease of reference, reproduced here. The CIC Operations Memoranda (CP 01-05) entitled "Interim measure concerning persons adopted by a Canadian citizen residing outside of Canada", in its entirety, is attached to these reasons as Schedule "A".
Citizenship Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-39
"3(1) Subject to this Act, a person is a citizen if
(a) the person was born in Canada after February 14, 1977;
(b) the person was born outside Canada after February 14, 1977 and at the time of his birth one of his parents, other than a parent who adopted him, was a citizen;
(c) the person has been granted or acquired citizenship pursuant to s. 5 or 11 and, in the case of a person who is 14 years of age or over on the day that he is granted citizenship, he has taken the oath of citizenship;
(d) the person was a citizen immediately before February 15, 1977; or
(e) the person was entitled, immediately before February 15, 1977, to become a citizen under paragraph 5(1)(b) of the former Act.
"3(2) Paragraph (1)(a) does not apply to a person if, at the time of his birth, neither of his parents was a citizen or lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence and either of his parents was
(a) a diplomatic or consular officer or other representative or employee in Canada of a foreign government;
(b) an employee in the service of a person referred to in paragraph (a); or
(c) an officer or employee in Canada of a specialized agency of the United Nations or an officer or employee in Canada of any other international organization to whom there are granted, by or under any Act of Parliament, diplomatic privileges and immunities certified by the Minister of Foreign Affairs to be equivalent to those granted to a person or persons referred to in paragraph (a).
[. . . . .]
"5(1) The Minister shall grant citizenship to any person who
(a) makes application for citizenship;
(b) is 18 years of age or over;
(c) is a permanent resident within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, and has, within the four years immediately preceding the date of his or her application, accumulated at least three years of residence in Canada calculated in the following manner:
(i) for every day during which the person was resident in Canada before his lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one-half of a day of residence, and
(ii) for every day during which the person was resident in Canada after his lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one day of residence;
(d) has an adequate knowledge of one of the official languages of Canada;
(e) has an adequate knowledge of Canada and of the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship; and
(f) is not under a removal order and is not the subject of a declaration by the Governor-in-Council made pursuant to s. 20.
"5(1.1) Any day during which an applicant for citizenship resided with the applicant's spouse or common-law partner who at the time was a Canadian citizen and was employed outside of Canada in or with the Canadian armed forces or the public service of Canada or of a province, otherwise than as a locally engaged person, shall be treated as equivalent to one day of residence in Canada for the purposes of paragraph (1)(c) and subsection 11(1).
"5(2) The Minister shall grant citizenship to any person who
(a) is a permanent resident within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, and is the minor child of a citizen if an application for citizenship is made to the Minister by a person authorized by regulation to make the application on behalf of the minor child; or
(b) was born outside Canada, before February 15, 1977, of a mother who was a citizen at the time of his birth, and was not entitled, immediately before February 15, 1977, to become a citizen under subparagraph 5(1)(b)(i) of the former Act, if, before February 15, 1979, or within such extended period as the Minister may authorize, an application for citizenship is made to the Minister by a person authorized by regulation to make the application.
"5(3) The Minister may, in his discretion, waive on compassionate grounds,
(a) in the case of any person, the requirements of paragraph (1)(d) or (e);
(b) in the case of a minor, the requirement respecting age set out in paragraph (1)(b), the requirement respecting length of residence in Canada set out in paragraph (1)(c) or the requirement to take the oath of citizenship; and
(c) in the case of any person who is prevented from understanding the significance of taking the oath of citizenship by reason of a mental disability, the requirement to take the oath.
"5(4) In order to alleviate cases of special and unusual hardship or to reward services of an exceptional value to Canada, and notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the Governor-in-Council may, in his discretion, direct the Minister to grant citizenship to any person and, where such a direction is made, the Minister shall forthwith grant citizenship to the person named in the direction.
[. . . . .]
"12(1) Subject to any regulations made under paragraph 27(i), the Minister shall issue a certificate of citizenship to any citizen who has made application therefor.
"12(2) Where an application under s. 5 or 8 or subsection 11(1) is approved, the Minister shall issue a certificate of citizenship to the applicant.
"12(3) A certificate issued pursuant to this section does not take effect until the person to whom it is issued has complied with the requirements of this Act and the regulations respecting the oath of citizenship.
[. . . . .]
"22(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, a person shall not be granted citizenship under s. 5 or subsection 11(1) or take the oath of citizenship
(a) while the person is, pursuant to any enactment in force in Canada,
(i) under a probation order,
(ii) a paroled inmate, or
(iii) confined in or is an inmate of any penitentiary, jail, reformatory or prison;
(b) while the person is charged with, on trial for or subject to or a party to an appeal relating to an offence under subsection 29(2) or (3) or an indictable offence under any Act of Parliament, other than an offence that is designated as a contravention under the Contraventions Act;
(c) while the person is under investigation by the Minister of Justice, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police or the Canadian Security Intelligence Service for, or is charged with, on trial for, subject to or a party to an appeal relating to, an offence under any of ss. 4 to 7 of the Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes Act;
(d) if the person has been convicted of an offence under any of ss. 4 to 7 of the Crimes Against Humanity and War Crimes Act;
(e) if the person has not obtained the authorization to return to Canada required under subsection 52(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act; or
(f) if, during the five years immediately preceding the person's application, the person ceased to be a citizen pursuant to subsection 10(1).
"22(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, but subject to the Criminal Records Act, a person shall not be granted citizenship under s. 5 or subsection 11(1) or take the oath of citizenship if,
(a) during the three year period immediately preceding the date of the person's application, or
(b) during the period between the date of the person's application and the date that the person would otherwise be granted citizenship or take the oath of citizenship,
the person has been convicted of an offence under subsection 29(2) or (3) or of an indictable offence under any Act of Parliament, other than an offence that is designated as a contravention under the Contraventions Act."
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, being Part I of the
Constitution Act
, 1982, Schedule B,
Canada Act
, 1982, 1982, c. 11 (U.K.)
(R.S.C., 1985, Appendix II No. 44) (the
Charter
)
"1. The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees the rights and freedoms set out in it subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.
[. . . . .]
"15(1) Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination and, in particular, without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability.
"15(2) Subsection (1) does not preclude any law, program or activity that has as its object the amelioration of conditions of disadvantaged individuals or groups including those that are disadvantaged because of race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability."
Loi sur la citoyenneté
, L.R.C. 1985, ch. C-39
"3(1) Sous réserve des autres dispositions de la présente loi, a qualité de citoyen toute personne:
a) née au Canada après le 14 février 1977;
b) née à l'étranger après le 14 février 1977 d'un père ou d'une mère ayant qualité de citoyen au moment de la naissance;
c) ayant obtenu la citoyenneté - par attribution ou acquisition - sous le régime des articles 5 ou 11 et ayant, si elle était âgée d'au moins quatorze ans, prêté le serment de citoyenneté;
d) ayant cette qualité au 14 février 1977;
e) habile, au 14 février 1977, à devenir citoyen aux termes de l'alinéa 5(1)b) de l'ancienne loi.
"3(2) L'alinéa (1)a) ne s'applique pas à la personne dont, au moment de la naissance, les parents n'avaient qualité ni de citoyens ni de résidents permanents et dont le père ou la mère était:
a) agent diplomatique ou consulaire, représentant à un autre titre ou au service au Canada d'un gouvernement étranger;
b) au service d'une personne mentionnée à l'alinéa a);
c) fonctionnaire ou au service, au Canada, d'une organisation internationale - notamment d'une institution spécialisée des Nations Unies - bénéficiant sous le régime d'une loi fédérale de privilèges et immunités diplomatiques que le ministre des Affaires étrangères certifie être équivalents à ceux dont jouissent les personnes visées à l'alinéa a).
[. . . . .]
"5(1) Le ministre attribue la citoyenneté à toute personne qui, à la fois:
a) en fait la demande;
b) est âgée d'au moins dix-huit ans;
c) est un résident permanent au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés et a, dans les quatre ans qui ont précédé la date de sa demande, résidé au Canada pendant au moins trois ans en tout, la durée de sa résidence étant calculée de la manière suivante:
(i) un demi-jour pour chaque jour de résidence au Canada avant son admission à titre de résident permanent,
(ii) un jour pour chaque jour de résidence au Canada après son admission à titre de résident permanent;
d) a une connaissance suffisante de l'une des langues officielles du Canada;
e) a une connaissance suffisante du Canada et des responsabilités et avantages conférés par la citoyenneté;
f) n'est pas sous le coup d'une mesure de renvoi et n'est pas visée par une déclaration du gouverneur en conseil faite en application de l'article 20.
"5(1.1) Est assimilé à un jour de résidence au Canada pour l'application de l'alinéa (1)c) et du paragraphe 11(1) tout jour pendant lequel l'auteur d'une demande de citoyenneté a résidé avec son époux ou conjoint de fait alors que celui-ci était citoyen et était, sans avoir été engagé sur place, au service, à l'étranger, des forces armées canadiennes ou de l'administration publique fédérale ou de celle d'une province.
"5(2) Le ministre attribue en outre la citoyenneté:
a) sur demande qui lui est présentée par la personne autorisée par règlement à représenter celui-ci, à l'enfant mineur d'un citoyen qui est résident permanent au sens du paragraphe 2(1) de la Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés;
b) sur demande qui lui est présentée par la personne qui y est autorisée par règlement et avant le 15 février 1979 ou dans le délai ultérieur qu'il autorise, à la personne qui, née à l'étranger avant le 15 février 1977 d'une mère ayant à ce moment-là qualité de citoyen, n'était pas admissible à la citoyenneté aux termes du sous-alinéa 5(1)b)(i) de l'ancienne loi.
"5(3) Pour des raisons d'ordre humanitaire, le ministre a le pouvoir discrétionnaire d'exempter:
a) dans tous les cas, des conditions prévues aux alinéas (1)d) ou e);
b) dans le cas d'un mineur, des conditions relatives soit à l'âge ou à la durée de résidence au Canada respectivement énoncées aux alinéas (1)b) et c), soit à la prestation du serment de citoyenneté;
c) dans le cas d'une personne incapable de saisir la portée du serment de citoyenneté en raison d'une déficience mentale, de l'exigence de prêter ce serment.
"5(4) Afin de remédier à une situation particulière et inhabituelle de détresse ou de récompenser des services exceptionnels rendus au Canada, le gouverneur en conseil a le pouvoir discrétionnaire, malgré les autres dispositions de la présente loi, d'ordonner au ministre d'attribuer la citoyenneté à toute personne qu'il désigne; le ministre procède alors sans délai à l'attribution.
[. . . . .]
"12(1) Sous réserve des règlements d'application de l'alinéa 27i), le ministre délivre un certificat de citoyenneté aux citoyens qui en font la demande.
"12(2) Le ministre délivre un certificat de citoyenneté aux personnes dont la demande présentée au titre des articles 5 ou 8 ou du paragraphe 11(1) a été approuvée.
"12(3) Le certificat délivré en application du présent article ne prend effet qu'en tant que l'intéressé s'est conformé aux dispositions de la présente loi et aux règlements régissant la prestation du serment de citoyenneté.
[. . . . .]
"22(1) Malgré les autres dispositions de la présente loi, nul ne peut recevoir la citoyenneté au titre de l'article 5 ou du paragraphe 11(1) ni prêter le serment de citoyenneté:
a) pendant la période où, en application d'une disposition législative en vigueur au Canada:
(i) il est sous le coup d'une ordonnance de probation,
(ii) il bénéficie d'une libération conditionnelle,
(iii) il est détenu dans un pénitencier, une prison ou une maison de correction;
b) tant qu'il est inculpé pour une infraction prévue aux paragraphes 29(2) ou (3) ou pour un acte criminel prévu par une loi fédérale, autre qu'une infraction qualifiée de contravention en vertu de la Loi sur les contraventions, et ce, jusqu'à la date d'épuisement des voies de recours;
c) tant qu'il fait l'objet d'une enquête menée par le ministre de la Justice, la Gendarmerie royale du Canada ou le Service canadien du renseignement de sécurité, relativement à une infraction visée à l'un des articles 4 à 7 de la Loi sur les crimes contre l'humanité et les crimes de guerre, ou tant qu'il est inculpé pour une telle infraction et ce, jusqu'à la date d'épuisement des voies de recours;
d) s'il a été déclaré coupable d'une infraction visée à l'un des articles 4 à 7 de la Loi sur les crimes contre l'humanité et les crimes de guerre;
e) s'il n'a pas obtenu l'autorisation requise préalablement à son retour au Canada par le paragraphe 52(1) de la Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés;
f) si, au cours des cinq années qui précèdent sa demande, il a cessé d'être citoyen en application du paragraphe 10(1).
"22(2) Malgré les autres dispositions de la présente loi, mais sous réserve de la Loi sur le casier judiciaire, nul ne peut recevoir la citoyenneté au titre de l'article 5 ou du paragraphe 11(1) ni prêter le serment de citoyenneté s'il a été déclaré coupable d'une infraction prévue aux paragraphes 29(2) ou (3) ou d'un acte criminel prévu par une loi fédérale, autre qu'une infraction qualifiée de contravention en vertu de la Loi sur les contraventions:
a) au cours des trois ans précédant la date de sa demande;
b) entre la date de sa demande et celle prévue pour l'attribution de la citoyenneté ou la prestation du serment."
Annexe B de la
Loi constitutionnelle
de 1982, partie I,
Charte canadienne des droits et libertés
, ch. 11 (R.-U.)
(L.R.C., 1985, Appendice II n° 44) (la
Charte
)
"1. La Charte canadienne des droits et libertés garantit les droits et libertés qui y sont énoncés. Ils ne peuvent être restreints que par une règle de droit, dans des limites qui soient raisonnables et dont la justification puisse se démontrer dans le cadre d'une société libre et démocratique.
[. . . . .]
"15(1) La loi ne fait acception de personne et s'applique également à tous, et tous ont droit à la même protection et au même bénéfice de la loi, indépendamment de toute discrimination, notamment des discriminations fondées sur la race, l'origine nationale ou ethnique, la couleur, la religion, le sexe, l'âge ou les déficiences mentales ou physiques.
"15(2) Le paragraphe (1) n'a pas pour effet d'interdire les lois, programmes ou activités destinés à améliorer la situation d'individus ou de groupes défavorisés, notamment du fait de leur race, de leur origine nationale ou ethnique, de leur couleur, de leur religion, de leur sexe, de leur âge ou de leurs déficiences mentales ou physiques."
THE NOTICE OF APPLICATION
[16]
The notice of application filed by the applicants states:
"This is an application for judicial review in respect of a decision made by the Honourable Denis Codere (sic), former Minister of Citizenship and Immigration.
"By letter communicated to the applicant on July 3rd, 2002, the Honourable Denis Coderre decided not to grant Canadian citizenship to the applicant. The applicant's application for a Certificate of Citizenship was thus denied.
"The applicant makes application for:
1. An order in the nature of Certiorari quashing the decision of the Honourable Denis Coderre dated July 3, 2003 rejecting the applicant's application;
2. An order in the nature of Mandamus requiring the respondent Minister of Citizenship and Immigration to grant Canadian Citizenship to the applicant and to issue a certificate of citizenship to him under s. 12 of the
Citizenship Act
;
3. Full costs on a solicitor client basis, pursuant to rule 400 of the
Federal Court Rules
, 1998;
4. Such further and other relief as this Honourable court may deem just.
"The grounds for the application are:
1. The respondent's rejection of the applicant's application for a Certificate of Citizenship is based on discrimination under s. 3 of the
Citizenship Act
which forces adopted children, such as the applicant in the case at bar, into the naturalization process thereby infringing their right to equal protection and equal benefit of the law under s. 15 of the
Charter
, since biological children are not forced into the naturalization process and are given an automatic right to citizenship.
2. The respondent's decision in rejecting the applicant's application for citizenship is based on a discriminatory treatment, under the Interim Measure, of the applicant as a child adopted between December 31st , 1946 and February 15, 1977, as opposed to a child adopted after February 15, 1977, thereby infringing the applicant's right to equal protection and equal benefit of the law under s. 15 of the
Charter
, since children adopted between December 31, 1946 and February 15, 1977 are made subject to the prohibitions of law as set forth in s. 22 of the
Citizenship Act
while the prohibitions provided for in that section do not apply to children adopted after February 14, 1977;
3. The respondent acted in any other way that was contrary to law."
THE ARGUMENTS
[17]
The applicants' memorandum of fact and law contains a forceful and compelling argument that paragraph 3(1)(e) of the
Act
is unconstitutional in that it discriminates between natural and adopted children, born abroad, of Canadian citizens. Although not cited as such, it is substantially a recitation of the reasons of Mr. Justice Linden in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The applicants submit that the provision is not saved under s. 1 of the
Charter
because it fails to meet the requirements of rational connection and minimal impairment.
[18]
They also argue that the interim measure makes a distinction between children adopted after February 15, 1977 and those adopted before that date. Children adopted between December 31, 1946 and February 15, 1977 encounter a more onerous process with burdensome requirements such as security and criminal records checks. If such checks reveal that an individual has been charged with an offence, the individual is prevented, by s. 22 of the
Act
, from taking the oath of citizenship. Individuals claiming Canadian citizenship on the basis of their post-1977 adoption need not undergo any of these procedures. The applicants argue that this distinction constitutes discrimination based on age (an enumerated ground) and is therefore prohibited, to the extent of its inconsistency, by virtue of s. 15 of the
Charter
. In the applicants' view, the rational connection requirement is not met and the interim measure cannot be saved by s. 1 of the
Charter
.
[19]
In the alternative, the applicants maintain that Mr. Worthington does not come within the provisions of s. 22 of the
Act
in any event. A person incarcerated under foreign law cannot fall within the ambit of s. 22 because the prohibition applies only to those incarcerated "pursuant to any enactment in force in Canada" or under "any Act of Parliament". The CIC correspondence of December 30, 2002, states that a person shall not be granted citizenship or administered the oath of citizenship while an inmate in any penitentiary. This, say the applicants, is a misstatement of the law and the application for citizenship was therefore rejected erroneously.
[20]
The respondent contends that the applicants, in their application for judicial review, seek to challenge two separate decisions - the decision to deny the s. 3 application and the decision of the former Minister not to recommend use of the discretionary power by the Governor-in-Council to grant citizenship under subsection 5(4) of the
Act
. A decision under s. 3 bears no relationship to the former Minister's decision of July 3, 2003. In addition to the fact that an application for judicial review must be limited to a single order (rule 302), the respondent says that no issue was taken regarding the s. 3 decision at the time it was made (August 30, 2002); judicial review was not sought; the time to seek judicial review of the s. 3 decision expired long ago and the court therefore lacks jurisdiction to entertain it. Thus, says the respondent Minister, to the extent that the applicants seek judicial review of a decision with respect to s. 3 of the
Act
, the request should be summarily dismissed.
[21]
The respondent concedes that the former Minister relied on erroneous information in deciding Mr. Worthington's subsection 5(4) application. Because he is serving a sentence in a United States facility, his circumstances are clearly outside the prohibitions set out in s. 22 of the
Act
. As a result, the respondent agrees that the former Minister's decision ought to be quashed and that the matter should be sent back for redetermination based on correct information. Regarding mandamus, the respondent refers to subsection 5(4) of the
Act
and notes that the authority pursuant thereto rests with the Governor-in-Council. The court lacks authority to recommend executive action.
[22]
Last, the respondent Minister submits that the notice of application is moot. This submission is premised on the basis that the parties agree that the former Minister's decision ought to be quashed. Since the applicants have failed to provide any argument with respect to the mandatory provisions of s. 5 of the
Act
, the tangible and concrete dispute has disappeared between the parties and the issues identified by the applicants have become academic. Any decision requiring the Minister to make a grant of citizenship would amount to an intrusion into the function of the legislative branch. This issue is further compounded, in the present circumstances, because the Governor-in-Council has never been provided an opportunity to make a decision in respect of Mr. Worthington's request for citizenship. The respondent asserts that the applicants will receive the relief sought in the notice of application to the extent that the law permits. The true issues can be resolved by quashing the decision under review and remitting it to the Minister for redetermination with directions as the court sees fit.
ANALYSIS
[23]
I begin with the request for an order in the nature of mandamus. The Federal Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), remains the cornerstone authority regarding an order of mandamus. As I indicated at the hearing of the application, no argument has been advanced in relation to the applicants' request in this regard. The prerequisite conditions articulated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, must be met in order for the relief to be granted. In the absence of any submissions or argument addressing those conditions, I am not prepared to grant such an order.
[24]
As to the request to quash the "decision of the Honourable Denis Coderre dated July 3, 2003 rejecting the applicant's application", I will grant that relief. It is relief that is sought by the applicants and it is relief that the respondent Minister agrees should be ordered.
[25]
With respect to the applicants' position - as opposed to their request for relief - that I seize the opportunity to declare, by virtue of s. 15 of the
Charter
, that both s. 3 of the
Act
and the interim measure are unconstitutional on the basis that they are discriminatory, I respectfully decline the applicants' invitation.
[26]
The mere existence of a constitutional question does not mean that the court is obliged to determine it. It is an established practice in Canadian law that, if a judge can decide a case without dealing with a constitutional issue, he or she should do so: R.J. Sharpe, K.E. Swinton and K. Roach,
The Charter of Rights and Freedoms
(2nd Ed. 2002) (Toronto: Irwin Law), at p. 97. It is incumbent on the court to ensure that a proper factual foundation exists before measuring legislation against the provisions of the
Charter
, particularly where the effects of impugned legislation are the subject of the attack:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 250, at 1099  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Adjudicative facts are those that concern the immediate parties. They are specific and must be proved by admissible evidence: ibid.
Charter
decisions should not and must not be made in a factual vacuum. To do so would trivialize the
Charter
and inevitably result in ill-considered opinions. The absence of a factual base is not just a technicality that can be overlooked, it is a flaw that is fatal:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 270, at p. 361  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[27]
This application is fraught with difficulties, the nature of judicial review being one of them. Judicial review proceedings are narrow in scope. Their essential purpose is the review of decisions for the purpose of assessing their legality. The reviewing court (absent exceptional circumstances not applicable here) is bound by the record that was before the judge or the board. Fairness to the parties and the court or tribunal under review dictates such a limitation:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The reviewing court must proceed on the record as it exists, confining itself to the criteria for judicial review: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at paragraph 6.
[28]
I do not intend to itemize all of the difficulties that arise in relation to this application. I will deal, briefly, with some of them. There is no affidavit from either of the applicants. The supporting affidavit is that of a solicitor from the law firm representing the applicants. While that is not necessarily fatal to an application for judicial review, in this instance it results in a clear violation of rule 8 of the
Federal Court Rules
, 1998, SOR/98-106, as am. (the
Rules
). The deponent does not have personal knowledge of much of the information that he has sworn to in the affidavit.
[29]
There is no certified tribunal record. No request in this respect was made pursuant to rule 317. Rather, the documents in the applicants' record, exhibited to the solicitor's affidavit, are those received from the A/Director of Public Rights Administration in response to the solicitor's request for a copy of Mr. Worthington's file. Some information was withheld on the basis that it qualified for exemption pursuant to specific sections of the
Access to Information Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1. No issue was taken regarding the withholding of information since it does not appear that any complaint was filed with the Information Commissioner. In the result, I am dealing with documents that were produced to the applicants' solicitor rather than a certified tribunal record.
[30]
There is no Notice of Constitutional Question in the applicant's record nor can I locate one in the court file. It is evident that the notice of application is directed not only to the respondent, but also to each of the provinces and to Nunavut and that it was served on the various Attorneys General. Section 57 of the
Federal Courts Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as am. mandates, in the absence of an order stating otherwise, that a Notice of Constitutional Question be served on the Attorney General of Canada and the Attorney General of each province at least 10 days before the constitutional question is to be argued. Rule 69 requires that the notice shall be in Form 69. Although the respondent did not take issue with the manner in which the applicants approached the notice, in my view, the jurisprudence reveals that compliance with the
Federal Courts Act
and the
Rules
in this respect is not to be taken for granted. The comments of Mr. Justice Létourneau in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at paragraphs 8 and 9 are apposite:
"This court will not entertain a constitutional challenge in the absence of a Notice being served on the Attorney General of Canada and on each Attorney General of the Provinces: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where this court said that it was without jurisdiction to hear the issue. Such Notice is not a mere formality or technicality that can be ignored or that the court can relieve a party of the obligation to comply with: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where this court ruled that the Notice must be given in every case in which the constitutional validity or applicability of a law is brought in question in the manner described in s. 57, including proceedings before the Tax Court governed by the Informal Procedure. Indeed, a judge cannot, proprio motu, raise a constitutional issue without giving a notice to the Attorney General: see
Reference re Remuneration of Judges of Provincial Courts
, [1997] 3 S.C.R. 3.
"The Notice serves a useful and essential purpose. The Attorney General, whether for Canada or for a province, bears the responsibility of enforcing legislation and defending the constitutionality of the laws enacted by Parliament or provincial Legislatures, as the case may be. The Notice enables them to discharge that duty: on the duty, see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 146;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at paragraph 28;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . It also alerts the provincial Attorneys General to challenges made to federal laws that may have an impact on their provinces although the duty to sustain the constitutionality of these laws is not theirs. This is why the Notice has to provide its recipients with adequate and sufficient information in terms of the material facts giving rise to the constitutional question and the legal basis for that question, otherwise it will be found insufficient and the court will assume that there is no serious question to be addressed: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 264-265 per Sopinka, J."
[31]
With respect to the arguments advanced, the submission that the interim measure is unconstitutional because s. 22 of the
Act
discriminates on the basis of age is countered by the applicants' alternative argument (with which the respondent agrees). Section 22 does not apply to Mr. Worthington. The right allegedly infringed must be that of the person who makes the challenge. Thus, any argument in relation to s. 22 constitutes an attempt to assert the rights of a third party. A party cannot generally rely upon the violation of a third party's
Charter
rights:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 321;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 82. The limited exception expressed in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 420 - a genuine interest as a citizen in the validity of the legislation and no other reasonable and effective manner in which the issue may be brought before the court - cannot be sustained in a vacuity. There is no evidence or argument, here, with respect to the prerequisites applicable to the exception.
[32]
There is merit to the respondent's position that the applicants failed to seek judicial review of the refusal with respect to the s. 3 application. The affidavit of the applicants' solicitor, at paragraph 6, states that the "application under s. 3 was refused due to the fact that Duane was an adopted child". Counsel for both parties advised that Mr. Worthington has resubmitted an application under s. 3 of the
Act
. It does appear that the time within which to seek judicial review of the s. 3 refusal expired long ago. The order extending the time within which to file the application for judicial review is with respect to the Minister's subsection 5(4) refusal.
[33]
On the other hand, the applicants' submission, during the hearing, that the unconstitutionality lies in the process behind the subsection 5(4) decision warrants consideration. The applicants argue that because s. 3 applications are diverted to s. 5, the s. 3 constitutionality is in issue. They want to challenge the s. 3 constitutionality on that basis and they take the position that the process was a continuing one.
[34]
There is authority to support the proposition that where there is a fresh exercise of discretion, a fresh decision will result:
Independent Contractors and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). There is also authority that interprets s. 18.1 of the
Federal Courts Act
broadly so as to bring an ongoing or fluid decision over time within its meaning:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D. Protho.).
[35]
The question is whether the applicants adequately delineated that position. Upon a review of the applicants' written arguments, it cannot be said that the respondent did not have notice that the applicants considered the constitutionality of s. 3 to be in issue. The difficulty is that it is not clear, in the written submission, how or why that was so. The respondent viewed the submission as constituting an attack on two separate decisions. The applicants' oral argument refined and clarified that contained in the written submission. The concept of the process being a continuing one makes sense but, in my view, without having had the benefit of the oral argument, it was not discernible from the written argument. Thus, the respondent was not in a position to address it, and should not be expected to, without notice. The consequences are significant. The Federal Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, unanimously found subsection 3(1) of the
Act
to be prima facie discriminatory. With proper notice, the respondent presumably would want to address, through evidence and argument, s. 1 of the
Charter
.
[36]
Additionally - and this takes me back to the nature of judicial review - there is no indication that there was anything regarding the s. 3 application before the Minister when the subsection 5(4) decision was made. As previously noted, the reviewing court is bound by the record that was before the decision maker. From the documentation contained in the applicants' record, it appears that only the memorandum was before the Minister. While the Minister would have known that the matter related to an adopted person, there is no indication that he had, or was cognizant of, any information with respect to Mr. Worthington's file beyond that fact. This was through no fault of the applicants. Mr. Worthington, it appears, did not request consideration under subsection 5(4) nor was he aware that any such consideration was being granted. This, in and of itself, is anomalous given that the interim measure policy specifically states, in relation to subsection 5(4), that "[t]he person shall be informed that this power is discretionary, and shall be required to provide all the evidence required to meet the basic requirements concerning adoption."
[37]
I could continue and recite additional problems, but it would serve no useful purpose to do so. In my view, enough has been said to illustrate that it would be totally inappropriate to accept the applicants' invitation to deal with the constitutionality of s. 3 in these circumstances. The factual foundation, on the basis of admissible evidence, is insufficient.
[38]
The application for judicial review will be allowed and the decision of the Minister, dated July 3, 2003, quashed. The matter will be remitted for redetermination. The respondent suggested that the matter could be remitted with such directions as the court sees fit. I will direct that Mr. Worthington's complete file as well as my reasons for order and order be provided to the Minister when Mr. Worthington's application is reconsidered. I have not ignored the applicants' argument that they will be back before the court in any event because Mr. Worthington, even if his application is allowed, will be required to take the oath of citizenship and such a requirement does not apply to natural born children. While that may be so, the applicants', in their argument regarding s. 22 of the
Act
, take exception to the fact that persons falling within the section are not permitted to take the oath. Additionally, the indication arising from Mr. Worthington's correspondence with Canadian officials is that he is anxious to take the oath (applicants' record at p. 370). A future application, at this juncture, is speculative.
[39]
The last issue is the matter of costs. The applicants requested, in their application, costs on a solicitor-and-client basis. That position was maintained at the hearing. Costs on a solicitor-and-client basis are the exception and are generally awarded only where there has been reprehensible, scandalous or outrageous conduct on the part of one of the parties:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . I am not satisfied that the respondent's conduct is such that an award of costs on a solicitor-and-client basis is justified. Having regard to the factors set out in rule 400 and specifically the factors in paragraphs (a), (e), (g), (i) and (k) of subsection (3), in the exercise of my discretion, I award costs to the applicants to be paid by the respondent in the all-inclusive amount of $3,500 (including disbursements and GST).
ORDER
[40]
THIS COURT ORDERS THAT
the application for judicial review is allowed. The decision of the Minister is quashed and the matter is remitted for redetermination. On the redetermination, the complete file of the applicant, Duane Edward Worthington, as well as these reasons for order and order shall be provided to the Minister. The applicants will have costs to be paid by the respondent in the all-inclusive amount of $3,500 (including disbursements and GST).
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kawm
SCHEDULE "A"
to the
Reasons for Order and Order dated
November xx, 2004
in
DUANE EDWARD WORTHINGTON
and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  number:
CP 01-05
Date:
July 16, 2001
NHQ policy file no.
3008-1
IMM 0750:
2001-42
Title:
Interim measure concerning persons adopted by a Canadian citizen residing outside of Canada
PURPOSE
The purpose of this memorandum is to announce a change in the treatment of citizenship applications for persons legally adopted by Canadians residing outside Canada.
This measure is necessary to fill the legal vacuum created by the case law on adoption (the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case) and to accommodate individuals who have no other alternative for becoming a Canadian citizen. The decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> has made it difficult to continue to refuse citizenship to persons adopted by Canadians abroad on the ground that they do not have permanent resident status in Canada. CIC had tabled a bill, C-16, in the last Parliamentary session that contained a provision designed to allow citizenship to be granted to adopted persons without requiring them to meet the criterion of permanent residence. Other criteria were also included to ensure that the adoption is legal, that the interests of the child are protected and that no fraud is being perpetrated to obtain entry to Canada or Canadian citizenship. CIC is still committed to this approach and the Minister intends to table this bill again.
Consequently, this interim measure only concerns applications relating to persons whose permanent residence is outside Canada. Such a person may be a minor or of the age of majority when the application is made, provided that he or she was adopted while under 18 years of age. In the case of a person adopted after that age, namely as an adult, that person will have to obtain permanent residence in Canada and make his or her citizenship application pursuant to subsection 5(1) of the
Citizenship Act
, like any other new immigrant.
Until the department tables new citizenship legislation, applications concerning minors adopted by Canadian parents residing in Canada will continue to be processed under paragraph 5(2)(a) of the
Citizenship Act
. These persons will then have to satisfy the permanent residence criterion established by this provision.
BACKGROUND
Under the
Citizenship Act
, a foreign child who has been adopted by a Canadian parent may only be granted citizenship after obtaining permanent residence.
In 1998, the Federal Court of Appeal determined, in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, that the
Citizenship Act
contained a distinction between natural-born children and adopted children in regard to the obtaining of citizenship. In the first place, this distinction was found to be discriminatory because it requires permanent residence of a child legally adopted by a Canadian citizen, while a child born of a Canadian outside Canada is a citizen from birth. In light of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision, it would be difficult to refuse citizenship to a foreign child legally adopted by a Canadian on the ground that the child is not a permanent resident of Canada or does not meet the medical or security requirements contained in the
Immigration Act
.
In response to this new case law, a provision had been developed in C-16 which allowed citizenship to be granted to adopted children regardless of their place of residence. New criteria for granting citizenship had been selected in order to minimize the discrimination between natural-born children and adopted children, while safeguarding the interests of the child and taking risks of fraud into account.
While awaiting the coming into force of new citizenship legislation, or the amendment of the existing statute, measures must be taken to accommodate Canadians who have adopted children outside Canada who live abroad permanently or who cannot satisfy the criteria of paragraph 5(2)(a) of the
Citizenship Act
.
Procedure:
Commencing July 16, 2001, all requests for information, certification or granting of citizenship that concern a person born outside Canada who has been adopted by a Canadian citizen and who is unable to obtain permanent resident status because they resided outside of Canada at the time of the adoption and continue to reside outside of Canada shall be forwarded to the Case Management Branch, to the attention of Ms. Linda Hill, Director, Case Review.
Under the
Citizenship Act
, the alternative offered to persons legally adopted by Canadians residing outside Canada is the discretionary power of the Governor-in-Council to grant citizenship to persons who do not meet the criteria of the
Act
(subsection 5(4)). Since the permanent residence criterion is considered discriminatory with respect to the granting of citizenship to children legally adopted by Canadians, it becomes difficult to continue to refuse citizenship for that reason alone. The measure now proposed seeks to offer an alternative to persons who are penalized by the existing law and who have no other alternative for becoming citizens.
As soon as an application is received, a citizenship officer in the Case Management Branch shall be responsible for contacting the person concerned, by mail, to inform the person of the possibility of obtaining citizenship through the discretionary power of the Governor-in-Council provided for in subsection 5(4). The person shall be informed that this power is discretionary, and shall be required to provide all the evidence required to meet the basic requirements concerning adoption. The criteria involved were essentially those developed in the former citizenship legislation (s. 8 of
Bill C-16
). They aim to ensure protection for the child, for the parents and for overall Canadian policy on citizenship and immigration. These criteria are:
. The person must have been adopted by a Canadian after December 31st, 1946.
. The person must have been less than 18 years of age at the time of the adoption.
. The adoption must have been done in the best interests of the adopted person.
. The adoption must have created a genuine parent-child relationship between the adopted child and the adopting parent.
. The adoption must have been done in accordance with the law of the place of adoption and of the place of residence of the adopting parent.
. The adoption must not have been done solely for the purpose of evading legal obligations relating to immigration or citizenship.
The Case Management Branch shall consider every case on its individual merits, make a report to the Minister, and the Minister shall make a favourable or unfavourable recommendation, as the case may be, to the Governor-in-Council concerning the granting of citizenship.
All persons 14 years of age or older shall swear the oath of citizenship in order to become Canadians.
Note:
If the adoption took place between December 31, 1946 and February 15, 1977, the person in question is subject to the prohibitions of the law as set forth in s. 22 of the
Citizenship Act
. If the person was adopted after February 14, 1977, the criminal prohibitions provided for in that section shall not apply and may not prevent the granting of citizenship or the swearing of the oath.
ANNEXE "A"
Notes de service sur les opérations
Politiques de citoyenneté (CP)
Guide:
CP
NSO no:
CP 01-05
Date:
16 juillet 2001
No de référence de la politique à l'AC:
3008-1
IMM 0750:
2001-42
Titre:
Mesure intérimaire concernant les personnes adoptées par un citoyen canadien résident à l'étranger
OBJET
Le but de cette note de service est d'annoncer une modification dans le traitement des demandes de citoyenneté visant des personnes légalement adoptées par des Canadiens résidant à l'étranger.
Cette mesure s'avère nécessaire pour combler le vide juridique crée par la jurisprudence en matière d'adoption (Affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) et permettre de traiter le cas des personnes qui n'ont pas d'autres alternatives pour devenir citoyen. En effet, à la suite de la décision de la Cour d'appel fédérale dans cette affaire, il serait difficile de continuer de refuser la citoyenneté aux personnes adoptées par des Canadiens à l'étranger sous le motif qu'ils n'ont pas la résidence permanente au pays. CIC a déposé un projet de loi sur la citoyenneté (C-16), au cours de la dernière session parlementaire, qui contient une disposition visant l'attribution de la citoyenneté aux personnes adoptées sans qu'elles ne doivent satisfaire au critère de résidence permanente. D'autres critères ont également été prévus afin de s'assurer que l'adoption est légale, que l'intérêt de l'enfant est protégé et qu'il ne s'agit pas d'une fraude pour obtenir l'entrée au Canada ou la citoyenneté canadienne. CIC demeure favorable à cette approche et la Ministre a l'intention de déposer à nouveau ce projet de loi.
En conséquence, cette mesure intérimaire ne touche que les demandes concernant des personnes dont la résidence permanente est à l'étranger. Il peut s'agir d'une personne majeure ou mineure au moment de la demande, à condition qu'elle ait été adoptée alors qu'elle était âgée de moins de 18 ans. S'il s'agit d'une personne adoptée après cet âge, soit à titre d'adulte, la personne devra obtenir la résidence permanente au Canada et faire sa demande de citoyenneté en vertu du paragraphe 5(1) de la Loi sur la citoyenneté au même titre qu'un nouvel immigrant.
Jusqu'à ce que le Ministère dépose la nouvelle législation sur la citoyenneté, les demandes visant des mineurs adoptés par des parents canadiens résidant au Canada continueront d'être traitées en vertu de l'alinéa 5(2)a) de la Loi sur la citoyenneté. Ces personnes mineures devront donc satisfaire au critère de résidence permanente prévue par cette disposition.
CONTEXTE
En vertu de la Loi sur la citoyenneté, un enfant étranger qui a été adopté par un parent canadien ne peut se voir attribuer la citoyenneté qu'après avoir obtenu la résidence permanente.
En 1998, la Cour fédérale d'appel a conclu, dans l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , que la Loi sur la citoyenneté comportait une distinction entre les enfants naturels et les enfants adoptés pour l'obtention de la citoyenneté. À prime abord cette distinction a été jugée discriminatoire puisqu'elle consiste à exiger la résidence permanente à un enfant légalement adopté par un citoyen canadien, alors que l'enfant né d'un Canadien à l'étranger est citoyen dès la naissance. Étant donné cette décision, il serait difficile de refuser la citoyenneté à un enfant étranger légalement adopté par un Canadien parce qu'il n'est pas résident permanent du Canada ou qu'il ne répond pas aux exigences médicales ou sécuritaires que prévoit la Loi sur l'immigration.
Compte tenu de cette nouvelle jurisprudence, une disposition avait été prévue dans le projet de loi C-16 permettant l'attribution de la citoyenneté aux enfants adoptés sans égard à leur lieu de résidence. De nouveaux critères d'attribution avaient été choisis de manière à diminuer le plus possible la discrimination entre les enfants naturels et les enfants adoptés tout en sauvegardant les intérêts de l'enfant et en tenant compte des risques de fraude.
En attendant l'entrée en vigueur de cette nouvelle loi, ou la modification de la loi actuelle, des mesures doivent être prises pour accommoder les Canadiens qui ont adopté des enfants à l'étranger et qui y vivent de façon permanente ou qui ne peuvent satisfaire les critères de l'alinéa 5(2)a) de la Loi sur la citoyenneté.
Procédure:
À compter du 16 juillet 2001, toutes les demandes d'information, d'attestation ou d'attribution de la citoyenneté concernant une personne née à l'étranger qui a été adoptée par un citoyen canadien et qui se voit dans l'impossibilité d'obtenir le statut de résident permanent en raison du fait qu'elle residait à l'extérieur du Canada au moment de l'adoption et continue de resider à l'extérieur par la suite, devront être acheminées à la Direction générale du règlement des cas, à l'attention de Madame Linda Hill, Directrice de la révision des cas.
En vertu de la Loi sur la citoyenneté, l'alternative qui s'offre aux personnes légalement adoptées par des Canadiens résidant à l'étranger est le pouvoir discrétionnaire du Gouverneur en conseil d'attribuer la citoyenneté à des personnes qui ne satisfont pas les critères de la loi(paragraphe 5(4)). Étant donné que le critère de résidence permanente est considéré discriminatoire pour l'attribution de la citoyenneté aux enfants légalement adoptés par des Canadiens, il devient difficile de continuer à refuser la citoyenneté pour ce seul motif. La présente mesure vise donc à offrir une solution de rechange aux personnes qui sont pénalisées par la loi actuelle et qui n'ont pas d'autres alternatives pour devenir citoyens.
Dès réception des demandes, un agent de citoyenneté à la division du règlement des cas sera responsable de contacter la personne concernée, par courrier, pour l'informer de la possibilité d'obtenir la citoyenneté en vertu du pouvoir discrétionnaire du gouverneur en conseil que prévoit le paragraphe 5(4). La personne devra être informée qu'il s'agit d'un pouvoir discrétionnaire et devra également fournir toutes les preuves justificatives pour répondre aux exigences de base concernant l'adoption. Les critères sont essentiellement ceux établis dans l'ancien projet de loi sur la citoyenneté (article 8 du Projet de loi C-16). Ils visent à assurer une protection tant pour l'enfant et les parents que pour la politique canadienne générale en matière de citoyenneté et d'immigration. Ces critères sont:
. La personne doit avoir été adoptée par un Canadien après le 31 décembre 1946;
. La personne doit être âgée de moins de 18 ans au moment de l'adoption ;
. L'adoption doit avoir été faite dans l'intérêt supérieur de l'adopté ;
. L'adoption doit avoir créé un véritable lien de filiation entre l'adopté et le parent adoptant;
. L'adoption doit avoir été faite conformément au droit du lieu de l'adoption et du lieu de résidence du parent adoptant ;
. L'adoption ne doit pas avoir été faite uniquement dans le but d'éluder les obligations légales en matière d'immigration ou de citoyenneté.
Tous les cas seront étudiés au mérite par la Direction du règlement des cas, qui fera un rapport à la Ministre, et la Ministre fera ensuite une recommandation favorable ou défavorable, selon le cas, au Gouverneur en conseil concernant l'attribution de la citoyenneté.
Toutes les personnes âgées de 14 ans et plus devront prêter le serment de citoyenneté pour devenir des citoyens canadiens.
Note:
Si l'adoption a eu lieu entre le 1er janvier 1947 et 15 février 1977, la personne est sujette aux interdictions de la loi prévues à l'article 22 de la Loi sur la citoyenneté. Si la personne a été adoptée après le 14 février 1977, les interdictions criminelles prévues à cet article ne s'appliquent pas et ne peuvent empêcher l'attribution de la citoyenneté ou la prestation du serment.
[End of document]