[1]
MacKay, J.
: These reasons concern an application for an interim order under s. 18.2 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended, to stay removal of the applicant from Canada pending determination of his application for leave and for judicial review. The latter application, and the application for a stay, were both filed June 6, 1996. The stay was heard by telephone on June 11, 1996 when, for brief oral reasons I dismissed the application. These are written Reasons filed in accord with s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
.
[2]
The applicant, earlier determined to be a Convention refugee, seeks to question by his application for leave and for judicial review, the decision on behalf of the Minister, made on May 30, 1996, pursuant to s. 53(1)(a) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the "
Act
"), that she is of the opinion that the applicant constitutes a danger to the public. Thereafter, arrangements for removal of the applicant were made, for him to be removed on the evening of June 11 and returned to Honduras, his country of origin. Removal would execute an outstanding deportation order made against the applicant in September 1993. The decision to remove him from Canada now gives rise to this application for a stay.
[3]
The applicant, Mr. Canales, arrived in Canada in October 1990 and thereafter made a claim to be a Convention refugee from his country of origin, Honduras. In 1992 he was found to be a Convention refugee. In 1991 he was convicted for possession of narcotics and was fined for that offence. In March 1993 he was convicted of a breach of probation undertakings he had given to avoid certain conduct. In July 1993 he failed to appear at an inquiry under the
Act
, ignoring an order issued that he do so, and in September he was detained by immigration authorities and an inquiry proceeded. He was then found to be inadmissible to Canada and a deportation order was issued on September 22, 1993. He initiated an appeal of that deportation order, but did not appear for its hearing and the appeal was declared to be abandoned.
[4]
From 1993 until late in 1995 he was convicted of a number of offenses involving narcotics, including both possession and trafficking offenses, though his maximum penalties appear to have been four months' incarceration in 1995 and one year's probation in 1996.
[5]
On April 10, 1996 the applicant was advised that the Minister was considering whether he constituted a danger to the public, pursuant to s. 53(1)(a) of the
Act
. The notice to him advised that he was entitled to make submissions, an extension of time was provided for those submissions to be made by counsel on his behalf, and ultimately on May 30, 1996 the Minister determined that she is of the opinion the applicant constitutes a danger to the public, the decision which is questioned by the application for leave and for judicial review.
[6]
In dealing with the requirements for a stay counsel for the applicant urged that there were serious issues raised before the court by the application for leave and for judicial review, that the applicant would suffer irreparable harm if he were now returned to Honduras, his country of origin, and that in the circumstances the balance of convenience favoured the grant of a stay pending determination of the application for leave and for judicial review.
[7]
In regard to serious issues before the court counsel urged that the application for leave and for judicial review raised four serious issues for consideration. I deal with each of these in turn as follows.
[8]
First, it is urged that s. 53(1)(a) infringes the
Charter
by imposition of a treatment that is cruel or unusual, that is, the removal of a Convention refugee in the circumstances here constitutes such treatment. In this case it is urged that the treatment is grossly disproportionate to the offenses committed. At a minimum, it is urged, that in light of s. 53 of the
Act
, a Convention refugee ought not to be deported unless the Minister conducts an assessment of the risk of deportation and establishes that removal can be safely conducted without risk of danger to the refugee.
[9]
I am not persuaded that the case does raise a serious issue concerning alleged infringement of s. 12 of the
Charter
. As was pointed out by my colleague Mr. Justice Gibson in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), whether there is a serious issue before the court must depend upon the judicial review application. At issue here is the Minister's opinion pursuant to s. 53(1)(a) of the
Act
and not the deportation order which itself is not questioned. Claims relating to the constitutionality of deportation do not arise as a result of the Minister's decision since, as pointed out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 151; 18 Imm. L.R.(2d) 165 (C.A.), the Minister's opinion does not lead, in itself, to any action which affects the life or security of the person.
[10]
Second, counsel for the applicant urges that the lack of an oral hearing in connection with the determination by the Minister constitutes a failure to meet essential procedural fairness requirements.
[11]
I am not persuaded that this is a serious issue raised by the application for judicial review. The jurisprudence makes clear that in similar cases, involving permanent residents, or persons claiming refugee status, similar processes established by the Minister do not require an oral hearing in advance of her decision. (See:
Nguyen
, supra,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.); and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)). The law is clear that where Parliament establishes an administrative discretion, as in this case, procedural fairness requirements do not always dictate an oral hearing. In my opinion s. 53(1)(a), as here applied, with notice to the applicant in advance of consideration by the Minister, including an indication of matters to be considered, and with an opportunity to make written submissions which are taken into account, satisfies requirements for procedural fairness. Here the evidence is clear that notice was given, that the documents which would be considered by the Minister were known to the applicant and he took advantage of the opportunity to make submissions. Those were taken into account. In sum, the lack of an oral hearing does not here raise a serious issue before the court.
[12]
Third, counsel for the applicant urges that the failure of the Minister to provide reasons for her decision violates principles of natural justice since it insulates the decision from judicial review and provides no clear basis on which to evaluate whether the Minister's opinion is patently unreasonable. In my opinion, the jurisprudence again is clear that in these circumstances there is no obligation on the Minister to provide reasons for her opinion. There is no statutory requirement for reasons to be stated and the decision of the Minister is clearly one within her statutory discretion. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)). I note that the lack of reasons does not preclude judicial review.
[13]
The fourth issue which counsel urges constitutes a serious issue before the court is said to be the vagueness of the terms of s. 53(1)(a) itself, which it is urged is constitutionally vague. The respondent urges that the standard for finding a statute to be so vague as not to be applicable is a high standard, and it is not here met. Moreover, it is urged that s. 53(1)(a) applies only in cases where a refugee claimant's criminal record renders him or her inadmissible to Canada and the subsequent opinion, that he or she constitutes a danger to the public, is designed merely to facilitate procedural steps to permit the Minister to meet her statutory obligation of implementing outstanding deportation orders.
[14]
In my opinion, the last issue raised by the applicant is a serious issue before the court not yet determined by jurisprudence, that is, that s. 53(1)(a) vests in the Minister discretionary authority with so little guidance that it can be considered constitutionally vague and unenforceable. At this stage, of course, I simply recognize that this is a serious issue to be heard, and I make no determination about that issue.
[15]
I turn to the issue of irreparable harm. For the applicant it is urged that to return him to his country of origin, Honduras, constitutes irreparable harm. It was earlier recognized he should have Convention refugee status because of his fear of persecution there. It is urged that returning a Convention refugee to his country of origin in itself constitutes irreparable harm. There is no evidence here adduced by the applicant about current country conditions within Honduras. There was evidence before the Minister that conditions within Honduras had changed for the better since the decision that the applicant was a Convention refugee. Moreover, the risk to the applicant if he were to be returned to Honduras at this time was assessed and was summarized in the documents submitted to the decision-maker on behalf of the Minister. That summary concluded, on the basis of public information available to the Minister, and of which the applicant had notice, that there was no evidence to indicate that the applicant would be at risk if he were returned now to Honduras. The argument of the applicant is that he believes he would still be at risk in Honduras, as would his family, who have remained there, if he were to be returned. No evidence is offered to support that belief and no argument is addressed to show that the opinion of the Minister in this regard was patently unreasonable.
[16]
In my opinion, the applicant does not establish that he would suffer irreparable harm if he is now returned to Honduras.
[17]
While I recognize there is a serious issue raised by the application for judicial review, I am not satisfied that irreparable harm will be suffered by the applicant if he is returned to Honduras. If he is so returned his application for judicial review may continue to be pursued. It is not made moot by his having been removed from Canada.
[18]
In these circumstances, the balance of convenience clearly lies with declining to issue the stay request. The Minister's responsibilities under the statute for removal of persons from Canada who have no right to remain ought not to be interfered with in the circumstances of this case.
[19]
For these reasons, the Order issued dismissing the application for a stay of the arrangements made for the removal of the applicant from Canada.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David Weir/saf
[End of document]