[1]
Reed, J.
: On September 1, 1993, an application was placed before me seeking an extension of time for the filing of the applicant's application record. The application for an extension of time was brought under Federal Court Rule 324 which authorizes the making of decisions on the basis of the written representations filed and without an oral hearing.
[2]
The applicant had filed, on July 28, 1993, an application for leave and, if leave was granted, for judicial review of a decision of an immigration officer which decision had refused to allow him to make an inland application for landing. The application record with respect to the leave request, according to the rules, was required to be filed before August 27, 1993.
[3]
The application for an extension of time which was received by me on September 1, 1993 had been filed in the court on August 20, 1993. The reason given for seeking an extension of time was because counsel for the applicant was going out of town from August 21 to August 27 and was unable to complete the application record before her departure. She also noted that her client lived in Campbell River and she therefore was not able to see him before leaving town on August 21. She stated that her client had a fairly arguable case. With respect to this last there was really no evidence filed to support that claim. A copy of material which had been sent by counsel to the Immigration Centre, seeking a reconsideration of its earlier decision, was filed but this material was all generated after the decision which was the subject of the leave/judicial review application.
[4]
I refused to grant the request for an extension of time and endorsed the application: "The personal schedule of counsel is not the type of reason which the jurisprudence indicates justifies granting extensions of time. The application is dismissed."
[5]
Counsel for the applicant filed a motion for reconsideration. The main ground of that motion is that it was not her personal schedule which presented the time limit being met but her professional schedule. She was scheduled to attend the Bar Convention in Quebec City and she was doing so as a member of the Provincial Council.
[6]
Counsel for the respondent opposes the request for a reconsideration. She notes that it is out of time since it was filed more than 10 days after the date of the order denying the extension of time. In addition, it is argued that the grounds do not fall within the limited circumstances in which this court can reconsider the terms of its own orders. Rule 337(5) provides a mechanism for the court to reconsider orders made where the court commits an oversight. Rule 337(5) does not allow the court to reexamine the conclusions which it has drawn from the evidence:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). The present case is not a case in which some matter should have been dealt with was accidentally overlooked or omitted. Counsel for the respondent also argues:
"The respondent also takes the position that, on the merits, this is not an appropriate case for reconsideration. Madame Justice Reed, in the order in question, stated that the personal schedule of counsel is not sufficient reason for an extension to be granted. There was material before the court that the reason the extension was sought was counsel's attendance at the Canadian Bar Association convention. Clearly, this was a professional matter, and not merely a personal commitment. However, the scheduling difficulties which resulted for counsel are personal to counsel. The respondent submits that conflicts between client deadlines and nonclient professional commitments, including attendance at Bar Conventions (whether as a member of Provincial Council or as a member at large) and attendance at Continuing Legal Education seminars for five days out of a 30 day time limit are not sufficient reasons to warrant the court granting an extension of time."
[7]
I think I should set out my approach to motions for extensions of time. I start with the premise that the time limits set out in the
Rules
are meant to be complied with. If they are too short then requests should be made to have the
Rules
amended so that the time limits are lengthened. I do not grant requests for extensions of time merely because it is the first time that counsel has asked or because the work load which counsel has assumed is too great. I think such decisions are unfair to those counsel who refuse clients because their work load is too heavy to allow them to meet required deadlines or who "pull out all the stops" to meet the deadlines, at great inconvenience to themselves. As I have indicated I take the view that the time limits set out in the
Rules
are meant to be complied with and they are meant to apply to everyone equally. If an automatic extension was meant to be available merely because counsel seeks one, then, the
Rules
should provide for such an automatic extension, for everyone, when such is sought.
[8]
On what grounds then do I grant an extension of time. I have already indicated that, in general, I am not receptive to requests which are based solely on the work load counsel has undertaken. When an application for an extension of time comes before me, I look for some reason for the delay which is beyond the control of counsel or the applicant, for example, illness or some other unexpected or unanticipated event.
[9]
There was no such unanticipated cause for the delay in the present case. At the time the leave application was filed, it was known that the time limit for the filing of the application was 30 days, counsel knew her client lived in Campbell River and that she would be attending the Bar Convention towards the end of August. The scheduling was under her personal control. Thus, it was hard for me to justify, in such circumstances, the granting of an extension of time.
[10]
I know that courts are often reluctant to disadvantage individuals because their counsel miss deadlines. At the same time, in matters of this nature, counsel is acting in the shoes of her client. Counsel and client for such purposes are one. It is too easy a justification for noncompliance with the
Rules
for counsel to say the delay was not in any way caused by my client and if an extension is not granted my client will be prejudiced. I come back again to the question of fairness. It is unfair for some counsel to be proceeding on the basis that barring unforseen events the time limits must be met and for others to be assuming that all they need do is plead overwork, or some other controllable event, and they will be granted at least one extension of time. In the absence of an explicit rule providing for the latter I proceed on the basis that the former is what is required.
[11]
I turn then to my jurisdiction in this case to grant the reconsideration requested. Firstly there was no oversight on my part respecting the evidence before me. I knew that counsel would be attending the Bar Convention. I also determined that she was in control of the scheduling of the preparation of the application record and knew of the Bar Convention commitment well in advance of its occurrence. I thus could not justify granting an extension of time on the basis of the material filed. I did not know that counsel was attending the Bar Convention as a member of Provincial Council, rather than merely as a member at large. I cannot honestly say at this time whether if I had known that fact it would have affected my decision. It certainly does not make counsel's absence from town any more unanticipated. It does add an element of constraint on her ability to change her plans. The capacity in which she was attending the convention was however known at the time the application for an extension of time was filed. It is not information which has recently come to light. I am not convinced that circumstances exist which allow a reconsideration of my order.
[12]
For the reasons given the application for a reconsideration will be dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]