[1]
Walsh, D.J.
: The defendant moves for an order pursuant to rule 337(5) extending the time within which it might request special directions with respect to costs and for an order pursuant to rule 344(7) for special directions with respect to the costs, indicating a number of matters for which special directions are sought. Both parties have made extensive written representations, including references to jurisprudence, to enable the matter to be dealt with pursuant to rule 324.
[2]
The first matter to be considered is whether the time for making the motion should be extended. After a lengthy trial during which a number of important issues both factual and legal involving interpretations of the Copyright Act and the Industrial Design Act were dealt with judgment was rendered in favour of plaintiff for damages and costs on June 14, 1985. This judgment was appealed in the Federal Court of Appeal by both plaintiff and defendant and the judgment of the Court of Appeal was rendered on June 13, 1986 [see (1986), 67 N.R. 139] allowing defendant's appeal on one of the issues raised, which was sufficient to result in the dismissal of plaintiff's action together with costs both in the Court of Appeal and in the Trial Division. During the trial no order was sought for special directions as to costs and normally by application of rule 344(7) an application should have been made within the 10 days specified in rule 337(5) for such special directions including directions contemplated by Tariff B. A strict application of rule 337(5) would actually have required such an application within 10 days after the pronouncement of the trial judgment, although it is perhaps not strictly accurate to state that this is a matter which had been overlooked or accidentally omitted. It is by no means unusual for counsel during the course of argument to overlook asking for a special order with respect to costs and the court cannot be said to have overlooked dealing with this when no such request has been made. However, in view of the importance of the matter and the difficulty of the issues raised it is certainly an application which would have been granted had it been made and discretion is given to the trial judge to extend the time for the application even after the expiration of the delay set forth. Rule 344(7) provides that an application in the Court of Appeal should be made before the Chief Justice or a judge nominated by him. As I have been nominated deputy judge to deal with this matter and, since the judgment of the Court of Appeal provided for the payment of costs to the defendant both in that court and in the court below it would appear to be proper to deal with the matter, since as the judge who heard the action in the first instance, I am familiar with all aspects of the matter.
[3]
No application was even made, however, within the 10 days following the judgment of the Court of Appeal. Solicitors for the plaintiff, Bayliner Marine Corporation sought leave to appeal the decision of the Court of Appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada, and according to the submissions of the defendant, it deemed it inappropriate to make a motion for special directions as to costs since the decision might go to the Supreme Court of Canada. It was not until December 18, 1986 that the Supreme Court of Canada refused leave to appeal. The judgment of the Court of Appeal therefore became final. The present motion was only produced on February 27, 1987 however, unavoidable delays having occurred during January and February owing to the physical locations of relative material and the absence of the chief officer of the defendant. There is considerable doubt in my mind as to whether this is a valid excuse as preparation for a special order could have been commenced while awaiting the decision of the Supreme Court as to whether leave to appeal would be granted or not.
[4]
The defendant relies on the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), as authority for the court justifying such a delay. In that case the application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court was dismissed on September 30, 1981 but it was not until January 20, 1982 that the draft bill of costs was submitted and not until May 10, 1982 that a motion for leave to extend the period for bringing the motion for special directions with respect to costs was made when the opposite party refused to consent to the bill of costs submitted without an order for special directions. Plaintiff's answer to this submission leaves the matter to the court's discretion. While normally I believe that rules respecting delays for bringing such applications should be strictly applied there are perhaps some extenuating circumstances in the present case due to the complexity of the matter and the number of matters with respect to which defendant seeks special directions as to costs. In deciding to grant the delay as was done in the Spur Oil case, I am guided by 2 factors: first, I do not believe that plaintiff will suffer any prejudice as a result of the delay in dealing with this application; and second, on examining the merits of the application, it appears to me that the major items with respect to which defendant seeks special directions will not be granted, leaving merely some lesser matters to be dealt with to which plaintiff may well consent.
[5]
Equity would appear to require that the merits of defendant's application should be dealt with rather than merely dismissing it out of hand on a procedural question.
[6]
I will deal with the merits under the various headings of defendant's submissions.
Numbers of counsel to be taxed
[7]
Defendant seeks counsel fees for two senior and one junior counsel both for the preparation and the conduct of the hearing and for disbursements incurred in connection with the attendance of two senior counsel at the hearing. Defendant submits that the word counsel as used in s. 2(1) of Tariff B is both singular and plural as was held in the Spur Oil case. In the present case, one of the witnesses had to be examined in the French language and since neither he nor the junior counsel were fluent in it an additional senior counsel was retained to prepare the witness' testimony and to conduct it. It was submitted that fees of this additional senior counsel for preparation for the hearing and conduct of it as well as disbursements incurred in connection with it should be allowed. In answer to this, plaintiff points out that the court provides simultaneous translation where required and in a bilingual country the engaging of an additional senior counsel for dealing with a French speaking witness would not be a proper item to include in costs. Defendant counters that, by retaining a French speaking lawyer to conduct the preparation and examination of the witness for the trial a disbursement for a translator prior to trial was avoided. I have no hesitation in concluding that it would set a dangerous precedent to justify the taxing of an additional counsel merely to assist the principal counsel and his junior who are not sufficiently familiar with one or the other of the official languages, as the case may be, to prepare or examine a witness in that language, and that if such assistance is required at trial, as it may well be in many cases, provision in the rules for simultaneous translation provides for this.
[8]
On the other hand it is by no means unusual to tax one senior and one junior counsel in a matter of this importance. The junior counsel in this case who resides in Toronto and is a member of the firm of senior counsel who resides in Ottawa, did much of the preparation and the legal research including the preparations for challenging the credentials of one of the plaintiff's expert witnesses, which submissions he presented at trial. I find therefore that one senior counsel and one junior counsel can properly be taxed in this case.
Classification of action
[9]
Defendant submits that this procedure should be taxed on the basis of a Class III action rather than Class II. It is true that plaintiff's amended statement of claim did not seek relief for any ascertained amount so this would be properly classified a Class II action pursuant to s. 1(3)(b) of Tariff A. It is clear that the amounts involved had plaintiff succeeded in this action would be greatly in excess of $50,000. Defendant's sales are said to have exceeded $10.5 million and damages were being sought inter alia for conversion. Section 1(4)(a) of the Tariff permits the court to make a direction whereby a step or all of the steps of a proceeding should be classified in a class other than that in which they would otherwise fall. This was done in the case of Smith Kline &  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 37 N.R. 296, it was held that costs could be awarded on a Class III basis rather than on a Class II basis in the words of Ryan, J., at page 107 C.P.R., 306 N.R.:
"... if it is established that, though specific sums are not mentioned on the face of the proceedings, a sum of more than $50,000 is significantly involved."
[10]
In answer to this plaintiff refers to the Court of Appeal decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . An examination of that case indicates that it dealt with a situation where an action had been started for an amount in excess of $50,000 and hence was a Class III action, but the judgment allowed less than $50,000 so in taxation the taxing officer reduced it to a Class II action. This was upheld by the Trial Division but overturned in the Court of Appeal. I do not consider it as authority for the proposition that if an action is started as a Class II action because no amount is mentioned, the court can have no discretion to convert it into a Class III action even if the amounts which would clearly be involved in a reference would exceed $50,000.00. In deciding that it is the action as started which governs Justice Marceau did state that this was:
"... in the absence of directions to the contrary in the final judgment ..."
[11]
It is precisely such direction which is now sought in the present motion to modify the final judgment by dealing with a matter which was not dealt with in it. I therefore conclude that it would be appropriate on the facts of this case to classify it as a Class III action.
Allowing counsel fees in excess of Tariff
[12]
Defendant seeks counsel fees substantially in excess of those allowed by the Tariff, invoking the importance and difficulty of the case. The court is however clearly still governed by the judgment of Chief Justice Jackett in the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in which he stated at page 806 that neither:
"... the volume of work in preparation considered alone, or in conjunction with such factors as the difficulty or importance of the case, as constituting a basis for exercising the judicial discretion to increase Tariff B costs items."
[13]
This judgment has frequently been criticised by a number of judges of the Trial Division and ways have been sought to evade the rigidity of it in view of the hopelessly inadequate amounts allowed in the Tariff but it has nevertheless been followed in the Court of Appeal in such cases as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , constitutes an exception to this. That was in the nature of a test case however which resulted on appeal in the reversal of the interpretation placed on the statute by several judges of the Trial Division of the court. The present case can hardly be considered as a test case however although it raised some issues for the first time of very serious legal questions, the action having been instituted before the judgments of Mr. Justice Strayer in the Royal Doulton and Interlego cases which were followed in the Trial Division in this case but subsequently reversed in appeal, with respect to the interpretation of the word "and" in regulation 11(1)(a) of the Industrial Design Act. The fact that an action involves the determination of a number of serious legal issues some of which may be novel however and which undoubtedly will affect many future cases does not I believe make it a test case such as the Manitoba Fisheries case. Many law suits involve serious and important legal issues requiring extensive study and preparation by counsel, but the Smerchanski judgment seems to preclude the possibility of the court exercising its discretion to award amounts beyond those allowed by the Tariff.
Expert witnesses
[14]
It is customary to allow reasonable payments to experts for services performed in preparing for and giving evidence pursuant to Tariff A, s. 4(2) and I would allow the taxation of the expert German which plaintiff does not contest. With respect to the expert Kirby however the situation is substantially different. In the judgment, I had this to say about his evidence:
"Peter Kirby, an experienced patent agent, also testified as an expert on behalf of defendant. He admitted however that his expertise is in the field of industrial design and much of what he said is inadmissible including opinions expressed in paragraphs 17 and following of his affidavit on the interpretation of s. 46 of the Copyright Act which is a legal matter. In paragraph 18 for example he sets out his views of the consequences of finding that copyright protection extends to shape and configuration of an article. He strongly critisizes the Royal Doulton case. These are all matters for argument by counsel not for evidence by an expert witness."
[15]
While one cannot blame counsel for retaining a number of experts in a case of such importance, it appears to me that it would create a dangerous precedent to allow full taxation of an expert, the main thrust of whose evidence is to give legal opinions (even though in the final outcome his views were sustained by the Court of Appeal). Such matters must be left for the court. At this late date, and without ordering a transcript of the evidence it is difficult to break down his evidence into the portions which were factual or with respect to which he had the right to express an opinion and the portions which involved legal opinions. His account refers inter alia to attending for a half day in Toronto for which he claims travelling and overnight expenses of $525.00 from Ottawa which appears to be excessive for the time involved. His claim for $2,645.00 fees for conferences with defendant's counsel, carrying out searches for designs in the patent office, reviewing his affidavit and additional conferences and telephone discussions and attending for a half day in Toronto may perhaps be reasonable within the meaning of s. 4(2) of Tariff A. I believe it would be reasonable to tax one half of his total bill of $3,170.00 or an amount of $1,585.00.
Disbursements of witnesses
[16]
Although the witness Hanna was president of defendant, the separate corporate personality permits him to be taxed as a witness including his travel expenses for examination for discovery and trial, but not for any attendance for the purposes of giving instructions to counsel. The other witness Gervais can be properly taxed for his expenses for attending as a witness. Plaintiff conceeds this.
[17]
Accordingly, I make the following order:
1. Pursuant to rule 344(7) and 337(5) I permit the present motion to be made extending the time for defendant to seek special directions with respect to costs;
2. The taxation shall be made on the basis of a Class III action;
3. Counsel fees may be allowed for one senior counsel and one junior counsel for preparation for the hearing and the conduct of same including reasonable disbursements incurred in connection therewith;
4. The expert witness German may be taxed pursuant to rule 4(2) of Tariff A for his reasonable fees and disbursements as an expert witness. The expert Kirby, part of whose evidence was not properly admissible, may be taxed for one half of his claim for fees and disbursements totalling $3,170.00, that is for $1,585.00
5. Reasonable disbursements incurred by Peter Hanna, for attendance as a witness for examination, discovery and trial but not for attendance for the purpose of giving instructions to counsel may be allowed. Reasonable expenses, witness fees of witness Gervais may similarly be taxed.
[18]
Defendant's motion although only partially successful is granted with costs since, although as plaintiff's counsel points out in his submissions, many of the items could have been agreed to had defendant's counsel sought his consent it appears that plaintiff may well have objected to the seeking of a special order after the normal delay for applying for same had expired.
[19]
In the event that the parties cannot agree as to the amounts to be paid, costs will be taxed in the normal way pursuant to these directions.
Application allowed;
order accordingly.
Editor: Catherine M. Bowlen/blk
[End of document]