[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
[Translation]: This is an application by Victor Pilntiz for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board, Refugee Division (hereinafter the "Refugee Division").
[2]
During an abandonment hearing on March 20, 1996, the Commission, after hearing the applicant's explanations, rendered the following decision:
"[Translation] On February 26, 1996 you and your counsel were notified by the Refugee Division that a hearing would be held on March 12, 1996.
"You did not appear at the hearing.
"On March 12, 1996, you and your counsel were notified by the Refugee Division that a hearing would be held on March 20, 1996 to allow you to explain why the Refugee Division should not declare that your claim has been abandoned.
"You and your counsel attended the hearing, but you gave no reasons why the Refugee Division should not declare that your claim has been abandoned.
"
ACCORDINGLY, THE REFUGEE DIVISION DECLARES THAT YOUR CLAIM HAS BEEN ABANDONED.
"
[3]
Counsel for the applicant submits, first, that the Refugee Division should have granted an adjournment, given the change in counsel of record, which was its normal practice a few months ago.
[4]
The cases hold, of course, that a person is entitled to choose his or her counsel. However, this choice is not unlimited. A person must choose an attorney who is able to appear within the time limits laid down by the court or tribunal that has jurisdiction. [see footnote 1]
[5]
Both the applicant and his counsel were aware of the date of the hearing and could not assume that the Refugee Division would grant an adjournment. In the circumstances, I am unable to find any breach of the right to counsel.
[6]
The applicant's second submission is that the Board members erred unreasonably when they decided that the applicant had not provided any reasons to justify his failure to appear. In this regard, I would adopt the statement of Pinard, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  counsel for the applicant, I do not read in the Board's decision that the Board considered that the applicant had not given any reasons to try to justify his earlier absence. What the Board wrote is that the applicant had not given any reasons why the Refugee Division should not consider that he had abandoned his claim, which simply means that the applicant did not provide valid reasons to prevent the Board declaring the claim to be abandoned."
[7]
The applicant's third submission is that the Board members breached the rules of natural justice by failing to consider the claim on its merits before declaring it had been abandoned. This submission is, in my opinion, unfounded and contrary to the rule enunciated by Denault, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Refugee Division gives the person concerned an opportunity to be heard, it is the very purpose of that abandonment hearing to allow the person concerned to explain the reasons why he believes he did not abandon the claim. It is only when the Refugee Division has allowed the claimant to explain his reasons and concluded that they were valid that it may proceed to hear the claim."
[8]
During his abandonment hearing, the applicant claimed that his absence stemmed from a misunderstanding of his counsel's explanations. in view of the fact that the applicant had understood all the other explanations that had been given him by his counsel, the Board thought the applicant's version was implausible. This was a finding concerning the applicant's credibility, in regard to which this court may intervene only if it is of the opinion that this finding was unreasonable, which is not the case.
[9]
For these reason, the application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/saf
Footnotes
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)
2.	(1996), 110 F.T.R. 50 (T.D.)
3.	(June 22, 1994), IMM-2843-93 (T.D.).