[1]
Addy, J.
: The plaintiff, which had been manufacturing and selling through its predecessor company, since approximately 1967, packaged automotive lubricants and petroleum products using the name "Turbo", is applying for an interlocutory injunction against the defendant in this action in conjunction with certain trade marks involving the word.
[2]
The plaintiff (hereinafter referred to as Turbo Resources) is actually the registered owner of four marks: the first one is a design mark of the word "Turbo" with a colour claim of a drawing of the word lined in red and blue; the second is a claim for the words "Go Turbo"; the third is a design mark covering the words "Go Turbo" including two maple leaves which are in turn disclaimed; the fourth one, also a design mark, covers a design of the word "Turbo" with blue letters on a white background over a red panel with a white maple leaf which is disclaimed.
[3]
Turbo Resources originally operated only in Alberta but gradually expanded its business, which includes the acquisition and operation of service stations, to certain other portions of the other three Western provinces and, to some very limited extent, to Western Ontario. By far, the bulk of its business operations however are still carried out in Alberta.
[4]
Petro Canada Inc., in January 1987, began packaging oil for sale in its service stations, with paper labels containing on both sides its own name and logo and on one side in bold print the words "Premium Turbo Tested" in English and on the other side the words "Super Turbo Huile Moteur - Testée dans les moteurs Turbo" in the French language. In both cases the word "Turbo" is coloured bright red and is in far bolder and larger print than the remaining words of the label including the designation Petro Canada.
[5]
Although I originally intended to issue only very brief reasons for my decision on the present application, I now feel that the particular circumstances of the case when considered in the light of certain contradictory pronouncements of Canadian courts regarding the principles to be applied in interlocutory injunctions, require a more detailed consideration of the jurisprudence governing the subject. It is to be hoped that, in so doing, further confusion will not be added to that already caused by the adoption by some of our courts of certain pronouncements of Lord Diplock in the well known case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[6]
Counsel both referred to that case, with regard to the controversial question as to whether in applications for interlocutory injunctions, there is obligation on the applicant to establish a strong prima facie case or whether the court must merely be satisfied that there is a serious question to be tried, in the sense that the action is neither frivolous nor vexatious.
[7]
In considering the Cyanamid case, it is most important to bear in mind that the plaintiff applicant was seeking a quia timet injunction: it involved only a threatened or prospective infringement of its patent by the defendant. The granting of the injunction would merely postpone what the latter proposed to do and would thus truly preserve the status quo. This situation seldom occurs, especially in industrial property cases or in passing-off cases. The injunction normally interrupts and disrupts in part or in whole the actual business operations of the defendant. It cannot, in such cases, be said to "preserve the status quo".
[8]
There are also assertions made by Lord Diplock which are expressed as being intended by him to be of general application and which certainly do not apply to the majority of cases in this country, at least where important commercial issues are at stake. He advances, for instance, as a general proposition that "the evidence available at the hearing of an interlocutory injunction is incomplete. It is given on affidavit and
has not been tested by oral cross-examination.
" (The underlining is mine.) This is certainly not the case here nor in the majority of cases. In the Cyanamid case, the trial judge found that there was a strong prima facie case. The Court of Appeal disagreed and set aside the injunction on that ground alone, without considering the balance of convenience or damages. Lord Diplock found that there was a serious question to be tried and then, without in any way pronouncing himself on the question of whether or not there was also a strong prima facie case, went on to agree with the trial judge's finding as to the balance of convenience. He then criticized the overruling by the Court of Appeal of the trial judge's finding in the following terms:
"As patent judge he (the trial judge) has unrivalled experience of pharmaceutical patents and the way in which the pharmaceutical industry is carried on. Lacking in this experience, an appellate court should be hesitant to overrule his exercise of his discretion, unless they are satisfied that he has gone wrong in law."
[9]
In the first place one is left to wonder whether that strange statement means that an appellate court in deciding whether or not it should overrule the discretion of the trial judge, must first of all consider the degree and extent of his experience in the subject matter of the injunction, but, more importantly, if the trial judge in the Cyanamid case had, as stated, "an unrivalled experience of pharmaceutical patents", then that experience would most certainly bear primarily on the issue of whether or not a strong prima facie case has been established regarding the monopoly afforded by that particular pharmaceutical patent, as well as any decision of that judge on the balance of convenience. Furthermore, as the Court of Appeal only dealt with the question of whether or not there was a strong prima facie case, Lord Diplock's above quoted admonition must be taken to apply to that finding. It follows that, if the Court of Appeal, in the only finding it made on the trial judge's decision, was wrong in interfering, one then is left to suppose that the latter was correct in that finding. In the light of the above and of the failure of the House of Lords to deal specifically with the trial judge's specific finding that a strong prima facie case was established, one might conclude that the speech of Lord Diplock, approved by the other Law Lords, regarding the mere requirement, in all interlocutory injunction proceedings, of an important issue to be tried, might well be considered as mere obiter dictum.
[10]
It is clear that in his speech Lord Diplock stated quite categorically that it was not necessary to establish a strong prima facie case or even a prima facie case. In effect, he stated that it was not necessary for the court to be satisfied that there appeared to be a probability of success on the part of the plaintiff. The relevant passage reads as follows:
"The purpose sought to be achieved by giving the court discretion to grant such injunctions would be stultified if the discretion were clogged by a technical rule forbidding its exercise if upon that incomplete untested evidence the court evaluated the chances of the plaintiff's ultimate success in the action at 50 per cent, or less, but permitting its exercise if the court evaluated his chances at more than 50 per cent."
[11]
Unless required to do so by a binding decision from higher authority, I refuse to accept this proposition as one of general application. It should not apply in cases where the granting of the injunction would not merely preserve the status quo but would cause actual substantive damage to the defendant. It simply does not seem acceptable or just to me, that, where the defendant appears on the evidence adduced on the motion for interlocutory relief to have a greater chance of success than the plaintiff, I should proceed to enjoin the defendant merely because the balance of convenience weighs in favour of the plaintiff. Where there would be a serious question to be tried, in the sense that the action is neither frivolous nor vexatious, yet where, on the one hand, the defendant would apparently have a greater chance of succeeding, and where, on the other hand, the potential harm caused to the plaintiff would exceed that caused the defendant, I would not conclude that the motion should then be decided in favour of the plaintiff.
[12]
After trial of an action, the claim for an injunction must necessarily fail should the plaintiff fail to establish a right to it on a balance of probabilities. Since an interlocutory injunction must be considered an exceptional remedy, as must any other interim relief previous to a full trial on the merits, it is difficult for me to conceive why, generally speaking, either at law or in accordance with the equitable principles which govern injunctive proceedings, a plaintiff should be granted interlocutory injunctive relief unless a strong prima facie case or at the very least a prima facie case has first been established. Put in another way, where the defendant would be suffering actual damage pending trial, then unless the person relying on the monopoly is able to satisfy the judge at the hearing that there is a probability of eventual success, the application should fail.
[13]
That being said, I am inclined to agree that, in certain rare occurrences, where the injunction would truly preserve the status quo because the defendant has not yet commenced to do what is sought to be enjoined, such as occurred in the Cyanamid case, and possibly also, where the prospective harm to the defendant would be extremely minimal as compared to that of the plaintiff and could be fully compensated for in damages and where the balance of convenience would weigh in favour of the plaintiff, the finding of the judge hearing the motion would not necessarily have to be a "compartmentalized" into the three classical categories so that, even though a prima facie case might not be fully established, the interlocutory injunction might nevertheless be granted, providing the chances of ultimate success, although not necessarily in favour of the plaintiff, are nevertheless judged to be fairly balanced.
[14]
My comments have been addressed primarily to cases involving industrial property. However, one can conceive of exceptional situations, other than those involving industrial property or quia timet injunctions, where the Cyanamid case test would also be applicable, even though some harm would be caused the defendant. For instance, where serious permanent, irreversible harm would be caused the plaintiff or where an important public interest is at stake. In those cases, the court might at times well be justified in intervening, without being satisfied of the probability of the plaintiff's eventual success, providing there appears to be an arguable case.
[15]
As a result of the Cyanamid case our courts have been greatly divided and, I would dare say, often confused as to what legal test should be applied in determining the merits of the case in conjunction with the additional questions of the nature of the damage and of the equitable principle of balance of convenience.
[16]
Some judges feel, as McNair, J., stated in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  circumstances and that a broad view of the matter should be taken. The same opinion was expressed by Stone, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 72.
[17]
Beetz, J., of the Supreme Court of Canada, recently stated that in constitutional cases the serious question formulation of American Cyanamid is sufficient in a constitutional case but specifically refrained from expressing any view with respect to the test to be applied in any other type of case ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241, at 127 and 128).
[18]
The following cases were decided after some consideration was given to the traditional requirement that the plaintiff was obliged to establish either strong prima facie case or a prima facie case -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C. Ontario) -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  England).
[19]
In the following cases, on the other hand, consideration was focused on whether there was a serious question to be tried:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Alta. Q.B.) -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C. Ontario) -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).
[20]
Before leaving the subject of the proper test to be applied a further consideration is worthy of mention. It is a practical one and relates more specifically to injunctions pertaining to industrial property matters.
[21]
The essential and very fundamental reason why monopolies in matters such as trade marks, patents and copyrights exist at all and are recognized and afforded protection under the law, is to encourage and reward research, inventiveness and the risking of capital in the scientific, technical, manufacturing and commercial fields. If that basic purpose of encouraging inventiveness, innovation and adventure in the commercial world is to be maintained, then, when a person who has conceived of a new project is faced with what might appear to be a monopoly in the same or a related field and has subsequently taken the required technical, scientific and legal advice indicating that what he proposes to do is not covered by the monopoly, he should feel absolutely free to embark upon and proceed without interruption on the proposed course.
[22]
The advice must necessarily be related solely to the question of whether the field of the proposed action or endeavor is at law free of the monopoly. Otherwise, notwithstanding the fact that his competitor asserting the previous monopoly would ultimately fail, the inventor or innovator, were he to be faced at the interlocutory stage with the mere test of a serious question to be tried, would, in addition, before proceeding with his project, be obliged to decide whether the balance of convenience eventually would also weigh in his favour, at some future time, which is now undetermined and depends entirely on whether and when the other party institutes an action. This would be placing an impossible and unrealistic burden upon him or upon any expert whose advice he might seek and would in effect run directly contrary to the raison d'être of monopoly laws in the first place. One of the main difficulties is that neither the innovator nor his experts would normally have any idea of the amount or possibly even of the nature of the harm which might be determined to have been suffered by the competitor at some time in the future when an interlocutory injunction might be applied for.
[23]
Some decisions seem to allude to it being somehow reprehensible that a person had dared enter with open eyes, a field where there exists a monopoly which might conceivably be related to the proposed endeavour and might thus be infringed. In a free market and especially in a free and democratic society such as ours where initiative, inventiveness and daring has always been the keystone of success, any such action, if taken bona fide by a person who feels that he or she has something of value to contribute, far from being reprehensible, should, generally speaking, not be impeded where in fact and in law, the specific area of the field of the proposed invention, action or endeavour is actually free of existing monopolies. Again, speaking generally and subject to certain exceptions such as those previously mentioned, it follows that, the person who holds a monopoly should, in order to obtain an interlocutory injunction, be required to satisfy the court on the evidence adduced in the motion, that there exists a prima facie right to it and that it appears that the defendant would probably be infringing upon it.
[24]
It has been said on several occasions that the judge hearing the injunction should refrain from trying the case and also from commenting on the evidence submitted except to the extent that such comments are deemed necessary to explain the decision. These certainly are proper comments. However, contrary to what somehow seems to be implied in the Cyanamid case and in other decisions, this does not mean that the judge is justified in refraining from weighing and considering the law and the evidence submitted by both sides regarding the issue of whether there appears to be a probability of eventual success by the plaintiff. The court must necessarily consider and weigh evidence which is often quite involved when deciding on a question of balance of convenience and on the nature and extent of the damage to both sides. In my view, it is not only proper but it is the duty of the judge hearing the injunction to do so on the issue of the plaintiff's legal position, but only of course to the extent that it is necessary.
[25]
Finally, courts in granting interim injunctions at times blithely refer to "maintaining the status quo" when in fact the injunction, far from doing so, allows the plaintiff to continue operating and either partially or totally interrupts, prevents or puts an end to ongoing activities or operations of the defendant thereby causing him continuing pecuniary damage until trial. It also seems that some courts conclude at times that one or the other party cannot be adequately compensated in damages for the alleged tort, when, on proper analysis, it is merely a case of damages being difficult to calculate, determine or estimate.
[26]
Petro Canada introduced the labelling complained of on November 19, 1986 and the evidence establishes quite clearly that the defendant Turbo Resources became aware of this in January 1987 yet did not advise Petro Canada of its objection until June 23rd, 1987. I do not consider that the delay complained of would constitute laches or an actual bar to the claim, but it certainly is an indication that Turbo Resources was not too concerned about the matter and that it considered the alleged infringement as being relatively unimportant since it did not warrant immediate action.
[27]
There is ample evidence that the word itself would constitute a very weak mark as it is a common term in both the automotive and in the automotive lubrication industries. It is used in Canada by seven automotive oil manufacturers and/or distributors in labelling their products. There are also 14 brands of automobiles presently sold in Canada using the word in the name of their vehicle. It is to be found in any modern English dictionary. In the automotive industry it is employed to describe a super charger which is driven by a turbine using the exhaust gases of the engine. "Turbo Tested" means tested for use in a turbo charged or super charged engine. It is only fairly recently that turbo charged automobiles have become very popular. The term is used by other manufacturers and distributors of automotive oils such as Shell and Castrol. Turbo Resources itself, when corresponding with Shell as far back as 1972, when the latter was originally objecting to its application for the design marks covering the word, pointed out that it was used by other oil companies for their products.
[28]
I therefore conclude that the word does not have the distinctiveness contemplated by s. 6(5)(a) of the Trade Marks Act. Thus, the main issue reduces itself to the consideration of whether, by reason of its prominence on the manner in which it is used on the label or by reason of the design itself, the word infringes any of the above-mentioned marks of the defendant Turbo Resources.
[29]
While Turbo Resources of course uses the word on all of its oil, petroleum and other products, Petro Canada only uses the word in conjunction with the word "tested" on labels of oil containers for oils which it claims to be turbo tested and are intended for use in turbo-charged motors. It is thus truly descriptive of the nature of the product being sold by that company.
[30]
As pointed out at the outset of these reasons, three of the marks are design marks, the only word mark being "Go turbo".
[31]
Insofar as the design is concerned, neither the colour, the size nor the design of the letters in the word "Turbo" nor the design of the whole word itself on the defendant's oil containers resembles any of the design marks of Turbo Resources.
[32]
With regard to the word, an exclusive right to use the expression "Go Turbo" does not at law create any right over the word "turbo" taken by itself especially as I have already pointed out in view of the exceptional weakness of the word from a trademark standpoint in the automotive field and in the field of automotive lubricants.
[33]
There remains the question of whether the word has acquired a secondary meaning for the plaintiff entitling it to special protection.
[34]
The word "Turbo" as previously stated now describes the use of which oil is being sold and intended to be used. It is therefore a truly descriptive word. There is in such cases a much heavier burden on any plaintiff who attempts to establish that such a word has attained a secondary meaning directly identifying him or his products than if the word were merely an original word or a "fancy" word, which is not descriptive of the product or of the person relying on the secondary meaning (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In such cases, it is almost impossible to prove that the distinctiveness of a descriptive word (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[35]
It is not only length of use which must be considered but also how and where it has been used. Although the plaintiff began using the word in 1972, the use has been fairly limited having regard to the areas where persons distributing oil are operating. At present, the only area where distinctiveness might be claimed is in Western Canada, within very limited areas in the Provinces of B.C. and Manitoba. Turbo Resources has established service stations in municipalities representing approximately 50% of the population of Saskatchewan but only approximately 7% of the population of B.C. and 6% of the population of Manitoba. There are apparently no stations in either Vancouver, Victoria or Winnipeg.
[36]
The affidavit pertaining to the issue of whether the word "Turbo" as used by Petro Canada might be confused with the Petro brand of oil sold by Petro Resources Ltd. in Western Canada, was the affidavit of one Warburton to the effect that he had attended at six Petro Canada Stations in Calgary and had requested "a litre of Turbo brand motor oil" and that, in all but one of the cases, the attendant began to pour Petro Canada's Turbo tested oil into his automobile. The one exception pointed out that he did not carry Turbo brand motor oil but only Petro Canada's Turbo oil.
[37]
Having regard to the fact that Petro Canada stations obviously do not sell the oil of their competitor and would not be expected to do so and having regard also to the fact that Petro Canada carried a special type of oil that is Turbo tested for use in turbo charged cars, I am somewhat astounded that even one of the attendants drew the distinction. It would not have made the slightest difference if the word "Turbo" had not been prominently displayed on the label but merely mentioned in the fine print on the label indicating that it was turbo tested. It is not contested or alleged that Petro Canada was not fully entitled to use the word "Turbo" where the word formed part of a description of the purpose of the oil. There is no evidence of any person having actually purchased a container of Petro Canada Turbo tested oil believing it to be a product of Turbo Resources.
[38]
Furthermore, the label on both sides of the container carries the name Petro Canada and the logo of the defendant. Both are very prominent and, although the letters spelling out Petro Canada are not in as bold a type as the word "Turbo", they are highly visible and distinguishable. It seems to me that no person looking at the label would come to the conclusion that the oil in the container is produced by Turbo Resources and not by Petro Canada.
[39]
The burden of establishing a prima facie case regarding a monopoly arising out of a possible secondary meaning of the word "Turbo" has not been discharged.
[40]
On the affidavit evidence presented on the motion and the cross-examinations thereon, I must conclude therefore that there has been no prima facie case established by the plaintiff Turbo Resources that Petro Canada might be infringing its monopoly. There remains of course a possibility that this might be established by further evidence adduced in trial.
[41]
The motion will therefore be dismissed. I specifically refrain however from dealing with the question of balance of convenience. Regarding the nature of the damages, I also refrain from making any finding except one to the effect that the harm done to Petro Canada, had injunction been granted, could have been compensated for by a monetary award. The cost of removal and the replacement of the labels on their Turbo tested oil containers would in fact be the only damage caused and this could fairly easily be determined.
[42]
The defendant will be entitled to costs in the cause.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]