[1]
Gibson, J.
: These reasons relate to an application for judicial review of a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division (the "CRDD") of the Immigration and Refugee Board wherein the CRDD determined the applicant not to be a Convention refugee within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2. The decision of the CRDD is dated the 25th day of May, 1994.
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Brazil who arrived in Canada for a second time in February, 1992. On both occasions, she arrived in Canada with full documentation for purposes of her work in the field of choreography and dancing. On her second arrival, she stayed in Canada. She first stated her intention to make a refugee claim at Toronto on the 7th day of December, 1992. Although the Convention reason that formed the basis for her claim was not clearly identified on the face of her personal information form or on the face of the reasons of the CRDD, it is clear from those reasons that the only Convention reason relied on was membership in a particular social group.
[3]
The applicant first met her future husband in Brazil in the summer of 1983. The CRDD summarizes their relationship in the following terms:
"The claimant testified that she lived with her husband from November 1984 until they were married in October 1985, and continuing through until 1987, save and except when she lived with her mother for five months after her husband had thrown her and her infant son off a bus in October 1985. She testified that from March 1988 until she left for Canada in 1992, she continuously lived with her parents."
[4]
The claimant's relationship with her husband was marked by violence committed by him against her from at least as early as February, 1985. The violence extended, as well, to members of her immediate family. There were instances when the use of a knife was threatened. There were instances when the applicant's husband was in possession of a gun. Death threats were not uncommon. On four occasions, the applicant complained to the police. On none of those occasions did she receive what she regarded as a satisfactory response. Certainly none of the reports led to the alleviation of the attacks on her. The applicant testified that her husband abused drugs and had criminal connections which would enable him to track her down anywhere in Brazil.
[5]
The CRDD commenced its analysis of the applicant's claim with the following paragraphs:
"In order for the claimant to be determined to be a Convention refugee, the evidence must establish that she has good grounds for fearing persecution in Brazil for one of the reasons set out in the definition of Convention refugee contained in the
Immigration Act
.
"On the evidence, the circumstances of the claimant's expressed fear of persecution is gender-based in nature. Gender-related persecution is a form of persecution which requires the consideration of this panel as it pertains to this particular claim." (citation omitted)
The CRDD then turned to consideration of guidelines issued by the Chairperson of the Immigration and Refugee Board pursuant to s. 65(3) of the
Immigration Act
entitled
Women Refugee Claimants Fearing Gender-Related Persecution
(Immigration and Refugee Board, Ottawa, Canada, March 9, 1993). After citing from the guidelines, the CRDD wrote:
"The guidelines specifically state, ... that in assessing a woman's claim of gender-related fear of persecution, the evidence must show that what the claimant genuinely fears is persecution for a Convention reason as distinguished from random violence or random criminal activity perpetrated against her as an individual.
"The guidelines further state ... that evaluation of the claimant's whole evidence as to weight and credibility ought to be conducted in light of the following considerations, among others:
'A gender-related claim cannot be rejected simply because the claimant comes from a country where women face generalized oppression and violence and the claimant's fear of persecution is not identifiable to her on the basis of an individualized set of facts. This so-called "particularized evidence rule" was rejected by the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at the hands of authorities (or private citizens not susceptible to state control), the claimant may have difficulties in substantiating her claim with any "statistical data" on the incidence of sexual violence in her country of origin.
'Decision-makers should consider evidence indicating a failure of state protection in that governing institutions and/or their agents in the claimant's country of origin may have condoned the instances of sexual violence if they had been aware of them or did nothing to prevent them.'
"The panel members are of the opinion that the experiences of the claimant, and the fear arising from those experiences, relate to past or future acts respectively of private violence and criminality perpetrated, or which she fears will be perpetrated, against her as an individual. We are of the opinion that her past experiences, and her related fear, cannot be characterized as persecution within the meaning of the Convention refugee definition, nor can they be related to any of the grounds therein." (citation omitted)
Almost precisely the same analysis was used by another panel of the CRDD in a matter that reached this court under the style of cause
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), which related to the claim for Convention refugee status of a female citizen of Ecuador who had been subjected to extensive violence at the hands of her former husband where less evidence of unsuccessful attempts to avail of state protection was provided. In that case, McKeown, J., stated:
"If women subject to violence are a particular social group, the reasoning of the Board cannot stand. The abuse will always be carried out by a domestic partner and not by any particular group. If an abused domestic partner is not a member of a particular social group, the abused domestic partner cannot have a well founded fear of persecution by reason of one of the five grounds in the Convention refugee definition. In my view, women in Ecuador subject to domestic violence belong to a particular social group."
After reviewing the comments of Mr. Justice La Forest in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 733 et seq.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and concluding that the panel of the CRDD, the decision of which was before him also misinterpreted the guidelines cited above, Mr. Justice McKeown continued:
"Because the Board did not accept the female applicant as a member of a particular social group, it failed to examine the documentary evidence relating to the treatment of women subject to domestic violence in Ecuador. The Board looked at the one time when the claimant contacted the police and decided that this was strictly an act of personal violence. However, if the Board had analyzed this incident in light of the documentary evidence, the Board might well have decided that she feared persecution by her domestic partner, on grounds of membership in a particular social group."
It was not argued before me that the documentary evidence before the CRDD in this matter disclosed other than support for the position of the applicant, namely, that state protection against domestic violence in Brazil was ineffective at best.
[6]
I adopt the reasoning of McKeown, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, with respect to the matter before me. Women subject to domestic violence in Brazil constitute a particular social group. Having reached that conclusion, on the facts that were before the CRDD in this matter, I conclude that the CRDD erred in law in failing to find that the applicant had good grounds for fearing persecution on a Convention ground if she were required to return to Brazil by reason of the continuous experience of violence against her committed by her husband and the inability or unwillingness demonstrated by state authorities to protect her from such violence in the past.
[7]
I am satisfied that my conclusion above and the decision of McKeown, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, are not inconsistent with the decision of MacKay, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 19 Imm. L.R.(2d) 81, and the Supreme Court in
Ward
that the tribunal in this case did not properly assess whether there was merit to the applicant's claim to membership in a particular social group in terms of the principles set out by Mr. Justice La Forest in
Ward
. Rather its conclusion was based on an absence of prior judicial determination of the question in relation to similar facts. I do not imply that I endorse the applicant's claim to membership in a particular social group for I am also persuaded by the respondent that in the application of the principles he outlined, La Forest, J., makes clear in
Ward
that it is not an apt criteria to define a social group solely by reason of the common victimization of members of the group."
After expressing concern that the CRDD erred in the matter before him in its failure to explicitly assess the applicant's claim in relation to the guidelines cited above, Mr. Justice MacKay went on to indicate that he was not persuaded that the CRDD's conclusion that state protection was available in the circumstances there under review "... was without support on the evidence before it". On that basis, he went on to dismiss the application for judicial review. Thus, Mr. Justice MacKay did not base his decision, according to my reading, on the issue of definition of a particular social group based upon common victimization of members of the group as was the case in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, and is the case in this matter.
[8]
I turn then to the last issue briefly argued before me which was the delay in the applicant's submission of her claim for refugee status after her arrival in Canada. While the CRDD correctly cites
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), for the proposition that delay in making a claim to refugee status is not a decisive factor in itself but is nonetheless a relevant element which the CRDD may take into account in assessing the statements, actions and deeds of a claimant, it found the applicant's explanation for the delay to be less than satisfactory. The CRDD stated:
"The panel members find less than satisfactory the claimant's explanation as to why she waited for ten months after arriving in Canada before making her refugee claim. She testified that she had too much on her mind, and people had told her that no one would listen to her at Immigration Canada. Also, she stated that she was afraid. She was asked why she made a claim if she believed what people had been telling her. She stated that she stopped believing what people had been telling her, and that she had to think about her life, so she changed her mind.
. . . . .
"Therefore, the panel members are of the opinion that the claimant did not come to Canada on February 27, 1992 for the purpose of making a Convention refugee claim, but for economic or other unrelated reasons."
The CRDD did not rely upon this conclusion as a critical element in its decision to reject the applicant's refugee claim. It is worthy of note that the applicant submitted as an element of the documentary evidence, a psychiatric assessment conducted at Doctors Hospital and dated December 1 and 13, 1993. The assessment advises that the applicant describes "... a variety of post-traumatic stress symptoms". The assessment could very well be read as supportive of the applicant's explanation for her delay in applying for refugee status. It is unfortunate, and I go no further than that, that the CRDD did not acknowledge this assessment in evaluating the applicant's explanation for her delay in applying for Convention refugee status.
[9]
Based upon the foregoing, I conclude that this application should be allowed and that this matter should be referred back for rehearing and redetermination by a differently constituted panel of the CRDD.
[10]
At the opening of the hearing, counsel for the respondent requested that the style of cause be amended to reflect the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration as the respondent. Counsel for the applicant did not object. The style of cause will be so amended.
[11]
I consulted counsel on the issue of certification of a question. Counsel for the applicant did not recommend certification of a question. Counsel for the respondent recommended certification of one of the two questions certified in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, which reads as follows:
"Are women subject to domestic violence in a particular country, members of a particular social group?"
The question as proposed will be certified.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/slm
[End of document]