[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This application for judicial review of a decision of the Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board) came on for hearing before me in Edmonton, Alberta, on October 8, 1993. The Board denied the applicant status as a Convention refugee despite its conclusion that he had a well-founded fear of persecution on the basis of his political opinion because they found him to be an accomplice in crimes against humanity. At the conclusion of arguments, I took the matter under reserve and indicated that these written reasons would follow.
Facts
[2]
The applicant is from the Chilean city Vina Del Mar. His family had a long history of involvement in leftist causes and had strong ties to the Socialist Party in that city. He joined the Socialist Party in 1981 while still in high school. In the late 1980's, the Party began a project to unify the various leftist parties in order to consolidate their opposition to the Pinochet regime. Mr. Poblete was commissioned by the Socialist Party in 1989 to join the Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front (the Front) and has always maintained his membership in the Socialist Party.
[3]
The Front was not a legal political party, but rather a clandestine organization that was divided into two distinct factions. The military faction was made up of people who had broken away from the Communist Party and advocated the use of violence and terror. The political faction had ties to the Socialist Party and denounced the use of force. Since the applicant's departure from Chile, there has been a complete split between the two factions. The political faction became the Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Movement and the military faction became the Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front - Autonomous.
[4]
The political faction was divided into three sections: recruiting, financial, and organizational (planning of meeting and activities). The applicant stated that his family's status as supporters of leftist causes meant that he was instinctively trusted by the Front members. As a result, he was made local vice-president in charge of recruiting and entrusted with the important task of keeping track of the membership lists. He was therefore one of only a handful of people who knew the local Front members' real names, as they were known to each other only by pseudonyms. The applicant had no involvement whatsoever with the military faction which kept both its membership lists and its activities secret from the rest of the Front members.
[5]
In July 1991, two members of the Front who had been recruited by the applicant were arrested in Santiago. It was discovered that these members had revealed the applicant's pseudonym to the government authorities as a contact in the Front. The applicant went into hiding and arrangements were made to obtain the necessary travel documents for him. He moved into a house occupied by a friend of his who was involved in the military faction, but it was raided by police. The applicant was able to avoid capture as he was not home at the time. The Front's leadership in Santiago determined that the applicant was too high a risk to the organization because of his knowledge of the membership lists, so they provided him with a plane ticket to Miami, Florida, and essentially ordered him to leave Chile.
[6]
In its written reasons, the Board concluded that the applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution on the basis of his political opinion, but denied his claim for Convention refugee status because he was an accomplice to the "crimes against humanity" committed by the military branch of the Front.
Issues
[7]
The following issues are raised in this application:
A) Did the Board err in its conclusion that the applicant was an accomplice to the crimes against humanity committed by the Front's military faction?
B) Did the Board err by failing to identify the substantive crimes to which it considered the applicant to be an accomplice?
Statutory Provisions And
Jurisprudence
A) Exclusion Based On Complicity
In Crimes Against Humanity
[8]
Section 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
defines the term "Convention refugee" as follows:
"'Convention refugee' means any person who
(a) by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(i) is outside the country of the person's nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country, or
(ii) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of the person's former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, is unwilling to return to that country, and
(b) has not ceased to be a Convention refugee by virtue of subsection (2),
but does not include any person to whom the Convention does not apply pursuant to section E or F of Article 1 thereof, which sections are set out in the schedule to this Act
;" (Emphasis added)
The relevant part of s. F of Article 1 of the
United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
reads as follows:
"F. The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
(a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes;"
[9]
The Federal Court of Appeal has considered this exclusion clause in three leading cases:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) and,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[10]
As stated by Reed, J., in her recent analysis of these cases:
"... The burden of proof which must be met by the Minister to demonstrate that the Convention does not apply to a given individual is less than the balance of probabilities. That is, there is no need for the person to have been convicted or even charged with an international offence. ... Alternatively, one could consider this requirement as a threshold question with respect to which the existence of the 'serious reasons for considering' have to be proven on the balance of probabilities but nothing turns on whether the test is characterized as a burden of proof requirement or as a threshold test." (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . See also <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 10 [original judgment] and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 12 [original judgment]).
[11]
As to the degree of complicity required to justify a finding that the claimant was an accomplice to the commission of international crimes, see Robertson, J.A., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (at p. 225):
"It is settled law that acts or omissions amounting to passive acquiescence are not a sufficient basis for invoking the exclusion clause.
Personal involvement in persecutorial acts must be established.
In this regard the reasoning in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is both binding and compelling (at p. 318):
'At bottom, complicity rests in such cases, I believe, on the existence of a shared common purpose and the knowledge that all of the parties in question may have of it.'
"At p. 320, MacGuigan, J.A., concluded:
'In my view, it is undesirable to go beyond the criterion of personal and knowing participation in persecutorial acts in establishing a general principle. The rest should be decided in relation to the particular facts.'
"Applying the above reasoning, we must determine whether the appellant's conduct satisfies the criterion of '
personal and knowing participation in persecutorial acts
'. Equally important, however, is the fact that
complicity rests on the existence of a shared common purpose as between 'principal' and 'accomplice'
. In other words,
mens rea remains an essential element of the crime
." (Emphasis added)
[12]
It therefore follows that as a general rule, mere membership in an organization involved in international offences will not satisfy the mens rea requirement of the exclusion clause. However, as stated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (at p. 317  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ):
"... where an organization is
principally
directed to a limited, brutal purpose, such as a secret police activity, mere membership
may
by necessity involve personal and knowing participation in persecutorial acts." (Emphasis added)
[13]
Where the organization's purpose is not so limited, however, the Minister seeking to establish complicity must show that the member had knowledge of the crimes in question and shared the organization's purpose in committing them. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Court of Appeal ruled the requisite mental element could in certain circumstances be inferred from the member's position within the organization (at p. 202):
"In my view, the case for an individual's complicity in international crimes committed by his or her organization is stronger if the individual member in question holds a position of importance within the organization. Bearing in mind that each case must be decided on its facts,
the closer one is to being a leader rather than an ordinary member, the more likely it is that an inference will be drawn that one knew of the crime and shared the organization's purpose in committing that crime
. Thus, remaining in an organization in a leadership position with knowledge that the organization was responsible for crimes against humanity may constitute complicity. ...
"In such circumstances, an important factor to consider is evidence that the individual protested against the crime or tried to stop its commission or attempted to withdraw from the organization. ..." (Emphasis added)
It is therefore possible to infer knowledge of crimes and a common purpose with the perpetrators of the crimes when the person in question occupies a sufficiently high leadership position and either tolerates the crimes or fails to withdraw from the organization.
B) Failure To Identify
Substantive Crimes
[14]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Court of Appeal identified the importance of making precise findings with respect to the crimes which it finds that the claimant has committed (at p. 207):
"The importance of providing findings of fact as to specific crimes against humanity which the refugee claimant is alleged to have committed cannot be underestimated in a case such as this where the Refugee Division has determined that the claimant has a well-founded fear of persecution at the hands of the Sri Lankan government. ... Given the seriousness of the possible consequences of the denial of the appellant's claim on the basis of section F(a) of Article 1 of the
Convention
to the appellant and the relatively low standard of proof required of the Minister, it is crucial that the Refugee Division set out in its reasons those crimes against humanity for which there are serious reasons to consider that a claimant has committed them. In failing to make the required findings of fact, I believe that the Refugee Division can be said to have made an error of law."
Linden, J.A., then referred to the court's decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and confirmed that the inadequacy of the Board's reasons will not require the matter to be referred back for redetermination if "on the basis of the correct approach, no properly instructed tribunal could have come to a different conclusion" (at p. 208).
Analysis
A) Exclusion Based On Complicity
In Crimes Against Humanity
[15]
The Board based its conclusion that the exclusion clause was applicable to the applicant's claim on the following two findings of fact drawn by inference: (1) that the applicant had advance knowledge of the military faction's activities; and (2) that the applicant shared a common purpose with the military faction, namely the
violent
overthrow of the Pinochet government.
Advance Knowledge Of
Illegal Activities
[16]
The Board inferred that the applicant had advance knowledge of the military faction's activities based on the fact that he held a position of trust and leadership within the organization.
[17]
This inference of advance knowledge might have been reasonable if the clear distinction between the military and political factions had not existed. The record is clear, however, that the applicant joined the political faction and worked exclusively in the area of information and recruitment. His position of leadership was within the political faction not the military one.
[18]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the claimant occupied a much higher leadership position and was involved in the planning and implementing of strategy for an organization dedicated to waging guerilla warfare. The Front, on the other hand, was not so unequivocally committed to violence. As one of several
local
,
non-military
leaders, Mr. Poblete was, at most, only very remotely connected to the criminal activities attributed to the dissident faction of his organization.
[19]
Although he was obviously trusted by the political faction, (as evidenced by his responsibilities over the membership lists) the same cannot be said for his relationship with the military faction. If anything, there was tension between the applicant and the more militant members in the military faction as a result of the military's dislike of the Mormon church.
[20]
There was also uncontradicted evidence that the military faction kept separate and distinct membership lists and that its chain of command was independent of the political faction. The military faction was in fact a clandestine organization within a clandestine organization.
Common Purpose
[21]
This inference was clearly premised on the Board's erroneous conclusion that the Front's common purpose was the
violent
overthrow of the Pinochet Government. By ignoring the divisions that existed within the Front, the Board has in essence unreasonably equated membership in the Front with a belief in the use of violence to achieve political goals. This assumption is not supported by the material that was before the Board which showed clearly that only a dissident faction within the Front advocated the use of violence.
B) Failure To Identify
Substantive Crimes
[22]
Based on my findings with respect to the Board's application of the exclusion clause, it is unnecessary for me to deal with this secondary question as the matter will be referred back to the Board for redetermination. It should be noted, however, that the Board has made little effort to link the applicant to specific criminal activities. Rather, it chose to refer only in general terms to shootings and bombings carried out by the military faction. Given the serious consequences to Mr. Poblete of the application of the exclusion clause, the Board should have endeavoured to carefully detail the criminal acts which it considers the claimant to have "committed". (See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 17-18 [original judgment]).
Conclusion
[23]
By failing to reorganize the fact that the use of violence was not advocated by the Front, but rather by a dissident faction, the Board has cast an overly broad net in its application of the exclusion clause to the applicant's claim for refugee status. In effect, the Board has inculpated the applicant based on his association with the Front. The Board's conclusion is based on the very "guilt by association" that has been consistently warned against by the Court of Appeal  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Moreno
, and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In order to implicate a claimant as an accomplice to international crimes, the Board must be satisfied that the claimant had knowledge of the commission of international crimes and shared the organization's purpose in committing them. Mr. Poblete's case is not one where mere membership in the organization will attract culpability.
[24]
The Board must be extremely cautious in its application of the exclusion clause, particularly in situations such as this one where it has concluded that the claimant has a well-founded fear of persecution in his country of origin. In light of the potential danger faced by such a claimant, the Board must base its decision to exclude only on clear and convincing evidence, (see L. Waldman,
Immigration Law and Practice
(Toronto: Butterworths, 1992), at para. 8.108) not simply on suspicion and speculation.
[25]
Based on the foregoing, this application will be allowed, with costs, and the decision of the Board with respect to the exclusion clause set aside. Given the Board's finding that the applicant has a well-founded fear of persecution, the matter will be referred back to the Board on the sole issue of the applicability of the exclusion clause, such that it may make a new determination not inconsistent with these reasons.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/nmg
[End of document]