[1]
Gibson, J.
: These reasons arise from an application for a stay of the execution of a deportation order issued against the applicant on November 22, 1994, pending the determination of an application for leave and for judicial review of a decision of the respondent made pursuant to s. 70(5) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended (the
Act
), that the respondent is of the opinion that the applicant "... constitutes a danger to the public in Canada ...".
[2]
The applicant became a permanent resident of Canada on July 11, 1991, having been declared a Convention refugee by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (the "UNHCR") in Cyprus. He had fled his country of origin, Iran, during the Iran-Iraq war, after deserting from the Iranian military. Since arriving in Canada, the applicant has accumulated a criminal record that includes convictions for theft, failure to comply with a recognizance, and trafficking in a narcotic. His two convictions for trafficking resulted in concurrent sentences of two and one-half years. His criminal activity was apparently related to his heroin addiction. The deportation order issued against the applicant followed shortly after the applicant was released from incarceration for the trafficking offences. An appeal of the deportation order was filed with the Immigration Appeal Division, and was scheduled to be heard on 28 March, 1996. This appeal process stayed the execution of the deportation order by virtue of s. 49(1) of the
Act
.
[3]
In September of 1995, the applicant was advised by letter that the Minister was intending to entertain the question of whether the applicant should be considered a danger to the public in Canada. On 2 October, 1995, the applicant responded to the letter, through counsel, and made written representations as to why he should not be considered a danger to the public.
[4]
The substance of the representations made on behalf of the applicant can be briefly summarized as follows. After only seven months of incarceration for the drug trafficking offences, the applicant was transferred to St. Leonard's Treatment Centre in Hamilton, Ontario, where he successfully completed a six-week intensive substance abuse treatment program. A letter from St. Leonard's Centre provided in part:
"... His participation in this process exceeded expectations; and his psychometric post test results indicated clear comprehension and positive change in knowledge and motivation. Throughout this period he was cooperative and pro social in interaction with staff and fellow clients."
The applicant had had no further negative contact with law enforcement officials since his release in September 1994. He maintained regular contact with his parole officer. A favourable letter from the parole officer was enclosed, which verified that the applicant had remained drug-free and cooperative. The applicant was married, with two Canadian children, and had moved from Toronto to Hamilton, apparently in part to separate himself from negative peer contact. The applicant had a full-time job; a letter from his employer stated in part:
"... He is a very respectable and presentable employee. He is very punctual and very well like [sic] by his co workers and customers. He is a very honest and hard working individual."
A newspaper clipping from the
Hamilton Mountain News
from September of 1995 highlighted the applicant's civic-mindedness and heroism in helping an elderly woman.
[5]
The applicant also provided information about conditions in Iran, and the treatment that the applicant would or might face if returned there.
[6]
When the applicant's hearing before the Immigration Appeal Division opened on 28 March, 1996, the applicant was advised that the Minister had formed the opinion that he was a danger to the public in Canada. The appeal was dismissed by the Immigration Appeal Division for lack of jurisdiction by reason of the Minister's opinion. The applicant was thereupon arrested and detained for removal from Canada to Iran.
[7]
In order for the applicant to succeed on this application, the burden rests on him to establish three things: first, that there is a serious issue to be tried on his application for leave and for judicial review; second, that unless the stay is granted, the applicant will suffer irreparable harm; and third, that the balance of convenience favours the applicant rather than the respondent. [see footnote 1]
[8]
Counsel for the applicant submitted that execution of the deportation order, actual removal of the applicant to Iran, would violate the applicant's ss. 7 and 12
Charter
rights, as he would face the threat of cruel and unusual punishment, and possibly death.
[9]
The serious issue to be tried must relate to the judicial review application. At issue in the applicant's judicial review application is the Minister's opinion, issued pursuant to s. 70(5) of the
Act
, and not the deportation order. Claims related to the constitutionality of the actual deportation of the applicant cannot, therefore, be considered serious issues in the context of review of the Minister's opinion. As was found in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), a decision involving a Minister's opinion, in that case pursuant to s. 46.01(1)(e)(ii) [see footnote 2] of the
Act
, does not imply or lead, in itself, to any action, such as deportation, which might affect life, liberty or security of the person.
[10]
That is not to say that the applicant was precluded by law from making the
Charter
arguments advanced on his behalf. It was open to him to directly challenge the deportation order made against him, notwithstanding the fact that the time to bring an application for leave and for judicial review of the deportation order had long since expired when he received notice of the Minister's opinion. Section 13(4) of chapter 15 of the
Statutes of Canada, 1995
, the statute by which s. 70(5) of the
Act
was enacted, reads as follows:
"(4) Subsection 70(5) of the Act, as enacted by subsection (3), applies to an appeal that has been made on or before the coming into force of that subsection and in respect of which the hearing has not been commenced, but a person who has made such an appeal may, within fifteen days after the person has been notified that, in the opinion of the Minister, the person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada, make an application for judicial review under section 82.1 of the Act
with respect to the deportation order or conditional deportation order referred to in subsection 70(5)
." (underlining added by me for emphasis)
[11]
For whatever reason, the applicant did not seek to take advantage of the opportunity provided to challenge the deportation order on the
Charter
grounds put forward in his application for review of the decision reflecting the Minister's opinion.
[12]
Counsel for the applicant further submitted that the validity of the Minister's opinion constituted a serious triable issue, considering what he alleged to be an apparent lack of a rational basis for the opinion and an apparent lack of regard for the applicant's submissions. Counsel submitted that the opinion that the applicant constitutes a danger to the public in Canada constituted an erroneous finding of fact made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard to the totality of the material before the Minister, since it was made more than two years after the applicant's drug trafficking convictions, and all evidence subsequent to the convictions spoke directly against such an opinion.
[13]
In
Nguyen
, supra, the court per Marceau, J.A., found:
"I do not believe that the Minister needs to be compelled to follow formal guidelines as to the factors he should take into account in forming his opinion, and I consider the Minister's opinion in respect of public danger as reliable as that of a court. ... The procedure set up and actually followed affords the individual concerned full opportunity to make his or her case which, I think in the circumstances, satisfied the demands of the "audi alteram partem" maxim. I see no reason to require an oral hearing in this case as in any other similar case."
However, this court has found a serious issue to be tried with regard to the validity of Minister's opinions [see footnote 3]. On the material before me, including the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent, I am satisfied that there is a serious issue to be tried with regard to the validity of the Minister's opinion. The affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent attempted to show the basis for and, I take it, the reasonableness of the report made by an immigration officer, which apparently formed the basis for the Minister's opinion. However, the affidavit was not that of the immigration officer. The notes attached to the affidavit as an exhibit indicate some commentary of the officer who made the report, and indicate some of the considerations taken into account. I am satisfied, however, that there is an issue as to whether all of the relevant considerations went into the formation of the opinion, and whether all of the relevant evidence was considered.
[14]
I am also concerned that the foregoing quotation from
Nguyen
related to an opinion formed in a different context, one relating to an individual who arrived in Canada without status, but alleging entitlement to Convention refugee status, as opposed to one relating to an individual with landed or permanent resident status on the basis of a UNHCR determination of refugee status. I conclude that it can reasonably be argued that
Nguyen
does not apply on the facts before me and in the circumstances of a determination under s. 70(5).
[15]
In the result, I conclude that there is a serious issue to be tried on the applicant's application for leave and for judicial review.
[16]
The irreparable harm that counsel for the applicant submitted the applicant would suffer if the stay were not granted was that he faced persecution, and possibly death, if returned to Iran. As noted, the applicant had deserted the Iranian army; counsel submitted that this was a crime punishable by death in Iran. Also, counsel for the applicant noted that the applicant had converted from Islam to Christianity since coming to Canada, which would also be severely punished in Iran. Finally, the applicant had been convicted of narcotics offences in Canada, and counsel submitted on his behalf that the Iranian regime treats persons involved with narcotics with extreme sanctions including death, notwithstanding that they have been convicted and punished in accordance with the law of another state. Counsel for the applicant argued that the fact of having been declared a Convention refugee by the UNHCR was prima facie evidence of a reasonable fear of persecution on return to Iran.
[17]
Counsel for the respondent submitted that there was no irreparable harm, as there was no serious risk of persecution if the applicant were returned to Iran. Counsel for the respondent cited case law wherein, on somewhat similar facts, irreparable harm had not been found. In both
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Minister pursuant to s. 53(1) of the
Act
to constitute dangers to the public in Canada; in both cases, this court found evidence of irreparable harm in the event of deportation to Iran to be lacking.
[18]
I am satisfied that, on the facts before me, there would be irreparable harm to the applicant if the stay were not granted and the deportation order were executed followed by a favourable determination for the applicant on the application for leave and for judicial review. I conclude that the fact of having been declared by the UNHCR to be a Convention refugee does not raise a presumption that an applicant will face persecution if returned to the country from which he or she sought refuge. In both <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as here, a considerable amount of time had passed since the refugee determination; the conditions in the country at the time of the hearing of the application for a stay, and the documentary evidence in support thereof, are what matters. As Nadon, J., did on the evidence before him in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , I find also that there is insufficient evidence that the Iranian regime punishes those convicted of drug-related offences in Canada to the extent advanced on behalf of the applicant. However, beyond these considerations, the factual basis for this applicant's claim to irreparable harm is not the same as in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . I find that there was adduced before me sufficient evidence that the applicant could come to irreparable harm if returned to Iran, as a result either of his desertion from the army, or because of his conversion to Christianity, or both, particularly when those factors are considered together with his refugee status and criminal record.
[19]
The balance of convenience, considering the risk of irreparable harm to the applicant, also lies in his favour. Although there will be an element of inconvenience to the respondent if this stay is granted, and I acknowledge that there is a public interest in having the respondent's duties under the
Act
fulfilled in a timely manner, I find the balance to lie in the applicant's favour. I note that while the deportation order was issued in respect of the applicant in November of 1994, the process which led to the issuing of the Minister's opinion was not implemented until September of 1995, and the opinion was not communicated to the applicant until 28 March, 1996. On the facts before me, I find that the balance of convenience lies in favour of the granting of a stay, until the application for leave and for judicial review has been dealt with.
[20]
Accordingly, an order has issued staying the execution of the deportation order issued against the applicant, pending determination of the applicant's application for leave and for judicial review of the respondent's decision whereby she formed the opinion that the applicant was a person who constituted a danger to the public in Canada.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/vem
Footnotes
1.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 123 (F.C.A.).
2. At the relevant time, s. 46.01(1)(e)(ii) of the
Act
read as follows:
"46.01(1) A person who claims to be a Convention refugee is not eligible to have the claim determined by the Refugee Division if
. . . . .
(e) the claimant is
. . . . .
(ii) a person
(A) described in paragraph 19(1)(c), or
(B) who has been convicted in Canada of an offence under any Act of Parliament for which a term of imprisonment of ten years or more may be imposed
who the Minister has certified constitutes a danger to the public in Canada, or
" (underlining added by me for emphasis)
3. See, for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
4. supra, note 3.
[End of document]