[1]
Addy, J.
[Translation]: This is a preliminary application prior to defence on the ground that the defendants object to the jurisdiction of the court in the matter.
[2]
The plaintiff's statement of claim contains a number of allegations relating to pilotage services, including the following made against one or other of the various defendants: failing to carry out the statutory obligation to establish, operate, maintain and administer an efficient pilotage service enabling the plaintiff's ship to reach its destination without unnecessary loss of time, failing to provide the pilotage services required by the Act, failing, ceasing or refusing to provide, or inadequately providing, pilotage services, anchoring the ship without reason or authorization, deliberately turning the ship back without a valid reason, failing or refusing to pilot the ship to its proper destination, delaying the unloading of cargo and unnecessarily retaining the services of two tugs.
[3]
Pilotage is an integral part of navigation. It is beyond question that navigation and the rules of admiralty as a whole are within the jurisdiction of the federal government. Section 12 of the Pilotage Act requires a pilotage authority to operate an efficient pilotage service, and the regulations made pursuant to s. 14(1) prohibited the plaintiff's ship from navigating in the Canadian waters in question without using pilots, since these waters consisted of areas where pilotage is compulsory under that Act. The duties and the responsibilities of pilots are also governed by recognized principles of admiralty law.
[4]
There is thus a body of federal rules of law which prima facie appear to be essential to resolving the issue.
[5]
It also seems beyond question that the Pilotage Act, like the Shipping Act, is quite clearly a "Law of Canada" referred to in s. 101 of the Constitution Act, 1867, which gives the Canadian Parliament jurisdiction to establish courts for the better administration of the laws within its jurisdiction.
[6]
Section 22(1) of the Federal Court Act gives the Trial Division jurisdiction between subject and subject "in all cases in which a claim for relief is made or a remedy is sought under or by virtue of Canadian maritime law or any other law of Canada relating to any matter coming within the class of subject of navigation and shipping, except to the extent that jurisdiction has been otherwise specially assigned". Since no such assignment has been made, the Trial Division has jurisdiction in the matter according to the facts alleged in the statement of claim. I accordingly conclude that in the circumstances this action and the related legislation meet the three conditions recently laid down by McIntyre, J., of the Supreme Court of Canada in ITO -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 256 and 257.
[7]
Counsel for the defendants maintained that the issue arose because of a work stoppage caused by a labour dispute, and that since the law relating to labour relations between the pilots and their employers, the various pilotage authorities, is within provincial jurisdiction this court has no powers in the matter.
[8]
First, the statement of claim in question does not allege that the stoppage was due to a labour dispute. Second, even if that were the case this objection could not be sustained since there is clearly no labour dispute between the owners of the ship and its crew, but rather a dispute between the pilots and the pilotage authorities or associations who are their employers. The work stoppage, delays and so on may have occurred as the consequence of a labour dispute, but the plaintiff is not in the slightest way involved in that, whether in fact or in law.
[9]
The application will accordingly be dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Catherine M. Bowlen/blk