[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is an application for an order extending the time limits under Rule 1603 of the
Federal Court Rules
to permit the respondent Apotex to file three affidavits.
[2]
The applicant Hassle initiated these proceedings by way of Originating Notice of Motion filed on June 4, 1993, seeking an order prohibiting the respondent Minister of National Health & Welfare from issuing a Notice of Compliance to Apotex in respect of the medicine omeprazole. Since that time, there have been numerous interlocutory proceedings, particularly during the period between April of 1994 and January of 1995.
[3]
By letter dated June 16, 1994, the solicitors for Hassle requested that Apotex confirm whether it intended to file evidence in support of its position in the prohibition proceeding. By reason of an oversight on the part of counsel for Apotex, the letter was not answered. On January 16, 1995, Apotex confirmed to the solicitors for Hassle that it would be filing responding evidence. Hassle has taken the position that Apotex is not permitted to file its evidence, as it is outside the prescribed time limit for doing so.
[4]
I am satisfied that the application should be granted and Apotex permitted to file the affidavits in question.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 377 (T.D.), MacKay, J., made the following observations at p. 380:
"It is true Part V.1 rules do not specifically provided for affidavits to be filed in reply by an applicant or by a respondent. Nevertheless, in my view, this court has discretion to permit that where it will serve the interests of justice, will assist the court and will not seriously prejudice the other party."
[5]
That reasoning is equally applicable to the facts now before me. In prohibition proceedings such as these, it is imperative that the court have before it all relevant evidence so that an informed and reasoned decision can be rendered. Furthermore, as no cross-examination have yet been held, I am unable to conclude that any prejudice will result to Hassle by the late filing of the affidavits. On the other hand, if the order sought is not granted, Apotex will be precluded from putting forward any evidence in defence of its position in the prohibition proceedings. I am also mindful that Hassle applied to the court, and was granted, permission to file evidence eighteen months after the filing of the Originating Notice of Motion. Not providing Apotex with an opportunity to respond would be unfair and contrary to the interests of justice.
[6]
For these reasons, the application is granted and Apotex is permitted to file the affidavits in question. Hassle is to file its reply as expeditiously as possible. Thereafter, the parties may apply to the court for an order directing that a schedule be adhered to so that the December 16, 1995, deadline can be met; should this prove to be impractical for Hassle, they may apply to the court for the extension of time beyond December 16, 1995. This delay is apparently caused by the oversight of Apotex and they shall pay the costs of this motion which I fix at $1,000 payable forthwith, in any event of the cause.
[7]
For these reasons, the application is granted.
Application granted.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/dmh
[End of document]