[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review of the interlocutory decision rendered on April 30, 2001, by Pierre Baillie, president of the appeal board created by the Public Service Commission of Canada under s. 21(1.1) of the
Public Service Employment Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-33 (
PSEA
), in which he concluded that the employing department had not created new positions. The consequence of that decision was to allow a merit selection of candidates pursuant to s. 10(2) of the
PSEA
.
FACTS
[2]
The plaintiffs are employed in the federal Public Service. They were potential candidates for a selection by comparative merit, since they were in the selection area for the positions in question.
[3]
For organizational reasons the departmental authorities in the Quebec region decided to alert the administrative organization of management positions in all Canada Human Resources Centres (CHRC) in Quebec, abolishing one level of management. Each branch of the CHRC formerly had a director in group EX-06, or PM-06 for small offices, an associate director at group and level PM-05, and four or five service directors at group and level PM-04.
[4]
With the reorganization, the position of associate director (PM-05) was abolished. The duties associated with the position of associate director (PM-05) were transferred to the service directors (PM-04).
[5]
The employer proceeded to reclassification of the PM-04 employees into PM-05 positions in accordance with s. 10(2) of the
PSEA
, after an assessment of their individual merit in accordance with established standards of competence.
[6]
Before deciding the question as to the validity of the candidate selection, the appeal board had to consider preliminary points.
[7]
First, before the appeal board the appellants raised the question of whether the appointments actually resulted from reclassification of the same position or whether this was a new position subject to the provisions of s. 10(1) of the
PSEA
.
[8]
Second, the Department made a preliminary objection alleging that the appeal board had no jurisdiction to decide on the validity of a classification decision.
[9]
In his interlocutory decision the president of the appeal board dismissed the Department's objection regarding the jurisdiction of the appeal board. He maintained that the question of whether these were new or existing positions is a question which can and should be decided by an appeal board.
[10]
In this connection, the appeal board said the following, at p. 13 of its decision:
[TRANSLATION]
"I said that I had jurisdiction to decide the appellants' proposition, and I will explain. Contrary to the Department's position, I feel that taking into account all the more or less recent changes to the
Act
and
Regulations
, the appeal board still has jurisdiction over such a matter. It is true that a definition of the word 'reclassification' was quite recently added to the
Regulations
, and it was probably the Commission's intention to clarify the situation as to what constitutes reclassification. It is now clearly mentioned that this is a classification decision. In my humble opinion, this adds little to the discussion as reclassification always was a classification decision, which fell under the responsibility of the Treasury Board, not a staffing decision as such which could result from implementation of the
Public Service Employment Act
. I have no intention of questioning the reclassification itself of the positions in question from level PM-04 to level PM-05, as I have no expertise in classification. After analyzing the duties and responsibilities described by management and applying the appropriate standards, the Department's classification officers determined, it would appear, that these were positions which should now be classified at the PM-05 group and level. That decision is in no way in question through my intervention. The question of whether these were new positions or the same positions, which were the subject of this reclassification, is a question which according to the court may and must be decided by an appeal board."
[11]
Further, the president of the appeal board dismissed the plaintiffs' argument that the reclassification created new positions which required candidate selection by a competition under s. 10(1) of the
PSEA
. He concluded that the positions in question had not substantially altered, since most of the principal duties of the positions in question had remained essentially the same.
Legislative background
[12]
Section 10 of the
PSEA
sets out two methods of merit selection for appointing candidates to a position. The first is appointment by competition, based on a comparative review of the skills of candidates under s. 10(1) ("relative merit"). The second is appointment other than by competition, based on an assessment of each candidate's individual merit, possible in certain circumstances laid down by the
Regulations
and the Commission ("individual merit"). Section 10(1) and (2) of the
PSEA
provides:
"10(1) Appointments to or from within the Public Service shall be based on selection according to merit, as determined by the Commission, and shall be made by the Commission, at the request of the deputy head concerned, by competition or by such other process of personnel selection designed to establish the merit of candidates as the Commission considers is in the best interests of the Public Service.
"(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), selection according to merit may, in the circumstances prescribed by the regulations of the Commission, be based on the competence of a person being considered for appointment as measured by such standard of competence as the Commission may establish, rather than as measured against the competence of other persons."
[13]
Section 5(2) of the
Public Service Employment Regulations
, SORé2000-80, describes the circumstances in which selection on the principle of individual merit is possible instead of selection by relative merit:
"5(2) A selection referred to in subsection 10(2) of the Act may be made in any of the following circumstances:
(a) when an employee is to be promoted within an apprenticeship or professional training program;
(b) when an employee is to be appointed to their reclassified position and
(i) the position has been reclassified as a result of a classification audit or grievance,
(ii) the position is one of a group of similar occupied positions in the same occupational group and level within the same part of an organization that have all been reclassified to the same occupational group and level, or
(iii) there are no other similar occupied positions in the same occupational group and level within the same part of the organization;"
[14]
Finally, s. 21 of the
PSEA
allows any person who meets certain criteria to appeal an effective or imminent appointment to the Public Service. An appointment made as the result of a competition may be appealed by any "unsuccessful candidate" (s. 21(1)). At the same time, an appointment made under s. 10(2) may be appealed pursuant to s. 21(1.1), which provides:
"21(1.1) Where a person is appointed or about to be appointed under this Act and the selection of the person for appointment was made from within the Public Service by a process of personnel selection, other than a competition, any person who, at the time of the selection, meets the criteria established pursuant to subsection 13(1) for the process may, within the period provided for by the regulations of the Commission, appeal against the appointment to a board established by the Commission to conduct an inquiry at which the person appealing and the deputy head concerned, or their representatives, shall be given an opportunity to be heard."
Did the appeal board err in law in concluding that it had the necessary jurisdiction to determine whether the positions in question were reclassified or new positions?
Parties' positions
[15]
The defendant argued that there was nothing in the
PSEA
which suggested that the appeal board had the necessary jurisdiction to rule on questions other than that of whether a selection was made according to merit, which is entrenched in s. 10 of the
PSEA
. Decisions made by an employing department in the exercise of a management function are in no way a matter for an appeal board.
[16]
It is s. 11(2)(c) of the
Financial Administration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-11, which gives the Treasury Board the power to classify Public Service positions:
"(2) Subject to the provisions of any enactment respecting the powers and functions of a separate employer but notwithstanding any other provision contained in any enactment, the Treasury Board may, in the exercise of its responsibilities in relation to personnel management including its responsibilities in relation to employer and employee relations in the public service, and without limiting the generality of sections 7 to 10,
. . . . .
(c) provide for the classification of positions and employees in the public service ..."
[17]
Additionally, the Treasury Board may delegate its powers to deputy heads of departments who may in their turn subdelegate their powers to members of their staff, in accordance with s. 12(1) and (3) of the
Financial Administration Act
:
"12(1) The Treasury Board may authorize the deputy head of a department or the chief executive officer of any portion of the public service to exercise and perform, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions as the Treasury Board directs, any of the powers and functions of the Treasury Board in relation to personnel management in the public service and may, from time to time as it sees fit, revise or rescind and reinstate the authority so granted.
. . . . .
"(3) Any person authorized pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) to exercise and perform any of the powers and functions of the Governor in Council or the Treasury Board may, subject to and in accordance with the authorization, authorize one or more persons under their jurisdiction or any other person to exercise or perform any such power or function."
[18]
Under that provision, departmental classification officers certified by the Treasury Board may classify positions in their own departments.
[19]
According to the defendant, when the classification officers in the Department of Human Resources Development decided to reclassify the positions in question, the appeal board had no jurisdiction to determine whether the positions constituted a reclassification or were new positions (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 264 N.R. 389).
[20]
The decision to classify the positions and reclassify them is not a decision which is taken by a selection board as part of an assessment on the merits, but is a decision of management taken by an employing department pursuant to the
Financial Administration Act
.
[21]
The defendant noted that it was the Federal Court Trial Division which should rule on judicial review on the legality of management decisions taken by an employing department, not the appeal board (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[22]
The plaintiffs argued that the appeal board correctly decided that it had jurisdiction to determine whether a position was new. An appeal board must intervene to determine whether the merit principle was correctly applied both at the individual merit level and at the relative merit level.
[23]
In the plaintiffs' submission, it is clear from the Federal Court of Appeal's judgment in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), that the appeal board has that jurisdiction.
ANALYSIS
[24]
First, it is worth recalling that the Federal Court of Appeal's judgments have several times indicated that the
appeal board's only function is to determine whether an appointment proposed by a selection board was made on the merit principle
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 52 N.R. 381 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). In my opinion, any ancillary jurisdiction which it may have should be related to this single function.
[25]
Accordingly, in all logic, if it has to rule on the validity of selection methods set out in s. 10(1) and (2), it should at least come to the conclusion that the merit principle was better served if the appointments were made on the basis of relative merit mentioned in s. 10(1) of the
PSEA
rather than on the basis of individual merit mentioned in s. 10(2) of the
PSEA
.
[26]
For this to be the case, one of the selection methods should still be better than the other. In such a case, the appeal board's concern with the choice of one or another selection method is understandable.
[27]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the Federal Court of Appeal held that there is no hierarchy in selection methods.
[28]
It said the following:
"Section 10(2) is not, properly speaking, an exception, for by its very introductory words, it is enacted 'for the purposes of subsection (1)', which establishes the principle that selection is to be made according to merit. Section 10(2) provides for alternative means to achieve the result prescribed by s. 10(1) and the fact that these means are alternative to those defined in s. 10(1) does not mean that they are inferior to them." ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , ibid., at para. 12.)
[29]
It thus becomes impossible for the appeal board to allow an appeal on the ground that the individual merit principle infringes the merit principle, since that selection method is not inferior to the other.
[30]
Consequently, I do not see how it is possible to connect the analysis made by the appeal board of its jurisdiction alone to s. 21 of the
PSEA
. I conclude that the appeal board did not have the necessary jurisdiction to decide whether the positions were reclassified or new.
[31]
Moreover, this is the conclusion to which Sharlow, J., came in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra.
[32]
In that case, the appellants were challenging the validity of appointments made under s. 10(2) of the
PSEA
on the ground that the position in question was not part of a reclassification process but was an entirely new position. This question was important, since the selection area and the appeal area would be different if the position had not been reclassified.
[33]
Sharlow, J., clearly held that the question of whether the position was a reclassification or a new position was not within the jurisdiction of the appeal board.
[34]
I refer to the relevant passage of his decision, which was upheld by the Federal Court of Appeal:
"The Appeal Board may well be the most appropriate forum for determining whether a position is in fact a new position or a reclassification, or whether an area of selection for a s. 10(2) appointment has been validly established. However, as I read s. 21(1.1), Parliament has chosen not to permit those questions to be put to the Appeal Board in the context of s. 10(2) appointments." ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , ibid., at para. 24.)
[35]
I admit that this decision appears to run contrary to the Federal Court of Appeal's judgment in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. However, I note that in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the Federal Court of Appeal did not elaborate on the source of the appeal board's jurisdiction to decide whether it was a reclassification or a new position, but simply stated that the appeal board had decided that the positions were new.
[36]
In any event, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, is more recent and the Federal Court of Appeal has directly answered the question.
[37]
Moreover, it is worth looking at the procedure the appeal board had to follow in determining whether these were new positions.
[38]
Its analysis was based essentially on the search for a substantial change to the nature of the duties: the appeal board accordingly undertook to compare the responsibilities of incumbents of PM-04 positions with the new responsibilities, an undertaking which in my opinion was essentially a matter for a certified classification officer.
[39]
Following that analysis, the appeal board concluded as follows:
[TRANSLATION]
"On the evidence, the positions in question were not substantially altered, since the great majority of the principal duties remained the same. Ms. Aumond's testimony added a very interesting viewpoint on the new responsibilities now devolving on directors of the service branch, and her explanations are very credible, as the witness was able to distinguish between the majority of the duties which such persons would continue to perform and the new responsibilities which, as it were, enriched the pre-existing responsibilities. In this case what struck me was that the result of management's decision was that certain duties formally reserved for the assistant director, PM-05, would now be performed by a much larger number of persons, although they would retain their own responsibilities. For example, instead of only one person making partnership agreements with external organizations, there would now be five or six, depending on the region, since formerly there was an assistant director and four or five directors. Further,
in the oral evidence, I have to take into account the opinion of the classification officer who testified and who stated that these were the same positions, not new positions, after making a comparative analysis of several important documents relating to current personnel actions.
In my view, he showed that changes had been made to the positions in question but those changes did not alter the nature of the positions. The appellants, for their part, did not persuade me to the contrary." (My emphasis) (Appeal board's decision, p. 16.)
[40]
I note that the appeal board took into account the opinion of the classification officer who testified that these were the same positions, not new ones. In my opinion it would be surprising for it to substitute its opinion for that of the classification officer, since the appeal board did not have that right in the case of the selection board ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra).
[41]
The result is that unless the legality of the decision made by the classification officer is questioned (a point which is exclusively a matter for the Federal Court Trial Division on review:
Viola
, supra), the appeal board had no choice but to affirm the classification officer's decision, which it did in the case at bar.
[42]
The plaintiffs relied on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in which the Supreme Court of Canada held that any change in a position's responsibilities requiring new classifications would be a bar to any reclassification of the position, since such a change really involved creating a new position, and this should be done according to selection by merit under the terms of the
PSEA
.
[43]
It should be noted that this decision was made before s. 10(2) of the
PSEA
came into effect.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 254 N.R. 368 (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal warned tribunals about using precedents which were established before the subsection came into effect:
"Jurisprudence relating to pre-1993 appointments often contains general statements made in the context of an appointment after a competition. Care must be taken in applying those cases to appointments made under subsection 10(2), because of the change in context." ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , ibid., at para. 4.)
[44]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the employing department had made no appointment by merit, arguing that assignment of a customs officer to the dog-handler position did not constitute an "appointment" within the meaning of the
PSEA
. The Supreme Court held that when a position's duties changed substantially, merit selection should be undertaken.
[45]
In the case at bar, whether the position was reclassified or new,
the selection will be made according to merit
. In these circumstances, it seems to me that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, cannot support the plaintiffs' arguments.
[46]
I also dismiss the plaintiffs' argument that individual selection under s. 10(2) should be used with great caution, since it is an exception to the general rule.
[47]
In this connection it will suffice to recall that the Federal Court of Appeal decided this point in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, noting that the appointment made under s. 10(2) was a subsidiary application of the merit principle,
not an exception to it
.
[48]
For these reasons, I conclude that the appeal board did not have the necessary jurisdiction to deal with the validity of the decision made by a reclassification officer to reclassify the positions at issue pursuant to s. 11(2)(c) of the
Financial Administration Act
, supra.
[49]
The application for judicial review is dismissed, with costs to the defendant the Attorney General of Canada.
ORDER
[50]
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
The application for judicial review is dismissed, with costs to the defendant the Attorney General of Canada.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/gs