[1]
Reed, J.
: The plaintiff seeks an interlocutory injunction preventing the defendant selling "Huggable" baby strollers, until resolution of the dispute between the parties at trial.
[2]
An interim injunction was granted by Mr. Justice Muldoon on September 19, 1985, (1985), 6 C.P.R. (3d) 168. At that time, it was anticipated that the interlocutory injunction application would be heard on October 7, 1985. That hearing was adjourned sine die. The defendant then spent extensive time amassing information, for example, concerning the styles and trends in baby strollers in Germany, Italy and elsewhere in Europe. Many affidavits were filed, several of a detailed and extensive nature. One such affidavit, 276 pages in length including appendices, analyzes the various components of the plaintiff's baby stroller, in much the same way a patent claim is analyzed, element by element. The last of the defendants' affidavit materials were finally sworn towards the end of March and the beginning of April, 1986. The defendant, then, moved quickly, presumptuously almost, to reactivate the return of the application for an interlocutory injunction which had so long lain dormant at its behest. A return date of April 7, 1986 was sought. Needless to say this was successfully resisted by the plaintiff.
[3]
The plaintiff's statement of claim alleges infringement of its registered design (No. 54,309 dated June 20, 1985) and of a copyright registration (No. 342, 012 dated April 1, 1985). Counsel for the plaintiff indicated that, in the light of the recent Federal Court of Appeal decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (June 13, 1986, Court file number A-536-85), no representations with respect to the copyright issue would be made for the purposes of the present motion.
[4]
I will comment first on counsel for the defendant's characterization of Mr. Justice Muldoon's decision as being focussed on the plaintiff's copyright claim. I do not so read that decision. Mr. Justice Muldoon refers, at page 169 of his decision, to the plaintiff's industrial design registration. He subsequently indicates that this registration raises a prima facie presumption of the validity of the claim made therein (page 171). He notes at page 170 that:
"The defendant's goods are, in the eye of the court, an almost perfect copy of the plaintiff's product in so far as the all-important form and cut and linear quilting are concerned."
He goes on to note that upon demonstration of obvious copying, in industrial property cases, the alleged infringer should be enjoined until he or she can demonstrate a right to engage in that activity. To support this contention the comments of Mr. Justice Addy in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 174 are cited. That decision in turn refers to the text of the publication, The Federal Court of Canada - A Manual of Practice (1971), at page 63:
"So, in industrial property matters, where there is a
clear case of copying
or otherwise infringing
a right that is a matter of public record
under Canadian statute and the defendant is seeking to find some basis to attack validity after he has been caught in the infringement,
I should have thought that maintenance for respect for the law calls for enjoining the transgressor until he makes
good his attempt to invalidate the rights he had been appropriating to his own use."
(underlining added)
On the basis of these findings and reasoning Mr. Justice Muldoon granted an interim injunction.
[5]
The evidence before me, is of course different from that before Mr. Justice Muldoon. Accordingly, the determination proceeds in reference to a different set of facts and on the basis of somewhat different arguments. Nevertheless, counsel for the defendant is conscious that the starting point must be the industrial design registration numbered 54309 and the presumption of its validity. Also, I note, particularly, that the former Chief Justice Jackett, in his above quoted text, referred to industrial property matters, not just copyright as the defendant would suggest, as attracting the rule that when copying or the clear infringement of a right is demonstrated the burden shifts to the defendant. (Patent claims of recent origin where the defendant gives an undertaking to keep an accounting were stated in the text to fall into a different category.)
[6]
With respect to whether or not copying occurred. The defendant filed affidavit evidence which purports to disclaim such activity. It is not convincing. What is more, a visual inspection of the two strollers (that of the defendant and that of the plaintiff) leads one to conclude that copying must have occurred. It is inconceivable that the similarities between the two could have resulted by chance. The colours (red and grey) are the same; and, they are the same in relation to the same component parts. Colour is not an element of the registered design but it is an element which indicates that copying occurred. The quilting design is the same in the two strollers: the spacing of the quilted lines is almost identical, the placement of the quilted pattern on the various component parts of the stroller (top of the hood, side panels, foot rest but not on the interior body part, top interior of the hood, or handle padding, etc.) are almost identical. The size of some parts of the stroller clothing while similar is not identical as between the two strollers. The "boot" is of a slightly different configuration. These differences do not, in my view, detract from the fact that copying is obvious from a visual inspection of the two strollers.
[7]
Copying per se, of course, is not the critical issue. The issue is whether there is a substantial similarity between the designs such that one can be said to infringe the other. While my above comments on the similarities between the two strollers demonstrate copying, they equally demonstrate substantial similarity. The plaintiff's design can be seen, prima facie, to be infringed by the defendant's stroller.
[8]
I note that the stroller which was before Mr. Justice Muldoon is not that to which the motion before me relates. That before Mr. Justice Muldoon was stated by the defendant not to belong to the defendant. The one in issue before me is of a slightly different configuration. I do not have any less difficulty than did Mr. Justice Muldoon, however, in concluding that substantial similarity between the design of the two strollers exists. I note, also, that while the defendant disclaims ownership of the stroller in evidence before Mr. Justice Muldoon the number (810-838), attached thereto in the testing laboratory where it was found by the plaintiff, is the catalogue number used by the defendant to identify the infringing stroller of which it admits ownership.
[9]
In any event, the defendant's main argument before me related to the validity of the industrial design registration held by the plaintiff. The defendant seeks to demonstrate that the plaintiff does not have an arguable case, or a serious question to be tried  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  not valid because the design lacks originality - it is a mere trade variant; (2) the registration is not valid because it does not conform to legislative requirements - no "drawing" is appended and the registration is imprecise in that it does not adequately detail what is claimed as the protected design.
[10]
With respect to the first attack on the registration the defendant asserts that the "form and cut" of the stroller clothing is something not copied from the plaintiff's design. The size of the clothing and its planar configuration were identical to earlier stroller clothing produced by the defendant. This differed in some dimensions from the plaintiff's stroller clothing. Secondly, the defendant claims that a trend towards quilted strollers existed in European design immediately before the plaintiff's development of its design, and that this trend was known by the plaintiff. It is argued that the design produced by the plaintiff is merely a modification thereof. It is alleged that the linear quilting which is the important aspect of the plaintiff's design was a known trade variant, prior to the creation of the design, used on a variety of juvenile (baby) articles including strollers and carriages. It is argued that the combining of the known components does not constitute the degree of originality required for a protectable design.
[11]
To demonstrate the alleged lack of originality the defendant produced in court more than ten different strollers, an additional number of physical exhibits, more than fifty catalogues or excerpts therefrom, and fifteen or more affidavits. Some of these last, as noted above, are voluminous.
[12]
I must confess to some reluctance to express any conclusion on the issue of the originality of the design at this stage of the proceedings. The application before me is one for an interlocutory injunction. I am conscious that it is only after trial that conclusions of the kind sought by the defendant on this motion should be drawn. Counsel for the plaintiff referred to the comments of Mr. Justice Walsh in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 161-162:
"In proceedings such as the present where a wide variety of issues are raised on a preliminary application for interlocutory injunction there is always the danger that definitive conclusions will be reached which should preferably be left for decision by the Judge hearing the case on the merits unfettered by any prior judicial expression of opinion on such issues ..."
It has on several occasions been said that it is not appropriate to consider originality at the interlocutory stage when copyright is in issue:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 174, affd. (1981), 54 C.P.R. (2d) 179.
[13]
At the same time, counsel for the defendant argued that the burden on him, in the face of a presumptively valid design registration, is to make a "convincingly conclusive" attack thereon, supra, page 1, note 1, at 170. Thus he argues extensive evidence must be brought forward and considered.
[14]
In any event, in light of the extensive evidence and argument before me on these issues I have come to the conclusion that I must make some conclusions thereon, albeit they obviously are only relevant for the purposes of this interlocutory proceeding.
[15]
The frame of the strollers are of standard sizes and shapes. Thus they dictate a certain size and shape to any stroller clothing. The plaintiff disclaims any design rights with respect to the frame or chassis of the stroller and has done so from the beginning of the litigation, 6 C.P.R. (3d) 168, at p. 169. There are aspects of the clothing that are not dictated by the frame: the side flaps on the hood, the existence of a weatherizer (as distinct from its size), the shape and existence of the boot. The general shape and configuration of these component parts and of the stroller as a whole were in use before the plaintiff created its design. The plaintiff freely admits this and Mrs. Kotliar on behalf of the plaintiff, explained in cross-examination how she worked from existing stroller shapes and clothing in creating her design.
[16]
What the plaintiff did, however, was to create a new "look" by the placement of a quilted pattern of fabric in certain directions on certain parts of the stroller clothing. This resulted in what has been referred to as giving the stroller a warm, protecting, soft, quality appearance. Thus a person looking at the stroller is given the feeling that the baby placed therein will be protected, "cuddled". The use of the quilting was for decorative or appearance purposes, not for functional purposes per se. What is being claimed in the design is not a method of construction, but an appearance or a "look" of the stroller.
[17]
On the basis of the evidence before me I could not conclude that there was a trend in European or North American strollers which was leading slowly and surely towards a design such as that developed by the plaintiff, or towards a type of design similar to that developed by the plaintiff. The use of quilting with respect to both European carriages and other "juvenile" items (both European and North American) was disparate, not demonstrating a trend with respect to stroller design; oft-times its use was primarily functional in nature (eg: the kinderwagen "bunting" bag; the use on the inside body part of some strollers). Additionally, I am not convinced that European design trends in the "stroller market" dictate or strongly influence North American designs. In any event, it is sufficient to say that the plaintiff demonstrates that it has a substantial and serious issue to be tried, and a prima facie case insofar as infringement is concerned. The defendant's attack on originality does not lead me to conclude that the plaintiff's claim is other than serious and substantial.
[18]
The defendant questions the validity of the plaintiff's registration on a second ground: there is no "drawing" appended thereto and it is imprecise. Section 4 of the Industrial Design Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. I-8 provides:
"The proprietor applying for the registration of any design shall deposit with the Minister a drawing and description in duplicate of the design, together with ... "
[19]
The plaintiff filed a lithograph of a photograph of the Huggable stroller with its application for registration, not a "drawing". It is my understanding that the design office encourages the use of photographs for this purpose.
[20]
I seriously doubt that when the present section of the Industrial Design Act, or its predecessor, was enacted photography was in common use. The Industrial Design Act is not concerned with the internal construction or function of an article. Thus, unlike many patent claims, a draftsman's drawing is not essential for an understanding of the design. Indeed such a drawing is more likely to be less effective in capturing the essence of the design than is a photograph. Reference was made by counsel to Mr. Justice Jackett's comments in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  raised as to whether a photograph met the statutory requirement of a "drawing". At the same time, for the purposes of that case, a photograph was treated by both counsel as sufficient and used as such by the Court for the purposes of its judgment. Given the antiquity of the Industrial Design Act, when considered together with its purpose, I would think a photograph sufficiently meets the requirements of a "drawing" set out in s. 4.
[21]
I find somewhat more difficult counsel's argument that the registration is invalid because it is imprecise (overbroad). As I understand this argument, it is that the design registration on its face seems to claim a monopoly right in the "stroller" as such. That is, that it claims a right in the frame, general shape and configuration of the stroller. Had a drawing been used, the Rules would seem to require that the frame of the stroller should have been drawn with (dotted) lines. Sections 7(1) to 7(3) of the Industrial Design Rules provide:
"(1) All drawings deposited shall be on sheets of good quality white paper or tracing cloth that is 8 inches wide and 13 inches long, and shall be made with clear, permanent black lines.
"(2) All views shall be clearly drawn in black lines on a sufficiently large scale to be easily read.
"(3) Any letter or word in a view that has not been disclaimed in the description shall be in stippled broken lines."
The frame is not part of the design claim. Yet, the description of the plaintiff's design does not expressly disclaim the frame. However, the plaintiff has consistently taken the position, supra page 7, note 2, that the frame was not part of its design. Thus it would have been obvious to Mr. Justice Muldoon, as it was to me that the general shape of the stroller, to the extent that it is dictated by the frame, is not part of the design claimed. Also, I think it must be recognized that it may often be difficult to articulate exactly what constitutes the essence of a design. It is certainly clear that it is not appropriate to treat design registrations in the same fashion as patent claims.
[22]
I have considered carefully the jurisprudence cited to me by counsel for the defendant with respect to the alleged ambiguity in the design registration: Sackett and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.); In Bayer's Design (1906), 24 R.P.C. 553 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Pat. A.B.), and Re Application for Toy Loader (1975), 36 C.P.R. (2d) 234 (Pat. A.B.). The Sackett case dealt with the registration of designs for a sideboard. Part of the designs (the pediment of one, the arrangement of the glass of another were copied). The sideboard as a whole was not copied. The Court held that if the owner of the design had wanted to protect individual elements of the design those should have been separately registered. The Bayer's case dealt with a design registration for a corset in which the Court found that it was really a method of construction which was being claimed. The Clatworthy and Kaufman cases found the registration invalid for lack of originality. And, the Nutcracker and Toy Loader cases both concern objections to applications for registration made by the examiner. Lastly, the description which forms part of the application for the design registration in this case does focus on the use of linear quilting on certain areas of the stroller clothing as being the primary feature of the design:
"The said Industrial Design is
characterized by
the upholstered fabric material on the stroller wherein the fabric is a quilted fabric with the sewing extending [in] parallel rows from front to back and up and down. The quilted fabric forms a horizontal hood portion ... "
(underlining added)
[23]
In the light of these factors and in the absence of clear law establishing parameters which would dictate a conclusion that the plaintiff's registration is invalid because it has been too broadly framed, I do not think it appropriate to refuse interlocutory relief at this stage on that ground. The facts raise legal and factual issues best left to be determined after full argument thereon at trial.
[24]
With respect to the other elements to be considered, in granting an interlocutory injunction (balance of convenience, irreparable damage and the preservation of the status quo), the same factors exist as were referred to by Mr. Justice Muldoon, supra page 1, note 1, at page 171, when granting the interim injunction:
"... The defendant is huge and the plaintiff is small, but the sales of the plaintiff's strollers, which have been very successful, constitute a quite significant portion of the plaintiff's revenues.
"Given the disparate market power of the parties, it is possible to believe that the plaintiff might well suffer irreparable harm if the defendant starts selling its look-alike strollers ..."
My review of the evidence leads me to the same conclusion, except that I would say that the sale by the defendant of the look alike strollers would almost certainly cause the plaintiff irreparable harm.
[25]
The defendant adduced evidence, not before Mr. Justice Muldoon, suggesting that the plaintiff's present financial situation was more precarious than previously had been thought and that, indeed, the plaintiff might not be able to honour its undertaking to compensate the defendant for proved losses should the defendant be the successful party at trial. I need do no more than indicate that I did not find this evidence compelling.
[26]
An order will issue in accordance with these reasons.
Application allowed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/kawm
[End of document]