[1]
Reed, J.
: This is an application for a stay of a deportation order. The application was filed on August 11, 1992. The deportation order was to have been executed on August 12, 1992. The respondent voluntarily postponed that execution for one week until August 18, 1992. I do not know whether the order has now been executed or again postponed. It had not been postponed as of noon on Monday, August 17, 1992. Clearly from what follows, this is a case in which common sense and fairness would indicate that a voluntary postponement of the order should have occurred.
[2]
The stay of the deportation order was sought from this court pending a decision by the Immigration and Refugee Board as to whether or not it would reopen Said Haji Mohamed Berhan's claim to refugee status. The Board made a decision on January 28, 1992, finding Said Haji Mohamed Berhan not to be a Convention refugee. Leave was sought to commence judicial review of that decision. Leave was denied on May 28, 1992. Some time thereafter submissions were apparently filed with the respondent seeking humanitarian and compassionate consideration.
[3]
On July 17, 1992, the applicant Said Haji Mohamed Berhan received notice that he and his family were to be deported on August 12, 1992. On August 6, 1992, an application was filed with the Immigration and Refugee Board seeking to reopen the Convention refugee determination hearing of January 28, 1992. That application contains additional material concerning the applicant's country of nationality, Ethiopia, which had not been before the Board at the time it made its January 28th decision. Counsel for the applicants advised me that decisions had been made by the Board to reopen other cases similar to that of the applicants on the basis of material similar to that which is sought to be added in support of the claim by these applicants.
[4]
There was some expectation that a decision on the applicants' request for reopening might be made during the week of August 12-August 18, 1992. This would not appear to have happened as of August 17, 1992 and therefore, as I have noted, common sense and fairness would indicate that a further extension should have been given.
[5]
I did not, however, order a stay of the deportation order in the circumstances of this case. I was not persuaded that I had authority to do so. There is recent jurisprudence which relates to the court's authority to order stays of removal orders when the validity of the order is not itself attacked. See, for example,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . It is clear that stays can be granted when the validity of the deportation order is itself being challenged. It is also arguable that such orders can be given when there is a proceeding before this court to which s. 18.2 of the
Federal Court Act
applies:
"18.2 On an application for judicial review, the Trial Division may make such interim orders as it considers appropriate pending the final disposition of the application."
See in this regard:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[6]
In the present case, there is no challenge to the deportation order and there is no proceeding for judicial review nor any leave application with respect thereto before this court to which s. 18.2 can apply. The proceeding which the applicants seek to pursue is a reopening before the Refugee Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board. It is that Board which is seized of both the decision to reopen and the reopening if such is granted. These facts bring this application within the decisions in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 165 (F.C.A.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[7]
As much as I would have liked to issue a stay in this case, I do not think that I have authority to do so.
[8]
I would indicate one other disturbing factor. The applicant's affidavit contains the following:
"27 In addition to the dangerous situation that I would face in Ethiopia which is set out in my affidavit in Exhibit 'C', my family and I would face severe hardship, including starvation and mistreatment. Both my wife and I have severe diabetic conditions, which requires us to take injections of insulin daily. Attached hereto and marked as Exhibit 'D' is a copy of a letter from Dr. R.D. Silver confirming my condition. Insulin is not available in Asmara. In fact, my sister who was a diabetic died approximately four months ago in Asmara because she could not get insulin."
The letter from Dr. R.D. Silver which is referred to is dated January 3, 1992.
[9]
On August 13, 1992, counsel for the applicants received a response to the submissions which the applicants had filed earlier seeking consideration of their status on the basis of humanitarian and compassionate grounds. A copy of this reply was forwarded to the court on the same day August 13, 1992. That reply states in part:
"The fact your clients are reluctant to return to their country of nationality is understandable. While I agree conditions in Ethiopia are difficult, I do not believe any unusual, undeserved or disproportionate hardship would be caused if they are removed from Canada.
. . . . .
"It is extremely unfortunate Mr. Berhan suffers from Type I diabetes mellitus. I understand he is currently taking medication to control the disease. I am pleased to know, Dr. R.D. Silver believes Mr. Berhan's glucose control has considerably improved.
"In view of his medical condition, I do not believe a deferral of removal is warranted. It is my understanding type I diabetes mellitus is treatable in other countries including United States."
[10]
I raised with both counsel, on the telephone on August 17, the seeming arbitrariness of the conclusion that the diabetes in question was treatable elsewhere including in the United States when the applicants' country of nationality was Ethiopia. Counsel for the respondent rightly pointed out that no issues respecting the humanitarian and compassionate review had been placed before me on the application for stay. Counsel for the respondent stated that he had not even seen the letter in question and that if he were to guess he would suggest that the reference to the "United States" was a typing error and "Ethiopia" was intended. The request for humanitarian and compassionate review was filed by the applicants' previous solicitor, not the present one, and no material was filed with the court describing the material sent to support that request or raising any issue related thereto. I note, in addition, that it is to the United States, not Ethiopia that the applicants are being deported, but I do not understand them to have status to remain in that country.
[11]
In any event, as I have indicated, while common sense and fairness would indicate that the execution of the deportation order should be postponed, I was not persuaded that I had authority to order a stay.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sms
[End of document]