[1]
Reed, J.
: The plaintiff seeks to amend its statement of claim to add thereto a claim for the infringement of the plaintiff's literary copyright in a work entitled "Love Buggy Owner's Manual" and to add a claim for infringement of copyright in the plaintiff's Huggable stroller as a work of artistic craftsmanship. The history of this action is described in the reasons given by Mr. Justice Muldoon, reported at (1985), 6 C.P.R. (3d) 168. Those reasons relate to the granting of an interim injunction to the plaintiff. Reference should also be made to reasons of mine, of today's date, respecting the granting of an interlocutory injunction. [See 4 F.T.R. 270].
[2]
Counsel agree on the principles of law applicable: Rule 420 allows for the amendment of a statement of claim in circumstances where it is expedient to do so for the purpose of determining the questions in controversy between the parties. Such amendments are not usually permitted where injustice would result to the party opposing the amendment. Injustice is often defined as damage which cannot be compensated by an award of costs. However, this is not an exhaustive definition of that concept.
[3]
The registration of the plaintiff's copyright in the "Love Buggy Owner's Manual" is number 349,958 and it is dated March 3, 1986. The registration in the design of the stroller as a work of artistic craftsmanship is number 349,959 and it also is dated March 3, 1986. The plaintiff commenced action against the defendant with respect to infringement of industrial design and copyright on August 28, 1985. There has as yet been no discovery with respect to the main action although discoveries of the defendant's witnesses and of the plaintiff for the purposes of the interlocutory injunction proceedings have been conducted.
[4]
The claim alleging breach of copyright in the Love Buggy Owner's Manual was not commenced at an earlier time because the plaintiff was not aware of the alleged infringement until the end of January, 1986. On January 28, 1986 the wife of a student articled to the plaintiff's counsel purchased a stroller at Toy City, a retail outlet owned by the defendant. The booklet accompanying that stroller, it is alleged, is an infringement of the plaintiff's copyright in the above mentioned manual.
[5]
The defendant resists that plaintiff's motion to amend its statement of claim on the ground that to do so is unjust because it allows the plaintiff to rely on registrations obtained after the action was commenced and after discoveries have been held (albeit for interlocutory purposes only). It is argued that it is unjust for the plaintiff to be able to take actions, after the proceedings have commenced, and thereby create legal presumptions on which it will subsequently rely.
[6]
The defendant also attacks the affidavit of Christopher Robinson, the articled student, on the grounds that it attests to facts "on information and belief" about which he is not sufficiently familiar and with respect to which first hand information from another affiant should have been sought.
[7]
While the first argument initially had some attraction, upon reflection I think the better course is to allow the amendment. If leave to amend were not granted it would of course, be open to the plaintiff to commence independant proceedings respecting the two claims sought to be added. The claims sought to be asserted are intimately connected to the issues now before the Court. There can be no real injustice visited on the defendant by allowing the amendments. While validity and ownership are presumed as a result of the registrations, the extra burden thereby thrust upon the defendant is not so great as to outweigh the convenience and efficiency for litigation of having all the issues tried together. The issues of ownership and validity will no doubt be fully canvassed in the course of discoveries and at trial, regardless of the existence of a presumption. In the circumstances I could not conclude that allowing the amendments will work an injustice on the defendant.
[8]
With respect to the attack on the sufficiency of the affidavit, one of the sources of the affiant's information was counsel for the plaintiff. It was entirely proper that such counsel should not himself sign an affidavit. A second source of information was Alan Kotliar, a principal of the plaintiff. The affidavit of Christopher Robinson does not disclose why Mr. Kotliar was not available to sign an affidavit himself. It would have been preferable either to have this information come directly from Mr. Kotliar or have Mr. Robinson's affidavit disclose why Mr. Kotliar was not at the time available. I am not, however, prepared to refuse leave with respect to the motion to amend solely on that basis. Accordingly, leave to amend, as sought, will be granted.
Application allowed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/kawm
[End of document]