[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
: The defendant seeks an Order, pursuant to Rule 419 striking out the Amended Statement of Claim on the grounds that it discloses no reasonable cause of action.
[2]
The plaintiff makes a cross-motion for an Order amending the Statement of Claim to include an allegation of an infringement of ss. 7 and 12 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
.
The Facts
[3]
The plaintiff, who resides in Ottawa, has been employed as a CR2 in the Department of National Defence since May 17, 1982. During the first five years of her employment, the plaintiff was a term employee; thereafter she obtained "indeterminate status". The plaintiff has been on sick leave without pay since September 26, 1990.
[4]
The defendant submits, and this is not denied by the plaintiff, that at all material times the plaintiff was subject to the terms and conditions contained in the collective agreement called the "Master Agreement".
[5]
The plaintiff alleges that she has been constructively dismissed. She claims to have been the victim of continual harassment and humiliation from her co-workers and supervisors between 1987 and 1989, and that as a result of this treatment she has suffered psychological and emotional damage for which she is still being treated. As a consequence of her inability to work due to the damage of her mental health, the plaintiff claims lost wages and other benefits as compensation.
Is There A Reasonable
Cause Of Action?
[6]
The issue to be resolved on a motion to strike is essentially whether the statement of claim discloses a reasonable cause of action. The case law clearly demonstrates that the court will strike out a claim only in plain and obvious cases where the court is satisfied beyond doubt that the action will fail.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 740. In the present case, I am satisfied so on a number of grounds.
[7]
Following to the Federal Court of Appeal decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  signing an action for wrongful constructive dismissal against the Crown. In that case, the defendant brought a motion pursuant to Rule 419(1)(a) to have the claim of constructive dismissal against the Crown struck out as disclosing no cause of action. With respect to this issue Stone, J.A., stated the following:
"Counsel for the appellant relies on the provisions of s. 24 of the
Public Service Employment Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-33, that the 'tenure of office of an employee is during pleasure ...'. He also relies on the following passage in the reasons for judgment of Strayer, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 202:
'With respect to the plaintiff's claim in contract for the wrongful dismissal of Fernando R. Ricafort, I am satisfied that there is no cause of action disclosed by the statement of claim. Section 24 of the
Public Service Employment Act
[see footnote 5] provides as follows:
"The tenure of an employee is during the pleasure of Her Majesty, subject to this and any other Act and the regulations thereunder and, unless some other period of employment is specified, for an indeterminate period."
'It has been frequently held that in the absence of special circumstances,
the remedies of a dismissed public servant lie elsewhere and not in actions for wrongful dismissal
[see footnote 6].'
"It is not clear that this case was brought to the attention of the Motions Judge. Be that as it may, we are agreed that it does correctly express the current state of the law. No special circumstances have been shown. That being so, we are of the opinion that the respondent cannot in law assert a claim in contract for wrongful dismissal from employment as a Crown servant." (emphasis added)
[8]
The rule that recourse to alternative bodies is a bar to court action has been considered by the courts in various contexts and is applicable to the present instance.
[9]
In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.B.R.(2d) 236; 184 A.P.R. 236, Estey, J., of the Supreme Court of Canada, reviewed a number of cases concerning the jurisdiction of courts in matters arbitrable under collective agreements and concluded at p. 720 that:
"
The courts have no jurisdiction to consider claims arising out of rights created by a collective agreement
. Nor can the courts properly decide questions that might have arisen under the common law of master and servant in the absence of a collective bargaining regime
if the collective agreement by which the parties to the action are bound makes provision for the matters in issue, whether or not it explicitly provides a procedure and forum for enforcement
." (emphasis added)
[10]
The plaintiff's allegation of general harassment in the case at bar can be addressed through the provisions of her collective agreement which explicitly provide a remedial procedure.
[11]
Paragraph M-38.02 of the agreement states that:
"M-38.02 Subject to and as provided in s. 90 of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, an employee who feels that he has been unjustly treated or considers himself aggrieved by any action or lack of action by the Employer in matters other than those arising from the classification process is entitled to present a grievance in the manner prescribed in clause M-38.05 except that,
(a) Where there is another administrative procedure provided by or under any Act of Parliament to deal with his specific complaint, such procedure must be followed
7
."
[12]
Therefore, there will be no recourse to the courts except, perhaps, on judicial review.
[13]
With respect to the plaintiff's complaint of sexual harassment, the appropriate recourse is through the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6. The ruling authority on the jurisdiction of the courts in the event that the matters complained of are arbitrable under an act such as the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C., 1985, c. H-6 is
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case, Laskin, J., decided that the plaintiff who was refused employment, and thereby suffered damages, because of her ethnic origin, did not have a civil action against the person who refused her employment, either on the basis of a common law tort of discrimination or on the basis of an action flowing directly from a breach of the
Ontario Human Rights Code
, 1981 R.S.O. 1990, c. H-19, Laskin, J., noted that the
Code
was comprehensive in its administrative and adjudicative features and included a wide right of appeal to the courts on both fact and law. He concluded that the possibility of creating a common law tort of discrimination in these circumstances was foreclosed by the legislative initiative which overtook the existing common law in Ontario and established a different regime which did not exclude the courts but rather integrated them into the enforcement machinery under the
Code
.
[14]
As for the allegation of language discrimination, any infraction or contravention of the
Official Languages Act
, R.S.C., 1985 (4th Supp.) c. 31 could be investigated by the Commissioner and dealt with appropriately.
The Charter Infringement Allegation
[15]
The plaintiff has sought leave of this court to amend her statement of claim by including allegations of
Charter
violations. I note here that, pursuant to Rule 421(1), the plaintiff does not require leave to amend because the defendant has not yet pleaded to the Amended Statement of Claim.
[16]
This fact notwithstanding, I am prepared to grant the requested amendment for the better administration of justice in order that the defendant's motion to strike can be considered in the context of the
Charter
issues as well.
[17]
The issue of the justiciability of
Charter
infringement allegations has been considered by the courts.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.R.(3d) 609, where the appellant sought a declaration of a
Charter
violation, Arbour, J.A., noted the fact that
Charter
rights are individual rights and that there should be as little impediment or restraint as possible on the individual's right to seek constitutional redress in the courts. On this basis, she concluded that even though
Charter
issues were arbitrable through the grievance procedure (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 271, is authority for this proposition), they could only be raised in that context by the union on behalf of the employee. If the union decided not to pursue the matter, the employee would have to file a complaint against the union in order to proceed to arbitration with the grievance. This constituted, in the opinion of Arbour, J.A., too great an impediment on the exercise of
Charter
rights.
[18]
It appears, then, that an alleged infringement of an individual's
Charter
rights is properly justiciable in this court. Since the plaintiff has claimed damages as a result of the
Charter
infringement as well as a declaration to this effect, this court is a "court of competent jurisdiction" within the meaning of s. 24 of the
Charter
for the purposes of granting an appropriate remedy. It remains to be determined whether the claims of the plaintiff in this regard disclose a reasonable cause of action.
[19]
Because it was obvious that neither counsel was prepared to argue the application of ss. 7 and 12 of the
Charter
to the case at bar, I requested written arguments on the issue.
Section 32 Of The Charter
[20]
Pursuant to s. 32, the
Charter
applies to "governmental action". This was defined by McIntyre, J., at p. 598 S.C.R. in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as being limited to Parliament and the legislatures and the executive and administrative branches of government exercising statutory authority, common law or crown prerogatives. See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[21]
In the present case, I cannot see how the alleged harassment by co-workers within the Department of National Defence could qualify as governmental action; therefore, the
Charter
is not applicable. However, assuming that it is applicable, I will continue with my analysis regarding ss. 7 and 12.
Section 7 Of The Charter
[22]
The question of what liberties are included in s. 7 was recently dealt with by Lamer, J. (as he then was), in
Reference re ss. 193 and 195.1(1)(C) of the Criminal Code (Man.)
, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1123; 109 N.R. 81; 68 Man.R.(2d) 1; 56 C.C.C.(3d) 65; 77 C.R.(3d) 1; [1990] 4 W.W.R. 481, where Manitoba had referred to the court the constitutionality of the named sections dealing respectively with the keeping of a common bawdy house and with communicating for the purpose of engaging in prostitution.
[23]
After a thorough review of important Supreme Court decisions regarding s. 7, Lamer, J., concluded at p. 1177-78:
"Put shortly, I am of the view that s. 7 is implicated when the state, by resorting to the justice system, restricts an individual's physical liberty
in any circumstances
. Section 7 is also implicated when the state restricts individuals' security of the person by interfering with, or removing from them, control over their physical or mental integrity. Finally, s. 7 is implicated when the state, either directly or through its agents, restricts certain privileges or liberties by using the threat of punishment in cases of noncompliance.
"Although this may appear to be a limited reading of s. 7, it is my view that it is neither wise nor necessary to subsume all other rights in the
Charter
within s. 7. A full and generous interpretation of the
Charter
that extends the full benefit of its protection to individuals can be achieved without the incorporation of other rights and freedoms within s. 7."
[24]
In my opinion, there is nothing of this kind on the facts of the case at bar. It is plain and obvious that the action based on a s. 7 violation would have no chance of success and therefore the pleadings to this effect in the Amended Statement of Claim should be stricken.
Section 12 Of The Charter
[25]
The plaintiff relies on the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , for the proposition that "cruel and unusual punishment" is punishment that is so excessive as to outrage the standards of decency. The plaintiff claims that s. 12 can refer to "treatment" alone substituted for "punishment" and that the fact that the defendant allowed the harassment to continue despite numerous appeals should be considered an outrage to the standards of decency.
[26]
Lamer, J., explored the meaning of s. 12 and stated at p. 1072 in
Smith
that the s. 12 guarantee against cruel and unusual punishment functions as a check on the state in fulfilment of some legitimate legislative or excessive duty. He concluded:
"In my view, the protection afforded by s. 12 governs the quality of the punishment and is concerned with the effect that the punishment may have on the person on whom it is imposed."
[27]
In the criminal context, examples of treatment suggested by Lamer, J., at 1074 included the lobotomization of certain dangerous offenders or the castration of sexual offenders.
[28]
The type of acts with which the plaintiff takes issue do not fall within this definition of s. 12 and therefore disclose no reasonable cause of action on that basis.
[29]
Based on the foregoing, the plaintiff's cross-motion to amend the Statement of Claim shall be granted and the defendant's motion to strike the Statement of Claim as amended shall be granted.
Motions granted.
Editor: Donna E. Mitchell/dlr
[End of document]