[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The plaintiff (in one of his purported capacities) James Russell Sterritt, has appealed the decisions and orders, (documents 13 and 14) of the prothonotary, John A. Hargrave, Esq. dated June 29, 1995. The first order is one whereby the learned prothonotary, pursuant to rule 419(1)(a) and (c) struck out the amended statement of claim herein, without leave to re-amend and without costs. The second order dismissed a long motion for an oral hearing of the defendant's rule 419 application to strike, together with various other motions thrown in, pursuant to rules 402, 421 and 468. By appealing in person the plaintiff certainly got the oral hearing, and more, about whose denial he was complaining. The appeals were heard by the court on July 24, 1995.
[2]
It is the plaintiff Sterritt's pleasure to designate his claimed Godhead with symbols which the court's printing machines cannot duplicate. Thus, "God" appears with the letter "O" shown as a shaded-in heart form, and "D" shown with the straight vertical stroke ending at its nether extremity in a surveyor's form of arrow-head. He also refers to the continents of the western hemisphere as Almerican or Almerica for his own reasons, if any. The notation (sic) will be avoided, only to save paper.
[3]
The plaintiff Mr. Sterritt purports to sue "on behalf of all Indians". When asked at the hearing by what authority he arrogates all Indians into his lawsuit, Mr. Sterritt replied that they have not objected, and would not object, to being included. When asked how all Indians would know that he is arrogating them herein, he replied that they must all know and that the onus is on all Indians to repudiate their inclusion as plaintiffs herein, if they wish to do so. In other words, Mr. Sterritt has utterly no authority to implicate "all Indians" willy-nilly as plaintiffs. He has no demonstrated authority, either, to take action "on behalf of the Kingdom Of God". These matters make one think of invoking rule 359.
[4]
A few passages from the amended statement of claim will illustrate its condition more aptly than attempted description or commentary.
"1.A. Plaintiff (PF.) is Indian, descendant of Simgeget (Royalty) and is father and grandfather of Sigidim Uanaak (Royalty in female line) of the Almerican Nation, 1B to 1L (Page 2A).
"2.A. PF resides at Gitanmaax, ancestral village of Gitxsan, one of the Almerican Indian Tribes, within the meaning and intention of Canada's
Constitution
(1492 to the present), 2B to 2E(b) (Page 2B)
"3.A. Pf is the true and rightful Heir of God's Crown, Messiah, God's Agent, owner of the radical root title in all the country of Canada (and in the World), and is the private Equity Holder of all the Crown's Lands and Properties including lands designated as Indian Reserve Lands and to include lands that may be set aside for Indians in future under Treaty or any such provisions; 3B to 3H (Page 2C)
"4.A. Defendant is subject to the Supremacy of God and cannot abrogate, derogate, or in any way diminish Pf's rights as Indian and as the true Crown 4B to 4C (Page 2C)
"5.A. Defendants presence in Canada without Pf's leave or consent constitutes Trespass and causes injury to all Indians and impedes completion of God's Kingdom 5B to 5G (Page 2D)
"6.A. Pf is son of Alma Jean Russell Sterritt (1917-1967) wife of Wiigak, mother-in-law of Delgamuukw, descendant of the Lt. General Wm. Goffe, born Newfoundland 6B to 6F (Page 2E)
. . . . .
"8.A. Defendant (Df) is Her Majesty, Elizabeth II, Queen, as represented in Canada and her Heir and Beneficiaries (Pf is Successor of Df) 8B (Page 2F)
"1.B. Plaintiff herein is plaintiff in Supreme Court of British Columbia Action #9990 [Prince Rupert Registry] wherein the defendant herein has filed defense to claims interactive with this Action
. . . . .
D. That Action may not encompass Federal Lands however reserved
E. This Action is comprehensive of Canada entirely
F. Pf's personal and sole corporate Right is subordinate only to the Right of Jesus Christ and God
. . . . .
L. Pf's Indian Right prevails over non-indian rights
"2.B. Plaintiff has moved [Action #9990, SCBC, P.R. Reg.] for Permanent Orders creating the Principality Of Gitanmaax at the Canyons and Junctions of the Skeena and the Hagwilget [Simpson's or Bulkley] Rivers by concession
. . . . .
"4.A. (Page 2)
"B. Pf is Beneficiary of the Supremacy of God [herein the bottom horizontal of the "D" ends on the left with an arrow-head, also].
"C. Pf is entitled to advance and increase and improve our Existing Right and the rights of all Indians and the right of the members of our Kingdom of God.
. . . . .
"F. Pf's equity in Canada is equal to the sum of the Indian Lands and the Crown Lands and includes Title as Prince in the Principality of Gitanmaax and includes Title as King, the Owner of the entire Province of British Columbia and involves Root Title underlying all Fee Simple Tenure."
. . . . .
[5]
The statement of claim continues in much the same manner. The prayer for relief seems quite mad, too, as in claiming a declaration inter alia.
"(a) plaintiff is Sovereign in Canada, and owns the Title in the Holy Royal Crown, which Title is superior to such rights held by defendant in Canada or in the Crown.
. . . . .
"In the alternative to 1(c) a Declaration that plaintiff is King Of Canada, Head Of State, Crown, and that plaintiff is entitled to advise Parliament regarding the completion of the Kingdom of God, and Pf can establish Hereditary Senates over all elected bodies in Canada."
[6]
It is all absurd in the same manner, as above demonstrated. There is no surprise in noting that the plaintiff Sterritt could not make any more sense of it at the oral hearing of his appeals, than appears above.
[7]
The court must ratify and affirm the learned prothonotary's reasons and orders dated June 29, 1995, from which these appeals are taken. The plaintiff's said appeals dated and filed on July 7, 1995, are dismissed, with costs in the respondent's favour, if asked.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/kaw
[End of document]