[1]
Joyal, J.
: This is an appeal by the International Board of Standards and Practices for Certified Financial Planners Inc. from a decision of the Registrar of Trademarks dated May 15, 1991, calling for the expungement of the appellant's trademark CFP under No. 281,360, pursuant to s. 45 of the
Trade-marks Act
.
Background
[2]
The appellant, International Board of Standards and Practices for Certified Financial Planners Inc. (hereafter "IBCFP"), is an independent nonprofit corporation which was formed in the United States in 1985 by two institutions, namely the College for Financial Planning and the Institute of Certified Financial Planners. IBCFP was established in the public interest to ensure that certified financial planners practice in accordance with recognized standards of conduct, and to further ensure that they perform their work effectively, ethically and in the best interest of their clients and the public.
[3]
The College for Financial Planning (hereafter "the College"), involved in the formation of IBCFP is also a nonprofit institution which was incorporated in 1972 as an educational institution for the purpose of offering courses and examinations leading to professional designation for financial service professionals. The College offers educational courses, programs and examinations in association with the trademark CFP. Both IBCFP and the College have their establishments in Denver, Colorado.
[4]
The trademark CFP was registered under no. 281,360 on July 15, 1983, in the name of the College for Financial Planning for "educational services, namely, offering courses in financial planning" based on use in Canada since 1973 and on use and registration in the United States.
[5]
On February 12, 1987 the College made an assignment of its trademark to IBCFP. The assignment was recorded in the Trademarks Office on May 15, 1987.
[6]
On November 26, 1987, a notice was issued to the appellant, pursuant to s. 44 (now s. 45) of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13 (hereafter "the
Act
"), by the Registrar of Trademarks at the request of the respondent, the Canadian Institute of Financial Planning (hereafter "the Institute"). The said notice required the appellant to furnish within three months an affidavit or declaration showing, with respect to the services specified in the registration, that the trademark CFP was in use in Canada, and if not, the date when it was last in use and the reasons for the absence of such use since that date. In response to the said notice, IBCFP filed the statutory declaration of Larry D. Hayden on July 19, 1988, and both parties then filed written submissions.
[7]
On May 14, 1991, an oral hearing was conducted before the Registrar, with both parties being represented. By decision dated May 15, 1991, David J. Martin, on behalf of the Registrar, decided that the registered mark CFP should be expunged.
[8]
On February 3, 1989, an application was filed to record the College as a registered user of the registered trademark CFP; the College was recorded as a registered user on May 12, 1989.
Proceedings Before The Registrar
[9]
In its written arguments, the appellant IBCFP claimed that as of the date of the s. 45 notice, the services listed in the registration were being rendered in Canada by the College for Financial Planning under contract to the appellant. The Registrar considered that this statement raised the following questions: does the evidence establish use of the mark in Canada by the College for Financial Planning at or about the date of the s. 45 notice and, if so, does such use qualify as use by the IBCFP? The Registrar dealt with the issues in the following way:
"In my view, the Hayden declaration fails to evidence use of the mark CFP in Canada by the College for Financial Planning. The bulletin appended as Exhibit A generally associates the trademark with the College of Financial Planning. According to that bulletin, the College for Financial Planning offers courses under its 'CFP Program' to prepare individuals for the examinations of the IBCFP which oversees use of the 'certification marks CFP and Certified Financial Planner'. The College for Financial Planning is a United States based enterprise.
"Mr. Hayden states that the sales of courses and course material bearing the trademark CFP in Canada since 1973 were in excess of $36,000. However, he fails to indicate when those sales were made and, in the absence of additional information, I must assume that they were all made well prior to the commencement of this proceeding. Mr. Hayden also states that the records of IBCFP shows that in November of 1987, a Mr. Willis of Three Hills, Alberta, and a Mrs. Burke of Toronto completed the CFP course of study and the six examinations required by IBCFP. However, he fails to evidence any commercial transaction with either of these individuals in Canada in relation to courses offered in association with the trademark CFP. There is no evidence that a service was performed for either of them in Canada for consideration or, for that matter, that any aspect of their 'course of study' occurred in Canada.
"As noted, the foregoing is insufficient to establish that there has been use of the registered services at or about the date of the s. 45 notice. In particular, the Hayden declaration fails to evidence use of the mark by the College for Financial Planning as claimed by Mr. Hayden. Furthermore, even if such use had been shown, the College for Financial Planning was not recorded as a registered user of the mark during the relevant period. Consequently, any such use would not have accrued to the benefit of the registered owner IBCFP. The fact that IBCFP subsequently applied to register the College for Financial Planning as a registered user only serves to confirm that IBCFP never used the mark in Canada and that if there was any use, it was by the College for Financial Planning.
"The registered owner has not relied on any special circumstances explaining the absence of use and I do not consider that the evidence would support such a finding. Therefore, registration no. 281,360 ought to be expunged."
[10]
It is from this decision that the appellant IBCFP appeals to this court pursuant to s. 56 of the
Trade-marks Act
.
Appellant's Submissions
[11]
The appellant contends that contrary to the Registrar's findings, there was use of the registered trademark CFP in Canada in association with the registered services at or about the date of the s. 45 notice, or that there were special circumstances explaining the absence of use of the said trademark in Canada at or about that date.
[12]
In support of its allegations, the appellant has submitted, as new evidence, two affidavits which attempt to demonstrate the use of the trademark by the College, the relationship between IBCFP and the College, as well as the special circumstances existing at the relevant time which would explain the technical nonuse of the mark by IBCFP.
[13]
The appellant claims that in the 1980's, the increased interest in financial planning and the maintenance of professional standards of financial planning professionals moved beyond the College's objectives and responsibilities as an education institution. This led the College to conceive and support the founding of IBCFP to serve as the policy body controlling the use of the trademark CFP and Certified Financial Planner and to ensure usage of the marks only by qualified professionals.
[14]
In order to facilitate the objectives of IBCFP, the College transferred ownership of the trademark to IBCFP in February of 1987. After the transfer, the College continued to use the trademark CFP under license from IBCFP in association with education services. IBCFP, however, did not use the trademark in Canada in association with educational services, as it was always its intention to have these services administered by the College. It would have been IBCFP's intention, therefore, to have the College appointed a registered user of the mark in Canada. By inadvertence, however, this procedure was not followed. The College nevertheless continued to use the mark in Canada and it was only in February of 1989 that a registered user application was filed.
[15]
The appellant concludes that, based on the foregoing, at least part of the intent in the formation of IBCFP was to have it administer the use of the said trademark and control the extent of its use. The assignment was the first step towards that end. In terms of the mandate of IBCFP, which includes standards of educational services, it was always the parties' intention that IBCFP would set these standards and oversee the courses provided by the College. As it was never IBCFP's intention to use the trademark CFP in association with educational services in Canada, it is evidence that IBCFP was not using the trademark as of the s. 45 notice. The inadvertent failure of IBCFP to record the College as a registered user provides the court with that kind of "special circumstance" provided in s. 45 on which technical nonuse should be excused.
Respondent's Submissions
[16]
The respondent Institute subscribes, of course, to the reasons set out in the Registrar's decision of May 15, 1991. The respondent denies that there was use in Canada of the registered trademark in association with the services covered in the registration at the date of the s. 45 notice. Furthermore, if there was no evidence before the Registrar of use by either IBCFP or the College, the additional affidavit evidence filed by the appellant in this court does nothing to advance the appellant's case. That evidence, says the respondent, falls short of establishing that the services performed by the College in Canada were in association with the mark CFP.
[17]
In any event, says the respondent, failure to file a registered user application is a matter entirely within the control of the appellant and does not constitute a "special circumstance" as provided in s. 45 of the
Trade-marks Act
, excusing nonuse.
The Evidence
[18]
The evidence originally submitted by the appellant in response to the s. 45 action failed to convince the Registrar that the trademark CFP had been used at all in the relevant period. The Registrar acknowledged, however, that in any event, any use of the mark by the College would not have accrued to the benefit of IBCFP.
[19]
Before this court, however, additional evidence was provided in the affidavits of Dr. William L. Anthes, President of the College, and of Mr. Robert Goss, Executive Director of IBCFP. I must recognize that these affidavits, to which are attached a package of exhibits, were not made available to the Registrar when the issue came before him.
[20]
The evidence first of all outlines the method used by the College since 1973 with respect to students enroling in the College's financial planning courses. As far as Canadian students were concerned, the programmes consisted of six individual courses of instruction. Curriculum information provided by the College required the student to pay fees, to study each course of instruction and eventually to attend at a testing centre to submit to written examinations. Students had the option to attend at any of the designated testing centres. In Canada, at the relevant period, there was a testing centre in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, at the Regional Community College. There was another one in Toronto, at 80 Bond Street, the address, interestingly enough, of the Canadian Institute for Financial Planning, the respondent in this appeal.
[21]
The evidence also discloses the payment of fees, the attendance of Canadian resident students at examination time, reports by the overseeing proctor, as well as information material distributed to candidates, material on which the mark CFP is frequently displayed. One would naturally expect this, as the mark CFP, standing for Certified Financial Planner, is what a candidate might add to his business card upon successful completion of his courses.
[22]
I am also satisfied that the College was not running quick-fix programmes simply in order to earn the fees. The application forms, with CFP several times displayed, required candidates to provide detailed employment information, current occupation, academic standing, and the like. There were several options available with respect to payment of fees, which were in the neighbourhood of $1,700. There were also conditions to induce students to complete their courses and submit to examinations in a timely manner, namely six months per course.
[23]
There is evidence that in 1987, some thirteen Canadian students were enrolled in CFP courses. In 1987, two candidates had successfully completed their courses and received their certification. Six more were certified in the following two years. Throughout the period 1984-1990, some forty students in Canada enrolled and passed through various stages of the course.
[24]
There is also evidence in the information material of the link between the College's instruction programmes and IBCFP. This material indicates that examination standards were set by IBCFP and that notification of examination results would come from IBCFP. Application forms in use in 1987 noted, among other things, the following:
"March 1987. College for Financial Planning. All rights reserved. The College for Financial Planning is an independent, nonprofit educational institution. CFP and Certified Financial Planner are certification marks of the International Board of Standards and Practices for Certified Financial Planners Inc. (IBCFP). Only individuals registered with the IBCFP are permitted to sit for CFP exams and CFP certificates are issued only by the IBCFP."
[25]
Among the students enrolled in the courses in Canada were people with experience in real estate, or employed with financial institutions, insurance companies and brokerage houses. There is also evidence that the curriculum of the College, with respect to course material and content, had that kind of academic character one might associate with college-level instruction.
Comments
[26]
In his reasons for decision, the Registrar refers to the evidence then available to him, showing that two Canadian candidates had completed the CFP course of study in 1987. The Registrar observed, however, that there was no evidence of any commercial transaction with either of these individuals in Canada, in relation to courses offered in association with the trademark CFP, that there was no evidence that a service was performed for either of them in Canada for consideration or, for that matter, that any aspect of their "course of study" occurred in Canada.
[27]
I should interpret that comment by the Registrar as responding to the limited evidence that was made available to him. Otherwise, I would find it difficult to accept the Registrar's comment as a general condition of use of a service mark in Canada. The course documents as well as the suggested reading list were sent to residents of Canada, the information provided by the College had numerous references to CFP as an identifying service mark, the course of study was undertaken in Canada and, although candidates had a wide choice of test centres, there is evidence of both Toronto and Prince Albert having been chosen by well identified residents in Canada. The examinations were conducted at these centres under surveillance of a proctor, appointed by the College, who would forward the examinations to the College for correction. The participation of test centres, either in Toronto or at the Community College in Prince Albert, at the instigation and under the direction of the College, indicates to me some evidence of use by the College in Canada. With regards to sales of the courses offered by the College, exhibits in the appellant's affidavits give ample evidence of services paid for and received.
The Law
[28]
I should first traverse the Registrar's comment to which I have referred above as to whether or not any services were performed by the College in Canada. Although there is no case law directly on point when dealing with service marks in relation to educational or academic services, similar issues have been raised when the registered owner was offshore.
[29]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 49, Addy, J., had before him the appellant's service mark by Saks Fifth Avenue. In reviewing the evidence before him, the learned judge commented as follows:
"With regard to the use of the mark in conjunction with the provision of retail department store services as mentioned in the registration there is evidence that the company responds to mail and telephone orders from Canada for merchandise, grants credit to Canadian customers, advertises wares in Canada by sending some catalogues to chosen Canadian customers, includes in every statement of account to its Canadian credit customers and to other Canadian customers upon request, monthly focus advertising inserts, provides a toll free (800) telephone number for purchasing of wares by telephone, also advertises its wares and services in Canada regularly in the
New York Times
, the
Detroit Free Press
and
Mademoiselle
magazine, all of which have a large Canadian circulation, arranges for the delivery of wares in Canada and the honouring of warranties and guarantees as well as the issuing of gift certificates to Canadian customers. These services are performed without the Canadian customer ever having to leave Canada and the Saks Fifth Avenue mark is used in association with all of these services by marking it on all documents and materials issued by the company relating to same.
"With regard to the guarantees pertaining to goods and the servicing of the goods sold to Canadians, although the guarantees would be honoured from the United States and the servicing would probably be performed there, they nevertheless would relate, in the vast majority of cases, to goods situated in Canada at the time when the appellant would be called upon to make good its undertakings. These services, guarantees and warranties and the offer to Canadian customers of performing them constitute 'retail department store services' as mentioned in the application and also constitute the furnishing of services in Canada within the meaning of the
Act
. The facts in the present case are quite distinguishable in my view from the situation with which I was called upon to deal in the case of
Motel 6  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) [...]. In the
Motel 6
case, [...] No person whilst residing in Canada could benefit in any way from the services or did they relate to anything situated in Canada.
"To summarize, I am fully satisfied that there is ample evidence to maintain registration regarding services."
[30]
As regards the Federal Court's role in reviewing a Registrar's decision, I should think that the issue is now well-settled. My colleague Teitelbaum, J., in
88766  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 260, points out that an appeal from the Registrar is often times a trial de novo. It is not an appeal limited to the evidence submitted to the Registrar but, in admitting new or additional evidence, a judge of this court at the appeal stage may consider de novo the whole issue.
[31]
I should adopt that principle in the case before me. There is sufficient evidence before me to look at all of the facts and circumstances all over again. I do not wish to imply by that statement that there is now before me new evidence of use by the registered owner at the time the s. 44 process was initiated. If the statute says that evidence of use of a mark must be evidence of use by the registered owner of the mark, the bulk of the evidence before me speaks of evidence of use by a "licensee" of the owner, namely the College. There is no doubt that the College "used" the mark in Canada in 1987. The debate therefore becomes one of determining if the absence of use by the registered owner, namely IBCFP, is due to special circumstances that excuse such absence of use.
[32]
Before analyzing the scope of this expression as found in s. 44 of the statute, regard must be had to the purpose of that particular provision of the statute. In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , President Jackett of the Exchequer Court had this to say at p. 155:
"As I read s. 44, it does
not
provide a summary procedure for determining whether a registered trademark has been 'abandoned' within the meaning of s. 18(1)(c). What it does, as I understand it, is provide a summary procedure whereby the registered owner of the trademark is required to provide either
some evidence
that the registered trademark is being used in Canada or evidence of 'special circumstances that excuse [...] absence of use'. The penalty for the registered owner failing to provide some evidence is that his trademark becomes liable to be 'expunged'. What seems to be contemplated is that there will be on the registry many trademarks that the registered owners do not use and in respect of which the registered owners make no pretence of having any interest."
[33]
President Jackett elaborated further on the substantive nature of s. 44 by noting at page 156:
"The fact that the Registrar is prohibited by s. 44 from receiving any evidence other than that provided by the registered owner shows that it was not intended that the Registrar reach a 'decision' under s. 44 as to whether the registered owner had 'abandoned' his trademark or whether the mark was in fact in use in Canada. What the Registrar decides is whether 'by reason of the evidence furnished to him or the failure to furnish such evidence, it appears to him that the trademark is not in use in Canada and whether, by reason of such evidence, it appears that the absence of such use has not been due to special circumstances that excuse the absence of such use'."
[34]
And finally, President Jackett stated:
"To put it another way, s. 44 provides a means for clearing from the registry registrations for which the owners no longer assert that there is any real foundation."
[35]
A similar observation had of course been made earlier by Thorson, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 91, where he stated:
"It is clear that the purpose of s. 44 of the
Act
is to provide a procedure for trimming the register of trademarks, so to speak, by getting rid of 'deadwood' in the sense of trademarks that are no longer in use [...]."
[36]
Over more recent years, however, the easy-flowing arteries of s. 44 became somewhat hardened.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  easy process contemplated in s. 44 might have become a trap for the unwary. In the business of trademarks involving competing interests, some funny games are often played. One might see the case of a s. 44 notice sent to a registered user who has literally gone out of business. His eyes light up when someone might wish to adopt his trademark. There might be value in that unused trademark after all, and he will attempt all sorts of means to show use of the mark.
[37]
One might also see the case where due to intercorporate reorganizations, there results a hiatus in the statutory use of a statutory trademark by the statutory registered owner when a s. 44 notice is issued. Such was the situation in the
George Weston
case, supra.
[38]
Other technical requirements also surfaced. It was said at one time that only the registered owner could file an affidavit, that only one affidavit could be filed and that such affidavit must be more than a bare statement of "use".
[39]
The cases of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), are examples of these constraints.
[40]
More recently, the pendulum has swung back to a more functional approach to s. 44 and a more practical interpretation of its requirements. This is seen in a series of cases, namely: the judgment of Reed, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 74; the judgment of Teitelbaum, J., in
88766  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; the judgment of McNair, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; the judgment of Cullen, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 473.
[41]
Among the cases cited by counsel for the respondent, one finds the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , which stated at p. 287:
"I shall therefore hold that 'use in Canada' of a trademark in respect of services is not established by mere advertising of the trademark in Canada coupled with performance of the services, elsewhere, but requires that the services be performed in Canada and that the trademark be used or displayed in the performance or advertising in Canada of such services."
[42]
Counsel for the respondent also cites the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 127 (F.C.T.D.), which establishes that "use" pursuant to a s. 44 notice must be use by the registered owner or the registered user. Also cited is the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the decision of the Senior Hearing Officer on behalf of the Registrar of Trademarks is to the same effect.
[43]
Other cases cited by the respondent deal with the weight of the evidence of use with or by a mere distributor as against use by the registered owner. In these cases, however, the issue of "special circumstances" was not raised, except obliquely perhaps in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.).
Findings On Special Circumstances
[44]
It is quite clear to me, with respect to the case at bar, that the issue is fundamentally one of "special circumstances" which might justify absence of use at the time the s. 44 notice was sent to the appellant.
[45]
To establish the evidentiary base on which such an issue may be discussed, it is useful to go back to July 15, 1983, when the trademark CFP, based on use in Canada since 1973, was registered under No. 281,360 in the name of the College. There is evidence that over the years 1983 to 1987, Canadian residents subscribed to the educational services provided by the College leading to the certification of CFP, for Certified Financial Planner. There is also an assertion by the witness Anthes in his affidavit that the mark was used continuously in Canada since 1973.
[46]
The appellant, IBCFP, an independent nonprofit corporation, was formed in 1985 following the initiative taken by the College for Financial Planning and the Institute of Certified Financial Planners. Both sponsors had an interest in maintaining the integrity of the CFP designation and the objectively legitimate standards of knowledge required to obtain it.
[47]
In a sense, IBCFP became the governing body to establish education and testing standards for CFP designation, to oversee examinations, to set codes of conduct and to accredit other educational institutions whose courses in financial planning met IBCFP's minimum standards of education. In other words, a student might graduate from the College, but the degree, so-called, would be granted by IBCFP.
[48]
It followed that the ownership of the trademark CFP was transferred in February 1987 from the College to IBCFP, which was now in control of the course standards and the granting of the Certified Financial Planner or CFP designation.
[49]
According to the Anthes evidence, it was never the intention on of either the College of IBCFP that as far as Canada was concerned, IBCFP would use the mark. IBCFP never intended to offer educational services in Canada. The intent was for the College to continue to offer these services and to continue, under license it was said, to use the mark CFP in association with these services.
[50]
By way of transfer, IBCFP became the registered owner of the mark in Canada. There was failure, however, to appoint the College as a registered user at that time. The status of registered user was only granted effective February 3, 1989.
[51]
At an earlier date, namely November 26, 1987, a s. 44 proceeding was instituted by the respondent. A hearing on that application was not heard until May 14, 1991 and the decision calling for expungement was made the next day.
[52]
The appellant admits that in 1987, it was not using the mark CFP in Canada. It argues, however, that this was due to special circumstances. It says that it never intended to use it. Its failure to have the College appointed as registered user was by inadvertence. It was a mere technical shortcoming on its part. It was intended that the College, which had used the mark in Canada for many years, would continue to use it. The College did continue to use it. The appellant concludes that the situation falls within the "special circumstances" mentioned in s. 44(3) and that such special circumstances excuse the absence of use by its owner.
[53]
Before analyzing the words and expressions used in s. 44(3) of the
Act
, I should note that the assignment of the CFP trademark from the College to IBCFP was recorded in the Trademarks Office on May 15, 1987. Section 44 proceedings were instituted by the required notice on November 26, 1987, some six months later. This was at the instigation of the respondent, the Canadian Institute of Financial Planning. If nothing else, it shows that the respondent was on its toes.
[54]
I have already reviewed the case law respecting the application of s. 44 to meet particular and singular cases. In my view, the provision must be interpreted in a manner consistent with the "deadwood" approach which courts have given it. It is a summary procedure to get rid of unused trademarks which simply clutter up the Registry.
[55]
In my view, also, the same approach should be taken respecting s. 44(3). The words "special circumstances that excuse such absence of use" do not impose on a registered owner the burden of establishing such special circumstances as will "justify" such absence of use, but as will "excuse" it. It seems to me that "excuse" is much more of a wimp word than other words, unqualified or not, having a similar generic connotation, like "justify", "demonstrate", "reasonably explain", or "show good cause". In any event, an excuse is never a reason. An excuse is only proferred when one is caught with one's fingers in the cookie jar, so to speak.
[56]
The case before me is not one where the trademark was not used at all. Nor is it a case where it was used by a third party who is a stranger to these proceedings and completely unknown to the statutory parties to it. From the evidence, there was no interruption at all in the use of the mark by its original owner, either before or after the assignment of the mark to the appellant IBCFP, or before or after s. 44 proceedings were initiated.
[57]
Admittedly, for our purposes, continued and uninterrupted use of the mark by the College does not enure to the benefit of the registered owner. It is a fact, however, that it was so used by the original owner who cannot be said to be dealing at arm's length with its own creature, IBCFP, and which was being called upon to exercise a role which the College had not contemplated earlier or which provided a level of academic correctness which the College had not enjoyed before. Such use cannot be said to mislead the public or attack the integrity of the trademark or otherwise diffuse its exclusiveness. I note in this respect that in the information material distributed by the College to its applicants in Canada, the appellant IBCFP is clearly shown as being the owner of the trademark.
[58]
Another approach to indicate continued respect for the intention of Parliament in providing for a s. 44 proceeding is not to catch an owner in an unexpected bind where the formalities of the law of trademarks submerge completely its obvious purpose and substance. If I have noted earlier that this court has adopted a more practical or functional approach to s. 44, then what, one may ask, would be the practical consequences of an expungement at this stage. Would not the College claim priority in use of the mark? Should the respondent adopt it in some form or another, would it not constitute a case of passing-off? The court must recognize that s. 44 proceedings are not meant to confer rights on any initiator of s. 44 proceedings or to litigate an issue between two protagonists claiming the same rights in the same property.
[59]
Nor is it a case where an earlier use of a mark is claimed by a party whose use in Canada is an illegal use to begin with, as in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , or where a distributor of wares registers a mark to the prejudice of its rightful owner, as in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  appropriate an owner's trademark when it knew full well it belonged to the manufacturer, as in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  before me is one where an original trademark owner assigns the mark to a new institution, yet continues to use it as before without the benefit of an appointment as a registered user. The failure to so appoint, in the light of the special circumstances I have outlined, provides in my respectful view the kind of excuse contemplated in the statute.
[61]
I should add another comment to the foregoing findings, and to which, hopefully, the parties will not find umbrage. In the curriculum of the College for the years 1986 and 1987, as well as in the general information booklet of IBCFP for the year 1991, it is evident that the courses of instruction respecting Fundamentals of Financial Planning, Insurance Planning, Investment Planning, Income Tax Planning, Retirement Planning, Employment Benefits and Estate Planning are mostly geared to the U.S. environment. The textbooks and the reference materials are in the context of U.S. legislative, regulatory and institutional requirements. It could be suggested that some of the courses are not altogether or completely relevant to the Canadian experience. In the circumstances, one might conjure images where protagonists over a trademark affair, who are both involved in the field of financial planning, might think of achieving a common purpose with common goals. I will say no more.
Conclusion
[62]
For the reasons stated and based on new evidence not made available to the Registrar, this appeal is allowed with costs.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/blk
[End of document]