[1]
Nadon, J.
: On January 29, 1999, I issued two orders. One of these orders dismissed the respondent's motion for a stay of these proceedings. These are my reasons for that order.
[2]
The respondent brought a motion for a stay of these proceedings on the following grounds: nondisclosure of evidence; fairness of the proceedings; and the fact that the
Federal Court Rules
had changed mid-way through these proceedings.
[3]
Under the ground of nondisclosure of evidence, counsel argued that the destruction and/or loss of documents on the part of the government prejudiced his client who was unable to present a full answer and defence, contrary to s. 7 of the
Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms
(the "
Charter
"). This argument arises from the fact that the respondent's immigration file, including his application for permanent residence in Canada wherein, according to the Minister he made false representations, had been destroyed some years prior to the institution of these proceedings. There is no direct evidence surrounding the destruction of this particular file, however, the evidence shows that destruction was routine for inactive government files and that, at the time of the destruction, there was no indication that any legal proceedings would ever be instituted with respect to Mr. Katriuk's immigration or citizenship status. It is the respondent's position that such destruction, without regard to what was being destroyed, i.e. without examining the nature of the documents, amounts to negligence on the part of the government. Counsel added that by 1958, when Mr. Katriuk was given his Canadian citizenship and had disclosed to immigration officials that he had entered Canada under a false name, the government was on notice that his immigration application for immigration was an important document and it should therefore have been preserved.
[4]
In support of his motion for a stay, counsel relied on the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 81. The issue in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was the effect of the intentional destruction of notes taken during an interview between a counsellor of the Sexual Assault Crisis Centre (the "Centre") and the complainant. The interview occurred prior to the complainant contacting the police. The destruction of the notes occurred prior to any application being brought before the court for their production and was done pursuant to the Centre's general policy of destroying the contents of files when the police were involved. The Centre admitted that its policy was put in place specifically to avoid having to produce such notes to the courts. The shredding of the notes was done without the consent or prior knowledge of the complainant who had agreed to the release of the notes. Sopinka, J., writing for the majority of five judges, states at page 100:
"... entitlement of an accused person to production whether from the Crown or third parties is a constitutional right.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Breach of this right entitles the accused person to a remedy under s. 24(1) of the
Charter
. Remedies range from one or several adjournments to a stay of proceedings. To require the accused to show that the conduct of his or her defence was prejudiced would foredoom any application for even the most modest remedy where the material has not been produced. It would require the accused to show how the defence would be affected by the absence of material which the accused has not seen."
[5]
In my view, neither the Supreme Court's decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , nor s. 7 of the
Charter
, are applicable in the present matter.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Linden, J.A., speaking for the Federal Court of Appeal, explained that s. 7 of the
Charter
did not apply to proceedings under s. 18 of the
Citizenship Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29. At page 175, he says:
"I am of the view that s. 7 does not render s. 18(3) of no force and effect. First,
at the time of the decision of the court, at least
, s. 7 was not engaged in that there was not yet any deprivation of Mr. Luitjen's (sic) 'life, liberty and security of the person'. All that was decided by the trial judge was the fact that Mr. Luitjens obtained his Canadian citizenship by false representation. This finding may well form the basis of decisions by others, which
may
interfere with those rights
at some future time
, but this decision does not do so. Therefore, it is merely one stage of a proceeding which may or may not result in a final revocation of citizenship and deportation or extradition."
[6]
In
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the respondent applied for directions in respect of the reference under s. 18 of the
Citizenship Act
. The respondent argued that, since the revocation proceedings instituted by the Minister were a guise under which to prosecute him for alleged war crimes, he should be afforded the procedural, evidentiary and charter protections normally reserved for the criminal process. Noël, J., in reaching his conclusion, described the nature of revocation proceedings as nonpunitive at pages 273-274 of his decision:
"The taking back by the state of a privilege on the ground that it was originally acquired by fraud based on a remedy provided by statute for that sole purpose is not punishment. The remedy involved is no more punitive than would be, for instance, the one pursued by an insurance company which sues an insured to obtain the cancellation of a policy on the ground that it was originally obtained by fraud, misrepresentation, or as a result of the willful omission of a material fact. In both cases, the remedy is limited to taking back that to which there was never any entitlement."
[7]
Mr. Justice Noël agreed with the view taken by Madam Justice McGillis in
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), that revocation proceedings are civil in nature. At page 193, McGillis, J., states:
"I am satisfied that the basic interpretive principles enunciated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  proceedings under s. 18 of the
Citizenship Act
must be analysed in the context of principles and policies underlying immigration and citizenship law, and not in the criminal law context. Indeed, as indicated earlier, a judge conducting a reference under s. 18 of the
Citizenship Act
makes only a factual finding concerning the circumstances under which a person obtained his Canadian citizenship. To paraphrase my words in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  agree with Collier, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  proceeding in which the civil standard of proof applies."
[8]
As the respondent's "life, liberty and security" are not at stake in these proceedings, s. 7 of the
Charter
cannot be invoked. These proceedings are civil in nature and consequently, the rules of evidence applicable to civil matters are the relevant rules.
[9]
In any event, even if I am wrong, I am still of the view that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is of no help to the respondent. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the court's decision stems from the Centre's decision to obstruct the course of justice by deliberately destroying the contents of its files.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 81; 146 W.A.C. 81, Mr. Justice Sopinka who delivered the reasons of the majority in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> makes this crystal clear at pages 693 and 694  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"The appellant sought to draw a parallel between this case and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> which was released immediately before the hearing of this appeal. The two cases, however, are clearly distinguishable. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the documents which were destroyed were relevant and subject to disclosure under the test in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. The conduct of the Sexual Assault Crisis Centre destroyed the accused's right under the
Charter
to have those documents produced. That amounted to a serious breach of the accused's constitutional rights and a stay was, in the particular circumstances, the only appropriate remedy. Where, however, the evidence has been inadvertently lost, the same concerns about the deliberate frustration of the court's jurisdiction over the admission of evidence do not arise. As the following passage from the majority judgment (at para. 56) attests, we expressly distinguished the case from the lost evidence cases generally:
'The justice system functions best and instils public confidence in its decisions when its processes are able to make available all relevant evidence which is not excluded by some overriding public policy. Confidence in the system would be undermined if the administration of justice condoned conduct designed to defeat the processes of the court. The agency made a decision to obstruct the course of justice by systematically destroying evidence which the practices of the court might require to be produced. This decision is not one for the agency to make. Under our system, which is governed by the rule of law, decisions as to which evidence is to be produced or admitted is for the courts.
It is this feature of the appeal in particular that distinguishes this case from lost evidence cases generally.
'" (Emphasis added)
[10]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  evidence and "lost evidence cases". In the present matter, the documents sought, through no deliberate action on the part of the Crown, are simply not available for production. Although not a "lost evidence case" per se, since the respondent's immigration documents were destroyed and not misplaced, the present matter would seem more correctly characterized as the inadvertent and not deliberate destruction of evidence and, thus, it is more appropriate to apply the analysis espoused in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  complainant, a 13 year old runaway, in the vehicle of a man who was subsequently charged with sexual assault. Prior to the commencement of the criminal investigation, the complainant had a 45 minute taped conversation with the police in preparation for a secure treatment application. Because the conversation was being taped, the constable only took written notes of the complainant's date of birth, address and phone numbers. However, the constable testified at Family Court, in making his application for a secure treatment order, that the taped interview related to the complainant's life on the run and her forced entry into prostitution. At the time of the preliminary inquiry, the constable had forgotten about the initial taped conversation with the complainant and then, between the date of the interview and the trial, misplaced the tape. However, close to a week after the taped interview, the constable asked the complainant and two girls he discovered to have been part of the same prostitution network to fill out police witness statement forms asking them to describe their life on the street and he followed the forms up with a pretyped list of questions. The trial judge stayed the proceedings based on a finding that the Crown failed to disclose the initial tape. The Court of Appeal allowed an appeal and ordered a new trial and the Supreme Court of Canada dismissed the appeal.
[12]
The five-judge majority of the Supreme Court of Canada found that the duty of disclosure was a distinct right that fell within the principle of fundamental justice encompassed in s. 7 of the
Charter
and its breach resulted in a constitutional violation. As a result, there was no burden on the party seeking a stay to demonstrate that the undisclosed material caused prejudice to the accused. In other words, the breach of the duty of disclosure alone resulted in a contravention of the accused's right to present full answer and defence.
[13]
Sopinka, J., speaking for the majority, described the test for lost evidence cases at pp. 684-685  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"I find that when the prosecution has lost evidence that should have been disclosed, the Crown has a duty to explain what happened to it. So long as the explanation is satisfactory, it discharges the Crown's constitutional obligation to disclose. There will, however, be a breach of the
Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms
if the explanation does not satisfy the trial judge. Moreover, I would not rule out a remedy in the extraordinary case in which a satisfactory explanation is given for the loss of evidence and no abuse of process is found, but the evidence is so important that its loss renders a fair trial problematic."
[14]
Sopinka, J., elaborated on the factors used to determine whether the Crown had fulfilled its duty to explain what happened to the evidence at p. 691  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"In order to determine whether the explanation of the Crown is satisfactory, the court should analyse the circumstances surrounding the loss of the evidence. The main consideration is whether the Crown or the police (as the case may be) took reasonable steps in the circumstances to preserve the evidence for disclosure. One circumstance that must be considered is the relevance that the evidence was perceived to have at the time. The police cannot be expected to preserve everything that comes into their hands on the off-chance that it will be relevant in the future. In addition, even the loss of relevant evidence will not result in a breach of the duty to disclose if the conduct of the police is reasonable. But as the relevance of the evidence increases, so does the degree of care for its preservation that is expected of the police."
[15]
The evidence adduced by the Minister herein showed that destruction was routine for inactive government files and that, at the time of the destruction, there was no indication that any legal proceedings would ever be instituted with respect to the respondent's immigration or citizenship status. On the issue of the evidence's relevance, the missing documents would have been equally valuable and determinative to both parties. The respondent's visa application was not available to either party therefore both parties suffered from its absence. If the document contained no mis-information other than the false name, this would help the respondent. On the other hand, if, as the Crown contended, the document contained false statements with respect to Mr. Katriuk's activities during the war years, it would help the Crown's case. In any event, the content of the application is the very issue with which we are here concerned and, unlike the trial judge in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , I am unable to conclude that it is likely that the documents would have been of any greater benefit to the respondent than to the Crown.
[16]
Since the respondent was given landed immigrant status in 1951 and granted citizenship in 1958, I fail to see how any government official could be negligent in failing to accord the respondent's immigration application form any further importance. At that time, there were no allegations of false representations against the respondent, nor had the respondent's name yet been mentioned in connection with allegations such as those contained in the Deschênes Commission documents. As such, there was no reason to see the evidence as being relevant at the time of its destruction. In any event, I am not satisfied that routine destruction of inactive government files constitutes negligence on the part of the government.
[17]
Consequently, the respondent's arguments based on s. 7 of the
Charter
and on the Supreme Court's decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> cannot succeed.
[18]
Also under the category of nondisclosure, counsel for the respondent argued that the government's use of a certificate provided for in s. 39 of the
Canada Evidence Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-5 was inappropriate in the circumstances. Section 39 of the
Canada Evidence Act
reads:
"39(1) Where a minister of the Crown or the Clerk of the Privy Council objects to the disclosure of information before a court, person or body with jurisdiction to compel the production of information by certifying in writing that the information constitutes a confidence of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, disclosure of the information shall be refused without examination or hearing of the information by the court, person or body.
"(2) For the purpose of subs. (1), 'a confidence of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada' includes, without restricting the generality thereof, information contained in
(a) a memorandum the purpose of which is to present proposals or recommendations to Council;
(b) a discussion paper the purpose of which is to present background explanations, analyses of problems or policy options to Council for consideration by Council in making decisions;
(c) an agendum of Council or a record recording deliberations or decisions of Council;
(d) a record used for or reflecting communications or discussions between ministers of the Crown on matters relating to the making of government decisions or the formulation of government policy;
(e) a record the purpose of which is to brief Ministers of the Crown in relation to matters that are brought before, or are proposed to be brought before, Council or that are the subject of communications or discussions referred to in paragraph (d); and
(f) draft legislation.
"(3) For the purposes of subs. (2), 'Council' means the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, committees of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, Cabinet and committees of Cabinet.
"(4) Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of
(a) a confidence of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada that has been in existence for more than twenty years; or
(b) a discussion paper described in paragraph (2)(b)
(i) if the decisions to which the discussion paper relates have been made public, or
(ii) where the decisions have not been made public, if four years have passed since the decisions were made."
[19]
Counsel for the respondent did not attack the constitutionality of this provision. In fact, counsel conceded that in many, if not most, situations, s. 39 could be used appropriately by the Crown. However, counsel argues that, in this case, its use was inappropriate.
[20]
There are no inherent limitations within s. 39 which make its use inappropriate in these circumstances. No constitutional challenge was brought against the provision. Had a constitutional challenge been brought, and had it been shown that Mr. Katriuk's constitutional rights had been violated, this may have been sufficient to grant a constitutional remedy. Counsel chose not to take this course of action and this decision means that I can only apply the provision as it reads. Section 39 accords the Crown the power to refuse to disclose certain documents in situations where to do so would breach a confidence of the Queen's Privy Council of Canada. Once a s. 39 certificate is issued, it is not open for the court to review the documents to ensure that the government has made a reasonable decision. The only mode of attacking such a certificate is to attack its wording as being too vague, as was done in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). No such attack was brought in this case and, in the end, there was no challenge either to the provision itself or to the certificate. As nothing within the statute prohibits the use of such a certificate with respect to Mr. Katriuk's situation and the portions of the Deschênes Commission Report for which counsel sought disclosure and which were excluded from disclosure by reason of the certificate, the proper use of such a certificate does not support the respondent's motion to stay these proceedings.
[21]
Finally, under the heading of nondisclosure, the respondent cited delay as something which exacerbated his nondisclosure problems. In 1957, when Mr. Katriuk notified immigration officials that he had obtained his immigrant status on the basis of a false name, the authorities were put on notice that there was something wrong with his immigration application and they should have investigated at that stage. All of the testimony from RCMP witnesses called by the Crown was to the effect that in 1951, collaborators were still a prohibited group of persons. The Deschênes Commission Report was issued in 1986. The Statement of Fact was not filed with this court until October 1996.
[22]
Counsel for the respondent focused primarily on the prejudice suffered by Mr. Katriuk. In this vein, counsel cited to the court a passage from the judgment of Vancise, J.A., in
Kodellas and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), at 179-180 [D.L.R.]:
"In my opinion, to determine whether there has been unreasonable delay in the context of s. 7, or put another way, whether there has been an infringement of the right to be tried within a reasonable period of time, it is necessary to consider the following:
. . . . .
'(4) Prejudice to the accused or wrongdoer. Here one must not only consider the impairment of the ability to make full answer and defence, but the effect of the delay on the wrongdoer, including the anxiety caused by the uncertainty and the disruption of his family and social relationships.'"
[23]
There is a difference between the point in time when the alleged wrong came to the attention of the authorities, about 1986, the point in time when the authorities choose to begin proceedings against the wrongdoer, 1996, and the point in time of the unfolding of the proceedings, 1997-1998. As the Minister has demonstrated that Mr. Katriuk obtained his citizenship by concealing material circumstances, any suffering by Mr. Katriuk will be the result of his own making. The only period of delay with which I am concerned is the period between the filing of the statement of claim in October 1996 and the unfolding of these proceedings in 1997 and 1998. I cannot conclude that the respondent has suffered due to an undue delay in this matter.
[24]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 241; 88 C.C.C.(3d) 417; 112 D.L.R.(4th) 513; 28 C.R.(4th) 265; 20 C.R.R.(2d) 1, the accused was charged with committing war crimes or crimes against humanity under the
Criminal Code
with respect to acts he allegedly committed in Hungary during World War II at a concentration camp. The accused was acquitted at trial and the Crown appealed to the Ontario Court of Appeal and then to the Supreme Court of Canada. The accused cross-appealed and one of the grounds of the cross-appeal was that the precharge delay violated his rights.
[25]
Lamer, C.J., stated that the appeal having been dismissed, the cross-appeal was moot. La Forest, J., writing for himself, L'Heureux-Dubé and McLachlin, JJ., in dissent, having found the appeal to have merit, wrote the following with respect to the delay issue at 786  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"The respondent also attempts to argue that the 45-odd years that have elapsed between the alleged commission of the offences and the charging of Mr. Finta constitutes a violation of his
Charter
guarantees. This contention has no merit. This court has already held that precharge delay, at most, may in certain circumstances have an influence on the assessment of whether post-charge delay is unreasonable but of itself is not counted in determining the delay; see
R
. v. Morin
, [1992] 1 S.C.R. 771, at p. 789. More commonly, precharge delay is not given any weight in this assessment; see
R
. v. Kalanj
, [1989] 1 S.C.R.1594. The
Charter
does not insulate accused persons from prosecution solely on the basis of the time that has elapsed between the commission of the offence and the laying of the charge; see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 1100."
[26]
Cory, J., with whom Gonthier and Major, JJ., agreed on this point, stated at 874-875  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"The respondent argues that this court should extend the principles set out in
R
. v.
Askov
, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 1199, to the situation of precharge delay. He argues that since 45 years have elapsed between the date of the actions giving rise to the charges and the date of trial, there is bound to be prejudice ...
"In the present case, I am unable to see any merit in the respondent's arguments that he suffered prejudice as a result of the precharge delay. Indeed, it is far more likely that the delay was more prejudicial to the Crown's case than it was (to) that of the defence. Defence counsel was entitled to argue that the witnesses' memories had become blurred with the passage of 45 years. Further, the documentary and physical evidence that the respondent now complains is not available was probably destroyed during World War II. Thus it is difficult to accept the respondent's assertion that any documentary or physical evidence that would have been available within a few years after the war has since been lost. Additionally, any prejudice occasioned by the death of witnesses that could have helped the defence was substantially reduced by the admission of the Dallos statements.
"With regard to the post-charge delay, less than a year passed from the time when the legislation was proclaimed in force to when the indictment was preferred. In light of the amount of investigatory work that had to be done before any charges could be laid, this seems to be a minimal and very reasonable period of delay."
[27]
The second ground raised by counsel for the respondent upon which to stay these proceedings is the unfairness of the procedure chosen by the Crown. The thrust of counsel's argument is that the Crown, because it was alleging that the fraud committed by Mr. Katriuk was in not disclosing that he had committed war crimes or crimes against humanity when he applied to enter Canada, should have pursued Mr. Katriuk directly on the basis that he had committed such crimes using the
Criminal Code
provisions. In a criminal proceeding, the Crown's burden of proving its allegations is raised from proving its case on a balance of probabilities to establishing it beyond a reasonable doubt. In a criminal proceeding, the respondent would have been able to invoke all of the safeguards found in the criminal law process, including the
Charter
.
[28]
I cannot fault the government for choosing to proceed in the manner in which it has. The fact that a criminal procedure was available to the Crown is irrelevant. By bringing its case against the respondent in the manner in which it has, the Crown has in effect rendered the issue of whether the respondent committed war crimes irrelevant. The issue in these proceedings is whether the respondent obtained his citizenship by fraud or by concealing material circumstances. Even if the respondent did not commit any crimes during the war, proving that he either gave false information or concealed material circumstances regarding his activities during the war period is sufficient to establish the allegations in this case. Does this amount to a wrongdoing on the part of the Crown so that these proceedings against the respondent should be stayed? Certainly not. When multiple avenues of proceeding are open to the Crown, the Crown is at liberty to pursue whichever avenue it chooses. I know of no legal principle which dictates otherwise. Again, there was no constitutional attack brought against the provisions of the law which permit the Crown to proceed in the manner it has chosen.
[29]
Counsel for Mr. Katriuk also submitted that bringing this proceeding against Mr. Katriuk and not against others named in the Deschênes Commission Report was discriminatory and hence a violation of s. 15(1) of the
Charter
. There is no merit to this argument. There is no reasonable basis to grant a stay simply because revocation proceedings were not instituted against all those who were named in the Deschênes Commission report. Perhaps the Crown has insufficient evidence with respect to the others. However, it would be logically inconsistent to say that the Crown cannot institute revocation proceedings against those with respect to whom the Crown believes it has sufficient evidence simply because it does not have sufficient evidence to bring proceedings against everyone who has allegedly committed criminal acts.
[30]
The third ground upon which the respondent seeks a stay is that the
Federal Court Rules
(the "
Rules
") changed in the midst of these proceedings. However, after carefully reviewing the arguments put forth by counsel for both parties, I am unable to see any merit in the argument that the change of rules should lead me to stay these proceedings because the rules make a defendant out of Mr. Katriuk as opposed to a respondent.
[31]
The change in the rules, however, does lead to an interesting issue with respect to costs. Prior to the changes in the
Rules
, rule 920 did not allow the court to grant costs to either party. However, since revocation proceedings under s. 18 of the
Citizenship Act
now fall under Part 4 - actions (rules 169 and following), this means that costs may be awarded against either party. For this reason, as I indicated in my decision concerning the main issue, the parties shall be free to bring on a motion for costs at a date and time to be fixed by the Registrar.
[32]
For these reasons, the respondent's motion for a stay of these proceedings was denied.
Motion denied.
Editor: Sharon J. McLaughlin/kaw
[End of document]