[1]
Reed, J.
: Two motions are brought by the respondents. One seeks reattendance of the applicant's officer, Mr. Drahotsky, for the purpose of answering certain questions posed during cross-examination of him on his affidavit. The other seeks disclosure of a large number of documents, approximately 500, which are claimed to be covered by solicitor-client privilege.
[2]
The main action to which these motions relate is an application by the Attorney General of Canada for an order pursuant to s. 20(1) of the Foreign Investment Review Act, S.C. 1973-1974, c. 46, to render nugatory an acquisition by the Central Cartage Company (hereinafter called Central) and the Detroit International Bridge Company (hereinafter called DIBC-new) of the shares of The Canadian Transit Company (hereinafter called CTC). Section 20(1) of the Foreign Investment Review Act provides that where the Governor in Council has made an order refusing to allow an investment (e.g.: because it was made by noneligible persons and is not of significant benefit to Canada) a Superior Court can be asked to make an order enforcing that decision. Thus, the court's role under a s. 20(1) application is to make what I will call an "implementation" order: an order to give effect to a decision which has already been taken by the Governor in Council.
"20(1) Where a noneligible person or group of persons any member of which is a noneligible person has made an actual investment in circumstances in which
(a) a demand has been served by the Minister under subsection 8(3) in relation to the investment and has not been complied with within the time stipulated in the demand,
(b) the Governor in Council has, by order, refused to allow the investment, or
(c) although the Governor in Council has, by order, allowed the investment or is deemed to have allowed it, the terms and conditions on which the investment has been made vary materially from those disclosed in any notice in writing given under subsection 8(1), (2) or (3) and in any other information or evidence given under this Act in relation thereto,
"... a superior court, on application on behalf of the Minister may make such order as, in its opinion, is required in the circumstances,
to the end that the investment shall be rendered nugatory
not later than the expiry of
such period of time
as the court considers necessary to allow in order
to avoid
or reduce, to the greatest possible extent consistent with the attainment of that end,
any undue hardship to any person who was not involved in the investment
knowing it to be subject to be rendered nugatory under this Act." (underlining added)
[3]
It is necessary first of all to summarize the plethora of litigation which surrounds this case, as well as the facts which gave rise to it. In 1978 the Ambassador bridge, which links Canada with the United States across the Detroit River, was owned one-half by Detroit International Bridge Company (hereinafter called DIBC-old) and one-half by CTC. DIBC-old owned the half of the bridge located in the United States; CTC owned the half that was within Canada. DIBC-old also owned all the shares of CTC. Central owned 24.6% of the shares of DIBC-old. In 1979, an acquisition was proposed by which the shares of CTC would be sold to a company named Fallbridge. I do not propose to go into the details of the proposed transaction. These are fully set out in the decision of the Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.L.R. 57 (F.C.A.). Suffice it to say the Foreign Investment Review Agency considered that transaction to be reviewable.
[4]
The scheme of the Foreign Investment Review Act provides for initial review of a reviewable transaction by the Foreign Investment Review Agency. A reviewable transaction is an acquisition or a proposed acquisition of a Canadian business by a noneligible person. After initial review by the Agency recommendations are then made by the Minister to the Governor in Council as to whether the acquisition should be allowed or not allowed.
[5]
Central took the position that the proposed transaction was not reviewable. Fallbridge took the position that it was not a noneligible corporation since it was owned by Canadians. An interim injunction (what will be called a "status quo" order) was sought by the Minister pursuant to s. 19(1) of the Foreign Investment Review Act. Such order was given by Mr. Justice Gibson on June 19, 1979. That order required Fallbridge and Central not to complete the proposed transaction and not to take any action either directly or indirectly in relation to CTC which might prejudice the ability of a court to untangle the acquisition (speaking colloquially) should the Governor in Council ultimately decide that the proposed acquisition would not be approved.
[6]
At the time of the proposed transaction, as noted above, Central owned 24.6% of the shares of DIBC-old; Fallbridge owned 24.9% of the shares of DIBC-old. These last had recently been purchased by Fallbridge through the use of an interest free loan from Central, given for that purpose. Part of the proposed arrangement was that Central and Fallbridge now being in control of DIBC-old would vote to effect a merger of that corporation with Ambri Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Central. Consequent on the issuance of the injunction order of Mr. Justice Gibson, the Fallbridge participation as direct owner of CTC shares was abandoned. However, a merger of Ambri and DIBC-old was effected. Central and Fallbridge voted their respective shares of DIBC-old for this purpose and DIBC-new was thereby created as the successor to Ambri and DIBC-old. Thus, on July 31, 1979, DIBC-new became the owner of all CTC shares. The Foreign Investment Review Agency considered this transaction to be reviewable and gave notice accordingly.
[7]
On March 13, 1980, the Governor in Council disallowed the DIBC-new acquisition of CTC's shares. On November 9, 1982, the Governor in Council refused approval of the earlier aborted transaction in which Fallbridge would have been a direct owner of the CTC shares. On November 26, 1982, the application to which the present motions relate was launched: an application for an order to render the DIBC-new acquisition nugatory. An affidavit of Mr. Drahotsky was filed in support of this application. It makes extensive reference to the earlier proposed transaction in which Fallbridge would have been a direct owner of CTC shares and to the circumstances surrounding that proposal. It is the cross-examination on this affidavit which is in issue in the first motion before me.
QUESTIONS TO BE ANSWERED - CROSS-EXAMINATION
[8]
On October 12, 1983, the cross-examination of Mr. Drahotsky commenced. On April 9, 1985, the respondents brought one of the many interlocutory motions which have been instituted in this case: a motion to have the applicant's application for an "implementation" order struck out on the ground that the applicant should have been required to proceed by way of an ordinary action brought by statement of claim rather than by way of a motion. Mr. Justice Walsh dismissed this request but at the same time ordered that the cross-examination of Mr. Drahotsky be restricted so that it not include questions relating to the once proposed Fallbridge transaction. After that order was given counsel for the applicant instructed Mr. Drahotsky not to answer certain questions, in accordance with the decision of Mr. Justice Walsh. Counsel for the applicant also objected to many of the same questions on the ground that they were irrelevant. With respect to the questions to which answers were refused on the basis of Mr. Justice Walsh's order it was implicit that these would be answered if that order was overturned on appeal.
[9]
At the same time that the application for the "implementation" order was being pursued the earlier s. 19(1) "status quo" order of Mr. Justice Gibson was wending its way to the Federal Court of Appeal. While one might have thought that this would long have been moot since the issue was no longer one of direct ownership of shares by Fallbridge, this was not the case. Mr. Justice Gibson's "status quo" order had been extended from time to time and was broadly enough framed to cover the revised transaction to which Fallbridge was not a direct party. I note that counsel for Central and Fallbridge chose to pursue this appeal and chose to raise in that context many of the same collateral attacks on the validity of the Governor in Council review proceeding as are now raised, in these proceedings with respect to the Governor in Council order itself.
[10]
The subsuming of the DIBC-new acquisition under the umbrella of the proceedings originally commenced with respect to the transaction in which Fallbridge would have been a direct owner of the CTC shares was addressed by the Federal Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  counsel for the respondent, [Attorney General of Canada] that the transaction envisaged by the parties at the time Mr. Justice Gibson made his order was never completed, albeit, perhaps, because of the order. The documentation in the record, in particular the final proxy statement which described the transaction which eventually was completed after Fallbridge defaulted under the loan agreement, makes it abundantly clear that it was not the same transaction as that presented to Gibson, J. The reasons that caused it to be changed are not relevant, as I see it. The fact is that it was the new transaction which was before each of the Judges who continued Gibson, J.'s order after July 31, 1979. That fact does not invalidate, however, his order or the other orders continuing the injunction granted by that order. Nor does it mean that its effect was spent. His order was not confined to the precise transaction then before him. The breadth or reach of the order created by the words
'... enjoining ... Fallbridge ... and Central ... from taking or causing or permitting to be taken by them, or either of them ... directly or indirectly, any action in any way in respect to which this Court has jurisdiction in relation to the Canadian Transit Company, which, in the opinion of this Court, would prejudice or would likely prejudice the ability of this Court ...'
is such that it encompassed the transaction which ultimately divested Fallbridge of its interest in CTC into the hands of a noneligible person, DIBC-new. The effect of that transaction was that CCC [Central], a noneligible person, instead of owning a 24.6 percent interest in CTC (a Canadian business enterprise), by virtue of its sole ownership of DIBC-new (also a noneligible person) became the controlling shareholder of CTC. All of the conditions for the application of s. 19(1) have thus been met if the underlying Gibson order was not invalid as alleged by applicant's counsel.
"Moreover, since all of the Judges of the Trial Division had before them the actual transaction, it was obviously their opinion that it
'would prejudice or would likely prejudice the ability of this Court [the Trial Division] on any subsequent application under s. 20 of the Act'
"In the exercise of their discretion because of their holding that opinion they extended the Gibson order for a further period to prevent the kind of action envisaged and enjoined by it, i.e. the acquisition of control of a Canadian business enterprise, a CTC, by a noneligible person, DIBC-new."
[11]
The Court of Appeal had before it, in the Fallbridge appeal, not only the s. 19(1) "status quo" order of Mr. Justice Gibson given in June 1979, as it had been extended from time to time, but also an order of Mr. Justice Mahoney which had been given March 31, 1980, granting an indefinite extension of that order pursuant to s. 19(5) of the Foreign Investment Review Act. While s. 19(1) provides for the making of "status quo" orders to allow the Governor in Council time to review and make a decision with respect to a proposed transaction, s. 19(5) provides for the making of "status quo" orders after a Governor in Council decision refusing approval of a transaction has been made. These last may be of indefinite duration and are designed to last until a court finally gives effect to the Governor in Council disallowance by way of an "implementation" order. Thus the Court of Appeal had before it an appeal from the decision of Mr. Justice Gibson with respect to the s. 19(1) interim "status quo" order, which related to the proposed Fallbridge transaction, and an appeal from the decision of Mr. Justice Mahoney with respect to the s. 19(5) "status quo" order of indefinite duration which related to the DIBC-new transaction as well.
[12]
Among the issues which the Federal Court of Appeal was asked to address and did address were: whether or not the transaction was reviewable by the Foreign Investment Review Agency; whether the parties were part of a "group of persons" who were acting "in concert" to acquire control of a Canadian business enterprise; whether the parties were noneligible persons by virtue of the fact that one of the members of that group, Central, was a noneligible person; whether or not the merger transaction was outside the application of the Foreign Investment Review Act because the merger occurred outside the territorial boundaries of Canada; whether or not the incorporation statute of CTC precluded the operation of the Foreign Investment Review procedure. The Federal Court of Appeal decision which issued November 4, 1985, rejected the respondents' jurisdictional attacks and found the transaction to be reviewable and found Fallbridge and Central to be acting in concert as part of a group, one of which was a noneligible person. In the present case the respondents raise many of the same issues, as defences to the request for the implementation order, as were dealt with in the Fallbridge appeal, e.g. the transaction is not reviewable because the parties are not noneligible persons or part of a group containing a noneligible person; the merger transaction is extraterritorial and therefore outside the application of the Foreign Investment Review Act; the CTC incorporation statute precludes review by the Foreign Investment Review Agency.
[13]
On May 28, 1986, the decision of Mr. Justice Walsh, refusing to order that the proceedings in this case be struck out and the applicant be required to proceed by way of statement of claim, was upheld by the Federal Court of Appeal. However, the restrictions on the scope of the cross-examination of Mr. Drahotsky, which had been imposed by the order of Mr. Justice Walsh, were removed. It is my understanding that this last was done on the consent of both counsel. It was felt that the issue had not been adequately argued before Mr. Justice Walsh. It is also my understanding that the consent of counsel for the applicant was given on the express condition that he reserved his right to object at any future time to such evidence.
[14]
The argument before me, although nominally related to specific questions which Mr. Drahotsky had refused to answer, proceeded in very general terms. Counsel for the applicant argued that all issues relating to the Fallbridge transaction are now either irrelevant or res judicata because of the Federal Court of Appeal decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  case consists of different parties, different issues and different witnesses from the earlier one and therefore any findings with respect to the Fallbridge transaction are not res judicata for the purposes of this case. He also argues that the earlier proceedings were of an interim or interlocutory nature and therefore there can be no res judicata for the purposes of the present proceedings.
[15]
In my view the issues raised in the present proceedings which were dealt with by the Federal Court of Appeal are res judicata. Or perhaps it is more correct to say they are precluded from being relitigated as a matter of issue estoppel. While the parties named in the style of cause as between the two cases may be different, the estoppel rule applies to bind not only the actual parties to an action but also their privies and assignees. In the earlier proceeding DIBC-old was named; in the present DIBC-new is the party. But, the one is a successor corporation to the other. While CTC was not named in the earlier proceedings, the decision to be given obviously would have bound that entity. I do not accept that the parties in the present action are so different as to preclude the earlier decision being binding upon them. What is more, counsel for the respondents chose to argue before the Federal Court of Appeal the same issues which are raised in these proceedings, e.g. whether the transaction is a reviewable one and whether the parties are noneligible persons. I do not think these issues can now be relitigated. This is equally true with respect to the other arguments dealt with by the Federal Court of Appeal (e.g. the argument based on the clauses in the CTC incorporating statute; the extraterritoriality issue). Lastly, I do not agree that the earlier proceeding is analogous to the finding of a prima facie case when granting an interim injunction, which finding would not bind the parties on the merits at trial. A s. 19(1) remedy may be of a temporary nature. It is designed to give the Governor in Council enough time to make a decision before the assets of the parties become so hopelessly entangled that it is impossible to disengage them. But, the issues which were determined in the course of the earlier litigation (e.g.: reviewability of the transaction, eligibility of the parties) have no prima facie quality about them. The court determined those issues in a final way.
[16]
With this in mind I now turn to the particular questions which it is alleged Mr. Drahotsky refused to answer. I note first of all that the presentation of the respondents' case has been somewhat unfocussed in this regard. Many of the questions for which answers are sought were in fact given, either after the cross-examination was adjourned or during the cross-examination itself. Secondly, of all the collateral attacks on the Governor in Council decision, which the respondents raise in the present proceedings, the only one which is not res judicata by virtue of the earlier litigation is that which alleges that the Governor in Council based its decision on irrelevant considerations (i.e.: made a decision which was patently unreasonable). Insofar as questions might peripherally relate to this issue they should be allowed.
[17]
With respect to the specific questions for which answers are sought:
Cross-examination of October 12, 1983:
Pages 14-15: Questions relating to whether Mr. Drahotsky is the person who instructs the Attorney General of Canada with respect to the s. 20 proceeding.
No argument was made by counsel as to why this is a relevant question. I see no issue to which it is relevant.
Pages 47-52: Questions relating to the production and identification of a policy identified by the Department of Transport as relevant to this proposal.
This policy has been produced subsequently and cross-examined upon at length in the cross-examination.
Pages 63-65: Q. Is the Policy produced the Policy referred to in the immediately preceding question?
This question was answered.
Pages 94-96: Question relating to the production of file numbers.
This question was answered: the file numbers are already on the documents produced.
Cross-examination of October 20, 1983:
Pages 51-54: Questions relating to whether the reversion criterion in the Policy was a factor in the determination of significant benefit in the application of DIBC.
A certificate pursuant to s. 36.3(1) of the Canada Evidence Act was filed with respect to confidences of the Queens Privy Council and was provided to the respondents on May 14, 1985. Insofar as the view of FIRA officials was concerned the question was answered at page 52.
Pages 69-72: Questions relating to what recommendations the Agency would give to the Minister if DIBC came and said yes to all conditions in Ex. "G" ("Policy") except reversion.
These questions are both hypothetical and irrelevant.
Cross-examination of May 9, 1985:
Pages 9-10: General objections to questions relating to the Fallbridge Application.
No precise question was asked of the witness on these pages. They merely contain a general statement by counsel for the applicant of the position he will instruct the witness to take in the light of Mr. Justice Walsh's decision.
Pages 25-29: In so far as any objection can be found in these pages it relates to questions concerning the Fallbridge application.
The issue is res judicata the reviewability of the transaction and noneligible status of the parties having been determined by the Federal Court of Appeal.
Pages 73-75: Q. 217-220. Line of questions as to whether Fallbridge, taken on its own and not as a member of any group, would be eligible under this Act?
The issue is res judicata by virtue of the Federal Court of Appeal decision.
Page 79: Q. 238. To the best of your recollection, in how many situations were loan arrangements a factor in determining whether there was an "acting in concert" or not?
The question is irrelevant.
Pages 79-80: Q. 239. In 1979, how many acquisitions were funded by borrowed money? Q. 240. Were there any investments other than this one in which borrowed money was used for the acquisition? Q. 241. How many were acquisitions with borrowed money where one of the parties is an acquirer? Q. 242. Were there any investments in 1979 other than this in which borrowed money was used for acquisition?
These questions are irrelevant.
Pages 84-85: Q. 252. Was the fact that the loan by Central Cartage to Fallbridge was secured by a pledge of DIBC shares a factor in the determination of the noneligibility of Fallbridge?
The issue to which the question relates is res judicata by virtue of the Federal Court of Appeal decision.
Page 87: Q. 254. The fact that the money loaned by Central Cartage to Fallbridge was in turn borrowed by Central Cartage from a Canadian bank, does that go to the noneligibility of Fallbridge?
The issue to which the question relates is res judicata by virtue of the Federal Court of Appeal decision.
Page 88: Q. 255. Was the agreement by Fallbridge to vote its shares in DIBC in the way described in the question a factor in the consideration of whether Fallbridge was eligible or noneligible?
The issue to which the question relates is res judicata by virtue of the Federal Court of Appeal decision.
Page 89: Q. 257-259. Was the agreement by Fallbridge to vote its shares in DIBC a factor affecting reviewability in this case?
The issue to which the question relates is res judicata by virtue of the Federal Court of Appeal decision.
Page 90: Q. 260. Was the agreement by by Fallbridge to vote its shares a concern with FIRA at the time the background memo to the Minister, dated April 11, 1979 (Exhibits, Vol. IV, Tab 12)
The issue to which the question relates is res judicata by virtue of the Federal Court of Appeal decision.
Page 102: Q. 303. On the basis of paragraphs 2 and 3 of Exhibit C to the affidavit of Lubor Drahotsky (Exhibits Vol. I), was Fallbridge noneligible or eligible?
The issue to which the question relates is res judicata by virtue of the Federal Court of Appeal decision.
Pages 103-106, particularly p. 106: Q. 317-318. With reference to page 2 of the April 11, 1979 memorandum to the Minister (Exhibits, Vol. IV, Tab 12) what facts supported the statement that Fallbridge is "ostensibly Canadian controlled"?
The issue to which the question relates is res judicata by virtue of the Federal Court of Appeal decision. In addition the questions were subsequently the subject of extensive questioning on the resumption of the cross-examination on June 6, 1985 without objection being taken.
Cross-examination of June 10, 1985:
Pages 134-136: Q. 340. What facts underlay the request of FIRA for instructions from the Minister to apply for an injunction? Was it an objective of FIRA to prevent the acquisition by Fallbridge and Central Cartage Co. of the outstanding shares of DIBC held by the public?
Although the objection was made, questions were subsequently answered regarding this area (see Questions 327 to 386 together with Exhibits "T" and "V").
Pages 140-141: Q. 353. What were the objectives of the Foreign Investment Review Agency in seeking instructions from the Minister to apply for an injunction?
The question was answered:
A purpose of the injunction was to maintain the status quo pursuant to s. 19 of the Foreign Investment Review Act which included preventing the share transaction until Governor in Council could review the matter.
Pages 171-175: Questions dealing with the purpose of the Agency in instructing the Dept. of Justice (i.e. to prevent the vote by Fallbridge pursuant to the Merger Agreement).
The questions were answered (see above) and they are in any event irrelevant to the present proceedings.
Pages 180-182: Q. 475. (a) Would FIRA have taken further proceedings if Fallbridge purchased the CTC shares as originally contemplated? (b) Was FIRA surprised that the shares of CTC did not pass to Fallbridge?
Question (a) is hypothetical and both questions are irrelevant.
Page 210: Q. 550-552. Was it the position of the Agency in August 1979 (See Exhibit A-4, Exhibits, Vol. VI, Tab 2-8) that the acquisition of CTC shares by Fallbridge was still a reviewable matter under the Act and prohibited by the injunction?
The question is irrelevant to the present proceedings.
Pages 219-223: Questions relating to the Fallbridge transaction.
The questions on these pages are either irrelevant, res judicata or both, or require legal conclusions from the witness. And, many of them were in fact answered.
Pages 230-231: Q. 588. Was there any occasion on which FIRA asked Fallbridge whether they were interested in continuing their application? Q. 589. Was Fallbridge ever asked by FIRA whether they had abandoned the application? Q. 590. Did Fallbridge insist the application should be processed?
These questions are irrelevant.
Cross-examination of July 10, 1985:
Page 392: Q. 1059. In considering the Fallbridge notice, did the Agency examine the number of union employees who would be retired or laid off if there was approval of the Notice filed by Fallbridge?
This question is irrelevant except to the extent it can be shown to relate to the acquisition by DIBC-new, which is the acquisition in issue in these proceedings.
Page 492: Q. 1310. Was there any request to the provinces relating to the evaluation of the "Fallbridge/Central Cartage acquisition?
This question is irrelevant except to the extent it can be shown to relate to the acquisition by DIBC-new.
Page 493: Q. 1311. Prior to September 1979 did FIRA ever contact the Province of Ontario re: the Ambassador Bridge and the "Central Cartage/Fallbridge" acquisition?
This question is irrelevant except to the extent it can be shown to relate to the acquisition by DIBC-new.
Page 557: Q. 1468. Are you aware of opportunities the Canadian Government had to acquire the bridge?
This question is irrelevant.
Cross-examination of July 11, 1985:
Page 580: Q. 1508. Were there any meetings between representatives of Central Cartage Co. and Mr. Duff Friesen about the possibility of transferring control and ownership of the Canadian portion of the bridge to a corporation controlled by Canadian residents?
Counsel for the respondent made no argument contesting the applicant's position that the questions relate to "without prejudice" settlement negotiations and are therefore privileged. I accept the applicant's position. What is more I doubt the relevancy of the question.
Page 582: Q. 1509. Before the filing of the s. 20 application, were there any discussions between DIBC and the Department of Justice relating to a conveyance of the bridge to the Government of Canada and how much compensation would be paid?
Counsel for the respondent made no argument contesting the applicant's position that the questions relate to "without prejudice" settlement negotiations and are therefore privileged. I accept the applicant's position.
Pages 582-583: Q. 1510. Were you aware that no person or committee (within the Government) had authority to discuss with Central Cartage such conveyance and the price?
Q. 1511. Are you aware whether such body or group of persons (within the Government) has been appointed?
Q. 1512. Has anyone from FIRA ever been requested to be a member of such a body or group?
Counsel for the respondent made no argument contesting the applicant's position that the questions relate to "without prejudice" settlement negotiations and are therefore privileged. I accept the applicant's position.
Page 608: Q. 1572. Was it normal practice of the Agency to get the Royal Canadian Mounted Police involved in the investigation of applicants as was done in this case?
This question is irrelevant.
Page 616: Q. 1603. Did the Agency try to verify from Fallbridge what its intentions were vis-a-vis CTC, as of March 1980? (Concerns Exhibits, Vol. VI, Tab. 62, p. 5)
This question is irrelevant.
Page 617: Q. Re: Exhibits, Vol. VI, Tab 62, p. 5: Q. 1604. Did the Agency attempt to determine whether Fallbridge had any remaining rights to acquire CTC?
Q. 1605. Did the Agency attempt to clarify whether Fallbridge would be able to arrange the terms of its ownership and management of the bridge so as to make it non-reviewable under the Act?
This question is irrelevant.
Cross-examination of October 31, 1985:
In argument counsel for the respondent referred to certain questions at page 675 (lines 14-21) and pages 680-681 (Questions 1734-1736). These questions were not referred to in the affidavit of Mr. Lunau supporting the respondents' application to have Mr. Drahotsky reattend to answer questions. No argument was specifically addressed to those questions by counsel for the respondent. I do not in any event see their relevance. They need not be answered.
Pages 720-724: Questions relating to whether there was consideration given by the Interdepartmental Committee on International Bridges as to the application of the Sharp Policy to the Fallbridge transaction.
Irrelevant except to the extent that the answers can be shown to relate to the acquisition by DIBC-new.
Pages 728-729: The questions are similar to those mentioned above at pages 720-723.
Irrelevant except to the extent that the answers can be shown to relate to the acquisition by DIBC-new.
Pages 742-744: (Ex. A-58) a letter from Mr. Drahotsky to Mr. A.R. Conboy and subsequent correspondence.
The letter and subsequent correspondence does not relate merely to the reviewability of the transaction or the noneligible status of the parties. The documents should be produced and the question answered on the same basis as the disposition made with respect to the immediately two preceding areas of questioning.
[18]
In summary six questions are to be answered: Q. 1059; Q. 1310; Q. 1311; those on pages 720-724; those on pages 728-729; and those on pages 742-744. The questions are being asked in the course of cross-examination and therefore considerable latitude as to what should be answered will be allowed. It is clear from what is written above, however that I am not at the moment convinced of the relevance of these questions. My hesitancy with respect to their relevancy arises, however, from different considerations than those which were argued before me. Therefore, I hesitate to deny answers to the questions on that basis.
[19]
Counsel for the applicant objects to the relevance of the questions on the ground that they relate to the Fallbridge transaction and are therefore res judicata. As noted above, the proposed transaction under which Fallbridge would have had a direct ownership of CTC shares and that ultimately consumated which saw DIBC-new as the owner of those shares has been treated by the parties (and by the Court of Appeal) as essentially the same acquisition. Therefore I do not think one can object to answering questions with respect to the proposed Fallbridge transaction merely on the ground that they relate to that proposed transaction. The reasoning has to be more selective. As noted above, insofar as issues relating to that transaction have been dealt with by the Federal Court of Appeal they are res judicata but insofar as they might relate to other issues not dealt with by the Federal Court of Appeal they are not res judicata.
[20]
My concern about the relevancy of the questions stems from another source. It is necessary, first of all, to keep in mind the nature of the present proceedings. The applicant has applied for an "implementation" order, an order to put into effect a decision made by the Governor in Council. More specifically the Crown seeks from the court the establishment of a trust arrangement whereby the CTC shares can be held, pending disposition of them in accordance with the principles of the Foreign Investment Review Act. In response thereto the respondents have raised what I have called collateral attacks on the validity of the Governor in Council order itself: the kinds of issues that are normally raised by way of a prerogative writ. Some of these, as noted above, have now been determined by the Federal Court of Appeal. The one that remains is the argument that the Governor in Council decision, disallowing the DIBC-new acquisition of the CTC shares, was made by reference to irrelevant considerations. But, it is not immediately obvious to me what relevance most of the evidence being adduced in this case has to that issue. It is not immediately obvious, for example, what relevance the deliberations of the Interdepartmental Committee on International Bridges or deliberations by other parts of the public service have to that issue. Such deliberations will not be evidence as to what the Governor in Council considered to be relevant considerations. S. 20(1) does not allow the courts to review the merits of a Governor in Council decision taken to disallow an acquisition. This is not in issue. Most of the evidence which is being adduced in this case seems to be predicated on the contrary assumption.
[21]
As noted above, counsel did not argue this point before me and the whole proceedings thus far have taken a very wide ranging approach. Accordingly, I am not prepared to refuse to allow the asking of the six questions listed above on the ground that they are irrelevant. But, I have considerable doubts in this regard. Nevertheless, the benefit of the doubt will be given to the respondents; the six questions will be answered; the question of relevancy is for the judge who hears the application on its merits to decide.
SOLICITOR-CLIENT PRIVILEGE
[22]
With respect to the claim for disclosure of approximately 500 documents for which solicitor-client privilege is claimed, there is little dispute between the parties as to the applicable law. The applicant agrees that he has the onus of proving that the documents fall into the privileged category. Both counsel for the applicant and counsel for the respondents agree that the principles governing solicitor-client privilege were set out by President Jackett in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  quite different principles usually referred to as solicitor and client privilege, viz:
(a) all communications, verbal or written, of a confidential character, between a client and a legal adviser directly related to the seeking, formulating or giving of legal advice or legal assistance (including the legal adviser's working papers, directly related thereto) are privileged; and
(b) all papers and materials created or obtained specially for the lawyer's 'brief' for litigation, whether existing or contemplated, are privileged.
"In considering the ambit of these principles, it is well to bear in mind the reasons for them.
"In so far as the solicitor-client communications are concerned, the reason for the rule, as I understand it, is that, if a member of the public is to receive the real benefit of legal assistance that the law contemplates that he should, he and his legal adviser must be able to communicate quite freely without the inhibiting influence that would exist if what they said could be used in evidence against him so that bits and pieces of their communications could be taken out of context and used unfairly to his detriment unless their communications were at all times framed so as not only to convey their thoughts to each other but so as not to be capable of being misconstrued by others. The reason for the rule, and the rule itself, extends to the communications for the purpose of getting legal advice, to incidental materials that would tend to reveal such communications, and to the legal advice itself. It is immaterial whether they are verbal or in writing."
[23]
Counsel for the respondents argues that it is very important in this case to clearly distinguish who is the solicitor and who is the client. I think this is easy to determine. The solicitor is clearly the Attorney General of Canada. Section 5 of the Department of Justice Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. J-2, provides:
"5. The Attorney General of Canada shall
(a) be entrusted with the powers and charged with the duties that belong to the office of the Attorney General of England by law or usage, so far as those powers and duties are applicable to Canada, and also with the powers and duties that, by the laws of the several provinces, belonged to the office of attorney general of each province up to the time when the British North America Act, 1867, came into effect, so far as those laws under the provisions of the said Act are to be administered and carried into effect by the Government of Canada;
(b) advise the heads of the several departments of the Government upon all matters of law connected with such departments;
(c) be charged with the settlement and approval of all instruments issued under the Great Seal;
(d) have the regulation and conduct of all litigation for or against the Crown or any public department, in respect of any subject within the authority or jurisdiction of Canada; and
(e) be charged generally with such other duties as are at any time assigned by the Governor in Council to the Attorney General of Canada."
[24]
The Attorney General and those working for him as legal advisors are solicitors for the purposes of advising the executive branch of the government of Canada. Since the Minister of Justice is ex officio the Attorney General (see s. 3 of the Department of Justice Act) one usually finds these persons referred to as legal advisors who are members of the Department of Justice. Also included, of course, would be anyone hired on contract to provide legal advice or services or someone doing so voluntarily even though such person might not officially be a member of the Department of Justice. The client in its broadest sense is the executive branch of the government of Canada. At the apex is the Governor in Council including more particularly the Minister of Industry, Trade and Commerce. Entities such as the Foreign Investment Review Agency and the Interdepartmental Committee on International Bridges are branches of the client. One cannot parse the various branches or governmental entities so that legal advice given, for example, to the Department of Transport by someone whose usual position is providing legal advice to the Foreign Investment Review Agency is somehow less confidential because it is being given to the Department of Transport rather than to the Foreign Investment Review Agency itself. The Court of Appeal decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Canada Limited -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , sets out the applicable principles with respect to in-house counsel. Providing such counsel are acting as legal advisors and not as representatives of the corporation in some other capacity and the communication relates to legal matters the communication is privileged. Lastly, it is agreed that the dominant purpose of a document for which privilege is claimed must be considered. If only a portion of the document is privileged and that portion can be excised, allowing the rest to be produced.
[25]
With these principles in mind, I reviewed the approximately 500 documents for which solicitor-client privilege is claimed. This led to further communication to counsel for the applicant with respect to approximately fifty of those documents. As a result, counsel for the applicant agreed that eight of these either had been produced or would be produced:
81-04-15 Minutes of Inter-Departmental Committee on International Bridges
79-08-08 Laureys (Director, Rulings Division, Compliance Branch, F.I.R.A.) memo to Stocks (Deputy Director, Compliance Branch, F.I.R.A.), Gundy (Assessment Officer, Service and Construction Industries Division, Assessment Branch, F.I.R.A.), Ebbitt (Assessment Officer), Auger (Assessment Officer, Service and Construction Industries Division, Assessment Branch, F.I.R.A.) and McIntosh (Senior Rulings Officer, Rulings Division, Compliance Branch, F.I.R.A.)
79-09-19 Auger (Assessment Officer, Service and Construction Industries Division, Assessment Branch, F.I.R.A.) letter to Frebold (Chief, Inter-Departmental Committees-Highways and Bridges, Canadian Surface Transportation Administration, Department of Transport)
79-09-27 Tennier (Deputy Commissioner, F.I.R.A.) note to Drahotsky (Director, Service and Construction Industries Division, Assessment Branch, F.I.R.A.) and Drahotsky (Director, Service and Construction Industries Division, Assessment Branch, F.I.R.A.) note to Auger (Assessment Officer, Service and Construction Industries Division, Assessment Branch, F.I.R.A.)
80-01-29 Auger (Assessment Officer, Service and Construction Industries Division, Assessment Branch, F.I.R.A.) memo to Stocks (Deputy Director, Compliance Branch, F.I.R.A.)
80-05-29 Gordon (Department of Justice Counsel) letter to Stocks (Deputy Director, Compliance Branch, F.I. R.A.), copy to Tetro (Department of Justice Solicitor, S.L.A., F.I.R.A.)
82-11-23 Memo, Barton (Department of Justice Solicitor, S.L.A., F.I.R.A.) to Richardson (Commissioner, F.I.R.A.) providing his legal opinion on legal issues between the parties with copy to Drahotsky (Director General, Compliance Branch, F.I.R.A.) and Wood (Director, Compliance Branch, F.I.R.A.)
[26]
In addition it was agreed that certain documents could be released with some deletions. I differ from counsel, however, with respect to the extent of the deletions necessary. Merely because a statement is made by counsel does not mean that it falls within solicitor-client privilege. The content of what is being said must be considered. If the communication does not relate to legal advice, then it is not privileged. Accordingly, the following documents will be produced with the deletions indicated:
79-04-20 Minutes of Inter-Departmental Committee on International Bridges wherein Department of Justice solicitor, William Weekes provides his legal opinion on legal issues between the parties
[27]
The deletions to be made are: page 2, first full paragraph commencing with the words "Mr. Weekes"; page 2, last paragraph, i.e. the reported comments of Mr. Weekes; page 3, the second paragraph; page 4, the reported comments of Mr. Weekes.
79-09-07 Minutes of Inter-Departmental Committee on International Bridges wherein Department of Justice Solicitor, William Weekes provides his legal opinion on legal issues between the parties
[28]
The deletions to be made are: page 5, paragraph 5, the first sentence only; page 6, first full paragraph which reports the comments of Mr. Weekes; page 6, third full paragraph, the two sentences which report the comments of Mr. Weekes.
79-12-20 Minutes of Inter-Departmental Committee on International Bridges wherein Department of Justice Solicitor, William Weekes provides his legal opinion on legal issues between the parties
[29]
The deletions to be made are: page 2, paragraph 8; page 3, the second sentence; page 3, the paragraph which reports the comments of Mr. Murphy.
79-07-23 Tennier (Deputy Commissioner, F.I.R.A.) memo to Auger (Assistant Director, Service and Construction Industries Division, Assessment Branch, F.I.R.A.) and Gundy (Senior Assessment Officer, Service and Construction Industries Division, Assessment Branch, F.I.R.A.) communicating legal advice with respect to legal issues between the parties with copy to Wood (Director, Compliance Branch, F.I.R.A.) and Tetro (Department of Justice Solicitor, S.L.A., F.I.R.A.)
[30]
Apart from the third paragraph this document does not appear to fall into the classification of communications covered by solicitor-client privilege. Counsel for the applicant has indicated that he intends to file a certificate pursuant to s. 36.3(1) of the Canada Evidence Act with respect to this document.
79-07-30 Stocks (Deputy Director, Compliance Branch, F.I.R.A.) memo to file, copy to Tetro (Department of Justice Solicitor, S.L.A., F.I.R.A.) communicating legal advice with respect to matters of legal issues between the parties
[31]
Counsel for the applicant defends the refusal to produce this document on the ground that "it relates to the original Fallbridge proposal, which did not take place as determined by the Federal Court of Appeal ..." This is not a reason for nondisclosure on the basis of solicitor-client privilege. The document should be disclosed unless a s. 36.1 Evidence Act certificate is appropriate.
81-11-17 Letter, Frebold (Chief, Inter-Departmental Committees-Highways and Bridges, Canadian Surface Transportation Administration, Department of Transport) to Drahotsky (Director General, Compliance Branch, F.I.R.A.) communicating legal advice received by Inter-Departmental Committee on International Bridges by Department of Justice Counsel
[32]
The document does not communicate legal advice but the attachment is preponderantly of that nature. The document is of no consequence without the attachment. Therefore it need not be produced.
[33]
In all other respects the applicant's claim for privilege is upheld.
CONDUCT OF THESE PROCEEDINGS
[34]
Having indicated the disposition I will make of the matters argued before me I now propose to add some general comments on the proceedings as they have evolved in this case. This action was started in March 1980. As noted above, the remedy sought is the implementation of a Governor in Council decision disallowing an acquisition of the shares of CTC. In support of its application for an implementation order the applicant filed an affidavit by Mr. Drahotsky setting out factual background. Mr. Drahotsky has been cross-examined on this affidavit on: August 18, 1983; October 12, 1983; October 20, 1983; October 21, 1983; March 27, 1985; May 9, 1985; June 6, 1985; June 10, 1985; June 11, 1985; July 10, 1985; July 11, 1985; October 3, 1985. This cross-examination has led to the creation of volumes of transcript; it has led to the production of volumes of documents at the behest of the respondents. Most of these I am sure are completely irrelevant to the issues before the court.
[35]
There has been an unending stream of interlocutory applications:
March 1, 1983
(Cattanach, J.)
- Order granted for service ex juris;
July 12, 1983
(Cattanach, J.)
- Two motions, one for particulars of relief sought, one to set aside service, both dismissed;
August 11, 1983
(Dubé, J.)
- Order granted on consent setting dates for cross-examination on affidavit of Drahotsky;
September 6, 1983
(Rouleau, J.)
- Order granted setting aside service ex juris;
September 8, 1983
(Rouleau, J.)
- Order granted setting date for cross-examination on affidavit of Drahotsky;
October 26, 1983
(Strayer, J.)
- Order granted directing A.G. of Canada to file particulars of relief sought, and staying cross-examination of Drahotsky;
March 5, 1984
(Strayer, J.)
- Order granted directing A.G. of Canada to file particulars defining the investment, directing the respondents to file particulars of allegations, staying the cross-examination, limiting the time within which any further affidavits could be delivered and limiting the issues and evidence to be dealt with on the principal application;
July 24, 1984
(Strayer, J.)
- Order granted directing respondents to file proper particulars, staying cross-examination of Drahotsky, limiting time within which any affidavits for the main application could be filed and limiting the evidence and issues which could be dealt with on the principal application;
April 15, 1985
(Walsh, J.)
- Motion to dismiss applicant's application, or to direct applicant to file statement of claim and proceed by way of action; motion dismissed on terms set out in order, confining evidence to this application and excluding the "Fallbridge application", allowing a motion for examination for discovery of applicant to be brought by respondents later, should it prove necessary, and directing an amendment to the Bill of Particulars if such a motion is made;
April 23, 1985
(Dubé, J.)
- Pursuant to two motions brought together: one order granted directing respondents to produce all relevant documents by a certain date, and setting a date for cross-examination of P. Moran; second order granted directing applicant to file affidavit of documents, allowing respondents to move for production of any document in the affidavit and not produced, forbidding cross-examination on applicant's affidavit of documents, limiting time within which objection under Canada Evidence Act could be filed, and setting a date for cross-examination of Drahotsky;
February 10, 1986
(Jerome, A.C.J.)
- Order granted on consent that respondents produce a list of documents and comply with order of Dubé, J., by producing all relevant documents by set dates;
May 27, 1986
(Strayer, J.)
- Order granted adding the Canadian Transit Company as respondent;
As well there has been the proceedings already referred to which were dealt with by the Federal Court of Appeal.
[36]
On the present application before me answers to various questions were sought which had in fact been answered, supra. It was argued that I should allow cross-examination to effectively reopen the issues of whether or not the transaction was reviewable by the Foreign Investment Review Agency and whether the parties were eligible or noneligible persons under the Act. As noted above this argument was based on the position that the original proposed transaction, in which Fallbridge would have been a direct owner of CTC shares, was a different transaction from the DIBC-new acquisition. Yet, I note that during the cross-examination of Mr. Drahotsky, in seeking to establish his position that certain documents were producible, counsel for the respondents took the exact opposite position. With respect to the claim for solicitor-client privilege counsel argued that memoranda dictated to file by a solicitor (relating to advice given to clients) were not protected by solicitor-client privilege because they were not communications to the client (i.e.; they were records for file purposes only). These kinds of frivolous arguments coming from experienced and knowledgeable counsel together with the phlethora of interlocutory motions and proceedings lead to only one conclusion: the litigation process is being dragged out by the respondents for their own particular purposes, for reasons extraneous to the litigation process. In my view the manner in which this case is proceeding is bordering on abuse of process.
[37]
One further comment must be made. As noted above, I sought further explanation from counsel for the applicant with respect to some of the documents for which solicitor-client privilege had been claimed. That explanation was forthcoming but counsel forwarded, as well, written representations with respect to whether or not the questions sought to be answered on cross-examination should be answered. The above reasons on this issue were written before these representations arrived and indeed I was somewhat unwilling to give them consideration without giving the respondents an opportunity to respond thereto. Accordingly, I have not read those representations; they were not taken into consideration for the purposes of this decision.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Catherine M. Bowlen/blk
[End of document]