[1]
Dubé, J.
: This unusual procedure taken by the Secretary of State under sections 9 and 17 of the Citizenship Act and rule 920 of the Federal Court Rules seeks to refer the matter of revocation of the citizenship of the respondent to this court. The three provisions referred to read as follows:
"9(1) Subject to section 17 but notwithstanding any other section of this Act, where the Governor in Council upon a report from the Minister, is satisfied that any person has obtained, retained, renounced or resumed citizenship under this Act by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances,
(a) the person ceases to be a citizen, or
(b) the renunciation of citizenship by the person shall be deemed to have had no effect,
as of such date as may be fixed by order of the Governor in Council with respect thereto.
"9(2) A person shall be deemed to have obtained citizenship by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances if
(a) he was lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances; and
(b) he subsequently obtained citizenship because he had been admitted to Canada for permanent residence.
"17(1) The Minister shall not make a report under section 9 unless he has given notice of his intention to do so to the person in respect of whom the report is to be made and
(a) that person does not, within thirty days after the day on which the notice is sent, request that the Minister refer the case to the court; or
(b) that person does so request and the court decides that the person has obtained, retained, renounced or resumed citizenship by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances.
"17(2) The notice referred to in subsection (1) shall state that the person in respect of whom the report is to be made may, within thirty days after the day on which the notice is sent to him, request that the Minister refer the case to the court, and such notice is sufficient if it is given by means of a registered letter addressed to the latest known address of such person.
"17(3) A decision of the court made under subsection (1) is final and conclusive and, notwithstanding any other Act of Parliament, no appeal lies therefrom.
"Rule 920. The following provisions shall apply to the hearing of a case (section 17 of the Act):
(a) upon receipt of a request to the Minister by a person (hereafter the 'person') in respect of whom the Minister intends to make a report pursuant to section 9 of the Act that the case be referred to the court, the Minister shall, if he decides to refer the case to the court, forward a copy of the request and of his reference to the court to the Registry,
(b) the Minister shall, within 14 days thereafter, file in the Registry and serve on the person,
(i) the application made by that person pursuant to subsection 13(1) of the Act,
(ii) the decision of the citizenship judge thereon,
(iii) a summary of the facts and evidence on which the Minister intends to rely at the hearing of the case, and
(iv) a list containing the names and addresses of any witnesses he proposes to call at the hearing of the case, and of any documents he proposes to tender in evidence;
(c) the provisions of rules 906, 907, 908, 909, 910, 915, 916, 917 and 919 shall, with all necessary modifications, apply to a case."
[2]
The applicant has duly filed the documents referred to in rule 920(b). At the opening of the hearing, the applicant filed an agreed statement of facts which greatly simplified the proceedings and led directly to oral arguments in the matter. The agreed statement of facts reads as follows:
"1. The Respondent, Deoranie Charran, was deported from Canada on April 12, 1975, pursuant to a deportation order.
"2. The Respondent re-entered Canada on October 23, 1975, using a passport obtained by falsely assuming the identity of her sister Noonadai.
"3. The Respondent applied for and obtained permanent resident status in Canada through her husband Karamchan Raibarran whom she married on November 8, 1975. In her application for that status the Respondent falsely recorded her maiden name and falsely stated that she had never been deported from Canada.
"4. The Respondent applied for citizenship on April 28, 1979, using the false name of Noonadai Raibarran.
"5. On her application for citizenship the Respondent falsely stated that she had never been under an order of deportation from Canada.
"6. The Respondent's application for citizenship was approved by a citizenship judge on June 20, 1979.
"7. The Respondent was granted Canadian citizenship after the oath or affirmation of citizenship was made, before a citizenship judge on August 15, 1979. The Respondent received Canadian citizenship certificate no. 2184935.
"8. On September 29, 1983, the Respondent pleaded guilty before and was convicted by a judge of the Provincial Court in the Province of Ontario, on a charge of making a false representation in her application for Canadian Citizenship, to wit: that she had never been under an order of deportation, contrary to section 28(1)(a) of the Citizenship Act.
"9. On or about September 6, 1983, the Respondent pleaded guilty and was so found, before a Court of General Sessions of the Peace in the Province of Ontario, upon the following charges:
(a) that she fraudulently personated one Noonadai with intent to gain advantage for herself, to wit: to gain permanent resident status in Canada, contrary to section 361(a) of the Criminal Code of Canada; and
(b) that she knowingly made false statements in connection with an application for admission into Canada for herself, to wit: by falsely recording her maiden name and by falsely representing that she had never been deported from Canada.
"10. The Respondent has, therefore, obtained Canadian citizenship on the basis of false representations made in her application for permanent residence and in her application for Canadian citizenship."
[3]
Under the circumstances, the respondent having pleaded guilty of fraudulently personating another person, and making false statements in order to be admitted into Canada, to gain permanent resident status in Canada and to obtain the Canadian citizenship, I must obviously find that she ceases to be a citizen under paragraph 9(1)(a) of the Act and I must decide accordingly under paragraph 17(1)(b) of the Act.
[4]
In his arguments, counsel for the respondent submits that the application of the Secretary of State should be denied because "he is estopped by his delay and dilatory conduct in this matter, which amounts to "acquiescence of the infringement". The argument is based on correspondence between counsel's office and the offices of the Secretary of State and the Minister of Employment and Immigration which he was allowed to file by consent. The correspondence dates back to October 4, 1984, with a letter from counsel's office complaining that as a result of her passport, birth certificate and other documents having been seized by the R.C.M.P., the respondent felt like a "nonperson" in Canada. There follow letters from the applicant that her case would "be reviewed as soon as possible".
[5]
The matter was reported in the Globe and Mail on October 25, 1984, and the respondent's solicitors complain by letter that these leaks to the press caused serious prejudice to the respondent and "it is therefore very distressing to read in a newspaper that proceedings may be instituted to revoke our client's citizenship". In a letter dated December 27, 1984, the Secretary of State assures the respondent's solicitors "that no personal information was released to the media by any official of my Department". The letter further states that "you can appreciate, I am sure, that a matter having such serious implications requires much thought and consultation before any decision can be made as to a possible course of action".
[6]
There is further correspondence from the solicitors stating that their client "has lived in fear and that her identity or status in Canada would be challenged due to her lack of documentation". Another letter from the Secretary of State dated March 22, 1985, states that "it is not possible to come to a hasty decision concerning this lady's case".
[7]
A letter dated January 14, 1985, from a Departmental Assistant of the Minister of Employment and Immigration stating that "their investigation has not indicated that any immigration officials have been involved in contacting the news media as you have suggested". Finally, a letter dated August 11, 1987, from the Registrar of Canadian Citizenship notifying the solicitors of the Minister's intention to make a report to the Governor in Council pursuant to sections 9 and 17 of the Act.
[8]
Counsel for the respondent argues that the officials concerned were aware of the situation of the plaintiff since 1981 but waited seven years to take action. He claims that the Secretary of State has a duty of fairness towards the respondent to act in a timely fashion and that it is manifestly unfair, after so much procrastination, to revoke her citizenship. He argues that the applicant has violated section 7 of the Charter and has acted contrary to fundamental justice. Counsel therefore seeks relief under section 24 of the Charter. The two Charter sections read as follows:
"7. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.
. . . . .
"24(1) Anyone whose rights or freedoms, as guaranteed by this Charter, have been infringed or denied may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain such remedy as the court considers appropriate and just in the circumstances."
[9]
In Harbhajan Singh et al. and the Minister of Employment and Immigration, [see footnote 1], the Supreme Court of Canada discussed the "security of the person". Wilson, J., said that it was "capable of a broad range of meaning". She said (at page 206):
"... Unfortunately no clear meaning of the word emerges from the case law, although the phrase has received some mention in cases such as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  security of the person means not only protection of one's physical integrity, but the provision of necessaries for its support". She did not find it necessary to consider whether such "an expansive approach to security of the person in section 7 of the Charter should be taken" but found that even the "narrow approach" must encompass "freedom from the threat of physical punishment or suffering as well as freedom from such punishment itself".
[11]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  security of the person" and found that the concept incorporated the security of the mind as well as the security of the body, which would include the inherent dignity of a person and his right not to be deprived of his self-respect and self-worth. The court held that section 7 protected a person "from serious hurt, whether of a corporeal or an incorporeal nature".
[12]
Even if I were to apply the "expansive approach", I could not come to the conclusion, in this matter, that the delay in the processing of the revocation of the citizenship of the respondent has caused her serious incorporeal hurt. It stands to reason that the longer the revocation was delayed the longer she could stay in Canada: she would undoubtedly be happier if the delay had lasted her lifetime. The deprivation of her identity documents undoubtedly caused her much distress, but she was guilty of misrepresentation and impersonation and she has only herself to blame if her Canadian passport was taken away from her. As to her birth certificate, I presume she could readily obtain a certified copy from her country of origin, as it is obviously not a Canadian document. Having entered the country under false pretences and having been caught by the authorities, she is in no position to blame them for her present anxiety.
[13]
Consequently, I must decide under section 17(1) of the Citizenship Act that the respondent has obtained citizenship by false representation, and fraud, and by knowingly concealing material circumstances.
[14]
The applicant's motion is granted.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
Footnotes
1. [1985] 1 S.C.R. 177; 58 N.R. 1; 17 D.L.R.(4th) 422; 14 C.R.R. 13.
2. 56 Sask.R. 173; 34 C.C.C.(3d) 193.
[End of document]