[1]
Noël, J.
[Translation]: The applicant is seeking a stay of the removal order. He is subject to deportation on July 22, 1993. The motion was heard on an urgent basis by telephone conference call on the afternoon of July 21, 1993.
[2]
The motion to stay is coupled with an application for judicial review of the decision of the Refugee Division refusing a request to reopen the hearing to permit the applicant to put forward new facts, following a negative decision on the merits. The Refugee Division held that it did not have jurisdiction to do this. The applicant contends that the Refugee Division had the power to reopen and that accordingly its decision is tainted by an error of law. This is the basis of the serious question that he put forward before me in support of the motion to stay.
[3]
I do not believe in this case that I may do otherwise than to follow the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case, the Court of Appeal held that the Refugee Division did not have jurisdiction to resume a hearing, after it had made its decision, so that the parties could put forward new facts.
[4]
According to the applicant, the amendments to the
Immigration Act
on February 1, 1993 mean that the decision of the Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is no longer applicable. More precisely, the applicant contends that by abandoning the concept of "final determination of refugee status" which appeared in s. 2(4) of the former
Act
, Parliament has changed the final nature of decisions made under the new
Act
. According to the applicant, this change means that an applicant may now seek a reopening of the hearing at any time in order to put forward new facts, so long as he or she is still on Canadian soil.
[5]
With respect, I do not agree. First, the Court of Appeal did not base its decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> in any way on s. 2(4) of the former
Act
. The essence of that decision appears at page 292, where Marceau, J. stated:
"The political refugees have now a right to be recognized as such, and the role of the Board is to adjudicate upon that right. I disagree with the view that the determination of the Board in that respect would be an ongoing process. The well-founded fear of persecution alleged by the refugee has to be ascertained, for it to be given effect according to law, at the moment his claim is adjudicated. It is true, of course, that facts may change and political events may occur which may lead to the conclusion that a fear which was not well-founded has become now reasonable. But it is not by reopening the hearing on the first claim that this can be verified, it is only by allowing a second claim and proceeding to consider it. Parliament has not provided for the possibility of successive claims; indeed, in the new
Act
, it has formally prohibited it (see s. 46.01(1)(c) [see footnote 1] [as enacted by R.S.C. 1985 (4th Supp.), c. 28, s. 15]) and it does not appear to me that such prohibition -- which is not concerned with a mere question of procedure as in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), but a question of substance -- can be seen as a violation of rights guaranteed by the Charter [
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, being Part I of the
Constitution Act, 1982
, Schedule B,
Canada Act 1982
, 1982, c. 11 (U.K.) [R.S.C. 1985, Appendix II, No. 44]]."
[6]
There is nothing in the amendments that took effect on February 1, 1993, that would contradict this reasoning. On the contrary, we see that Bill C-86 maintained the prohibition set out in s. 46.01, to which the Federal Court of Appeal referred in support of its reasons. In my view, Parliament could not have prohibited the making of a fresh claim to refugee status under s. 46.01 while at the same time permitting the Refugee Division to reopen its hearing at any time upon presentation of new facts.
[7]
In my view, the Court of Appeal
made a definitive ruling in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> on the question before me, and there is nothing in the amendments that came into force on February 1, 1993 that would permit me to do otherwise than to apply that decision.
[8]
The applicant has not established that there is a serious question, and I must therefore dismiss the application to stay.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/blk
Footnote
1. This paragraph reads as follows:
"46.01(1) A person who claims to be a Convention refugee is not eligible to have the claim determined by the Refugee Division if
(c) the claimant has, since last coming into Canada, been determined
(i) by the Refugee Division, the Federal Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court of Canada not to be a Convention refugee or to have abandoned the claim, or
(ii) by an adjudicator and a member of the Refugee Division as not being eligible to have the claim determined by that Division or as not having a credible basis for the claim; ..."