[1]
Joyal, J.
[Translation]: This is an originating notice of motion seeking to obtain, inter alia, a writ of certiorari and a writ of mandamus against the decision made by the Department of Fisheries and Oceans on September 16, 1991. That decision consisted of a refusal to make an exception to the imposition of a quota of 158.76 metric tonnes of shrimp allocated to the applicant, who is engaged in commercial fishing. The applicant is of the opinion that the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans does not have the discretion to attach such conditions to fishing licences. He is therefore seeking to have the decision quashed and an order made compelling the Minister to allocate a quota of 227 metric tonnes of shrimp to him.
The Facts
[2]
The applicant holds a shrimp fishing licence issued for a 59-foot fishing boat. He is also the owner of a corporation known as "Les Pêcheries Gedema Inc.".
[3]
On about March 15, 1991, the applicant was informed of the establishment of a program of individual quotas for shrimp fisherman in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. The purpose of this program was to impose individual quotas on shrimp fishermen varying between 158.76 and 227 metric tonnes. Any increase over the lowest quota, 158.76 tonnes, was based on each fisherman's personal historic catches for the years 1987 and 1989 inclusive.
[4]
Unfortunately, the applicant was unable to take part in fishing activities during the 1987 to 1989 seasons, since his licence had been withdrawn in 1984. Following a number of unsuccessful appeals by the applicant, the Department returned his licence on February 15, 1990. Because of the fact that he had been unable to fish for shrimp during the period from 1984 to 1989, the personal assessment of his historic catches was not favourable to him when it came time to impose a shrimp quota on him. He was therefore given the minimum possible shrimp quota: 158.76 tonnes.
[5]
On March 29, 1991, the applicant explained the unfair situation in which he found himself to the Department, and asked that the situation be remedied, taking into account his 1990 catch. In an informational letter dated April 24, 1991, the Department explained to him that the membership of the working group of the Individual Quota Program for Gulf of St. Lawrence shrimp consisted of 71 fishermen who represented the associations of fishermen involved in shrimp fishing. After discussion and consultation, a majority of the fishermen, 87%, had agreed to the proposed formula for allocating shrimp.
[6]
By letter sent on September 16, 1991, the Department informed the applicant that it could not make an exception to the decision to impose the minimum quota on him since there was an agreement between New Brunswick fishermen and Quebec fishermen.
[7]
On December 5, 1991, following this decision, the applicant applied to this court for the prerogative writs.
Legislation And Case Law
[8]
Under s. 7 of the
Fisheries Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-14, the Minister has absolute discretion to issue licenses for fishing. Section 7 is worded as follows:
"7(1) Subject to subs. (2), the Minister may, in his absolute discretion, wherever the exclusive right of fishing does not already exist by law, issue or authorize to be issued leases and licences for fisheries or fishing, wherever situated or carried on.
"(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, leases or licences for any term exceeding nine years shall be issued only under the authority of the Governor-in-Council."
[9]
The applicant contends that despite the fact that the Minister has the discretion to issue fishing licences, he cannot place conditions on them since this is a power conferred on the Governor-in-Council under s. 43 of the
Act
. That section reads as follows:
"43. The Governor-in-Council may make regulations for carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act and in particular, but without restricting the generality of the foregoing, may make regulations
(a) for the proper management and control of the sea-coast and inland fisheries;
(b) respecting the conservation and protection of fish;
(c) respecting the catching, loading, landing, handling, transporting, possession and disposal of fish;
(d) respecting the operation of fishing vessels;
(e) respecting the use of fishing gear and equipment;
(f) respecting the issue, suspension and cancellation of licences and leases;
(g) respecting the terms and conditions under which a licence and lease may be issued;
(h) respecting the obstruction and pollution of any waters frequented by fish;
(i) respecting the conversation and protection of spawning grounds;
(j) respecting the export of fish or any party thereof from Canada;
(k) respecting the taking or carrying of fish or any part thereof from one province to any other province;
(l) prescribing the powers and duties of persons engaged or employed in the administration and enforcement of this Act and providing for the carrying out of those powers and duties; and
(m) authorizing a person engaged or employed in the administration or enforcement of this Act to vary any close time or fishing quota that has been fixed by the regulations."
[10]
We should also refer to s. 33(1) of the
Atlantic Fishery Regulations
, SOR/91-76:
"33(1) For the proper administration and control of fisheries, the Minister may specify in a licence any one or more conditions that are not inconsistent with these Regulations respecting
(a) the species of fish and quantities thereof that are permitted to be taken;
(b) the waters in which fishing is permitted to be carried out;
(c) the period during which fishing is permitted to be carried out;
(d) the vessel that is permitted to be used;
(e) the person or persons permitted to operate the specified vessel;
(f) the type and quantity of fishing gear and equipment that is permitted to be used and the manner in which it is to be used;
(g) the specific location at which fishing gear is permitted to be set;
(h) information that the master of the vessel shall report to the Department from sea, including the method by which, the times at which and the person to whom the report is to be made;
(i) the location and times at which landing of fish from the vessel is permitted;
(j) the method permitted for landing of fish from the vessel and the method by which the weight of the fish is to be determined; and
(k) records that the master of the vessel shall keep of any fishing activity carried out under the licence or of the sale or transporting of fish caught under the licence, including the location at which the records are to be stored, the method by which, the times at which and the person to whom the records are to be produced, and the length of time that the records are to be retained."
[11]
Section 7 of the
Fisheries Act
gives the Minister a discretionary power to issue fishing licences. Section 33(1) of the
Regulations
, which relates to that power, permits the Minister to impose conditions on licences respecting the species and quantities of fish that may be caught. The applicant contends that the power to create conditions under which fishing licences may be issued under s. 43(g) of the
Act
belongs to the Governor-in-Council, and that by adopting s. 33(1) of the
Regulations
the Governor-in-Council has unlawfully delegated his power.
[12]
Despite the decisions on this point that were cited by the applicant, the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), later affirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada, on December 15, 1988, and reported at (1988), 89 N.R. 323; 31 O.A.C. 319; 56 D.L.R.(4th) 575 (S.C.C.), with respect to s. 43(g) of the
Fisheries Act
[formerly s. 34(g)] dealt specifically with the question of the delegation of power in paragraph 43(g). Mr. Justice Mackinnon of the Ontario Court of Appeal explained.
"Section 34(g) of the
Fisheries Act
allows for the Governor-in-Council to make regulations 'respecting the terms and conditions under which a lease or licence may be issued [...]' In dealing with this subsection the Divisional Court judge quoted the wording of the subsection as it stood prior to the amendment by R.S.C. 1970, c. 17 (1st Supp.) That wording was 'prescribing the terms and conditions under which a licence or lease is to be issued [...]' By the amendment it can be seen that the wording of the subsection was brought in line with s. 34(b) to (k). The amendment must have had some purpose and significance and, in my opinion, Parliament was ensuring that the Governor-in-Council was empowered to delegate to others the administration of its regulations. Accordingly, I differ from the view expressed by the Divisional Court judge that 'the clear intent' of Parliament was that the 'discretionary power' was entrusted to the Governor-in-Council and no one else. It is difficult to accept that Parliament intended that the Governor-in-Council administer in detail the myriad of situations existing across Canada from the suburban areas to the remote north. If the respondents are right, the Governor-in-Council, in administering the regulations in the instant case, would be expected to allocate the thousands of individual quotas within the over-all maximum quota it had set with relation to yellow pickerel as well as divide up the various water areas."
[13]
Mr. Justice Mackinnon added, at page 270:
"[...] the French language version of both 'respecting' and 'prescribing' was the single word 'concernant'. ... In using the same word 'concernant' throughout, it reinforces my view that it was always the intention of Parliament that the Governor-in-Council would have the power to subdelegate under paras. 34(a) to (k), [...]"
[14]
Mr. Justice Mackinnon also stated, at page 284:
"As I said earlier, it cannot have been the intention of Parliament that the Governor-in-Council would have the obligation to issue individual licences with individual quotas to thousands of commercial fishermen, with regard to the different areas of the large lakes being fished, having set out in part at least the maximum total quotas for the individual species and set out generally the waters from which they might be taken.
"Dickson, J., also quoted (p. 147 D.L.R., p. 312 N.R.) from 1 Hals., 4th Ed., p. 7, para. 4, under the title 'Administrative Law' as follows:
'The functions of government are classified as legislative; executive or administrative; judicial; and ministerial ... executive and administrative acts entail the formulation or application of general policy in relation to particular situations or cases, or the making or execution of individual discretionary decisions ...'
"The actions of the Minister in fixing the individual quotas for commercial fisherman for particular waters 'was the application of general policy in relation to particular situations or cases' in the province. That action was, accordingly, administrative and did not fall within the ban on interdelegation of legislative power."
[15]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at page 948, the Federal Court - Trial Division reiterated that when the issue is an administrative power, subdelegation does not cause a problem:
"... the law is clearly as counsel for the defendant submitted: a delegate legislator may sub-delegate to another body administrative power if necessary to do so in order to implement the scheme or the standards established."
[16]
In my opinion, ss. 7 and 43 of the
Act
, combined with s. 33 of the
Regulations
, give the Minister discretionary power not only to issue fishing licences, but also to place conditions on them with respect to the species and quantity of fish. I cannot conclude from reading
Re Peralta
that the Governor-in-Council has unlawfully delegated his power to the Minister. The delegation in question was administrative in nature.
[17]
The applicant contends that even if the Minister had the discretion to impose quotas on shrimp fishermen, he acted in an improper, unfair and arbitrary manner in respect of the applicant by failing to consider the applicant's situation reasonably and by refusing to use his discretion to increase the quota allocated to the applicant.
[18]
The applicant was indeed in a disadvantaged situation and did suffer as a result of the decision imposed on him. In the circumstances, however, I cannot conclude that there was a procedural defect on the Minister's part in deciding to impose the quota and refusing to modify the applicant's quota. The Minister did not make his decision arbitrarily or in a void. Rather, under s. 3 of the
Fisheries Development Act
, R.S.C. 1985 c. F-21, he wished to establish a program to make shrimp fishing more efficient by promoting conservation and preservation of the shrimp.
[19]
The program was established through the consultation among the various fishermen's associations, who were aware of the situation and had asked that such a program be implemented. The purpose of the membership application sent to fishermen on March 15, 1991 was to conduct a survey on the question of consent to the program. A majority of the fishermen had consented to the agreement, and when the agreement was adopted in April 1991, it applied to all fishermen who held shrimp fishing licences issued for boats under 100 feet for fishing in the Gulf of St. Lawrence region (see definition of "program" in the draft agreement placed on the record). This agreement process did not operate to limit the Minister's jurisdiction or to hinder his discretion, but permitted him to make a reasonable and informed decision based on the circumstances. His refusal to make an exception to the original decision to impose the minimum quota on the applicant is a decision that his discretionary power permitted him to make.
[20]
There is no doubt as to the respondent's good faith in the measures taken to establish a fair and equitable program and to ensure that all the fishermen affected would abide by it. The process had to follow a complex set of calculations in which each factor was related to the others. I conclude that in exercising his discretionary power the respondent decided that he could not entertain exceptions to the basic formula. Even if the manner in which the discretion was exercised displeased the applicant, it cannot be challenged by way of evocation.
[21]
Accordingly, the applicant's application must be dismissed. I make no order as to costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/dlr