[1]
Gleason, J.
: The plaintiff, Charles Robertson, operated a garage on the Mohawk Reserve at Kahnawake for over 30 years. The garage was located on two plots of land that Mr. Robertson possessed under the land management regime established under the
Indian Act
, RSC 1985, c I-5 [
Indian Act
].
[2]
Mr. Robertson eventually leased the lots and garage to the defendant, Kyle Beauvais, who ran a cigarette manufacturing operation there between 2007 and early 2011. In the spring of 2010, Mr. Robertson, who was then 70 years old, decided to sell the garage and had discussions with a number of potential buyers, including Mr. Beauvais. What happened thereafter is the subject of dispute between the parties and gives rise to this action.
[3]
Mr. Robertson claims that he and Mr. Beauvais reached a verbal agreement for the sale of the garage and transfer of possessory rights to the lots for a purchase price of $350,000.00 and that Mr. Beauvais paid him only $5,000.00 as a deposit toward the sale price. Despite this, Mr. Robertson went to the Land Management Office of the defendant, the Mohawk Council of Kahnawake [the Council], and signed two Transfer of Land documents [the Transfers] that purported to confirm the transfer of the land on which the garage was situated to Mr. Beauvais. Mr. Robertson claims he signed the Transfers in error, alleging that he was confused and unable to read them.
[4]
Mr. Beauvais, on the other hand, claims that he and Mr. Robertson reached an agreement to transfer the possessory rights to the lots and the garage for a total purchase price of $225,000.00 and that he paid the entire amount to Mr. Robertson, in cash. He therefore alleges that Mr. Robertson is trying to renege on the agreement, despite having been paid in full.
[5]
Although the Council forwarded the two Transfers signed by Mr. Robertson to the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development [the Minister], the Minister has not issued Certificates of Possession for the lots in favour of Mr. Beauvais and has deferred the issue of the validity of the Transfers to this Court for determination. Thus, the Certificates of Possession for the land at issue in this action remain in the name of Mr. Robertson.
[6]
In this action, Mr. Robertson has sued both Mr. Beauvais and the Council. Her Majesty was named as a Third Party but took no part in the action and did not appear at trial.
[7]
Mr. Robertson claims the following relief in this action:
(a) A declaration that the Certificates of Possession, issued to him under section 20 of the
Indian Act
, are valid "à toutes fins que de droit" and that he is therefore entitled to possessory title to the two lots in question;
(b) A declaration that the Transfer of Land documents that he signed in favour of Mr. Beauvais are annulled, cancelled and of no effect "à toutes fins que de droit";
(c) A declaration that that these Transfers of Land are unenforceable and unconscionable;
(d) A declaration that the decision of the Third Party, as represented by the Minister, to defer the approval or refusal of the Transfers is valid "à toutes fins que de droit" and that the Transfers be refused;
(e) Orders against both defendants for moral damages in the amount of $50,000.00, each, and for exemplary damages in the amount of $100,000.00, each, for breach of sections 6 and 49 of the
Charter of human rights and freedoms
,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  fiduciary duties towards Mr. Robertson;
(f) An order that Mr. Beauvais pay the rent that Mr. Robertson claims to be owing, namely $4,500.00 per month from May 1, 2010 to the date Mr. Beauvais vacates the garage and the two lots;
(g) A declaration that the agreement of purchase and sale for the two lots in question be "resiliated", cancelled and declared to be of no effect "à toutes fins que de droit";
(h) A declaration that the lease agreement between Mr. Robertson and Mr Beauvais be "resiliated" and cancelled;
(i) An order that Mr. Beauvais vacate the premises and leave them in the condition that they were in at the beginning of the lease, reasonable wear and tear excepted, within three days of the date of judgment;
(j) An order for provisional execution notwithstanding appeal, under article 547 of the
Code of Civil Procedure
,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  defendants, on the other hand, seek to have the actions against them dismissed, with solicitor-client costs. Counsel for Mr. Beauvais additionally requested during closing argument that I find there to have been a valid contract between his client and Mr. Robertson, that Mr. Beauvais be found to have paid the entire purchase price and that the determination of whether new Certificates of Possession should be issued be remitted back to the Minister, who possesses discretion under the
Indian Act
as to whether or not to issue such certificates.
[9]
During the course of a five day trial, seven witnesses testified, and much of their evidence was conflicting. Thus, the following legal and factual issues arise in this action:
1. What transpired between Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais, and, more particularly, did they conclude a verbal agreement for the transfer of possessory rights to the garage and the lots and, if so, what were its terms? How much money did Mr. Beauvais pay Mr. Robertson?
2. Did Mr. Robertson understand what he was signing when he signed the two Transfer of Land documents that purported to transfer the lots in question to Mr. Beauvais?
3. Did the Council breach any duty it owes Mr. Robertson?
4. Does this Court have the jurisdiction to grant the remedies sought? If so, what remedies are appropriate in this case?
5. In considering an appropriate remedy, what is the legal effect of the two Transfers signed by Mr. Robertson, and if he was confused as to their effect, can he rely on his mistake or is he prevented from doing so by article 1400 of the
Québec Civil Code
, which categorizes some errors as "inexcusable"?
6. Should interest be awarded although it was not claimed in the Statement of Claim?
and
7. What costs award is appropriate?
[10]
Prior to examining these issues, it is useful to review the provisions of the
Indian Act
applicable to reserve lands and the evidence tendered regarding land ownership on the Mohawk Reserve, as land is held differently on an Indian reserve than elsewhere in the country, which, as will be seen, has important implications for this case.
The provisions of the
Indian Act
relevant to land ownership on an Indian reserve and application of those provisions in Kahnawake
[11]
By virtue of section 18 of the
Indian Act
, land that comprises an Indian reserve is held by Her Majesty for the use and benefit of the Indian band for which it was set apart. The legislation sets up a system by which the Minister possesses discretion to issue "Certificates of Possession" to members of Indian bands. A Certificate is evidence of the bearer's right to possess the land described in the Certificate. Subsections 20(1) and (2) of the
Indian Act
provide as follows in this regard:
Possession of lands in a reserve
20. (1) No Indian is lawfully in possession of land in a reserve unless, with the approval of the Minister, possession of the land has been allotted to him by the council of the band.
Certificate of Possession
(2) The Minister may issue to an Indian who is lawfully in possession of land in a reserve a certificate, to be called a Certificate of Possession, as evidence of his right to possession of the land described therein.
Possession de terres dans une réserve
20. (1) Un Indien n'est légalement en possession d'une terre dans une réserve que si, avec l'approbation du ministre, possession de la terre lui a été accordée par le conseil de la bande.
Certificat de possession
(2) Le ministre peut délivrer à un Indien légalement en possession d'une terre dans une réserve un certificat, appelé certificat de possession, attestant son droit de posséder la terre y décrite.
[12]
Section 21 of the
Indian Act
requires the Minister to maintain a register, called the "Reserve Land Register", which details the particulars in respect of the Certificates of Possession issued by the Minister under section 20 of the
Indian Act
.
[13]
By virtue of sections 18.1, 20, 24 and 25 of the
Indian Act
, only members of the Indian band for whom the reserve lands are held may be granted a Certificate of Possession for land on the reserve. Section 24 of the
Indian Act
recognises the right of Indians who are lawfully in possession of reserve lands to transfer those lands to the band or to another member of the band. Section 24 provides in this regard:
Transfer of possession
24. An Indian who is lawfully in possession of lands in a reserve may transfer to the band or another member of the band the right to possession of the land, but no transfer or agreement for the transfer of the right to possession of lands in a reserve is effective until it is approved by the Minister.
Transfert de possession
24. Un Indien qui est légalement en possession d'une terre dans une réserve peut transférer à la bande, ou à un autre membre de celle-ci, le droit à la possession de la terre, mais aucun transfert ou accord en vue du transfert du droit à la possession de terres dans une réserve n'est valable tant qu'il n'est pas approuvé par le ministre.
[14]
Mr. Jean Boucher, Manager, Lands and Resources in the Québec regional office of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada [AANDC] and Ms. Cheryl Diabo, a former employee at the Land Management Office [LMO] operated by the Council, both testified as to how these provisions are applied on the Kahnawake Reserve. They confirmed that the Council has chosen to use the Certificate of Possession system established under the
Indian Act
to manage land transfers at Kahnawake. (Mr. Boucher indicated that the choice as to whether to use this system is optional and a matter for each First Nation to determine.)
[15]
The Reserve lands at Kahnawake (or at least the lands in issue in this action) are divided into lots, and surveys have been conducted to delineate their parameters. Under the procedure established by AANDC and used by the Council, those in valid possession of lots are granted a Certificate of Possession by the Minister. When a band member wishes to transfer lands for which he or she holds a Certificate of Possession, the band member must go to the Council's LMO and sign a document entitled "Transfer of Land on an Indian Reserve". The member's signature is witnessed by an LMO employee, who completes an affidavit, attesting to the identity of the signatory and authenticity of the signature.
[16]
The Transfer of Land document signed by a transferor is a one page document, which identifies the transferor, confirms that he or she is a member of the Mohawks of Kahnawake Indian Band and in lawful possession of the land to be transferred, contains a description of the land being transferred and then contains a short paragraph confirming the transfer of the land. This paragraph confirms there has been consideration for the transfer, sets out the name of the transferee, confirms receipt by the transferee of the named consideration and then states that the transferor has transferred to the transferee all of his or her "estate and interest in the said parcel of land granted to [the transferor] under the
Indian Act
".
[17]
On the template Transfer of Land forms contained in AANDC's Indian Land Registration Manual, no amount is specified for the consideration to be paid for a transfer, and any amount could thus be filled in when the transfer document is completed if the template is used. Mr. Boucher testified, however, that approximately ninety percent of the transfers received in his office show only a single dollar as being the amount of the consideration for the transfer.
[18]
The pre-printed Transfer of Land forms used by the Council at the times material to this action stipulated one dollar as being the amount of the consideration for the transfer, and Ms. Diabo testified that all the transfers signed during her tenure at the LMO adopted this form. She thus stated that the actual amount (if any beyond $1.00) paid by a member of the band for a plot of reserve land was purely a private matter between the transferor and transferee and is not recorded on the Transfer of Land form.
[19]
Ms. Diabo also testified that the work of her office consisted principally of verifying that the transferor was in valid possession of the land to be transferred (which requires verification of the Register maintained by the Minister), verification that both the transferor and transferee were members of the Mohawks of Kahnawake Indian Band and that the forms were appropriately completed. She indicated that the LMO did not inquire as to whether the agreed-upon purchase price had been paid for any transfer of land. The Council's procedures manual, applicable to the transfer of lots on the Reserve, contemplates that once these verifications are completed and the Transfer of Land form and affidavit of execution are completed at the LMO, the documents should then be sent to the Chairperson of the Band's Land Management Committee for approval. Ms. Diabo testified that at the end of the process, the completed forms are typically sent on Friday of each week to AANDC, for registration and issuance of Certificates of Possession.
[20]
Mr. Boucher testified as to the procedures used by AANDC and confirmed that it verifies the documents submitted before issuing a Certificate of Possession to the transferee and listing the transferee in the Register maintained by the Minister under the
Indian Act
. Among the matters that AANDC verifies are that the documents are legible and appropriately completed and that the transferor is in valid possession of the land to be transferred. Mr. Boucher indicated that this requires verification of the Register to confirm that the transferor held the Certificate of Possession for the land at the time of the transfer. This, however, does not prevent the immediate transfer by a transferee to someone else (without the intervening step of the issuance of a new Certificate of Possession in the name of the transferee). Mr. Boucher testified in this regard that the documents submitted in this case were suitable for registration and would have resulted in the issuance of Certificates of Possession in favour of Mr. Beauvais but for the intervention of counsel for the plaintiff, who objected that Mr. Robertson had signed the Transfer of Land documents in error.
[21]
As is more fully discussed below, for one of the lots in question, Mr. Robertson was not the holder of a Certificate of Possession when he signed the Transfer of Land document in favour of Mr. Beauvais as that lot had been transferred to Mr. Robertson the same day that he signed a transfer in favour of Mr. Beauvais. Mr. Boucher, however, indicated that this sort of transaction would qualify for approval by the Minister, thereby indicating that, at least as far as he is concerned, one need not necessarily be the holder of a Certificate of Possession to be recognised by the Minister as having the right to transfer a lot on an Indian reserve so long as there is a valid chain of transfer to the final transferee.
[22]
Both these witnesses' testimony, the excerpts of the manuals filed and the
Indian Ac
t, itself, establish that Transfer of Land documents are not akin to deeds that are registered to transfer title to land outside a reserve. These transfers differ from deeds in three principal respects: first, the Transfer of Land documents do not convey title; second, they do not necessarily list the consideration actually paid for a lot on an Indian reserve; and third, they do not, of themselves, convey rights to possess reserve land, as the Minister has discretion as to whether or not to issue a Certificate of Possession under the
Indian Act
and the Certificates are merely evidence of the right of the person named in the Certificate to possess the land mentioned in the Certificate. Indeed, the jurisprudence has recognised that the regime applicable to reserve lands established under the
Indian Act
is
sui generis
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
R v Vanderpeet
, [1996] 2 SCR 507, 137 DLR (4th) 289).
[23]
With this backdrop in mind, it is now possible to review what occurred between Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais.
Background to the agreement between Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais
[24]
In 1972, Mr Robertson acquired the land that is the subject of this action, which was then described as the Whole of Lot 3-8 Block B, Kahnawake Indian Reserve No. 14 and the Whole of Lot 3-10 Block B, Kahnawake Indian Reserve No. 14 [hereafter called, simply, Lots 3-8 and 3-10]. A few years later, Mr. Robertson constructed a garage on the two lots where, until 2005, he operated an auto body shop, an auto repair business and bought and sold used cars. In 1995, Mr. Robertson hired Nathalie Leduc, who worked for him until 2005. In 2001, she and Mr. Robertson commenced a romantic relationship and became - and still are - common-law spouses. Ms. Leduc resides with Mr. Robertson at his house on the Kahnawake reserve.
[25]
Both Ms. Leduc and Mr. Robertson testified that Ms. Leduc did all the reading and writing associated with running the garage and the auto repair/sale business because Mr. Robertson found reading difficult and had problems with transposing characters. They also testified that even after he ceased operating the garage in 2005, Mr. Robertson still had Ms. Leduc do his reading and writing for him by, for example, paying all the household bills.
[26]
In addition to experiencing difficulty with reading, Mr. Robertson also developed vision problems and in 2007 underwent surgery on one of his eyes for glaucoma, secondary to diabetic retinopathy. A note from the ophthalmologist who treated him that was filed on consent indicates that as of 2008 (when he was last examined), Mr. Robertson had unimpaired vision in one eye but that his vision in the other eye was significantly impaired. During the trial, Mr. Robertson was able to read very large print, namely the large heading on Transfer of Land documents, but stated he could not decipher any of the rest of the document in smaller print. Despite this, he admitted to still driving a car on the reserve and thus is able to see to a certain extent.
[27]
In 2005, as part of the settlement of previous litigation with one of his daughters in respect of monies that Mr. Robertson owed her, Mr. Robertson transferred Lots 3-8 and 3-10 to his daughter, Shelly Robertson. In 2007, she and her husband, Lester Norton, rented a portion of the garage situated on the Lots to Kyle Beauvais. Mr. Beauvais, along with his brother, Chris, and another individual, Davis Rice, set up a cigarette manufacturing business in the premises and paid $2,500.00 per month in rent to Mr. Norton.
[28]
In 2008, Mr. Robertson borrowed $40,000.00 from one of his sons-in-law, Clive McComber, to repay the monies Mr. Robertson owed to Shelly. After the repayment was made, Shelly signed two Transfer of Land documents at the LMO, to transfer Lots 3-8 and 3-10 back to Mr. Robertson.
[29]
A brief written agreement was prepared by Ms. Leduc and Mr. McComber to indicate that the $40,000.00 was being loaned for only 30 days and that if it were not repaid Mr. Robertson would transfer the whole of Lot 3-8 to Mr. McComber. Mr. Robertson signed this agreement. Thereafter, he and Mr. McComber went to the LMO, where the Council's employees witnessed their signatures on the agreement and Mr. Robertson signed a Transfer of Land document to transfer the whole of Lot 3-8 to Mr. McComber.
[30]
In their testimony, Mr. Robertson and Ms. Leduc explained that Mr. McComber required that the land be transferred as security for the loan, the agreement being that if monies were repaid, Mr. McComber would transfer all but a small part of Lot 3-8 back to Mr. Robertson. In lieu of interest, Mr. Robertson agreed to transfer a small portion of Lot 3-8 to Mr. McComber that was contiguous to other lands owned by Mr. McComber.
[31]
The Council forwarded the Transfers of Land documents signed by Shelly for Lot 3-10 and for Lot 3-8 to AANDC. On December 15, 2008, the Minister issued a Certificate of Possession for Lot 3-10 to Mr. Robertson and issued a Certificate of Possession for Lot 3-8 to Mr. McComber.
[32]
A little after the 30 day time period to repay the $40,000.00 had elapsed, Mr. Robertson repaid Mr. McComber the $40,000.00, this time with money borrowed from Angela, another of his daughters. On November 25, 2008, Mr. Robertson and Mr. McComber signed another brief written agreement, confirming the repayment of the monies and providing that the portion of Lot 3-8 that was to be returned to Mr. Robertson would be transferred back to him by Mr. McComber. Ms. Leduc also prepared this agreement and Mr. Robertson merely signed it.
[33]
Mr. Robertson testified that he believed Mr. McComber had signed a Transfer of Land document to return the portion of Lot 3-8 that was to be transferred back to him. However, as it turned out, Mr. McComber did not actually do so until 2010 after Mr. Robertson determined to sell his garage, as is discussed below.
[34]
Before any transfer could be accepted by the LMO in respect of the transfer back of the bulk of Lot 3-8 to Mr. Robertson, it was necessary that a plan of subdivision be prepared to delineate what part of the lot was being retained by Mr. McComber. It was also necessary that a fee be paid to the Council for the preparation of the plan of subdivision. The plan was prepared in February 2009 by a surveyor, but it was not filed with the LMO until 2010.
[35]
From 2008 forward, however, Mr. Beauvais paid rent to Mr. Robertson. The rent was first $2,500.00 per month, the same amount that Mr. Beauvais had been previously paying to Mr. Norton. In mid-2008, Mr. Beauvais expanded his cigarette manufacturing operation and rented the entire garage from Mr. Robertson and, consequently, the rent increased to $4,500.00 per month. Both Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais confirmed that this amount was paid each month in cash and that typically no receipts were given for the amounts paid. (Mr. Robertson did file two receipts that he claims were issued by Mr. Beauvais' employee, Garth Cross. It would appear, though, that it was the exception for receipts to be issued for the rent payments.)
[36]
In late 2009 or early 2010, Mr. Robertson determined that he wished to sell his garage and to transfer possession of Lot 3-10 and the portion of Lot 3-8 that was supposed to have been returned to him by Mr. McComber. Mr. Robertson had a number of discussions with several potential buyers, where a purchase price of $400,000.00 was discussed, during which Mr. Robertson claims that none of the potential buyers balked at the price. This claim was corroborated by Darcy Lazore, another of Mr. Robertson's sons-in-law, who testified that he had attempted to broker a deal for third parties to acquire the premises to run a cigarette operation there. (This venture did not get off the ground as Mr. Lazore and the potential purchasers were from Akwesasne in New York State and therefore could not obtain Certificates of Possession for the lots under the
Indian Act
as they were not members of the Kahnawake Band. However, Mr. Lazore confirmed that the individuals he was involved with might have been willing to pay $400,000.00 for the garage and the lots.)
[37]
Both Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais concur that they had initial discussions regarding the sale of the garage and transfer of the lots in approximately February or March of 2010 and that Mr. Robertson initially indicated that he wanted to obtain $400,000.00 for the lots and garage.
[38]
Mr. Beauvais testified that sometime prior to on April 1, 2010, he went to the LMO to review the state of the register with respect to Lots 3-10 and 3-8 and learned that Lot 3-8 was still in Mr. McComber's name. Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais concur that some time before April 1st Mr. Beauvais informed Mr. Robertson of the fact that Mr. McComber had not transferred any portion of Lot 3-8 back to Mr. Robertson.
What transpired Between Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais and how much money did Mr. Beauvais pay Mr. Robertson?
[39]
The versions of events offered by Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais from that point forward diverge.
[40]
Mr. Robertson claims that sometime in March 2010, he went to the garage and had a discussion with Mr. Beauvais and that during this discussion Mr. Beauvais asked Mr. Robertson to agree to a lower price, reminding Mr. Robertson that his father had been a close friend of Mr. Beauvais' father. Mr. Robertson claims that during this conversation he agreed to sell the garage and to transfer the lots to Mr. Beauvais for $350,000.00 but that no closing date was agreed to. He also claims that Mr. Beauvais indicated to him that he would need financing to complete the purchase.
[41]
Mr. Robertson testified that he went to the LMO on April 1, 2010 to sort out the right to possession of Lot 3-8, which had not been transferred back to him by Mr. McComber. At the LMO, Mr. Robertson spoke with Ms. Diabo. In his evidence, Mr. Robertson offered little detail regarding what he discussed with Ms. Diabo on that day, other than indicating that he learned from her that a transfer to him from Clive McComber of part of Lot 3-8 could not be processed as there was an outstanding $500.00 fee to be paid for the survey done to subdivide Lot 3-8 between the part to be retained by Mr. McComber and the part to be transferred back to Mr. Robertson.
[42]
Ms. Diabo offered a bit more detail regarding her discussion with Mr. Robertson on April 1, 2010 and, in addition to confirming that she told him about the outstanding $500.00 fee, also indicated that Mr. Robertson told her that he intended to sell Lot 3-10 and his portion of Lot 3-8 to Mr. Beauvais. The documentary evidence bears this out as Ms. Diabo went ahead to prepare the paperwork to complete the two Transfer of Land documents for the two lots. She indicated that Mr. Beauvais did not come into the LMO after April 1st, so she must have learned of Mr. Robertson's intention to sell the lots to Mr. Beauvais from Mr. Robertson when he came to the LMO on April 1, 2010.
[43]
Mr. Robertson went to the Council's main office on April 1, 2010 to pay the outstanding $500.00 and received a receipt for doing so, which he gave to Ms. Leduc when he returned home. Once the fee was paid, it was possible for the LMO to process the transfer from Mr. McComber to Mr. Robertson of the portion of Lot 3-8 that was to be returned to Mr. Robertson. (After it was subdivided the portion of Lot 3-8 that was to return to Mr. Robertson was designated as the Whole of Lot 3-8-1 Block B, Kahnawake Indian Reserve No. 14 [hereafter called Lot 3-8-1]).
[44]
Ms. Diabo testified that she called Mr. McComber on April 7, 2010 to request that he come in and sign a Transfer of Land for Lot 3-8-1 in favour of Mr. Robertson. She indicated that during that conversation Mr. McComber told her that he had business he needed to clear up with Mr. Robertson before he would sign the transfer. Both Mr. Robertson and Ms. Leduc corroborated this, indicating that Mr. McComber wanted to obtain some tools that were in a locked storage bin on the lots before he would sign the transfer. The documentary evidence also corroborates that Ms. Diabo called Mr. McComber on April 7th.
[45]
Mr. Robertson stated that he went back to the LMO on April 12th, possibly following a call from Ms. Diabo. (She testified that she had called him to come in.) Mr. Robertson stated that when he arrived at the LMO on April 12th, he asked Ms. Diabo if Mr. McComber had signed the Transfer of Lot 3-8-1 and spoke with Carol Goodleaf, Ms. Diabo's supervisor. According to both Mr. Robertson and Ms. Diabo, who overheard their conversation, Ms. Goodleaf first told Mr. Robertson that Mr. McComber had come to the LMO and had indeed signed the Transfer of Land document for Lot 3-8-1 to convey it back to Mr. Robertson. Ms. Goodleaf then explained to Mr. Robertson that he was required to grant Mr. McComber a right-of way over Lot 3-8-1 to allow Mr. McComber access to the portion of Lot 3-8 that he retained. The right-of-way was mentioned in the transfer from Mr. McComber to Mr. Robertson. Both Mr. Robertson and Ms. Diabo confirmed that Mr. Robertson became upset about the need for there to be a right-of-way. Ms. Diabo and Mr. Robertson, however, differ as to what happened next.
[46]
Ms. Diabo testified that Mr. Robertson next spoke with her and asked to sign the documents to transfer Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1 to Mr. Beauvais. Mr. Robertson, on the other hand, claims he asked no such thing and says he thought he was being given paperwork regarding the transfer back to him of Lot 3-8-1. However, he did proceed to sign the two Transfers for Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1 in favour of Mr. Beauvais. He claims that Ms. Diabo gave him two originals and two copies that she told him were for Mr. Beauvais, to use in connection with getting financing from the Caisse Populaire on the Reserve. He maintains, though, that he thought the Transfers merely documented the transfer back to him of Lot 3-8-1 by Mr. McComber.
[47]
Ms. Diabo, on the other hand, testified that while she gave one set of originals to Mr. Robertson and one copy to Mr. Robertson to give to Mr. Beauvais, she made no mention of Mr. Beauvais' needing financing. She also testified that she read to Mr. Robertson the names of the transferor (Mr. Robertson) and the transferee (Mr. Beauvais) and the description of the lots to be transferred shown on the two Transfers before Mr. Robertson signed them. Mr. Robertson does not deny that this may have occurred but maintains that he simply did not understand what he was signing.
[48]
Having heard both testify, and considering their evidence in light of the relevant documents filed as exhibits, I do not find there to be much real conflict between Mr. Robertson's and Ms. Diabo's versions of what transpired on April 12th at the LMO. They simply had a mis-communication about why Mr. Robertson was there. Ms. Diabo believed that Mr. Robertson had come in to get a copy of the transfer from Mr. McComber and to sign the Transfers in favour of Mr. Beauvais. Given the passage of time, it is likely impossible for her to recollect the exact words Mr. Robertson used, but she certainly understood him to be requesting that he be given the Transfers in favour of Mr. Beauvais so he could sign them. Mr. Robertson, on the other hand, believed he was there to simply confirm the transfer back to him of land from Mr. McComber. He was upset about what Ms. Goodleaf had told him about the right-of-way and did not - and possibly could not - read the documents he signed. However, he signed them and was given a set of originals and a set of copies by Ms. Diabo. I find it unlikely, though, that she would have said anything about Mr. Beauvais' going to the Caisse Populaire as she had no idea whether Mr. Beauvais might have needed financing. Importantly, both Mr. Robertson and Ms. Diabo concur that Mr. Robertson did not mention that he could not read the documents he signed and did not indicate any confusion as to what was transpiring.
[49]
Mr. Robertson claims that he did not give the Transfers to Ms. Leduc when he returned home on April 12th, but instead put the envelope containing the originals into his briefcase and left the copies in his car. He stated, though, that he told Ms. Leduc that he had received the transfer of Lot 3-8-1 back from Mr. McComber and that he was taking copies of the documents he had received to Mr. Beauvais to complete the transaction with him. He claims, moreover, that he had Ms. Leduc prepare a letter of reference for Mr. Beauvais, to confirm that Mr. Beauvais had always paid his rent, for Mr. Beauvais to use in connection with his application for a loan. Ms. Leduc corroborated this testimony and confirmed that she prepared a letter of reference, a copy of which was filed as an exhibit.
[50]
Mr. Robertson then claims that he went to see Mr. Beauvais on April 13th to give him the letter of reference and copies of what he thought were documents confirming the transfer of land from Mr. McComber to him. (In actuality, they were copies of the Transfers in favour of Mr. Beauvais that Mr. Robertson claims he signed in error.) Mr. Robertson further testified that he asked for a deposit during the meeting, that Mr. Beauvais directed Mr. Cross to see how much money they had in the safe at the garage, discovered that there was at least $5,000.00 and that Mr. Beauvais and Mr. Robertson agreed that Mr. Beauvais would provide a $5,000.00 deposit towards the purchase price of $350,000.00 that they had agreed upon. He also stated that they left the closing date undetermined as Mr. Beauvais still needed to go to the Caisse Populaire and indicated he would need some time to get the financing in place as there had been a death in the family. Ms. Leduc testified that once Mr. Robertson returned home from the meeting with Mr. Beauvais, she saw the receipt and counted the $5,000.00 deposit, which she put into the safe located in their home.
[51]
The next event that transpired according to Mr. Robertson and Ms. Leduc is that Mr. Beauvais called Ms. Leduc on April 21, 2010 to request a meeting with Mr. Robertson. Mr. Robertson went to the garage on the 21st and claims Mr. Beauvais told him that Mr. Robertson had signed the Transfers, which transferred the land to Mr. Beauvais, that Mr. Beauvais did not intend to pay more because Mr. Robertson owed at least $400,000.00 to Mr. Beauvais' father and that Mr. Beauvais directed him to get off his property. Mr. Robertson claims that Mr. Beauvais' brother, Chris, then threatened him, saying that Mr. Robertson should not complain as "they had the muscle". Mr. Robertson says that he then went home, that he and Ms. Leduc read the original Transfers that he had in his briefcase, confirmed the error that he made, consulted a lawyer and went to the LMO to try and undo the transaction.
[52]
While there is a certain divergence in the testimony from Ms. Diabo, Mr. Robertson and Ms. Leduc regarding what occurred at the LMO on April 21st, nothing turns on this. Suffice to say that Mr. Robertson and Ms. Leduc were very upset, tried to get the Transfers reversed and were told by Ms. Diabo that there was nothing that could be done. Ms. Diabo volunteered that after they left she was so upset that she went into the bathroom to weep.
[53]
After that, Ms. Leduc and Mr. Robertson went to the Peacekeepers' station on the Reserve to file a complaint against Chris Beauvais. In connection with that complaint, Ms. Leduc wrote a statement, which Mr. Robertson signed, that corroborates their version of events. They also left with Officer Stacey a copy of the Transfers that Mr. Robertson claims to have signed in error as well as a copy of the receipt that he claims Mr. Beauvais gave him.
[54]
Mr. Robertson thus alleges that he has been paid only $5000.00 of the agreed-upon $350,000.00 purchase price and that he has been wrongfully denied possession of Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1.
[55]
Mr. Beauvais, on the other hand, testified to completely opposite effect. He claims that he offered Mr. Robertson only $225,000.00 for the garage and that Mr. Robertson was initially unwilling to accept this amount. Mr. Beauvais further says that he learned from Clive McComber some time in the morning of April 12th that Mr. McComber had been to the LMO to sign a Transfer of Land document for Lot 3-8-1 in favour of Mr. Robertson, that Mr. Robertson came by the garage later on the 12th, told him that he was then willing to sell for $225,000.00 and that Mr. Robertson then agreed to this amount and that Mr. Beauvais then paid Mr. Robertson $225,000.00, in cash for the land and the garage. Mr. Beauvais claims that he regularly had between $300,000.00 to $500,000.00 in cash in the safe at the garage from the sale of cigarettes and that in this instance Garth Cross counted the cash and gave it to Mr. Robertson immediately after they agreed to the purchase price on April 12th. He stated that his brother, Chris, was also there when the payment was made.
[56]
Mr. Beauvais claims that he went to the LMO later that day to verify that Mr. Robertson had signed the Transfers to transfer the property to him. Mr. Beauvais moreover stated that he did not give Mr Robertson a deposit and that no receipt or letter of reference was given to him by Mr. Robertson.
[57]
Mr. Beauvais agrees that he called Ms. Leduc to have Mr. Robertson come and see him on April 21st, but testified that he did so as he had learned that Mr. Robertson had made several attempts to contact him while he was away. He claims that when Mr. Robertson showed up at the garage on April 21st, he asked for more money, that Mr. Beauvais told him he was not willing to pay any more and that he asked Mr. Robertson to leave his property. He claims that he then went back into the garage so did not hear if his brother threatened Mr. Robertson but did confirm that his brother was upset.
[58]
It is common ground between Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais that Mr. Beauvais continued to occupy the garage until early 2011, when he ceased his cigarette manufacturing business. Mr. Beauvais then rented the property to another tenant or tenants, to run a heat exchanger service. As of the date of trial, the other tenant(s) were still renting the garage. No evidence was offered as to how much the other tenant(s) have paid Mr. Beauvais in rent since early 2011. Mr Beauvais claims that he made significant improvements to the garage, spending in excess of $50,000.00 to repair it, to make it suitable for rental to the other tenant(s).
[59]
Of these two versions of events, I prefer Mr. Robertson's for several reasons.
[60]
First, there is an important contradiction between what Mr. Beauvais testified to at trial and his testimony during his examination for discovery. In this regard, he made no mention during his examination for discovery that he had verified with Mr. McComber that Mr. McComber had re-conveyed the land to Mr. Robertson before he paid the $225,000.00 to Mr. Robertson. During cross-examination at trial, however, when he was pushed as to the unlikelihood of his paying out $225,000.00 without having even verified if Lot 3-8-1 was back in Mr. Robertson's name, Mr. Beauvais stated that he verified this with Mr. McComber before he paid the money on April 12th.
[61]
Second, in one key respect, Mr. Beauvais' testimony was contradicted by Ms. Diabo, who is a largely independent witness as she no longer works for the Council. More specifically, when once again faced in cross-examination with the unlikelihood of his version of events, Mr. Beauvais claimed that he went to the LMO to check that Mr. Robertson had in fact signed the Transfers, shortly after he paid him the cash. Ms. Diabo, though, testified that Mr. Beauvais did ever not return to the LMO after his initial inquiry that was made before April 1, 2010.
[62]
Third, Mr. Beauvais failed to call any witness to corroborate that he made the alleged $225,000.00 cash payment and failed to call Mr. McComber to confirm whether and when Mr. McComber told Mr. Beauvais that the land had been put back into Mr. Robertson's name. Counsel for Mr. Beauvais advised during the course of the trial that Mr. McComber was under subpoena, but he was not called to testify. Similarly, neither Mr. Cross nor Chris Beauvais was called to confirm that Mr. Beauvais paid the $225,000.00 in cash to Mr. Robertson as Mr. Beauvais claims.
[63]
In the circumstances, I am entitled to draw an adverse inference from Mr. Beauvais's failure to call Mr. McComber, Mr. Cross or his brother to corroborate his version of events. In this regard, it is well-established that in civil cases, "an unfavourable inference can be drawn when, in the absence of an explanation, a party litigant ... fails to call a witness who would have knowledge of the facts and would be assumed to be willing to assist that party" (Sopinka, Lederman & Bryant,
The Law of Evidence in Canada
, 3d ed (Canada: LexisNexis Canada Inc, 2009) at §6.449).
[64]
Fourth, although not determinative, it is noteworthy that Mr. Beauvais failed to plead the alleged payment of the $225,000.00 in his Statement of Defence. If the payment had in fact been made, one would have assumed that it would have been the centrepiece of any defence.
[65]
Finally, the version offered by Mr. Beauvais is incredible in at least one respect. He claims that he sold cigarettes only to others on the Reserve. The ability of such a business (as opposed to a business that sold cigarettes to those who did not reside on the Reserve) to generate the type of cash that Mr. Beauvais claims to have earned is suspect.
[66]
On the other side of the ledger, Mr. Robertson was unshaken in his version of events and to a certain extent his testimony was supported by Ms. Leduc, although much of her testimony rested on what Mr. Robertson had previously told her and thus cannot be considered to be independent corroboration.
[67]
Thus, I find that Mr. Beauvais paid only $5,000.00 for the land, which through his own testimony is worth much more - at least $225,000.00, if not $350,000.00.
Did Mr. Robertson know he was signing Transfers in favour of Mr. Beauvais when he executed them?
[68]
Given the foregoing finding, I also find that Mr. Robertson did not appreciate that he was signing Transfers in favour of Mr. Beauvais when he signed them on April 12th and that he did not appreciate what they were when he gave copies of them to Mr. Beauvais on April 13th. In this regard, I agree with counsel for Mr. Beauvais that the state of Mr. Robertson's knowledge is directly tied to the determination of whether the $225,000.00 was paid as it would make no sense for Mr. Robertson to have knowingly given the Transfers to Mr. Beauvais if he had not been paid.
[69]
Mr. Robertson's claim of his inability to read is supported by Ms. Leduc's testimony and, to a certain extent, by the medical reports that were filed. In addition, all previous documents that Mr. Roberts signed were prepared by others, which likewise tends to indicate that he might not have been able to read the Transfers.
[70]
Ms. Diabo's reaction of crying when she learned of the mistake also tends to corroborate Mr. Robertson's version of events, as Mr. Robertson and Ms. Leduc were upset enough on April 21st to make her cry. This is consistent with their only learning that day of the mistake and of a mistake having been made as, if Ms. Diabo did not believe Mr. Robertson had been legitimately mistaken, there would have been less reason for her to break down in tears.
[71]
In addition, the fact that the documents were signed on the heels of the discussion about the right-of-way that upset Mr. Robertson makes it likely that he did not pay as much attention to what he was doing as he ought to have done when he signed the two Transfers.
[72]
Finally, having had the opportunity to observe Mr. Robertson over the course of the day and a half during which he testified, I can well believe that he might have been confused when he signed the Transfers as, during the trial, he appeared to have some difficulty in understanding questions that were not that complex. Thus, I find that Mr. Robertson made a mistake when he signed the two Transfers in favour of Mr. Beauvais and did not appreciate their significance either when he signed them or when he handed them over to Mr. Beauvais.
[73]
Counsel for Mr. Beauvais argues that I should not make this finding because it is unbelievable that Mr. Robertson would not have shown documents as important as the Transfers to Ms. Leduc and because Mr. Robertson admitted during cross-examination that he knew that normally only the transferor is required to sign a Transfer of Land document. While Mr. Robertson did make this admission, and while no good explanation was offered by either Ms. Leduc or Mr. Robertson for the failure to have Ms. Leduc look at the Transfers earlier - especially when she read or wrote everything else - neither of these matters is sufficiently strong for me to infer that Mr. Robertson knew what he was signing in light of the rest of the evidence. In short, given my finding that the $225,000.00 was not paid, it is not possible to infer that Mr. Robertson knowingly signed the Transfers or that he knowingly gave them to Mr. Beauvais as this is incompatible with his not having been paid for the land.
[74]
I therefore find that Mr. Robertson signed the two Transfers in favour of Mr. Beauvais in error, that the verbal agreement Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais made was for a purchase price of $350,000.00 and that Mr. Beauvais only paid $5,000.00 to Mr. Robertson but despite this retained the land and continued to occupy and then rent the garage.
Did the Council breach any duty it owed to Mr. Robertson?
[75]
I turn next to Mr. Robertson's claim against the Council. He premises this claim on the assertion that the Council breached its fiduciary duties toward him in not ensuring the he understood the Transfers before he signed them and in not ensuring that the agreed-upon purchase price had been paid. Counsel for Mr. Robertson also suggested that the fact that the LMO forwarded the Transfers to AANDC on Thursday, as opposed to Friday, which is the day they typically send such documents to AANDC, should be viewed as demonstrating an intention on the part of the Council to deliberately act adversely to Mr. Robertson's interests, presumably by hastening the process for the issuance of Certificates of Possession in Mr. Beauvais' name.
[76]
In my view, there is absolutely no basis to make any such finding nor to conclude that the Council breached its fiduciary obligations to Mr. Robertson. Generally speaking, a fiduciary is required to act in a manner consistent with the best interests of the party to whom the duty is owed and, more specifically, to avoid conflicts of interest (see e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] BCWLD 6951;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (BCSC)). The scope of the duty, however, does not extend so far as Mr. Robertson alleges because Ms. Diabo and Ms. Goodleaf, the two Council employees who interacted with Mr. Robertson, behaved reasonably.
[77]
More specifically, there was no reason for them to have doubted Mr. Robertson's capacity to understand the Transfers, and Ms. Diabo followed the same procedure with Mr. Robertson that the LMO always adopted. Nor was there any need for the LMO to confirm that any agreed-upon purchase price had been paid before accepting to register a Transfer of Land document. In short, I do not accept that the Council's duty to act in the best interest of band members requires it to chaperone band members through every step of the land transfer process. As for the suggestion that there is something sinister in the Transfers being sent to AANDC on a Thursday as opposed to a Friday, there is not a shred of evidence to support this assertion.
[78]
I therefore find that the Council has not breached any duty it owes to Mr. Robertson and, accordingly, that the claim against the Council must be dismissed.
What remedies should be awarded?
[79]
Turning, next, to consideration of the various remedies sought by Mr. Robertson in respect of the land and against Mr. Beauvais, it will be recalled that Mr. Robertson seeks several declarations, an order requiring Mr. Beauvais to return the land to him, damages equivalent to $4,500.00 per month from May 1, 2010 to the date Mr. Beauvais vacates the land, moral damages in the amount of $50,000.00, exemplary damages in the amount of $100,000.00, and an order for provisional execution notwithstanding appeal under article 547 of the CCP.
[80]
Several of these claims raise complex issues concerning this Court's jurisdiction. In his interim ruling on a motion to strike this action for want of jurisdiction brought by Mr. Beauvais, my colleague, Justice Barnes, in 2011 FC 378 dismissed the motion, holding that it was not plain and obvious that there was no jurisdiction over the claims and referred the final determination of the extent of the Court's jurisdiction over the various claims made in the action to the trial judge. For the reasons set out below, I have determined that this Court does possess jurisdiction to award many of the remedies, including damages, sought by Mr. Robertson in this action.
i.
What remedies are within this Court's jurisdiction to grant?
[81]
In terms of the general scope of this Court's jurisdiction over claims made in an action, as the Supreme Court of Canada held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
ITO
] at para 12, three criteria must be satisfied for this Court to have jurisdiction over a matter:
1. there must be a statutory grant of jurisdiction by the federal Parliament;
2. there must be an existing body of federal law which is essential to the disposition of the case and which nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction; and
3. the law on which the case is based must be "a law of Canada" as the phrase is used in s. 101 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
(UK), c. 3.
[82]
The case law also recognises that where this Court possesses jurisdiction under the foregoing criteria, but the
Federal Courts Rules
, SOR/98-106 [the Rules] or federal case law do not cover a subsidiary part of the claim, regard may be given to provincial law in the jurisdiction where the cause of action arose to fill the gap (see e.g.
ITO
at para 34;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> DLR (4th) 103).
[83]
The three criteria from the
ITO
case have been found to be satisfied in cases involving claims for a declaration regarding a defendant's trespass to land on an Indian reserve. More particularly, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], where one band sued another for trespass and the issue concerned which band had the rightful use and occupation of the reserve, the Supreme Court of Canada held that this Court had jurisdiction over the claim. Writing for the Court, Justice Wilson first held that paragraph 17(3)(c) [see footnote 1] (now subsection 17(4)) of the
Federal Courts Act
, RSC 1985, c F-7  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  met the first branch of the
ITO
test. Section 17(4) of the FCA provides:
Conflicting claims against Crown
(4) The Federal Court has concurrent original jurisdiction to hear and determine proceedings to determine disputes in which the Crown is or may be under an obligation and in respect of which there are or may be conflicting claims.
Demandes contradictoires contre la Couronne
(4) Elle a compétence concurrente, en première instance, dans les procédures visant à régler les différends mettant en cause la Couronne à propos d'une obligation réelle ou éventuelle pouvant faire l'objet de demandes contradictoires.
[84]
In dealing with this issue, Justice Wilson stated as follows at para 21 of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
In my view, Hugessen J. took the right approach in analyzing s. 17(3)(c) itself in order to determine the scope of the jurisdiction conferred. As he pointed out, the section requires: a) a proceeding, b) to determine a dispute, c) where the Crown is or may be under an obligation, d) in respect of which there are or may be conflicting claims. Interpleader by the Crown would fit this description. Indeed, at first blush it is hard to envisage situations other than interpleader in which the requirements of s. 17(3)(c) will all be met. I believe, however, that the present case is one such situation. A proceeding is certainly involved to determine the dispute between the Plaintiff and Defendant Bands. The obligation owed by the Crown in this case results from the very nature of aboriginal title. This Court's most recent affirmation that the nature of the Indian interest in aboriginal lands is
sui generis
is found in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . As noted in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the obligation owed by the Crown in respect of lands held for the Indians is recognized in, although not created by, s. 18(1) of the
Indian Act
. The Crown must hold the land comprising Reserve No. 12 for the use and benefit of one of the Bands. The question is: which one? Finally, the case at bar falls within the wording of s. 17(3)(c) because the conflicting claims are undoubtedly in respect of the Crown's obligation. Each Band claims that the Crown, which holds the underlying title to the land, owes to it alone the obligation to hold the land for its exclusive use and occupancy.
[85]
Justice Wilson went on to hold that the second and third branches of the
ITO
test were satisfied by the
Indian Act
, which sets aside Indian reserves for the use and occupancy of Indian bands, and by the common law of aboriginal title, which underlies the obligations of the Crown to Indian bands (at para 30).
[86]
This Court applied <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Jones Estate
], where Justice MacKay granted the plaintiff's action for declaratory relief with respect to possessory title to a lot on an Indian reserve. There, in a postscript to the decision, Justice MacKay, following the decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , held that subsection 17(4) of the FCA grounded jurisdiction because the claim involved obligations of the Crown in relation to Indian people and the case involved a claim with respect to land on a reserve under the
Indian Act
in a situation where, like here, there were conflicting claims made as to entitlement to the land.
[87]
Thus, this Court possesses jurisdiction over Mr. Robertson's claim for a declaration that he is entitled to possession of the two lots in question. Such a declaration, moreover, encompasses consideration of the effect of the previous rental agreement, of the terms of the verbal sale agreement, of the Certificates of Possession issued to Mr. Robertson and of the effect of the Transfers of Land signed by him. It also involves a determination that Mr. Beauvais is not in lawful possession of the lots, and, accordingly, not eligible to be issued Certificates of Possession by the Minister as subsection 20(2) of the
Indian Act
provides the Minister discretion to issue Certificates of Possession only to Indians who are lawfully in possession of reserve lands. Thus, this Court does possess jurisdiction to issue the declaratory relief Mr. Robertson seeks in respect of his right to possess Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1.
[88]
In terms of the request for injunctive relief, section 44 of the FCA provides this Court jurisdiction to grant an injunction on such terms as it deems appropriate in any case where it appears just and convenient to do so. Injunctions like that sought by Mr. Robertson have previously been granted by this Court (see e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CNLR 51, in which Justice Blais (as he then was) ordered a defendant to vacate a house on an Indian reserve). Thus, the injunctive relief sought may likewise be granted.
[89]
However, the situation is more complicated as concerns jurisdiction to award the damages claimed as the parties cited no authority on this point and the claims for damages depend to a large extent on provincial law.
[90]
Although the issue does not appear to have squarely decided, there is authority which supports the conclusion that this Court does possess jurisdiction to award damages similar to those clamed by Mr. Robertson in this action as there are cases where similar damage awards have been made and there are also several decisions where this Court has declined to strike claims for damages made in connection with alleged wrongful possession of lands on an Indian reserve.
[91]
In this regard, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Prothonotary Hargrave found that the defendant band council had trespassed on the plaintiff's land on a reserve by constructing a radio antenna on land for which the plaintiff held a Certificate of Possession. The prothonotary awarded the plaintiff damages for the trespass. In so doing, however, he did not discuss the Court's jurisdiction to make the requested remedial order as neither party appears to have raised the issue.
[92]
Similarly, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  this Court assumed jurisdiction over a claim for damages related to a lease of reserve lands, but again the jurisdictional issue was not raised. There, the plaintiff, Mr. Hofer, a non-Indian farmer, claimed he had entered into an agreement to extend leases for reserve lands. Despite this, he was told that his lease permits had expired and was evicted. He tried to sue the band for damages for breach of contract with respect to the lease agreements but only two of the agreements were supported by a permit under s. 28 of the
Indian Act
(pursuant to which the Minister may grant a non-Indian the right to occupy reserve lands). In a preliminary decision, Justice Hugessen ruled that while the claim for damages might succeed with respect to the lands where permits had been issued under s. 28, the other agreements had no chance of success, and he accordingly struck those claims. The matter was subsequently resolved prior to trial.
[93]
Thereafter, a band member who was set to lease land to Mr. Hofer sued the band for damages based on the loss of income from the lease.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Dawson assumed jurisdiction over the claim, dismissed it on the merits, but went on to conduct a provisional damages assessment. Although the Court assumed jurisdiction over the claim and provisionally adjudicated it on the merits, the jurisdiction of the Court to make a damages award was not specifically addressed.
[94]
Thus, while the foregoing cases support the conclusion that I do possess jurisdiction to award the damages claimed, they deal with the issue only tangentially.
[95]
In several other cases, this Court has refused to strike claims for damages related to occupation of lands on an Indian reserve. While these cases are not determinative of the jurisdictional issue as the test on a motion to strike is whether it is plain and obvious that a claim cannot succeed (see e.g.
Hunt v T & N plc
, [1990] 2 SCR 959, 74 DLR (4th) 321), these cases do provide some support for the conclusion that I do possess jurisdiction to award damages in this case.
[96]
For example, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , aff'd [1993] 2 CNLR 134 (FCA), leave to appeal to SCC refused 155 NR 320 (SCC), a band sued the Crown for declaratory relief, an order for an accounting of the proceeds of the sale of the lands, damages and compensation for breach of fiduciary duty flowing from a decision to surrender reserve land to two adjacent bands. The Crown filed third party notices, joining the two other Indian bands and seeking contribution, indemnity, or relief over from the other bands. The third party bands brought a motion to strike the third party notice for want of jurisdiction. Justice Strayer dismissed the motion, holding that jurisdiction over the third party claim could be found in subsection 17(4) of the FCA.
[97]
In a similar fashion, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 132 FTR 145, a married Indian couple obtained a Certificate of Possession as joint tenants for land on a reserve and built a residence there. They subsequently divorced. The man had been living outside the property for some years and no longer enjoyed physical access to the residence. He brought an action against the Crown and the occupants of the residence for compensation for his contribution towards the construction costs of the family residence. The defendants (other than the Crown) brought a motion to stay the action for want of jurisdiction. Relying on <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and
Jones Estate
, Chief Justice Lufty dismissed the motion and held that it was not plain and obvious that the Court lacked jurisdiction as jurisdiction could well be rooted in s. 17(4) of the FCA.
[98]
There are, however, cases going the other way. For example, in a relatively short decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 1167, Justice Wetston dismissed a claim made by one member of an Indian band against another band member for return of monies paid under an agreement of purchase and sale with respect to reserve lands, holding that this Court lacked jurisdiction to hear a land dispute between two Indians regarding who had the right to ownership of lands on a reserve. However, he only considered section 17(2)(a) of the FCA (not section 17(4)) and made no mention of the Supreme Court decision of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The case also pre-dates the decision of Justice MacKay in
Jones Estate
.
[99]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Lower Similkameen Band
], the chief and councillor of an Indian band sued band members for trespass and conversion flowing from the claimed wrongful occupation of the band council's offices. Prothonotary Hargrave struck these claims, noting at para 17 that:
Mr. Justice MacKay took a different but reconcilable view in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  parties sought declaratory relief as to rights to a certain parcel of land located on Reserve lands. The Crown, in whom title to the Reserve was vested, was a party to the action and acknowledged the Court's jurisdiction to resolve the claims as to possessory title. Mr. Justice MacKay found that there was jurisdiction by reason of section 17(4) of the
Federal Court Act
, which confers jurisdiction on the Trial Division "... to hear and determine proceedings to determine disputes where the Crown is or may be under an obligation, in respect of which there are or may be conflicting claims." He then pointed out the obligation concerned approval of possessory title to certain lands and of Indian lands and that the obligation arose in relation to Indian people, under the
Indian Act
, with regard to management of Indian lands. In the present instance, while the Plaintiffs may seek a declaration as to their proper election as Chief and Councillor, a claim for damages for trespass does not fit either within section 31 of the
Indian Act
, or within the framework of sections 17(2)(a) or 17(4) of the
Federal Court Act
.
[100]
In that case, however, the Crown had not been named as a party and there was no issue concerning who was entitled to a Certificate of Possession under the
Indian Act
.
[101]
In my view, the foregoing cases support the conclusion that I possess jurisdiction to award damages in this case both because the majority of them support this conclusion and because, on a principled basis, this conclusion flows from the decision of the Supreme Court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In this regard, the claims for damages made by Mr. Robertson are accessory to and flow directly from a finding that Mr. Beauvais is not entitled to possess Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1. In other words, unlike the situation in
Lower Similkameen Band
, I am not faced with a stand-alone claim for trespass based on private civil law principles but, rather, with determining what remedies in addition to a declaration and injunction are appropriate to correct Mr. Beauvais' wrongful possession of the lots. The selection of the appropriate remedy is not a jurisdictional issue in my view because <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> affords this Court subject matter jurisdiction over claims of wrongful possession of lands on an Indian reserve and, thus, plenary authority to remedy situations of wrongful possession. In short, the holding in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is not limited to claims for declaratory relief but, rather, should be read as grounding jurisdiction in this Court to grant all appropriate relief in cases where there is a dispute over entitlement to reserve lands in cases where the Crown is impleaded.
[102]
To hold otherwise would cast an unwarranted burden on plaintiffs by requiring them to bifurcate their claims if they choose to invoke this Court's undoubted jurisdiction to grant declaratory and injunctive relief in cases such as the present. Proceeding in this fashion would also expose defendants to the costs of a second action before a provincial superior court and would result in duplicative proceedings, which are results that ought be avoided if at all possible. There are, therefore, sound policy reasons which likewise inform the determination that this Court possesses jurisdiction over damages claims like those made by Mr. Robertson in this case.
[103]
I therefore find that I do possess jurisdiction to award the damages claimed. The fact that in so doing I may need to have regard to civil law principles or to the
Québec Charter
does not forestall this conclusion. In
ITO
, the Supreme Court determined that this Court may apply provincial law where the claim at issue, in pith and substance, falls within the Court's jurisdiction. Justice McIntyre, writing for the majority, held at para 34:
The Federal Court is constituted for the better administration of the laws of Canada. It is not, however, restricted to applying federal law in cases before it.
Where a case is in "pith and substance" within the Court's statutory jurisdiction, the Federal Court may apply provincial law incidentally necessary to resolve the issues presented by the parties
: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (SCC), where, in a case involving a dispute over patent rights, the effect of an employment contract had to be considered in the Federal Court, and see as well:
McNamara Construction (Western) Ltd v R
, where Laskin CJC suggested that the provincial law of contribution indemnity may be applied by the Federal Court where jurisdiction is otherwise founded on federal law. [emphasis added]
ii.
What remedies should be awarded?
[104]
Having determined that I possess jurisdiction to order the remedies sought, I turn now to consideration of what remedies ought to be awarded.
a) The parties' arguments
[105]
Counsel for Mr. Robertson argues on the remedial issues that by mere virtue of the fact that his client has Certificates of Possession for the lots and that the Minister has not issued new ones to Mr. Beauvais, I should conclude that Mr. Robertson is entitled to all the remedies he seeks. He relies in this regard on
Jones Estate
where Justice MacKay found the plaintiff entitled to possession of the reserve land in that case because the Minister had not issued a Certificate of Possession to the defendant, who was relying on a transfer much like the ones signed by Mr. Robertson. In that case, Justice MacKay held that a Transfer of Land document does not cast a legally enforceable obligation on the transferor until the Minister approves the transfer due to the requirements of section 24 of the
Indian Act
. The section provides in relevant part that "no transfer or agreement for the transfer of the right to possession of lands in a reserve is effective until it is approved by the Minister".
[106]
I agree with counsel for Mr. Robertson that due to section 24 of the
Indian Act
, Transfer of Land documents do not, of themselves, create legally enforceable obligations but disagree with his assertion that the Certificates of Possession that Mr. Robertson holds from AANDC must necessarily result in his being awarded the remedies he seeks. In this regard, Mr. Boucher testified that but for the intervention of counsel for Mr. Robertson, the Minister would have issued Certificates of Possession to Mr. Beauvais based on the Transfers signed by Mr. Robertson. Correspondence from AANDC to counsel for Mr. Robertson moreover indicates that the Minister has referred to this Court the task of determining whether the Transfers are valid. It would therefore be entirely circuitous to avoid ruling on the terms of the contract between Mr. Beauvais and Mr. Robertson and on the validity of the Transfers by holding that Mr. Robertson is entitled to possession of the lots by virtue of the mere fact of holding Certificates of Possession for them. Rather, what is necessary is that I determine what the terms of the agreement were between Mr. Beauvais and Mr. Robertson, which I have done, and that I also determine the effect of the Transfers signed in error by Mr. Robertson.
[107]
On this point, counsel for the defendants argue that Mr. Robertson cannot rely on his mistake in not appreciating the import of the Transfers because he is guilty of an "inexcusable error". Under the
Québec Civil Code
, a court may annul a contract if it finds that one of the contracting parties' consent was absent due to "error, fear or lesion" and the error was a material one, relating to the nature of the contract, the nature of its subject matter or any matter essential to valid consent having been given (arts. 1416, 1385, 1399 and 1400 CCQ). An "inexcusable error", however, cannot constitute a defect of consent under art. 1400 of the CCQ. In determining whether an error is inexcusable, the court must have regard to all circumstances present in the case and undertake an
in concreto
examination of the error. Factors to be taken into consideration include the age, the mental state, the intelligence and the professional or economic positions of the parties (Pierre-Gabriel Jobin & Nathalie Vézina,
Baudoin et Jobin: Les obligations
, 7th ed (Cowansville, Que: Yvon Blais, 2013) at 328). The primary question asked by the courts is whether there has been a high enough degree of negligence to characterize the error as inexcusable (in French, "une négligence d'une certaine gravité") (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QCCA) at para 58;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QCCA) at para 61).
[108]
The behaviour of the co-contractant can also influence whether an error will be characterized as inexcusable. When there has been bad faith on the part of one party (for example misleading the other party or not providing information as required), an error that would otherwise have been inexcusable (such as not reading a contract) may be judged to be excusable (
Jobin
at 329).
[109]
The failure to read a contract before signing it will usually be characterized as an inexcusable error, given that there is a general obligation to inform oneself before entering into contracts (see e.g.
Corporation First Capital (Carrefour Don Quichotte) inc c Massé
, 2008 QCCS 4080 at para 62). However, not having read the contract will not always lead to a finding of inexcusability, and courts will conduct an analysis based on the context, looking to factors such as the experience of the person committing the error and the relationship between the contracting parties.
[110]
For example, in
Gingras Jacques Lajoie et Associés ltée c 9081-7263 Québec inc
, [2003] JQ no 18944 at para 37, the Court of Québec noted that the applicant was a young person with little business experience who had developed good relations with and therefore trusted the defendant. He also asked questions about the contract before he signed it but did not read it. The Court held his error was excusable in the circumstances. To somewhat similar effect, in
Banque nationale du  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Superior Court of Québec annulled the contract based on excusable error even though the applicant had failed to read the contract before signing, citing the applicant's blind faith in the bank, where she had been a client for many years.
[111]
Here, I believe the concept of inexcusable error has no application for two reasons.
[112]
First, the doctrine applies to contracts, but Transfer of Land documents do not constitute a contract and are not equivalent to deeds. Rather, these documents must be considered as only evidence of intention to transfer land. As noted, they do not have any legal force as was held in
Jones Estate
. Thus, the terms of the contract between Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais are to be determined by what they agreed to. Here, as I have found, the terms of the contract were for a purchase price of $350,000.00, which implies that the land would be transferred only after the purchase price was paid. Thus, the fact that Mr. Robertson signed the Transfers without reading them does not bar him from relief.
[113]
Second, even if the doctrine of inexcusable error were to apply, I do not accept that Mr. Robertson's error is inexcusable in light of all the pertinent facts. At the time of signing the Transfers, Mr. Robertson was 70 years old and likely distracted due to the discussion about the right-of-way. He has difficulty reading. While he previously operated a garage and second hand car business, most of the administrative tasks were done by Ms. Leduc and there is nothing before me to indicate any degree of sophisticated business knowledge on the part of Mr. Robertson. Indeed, my observations of him were to the opposite effect. In addition, given my factual findings, it is clear that Mr. Beauvais is seeking to profit from Mr. Robertson's error and that Mr. Robertson genuinely did not appreciate that the documents he signed purported to record his intention to transfer the lots to Mr. Beauvais. In light of these facts, I believe Mr. Robertson's error was excusable.
b) Declaratory and injunctive relief
[114]
Having dealt with the parties' remedial arguments, I turn now to consideration of what remedies I should award. In terms of the requested declarations, I believe only one is necessary, namely, a declaration that Mr. Robertson is lawfully entitled to possession of Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1. As already discussed, in light of this determination, it is not possible for the Minister to issue Certificates of Possession in favour of Mr. Beauvais and has already issued them in favour of Mr. Robertson.
[115]
I also believe it appropriate to issue a mandatory order recognising Mr. Robertson's possessory rights, but given that tenant(s) were occupying the garage as at the date of the trial and are likely still doing so, these tenant(s) should be given the opportunity to negotiate for continued possession with Mr. Robertson. I have therefore ordered that from the date of this judgement, forward, the current tenant(s) of Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1 shall pay rent to Mr. Robertson as opposed to Mr. Beauvais and I will leave it to Mr. Robertson and the current tenant(s) to determine if and on what terms the lease of the garage will continue.
c) Compensatory damages
[116]
As concerns compensatory damages, Mr. Robertson claims as against Mr. Beauvais lost rent, equivalent to $4,500.00 per month from May 1, 2010 to the date of judgment. There is evidence before me to support damages in this amount from May 1, 2010 until early 2011, when Mr. Beauvais ceased operating his cigarette manufacturing business in the garage as the rent previously paid by Mr. Beauvais to Mr. Robertson was $4,500.00 per month. No evidence was tendered as to the exact date of the dissolution of the cigarette business, but the evidence does show it was in operation from May 1, 2010 to December 31, 2010, a period of eight months.
[117]
Therefore, an amount of $36,000.00 in respect of this period is appropriate, subject to the adjustments discussed below.
[118]
In terms of the period from January 2011 to present, the evidence does not allow me to quantify the damages Mr. Robertson suffered as no evidence was tendered regarding when the current tenant(s) began renting the premises. Nor is there evidence as to the amount of rent paid by those tenant(s) to Mr. Beauvais over this period, and there is no reason to assume that it is $4,500.00 per month. In addition, Mr. Beauvais testified that he made substantial improvements to the garage, spending at least $50,000.00 on them. Mr. Robertson is not entitled to benefit from these improvements without compensating Mr. Beauvais for them. Finally, $5000.00 must be deducted form the damages to account for the deposit that I have found Mr. Beauvais paid Mr. Robertson.
[119]
In the circumstances, I believe the most just and expedient manner of finalizing assessment of the quantum of compensatory damages would be to allow Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais an opportunity to settle the amount in accordance with the following directions. The quantum should be equal to $31,000.00 plus the amount of monthly rent paid by the tenants to Mr. Beauvais multiplied by 38.13 months (the period from January 1, 2011 to the date of this Judgment) less the value of the improvements made to the property by Mr. Beauvais. In the event Mr. Robertson and Mr. Beauvais cannot settle what this amount is, either may request that the matter be returned to me to settle by way of reference under Rule 153 of the Rules.
d) Moral damages
[120]
Mr. Robertson next claims moral damages from both Mr. Beauvais and the Council in the amount of $50,000.00, each. Moral damages, broadly speaking, are meant to address the non-pecuniary loss or pain and suffering that may be experienced by a plaintiff due to the fault of a defendant. While moral damages have been awarded for wrongful retention of real estate (see e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  EYB 2010-172586), I do not find it appropriate to make any award in this case because Mr. Robertson called virtually no evidence regarding the moral prejudice he claims to have suffered as a result of his being deprived of the garage. In this regard, no medical evidence was tendered and, at best, Ms. Leduc and Mr. Robertson testified only that Mr. Robertson might have been somewhat depressed by the situation and was not able to engage in the full range of leisure activities he had previously enjoyed due to lack of funds. In my view, this testimony falls short of establishing the sort of prejudice required to establish entitlement to moral damages and I therefore make no award of damages under this head.
e) Exemplary damages
[121]
Mr. Robertson finally claims exemplary damages against Mr. Beauvais and the Council in the amount of $100,000.00, each. Punitive damages may be awarded under either art. 1621 of the
Québec Civil Code
or section 49 of the
Québec Charter
for an unlawful or intentional interference with one of the rights guaranteed by the
Québec Charter
. Among these rights is the right to the peaceful enjoyment and free disposition of property enshrined in section 6 of the
Québec Charter.
[122]
As I have found that the Council did not breach any fiduciary duty it owes to Mr. Robertson, no exemplary damages against the Council are warranted.
[123]
As concerns the claim for exemplary damages against Mr. Beauvais, the case law interpreting section 49 of the
Québec Charter
recognizes that exemplary damages are appropriately awarded where the defendant deliberately seizes and refuses to return the plaintiff's property (see e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
Investissements Historia inc v Gervais Harding et ass inc
, JE 2006-955 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1 because, as I have found, he refused to pay Mr. Robertson the agreed-upon purchase price and refused to return the land to Mr. Robertson. In somewhat similar cases, damages in the range of approximately $3,000.00 to $10,000 have been awarded (see e.g.
Aubry v 3370160 Canada inc
, JE 2001-908 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  $5,000.00 is appropriate, given the nature of the transgression and the respective circumstances of Mr. Beauvais and Mr. Robertson.
f) Provisional execution notwithstanding appeal
[126]
As concerns the request for an order for provisional execution notwithstanding appeal under art. 547 of the CCP, those provisions are inapplicable to actions before this Court as the Rules deal comprehensively with this issue. In this regard, Rule 392 provides that as an order is effective from the time that it is endorsed in writing and signed, unless it states otherwise, and Rule 398 governs the process to obtain the stay of an order pending appeal, which requires the defendant to seek a stay. Thus, there is no basis for making the order sought by Mr. Robertson under this provision.
Interest and costs
[127]
Turning, finally, to the issues of interest and costs, in closing submissions, counsel for Mr. Robertson requested an order for interest on the damages awarded. However, he made no such claim in the Statement of Claim. I therefore decline to award interest.
[128]
In terms of costs, they shall follow the event and, as the case was of average complexity, shall be based on the mid-range of Column III of Tariff B to the Rules. Thus, based on this column in the Tariff, Mr. Beauvais should compensate Mr. Robertson for his costs, and Mr. Robertson, in turn, shall compensate the Council for its costs. There is no basis for an award of solicitor-client costs in this case.
[129]
In the event the parties cannot agree as to the quantum of costs, they may file written submissions of no more than 15 pages, each, on the issue within 30 days of the date of judgment.
JUDGMENT
[130]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The plaintiff is lawfully entitled to possession of Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1 on the Kahnawake Indian Reserve;
2. The current tenant(s) (if any) of Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1 on the Kahnawake Indian Reserve shall pay rent to the plaintiff at their current rate, until such a time that the plaintiff and the current tenant(s), should they wish, reach a new agreement;
3. The plaintiff and Mr. Beauvais shall attempt to settle the amount of compensatory damages owed by Mr. Beauvais to the plaintiff in accordance with the following directions. The quantum shall be equal to $31,000.00 plus an amount equal to the monthly rent paid by the tenant(s) of Lots 3-10 and 3-8-1 to Mr. Beauvais for 38.13 months, less the value of the improvements made to the lots by Mr. Beauvais. In the event the plaintiff and Mr. Beauvais cannot settle the amount of compensatory damages payable, either may request that the matter be returned to me to settle by way of reference under Rule 153 of the Rules;
4. Mr. Beauvais shall pay the plaintiff exemplary damages in the amount of $5,000.00;
5. Mr. Beauvais shall pay the costs of the plaintiff in accordance with the mid-range of Column III of Tariff B to the Rules, and the plaintiff shall pay the costs of the Mohawk Council of Kahnawake in accordance with the mid-range of Column III of Tariff B to the Rules. In the event the parties cannot agree as to the quantum of costs, they may file written submissions of no more than fifteen (15) pages each on this issue within thirty (30) days of the date of this judgment.
Judgment accordingly.
Editor: J. Danielle King/vnh
[End of English language judgment]
Footnotes
1. Under the old s.17(3)(c) of the FCA, the Federal Court had exclusive original jurisdiction. Under the current s. 17(4) of the FCA, this Court has concurrent original jurisdiction.
.........................
[1]
La juge Gleason
[Traduction]: Le demandeur, Charles Robertson, a exploité un garage durant plus de trente ans dans la réserve mohawk de Kahnawake. Ce garage était situé sur deux terrains qu'il possédait dans le cadre du régime de gestion foncière établi aux termes de la
Loi sur les Indiens
, LRC 1985, c I-5 (la
Loi sur les Indiens
).
[2]
M. Robertson a fini par louer les terrains et le garage au défendeur, Kyle Beauvais, qui a y a ensuite exploité une entreprise de fabrication de cigarettes entre 2007 et le début de 2011. Au printemps de 2010, M. Robertson, qui était alors âgé de 70 ans, a décidé de vendre le garage et en a discuté avec un certain nombre d'acheteurs potentiels, dont M. Beauvais. Ce qui s'est passé ensuite fait l'objet d'un différend entre les parties et a donné lieu à la présente action.
[3]
M. Robertson soutient que M. Beauvais et lui ont conclu une entente verbale concernant la vente du garage et le transfert de droits de possession sur les terrains à un prix d'achat de 350 000 $ et que M. Beauvais ne lui a payé que 5 000 $ à titre d'acompte. Malgré cela, M. Robertson s'est rendu au Bureau de gestion foncière du défendeur, le Conseil des Mohawks de Kahnawake (le Conseil) et a signé deux documents de transfert de terre (les documents de transfert), lesquels confirmaient censément que les terrains sur lesquels le garage était situé avaient été transférés à M. Beauvais. M. Robertson prétend avoir signé les documents de transfert par erreur, alléguant qu'il avait l'esprit confus et qu'il était incapable de les lire.
[4]
M. Beauvais, en revanche, soutient que M. Robertson et lui ont conclu une entente de transfert des droits de possession sur les terrains et le garage à un prix d'achat total de 225 000 $ et qu'il a payé la totalité de la somme à M. Robertson, en argent comptant. Il allègue donc que ce dernier tente de revenir sur l'entente, même s'il a été payé intégralement.
[5]
Le Conseil a transmis les deux documents de transfert signés par M. Robertson au ministre des Affaires indiennes et du Nord canadien (le ministre), mais celui-ci n'a pas délivré de certificats de possession des terrains en faveur de M. Beauvais et il a renvoyé à la Cour, pour jugement, la question de la validité des documents de transfert. Les certificats de possession des terrains en litige dans la présente action sont donc toujours inscrits au nom de M. Robertson.
[6]
Dans la présente action, M. Robertson poursuit à la fois M. Beauvais et le Conseil. Sa Majesté a été désignée comme mise en cause, mais elle n'a pas pris part à l'action et n'a pas comparu au procès.
[7]
Dans la présente action, M. Robertson sollicite les mesures de réparation suivantes:
a) une déclaration portant que les certificats de possession, qui lui ont été délivrés en vertu de l'article 20 de la
Loi sur les Indiens
, sont valides « à toutes fins que de droit » et qu'il a donc droit au titre de possession sur les deux terrains en question;
b) une déclaration portant que les documents de transfert de terre qu'il a signés en faveur de M. Beauvais sont nuls et sans effet « à toutes fins que de droit »;
c) une déclaration portant que ces transferts de terre sont inexécutoires et déraisonnables;
d) une déclaration portant que la décision de la mise en cause, représentée par le ministre, de reporter l'approbation ou le rejet des documents de transfert est valide « à toutes fins que de droit » et que les documents en question sont rejetés;
e) des ordonnances à l'encontre des deux défendeurs pour dommages-intérêts moraux de 50 000 $, chacun, ainsi que pour dommages-intérêts exemplaires de 100 000 $, chacun, pour atteinte aux articles 6 et 49 de la
Charte des droits et libertés de la personne
,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  allégué à ses obligations fiduciaires envers M. Robertson;
f) une ordonnance portant que M. Beauvais paie le loyer qui, selon M. Robertson, est exigible, soit 4 500 $ par mois entre le 1er mai 2010 et la date à laquelle M. Beauvais quittera le garage et les deux terrains;
g) une déclaration portant que le contrat d'achat et de vente des deux terrains en question est « résilié », annulé et déclaré sans effet « à toutes fins que de droit »;
h) une déclaration portant que le bail conclu entre M. Robertson et M. Beauvais est « résilié » et annulé;
i) une ordonnance portant que M. Beauvais quitte les lieux et les laisse dans l'état où ils se trouvaient au début du bail, sauf pour ce qui est de la détérioration et de l'usure normales, dans les trois jours suivant la date du jugement;
j) une ordonnance d'exécution provisoire malgré l'appel, aux termes de l'article 547 du
Code de procédure civile
,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  deux défendeurs, pour leur part, souhaitent que les actions engagées contre eux soient rejetées, avec dépens sur la base procureur-client. L'avocat de M. Beauvais a de plus demandé dans son plaidoyer final que je conclue qu'il existait un contrat valide entre son client et M. Robertson, que M. Beauvais a payé la totalité du prix d'achat et que la question de savoir s'il y a lieu de délivrer de nouveaux certificats de possession soit renvoyée pour décision au ministre, à qui la
Loi sur les Indiens
confère le pouvoir discrétionnaire de décider s'il convient de délivrer de tels certificats ou non.
[9]
Pendant les cinq jours qu'a duré le procès, sept personnes ont témoigné, et une bonne part de leurs témoignages était contradictoire. La présente action soulève donc les questions de droit et de fait suivantes:
1. Que s'est-il passé entre M. Robertson et M. Beauvais et, plus particulièrement, ont-ils conclu une entente verbale pour le transfert de droits de possession sur le garage et les terrains et, dans l'affirmative, quelles en étaient les conditions? Combien d'argent M. Beauvais a-t-il payé à M. Robertson?
2. M. Robertson a-t-il compris ce qu'il signait quand il a apposé sa signature sur les deux documents de transfert de terre qui transféraient censément les terrains en question à M. Beauvais?
3. Le Conseil a-t-il manqué à une obligation quelconque de sa part envers M. Robertson?
4. La Cour est-elle compétente pour accorder les mesures de réparation demandées? Dans l'affirmative, quelles sont les mesures de réparation qui conviennent en l'espèce?
5. Pour ce qui est de l'examen d'une mesure de réparation appropriée, quel est l'effet juridique des deux documents de transfert que M. Robertson a signés et, s'il n'a pas bien compris leur effet, peut-il se fonder sur l'erreur qu'il a commise, ou l'article 1400 du
Code civil du Québec
, qui qualifie certaines erreurs d'« inexcusables » l'empêche-t-il de le faire?
6. Faut-il accorder un montant d'intérêt même si la demande n'en a pas été faite dans la déclaration?
7. Quels dépens convient-il d'adjuger?
[10]
Avant d'examiner ces questions, il est utile de passer en revue les dispositions de la
Loi sur les Indiens
qui concernent les terres de réserve de même que les éléments de preuve qui ont été produits sur la propriété de terres dans la réserve des Mohawks, car, dans une réserve indienne, la possession de terres est différente d'ailleurs au pays et il s'agit là d'un aspect qui, comme nous le verrons, a d'importantes répercussions en l'espèce.
Les dispositions de la
Loi sur les Indiens
concernant la possession de terres dans une réserve indienne et leur application à Kahnawake
[11]
Aux termes de l'article 18 de la
Loi sur les Indiens
, les terres qui constituent une réserve indienne sont détenues par Sa Majesté à l'usage et au profit de la bande indienne pour laquelle elles ont été mises de côté. La loi établit un système dans le cadre duquel le ministre a le pouvoir discrétionnaire de délivrer des « certificats de possession » aux membres d'une bande indienne. Un certificat atteste le droit qu'a son détenteur de posséder les terres qui y sont décrites. Les paragraphes 20(1) et (2) de la
Loi sur les Indiens
prévoient ce qui suit à cet égard:
Possession de terres dans une réserve
20. (1) Un Indien n'est légalement en possession d'une terre dans une réserve que si, avec l'approbation du ministre, possession de la terre lui a été accordée par le conseil de la bande.
Certificat de possession
(2) Le ministre peut délivrer à un Indien légalement en possession d'une terre dans une réserve un certificat, appelé certificat de possession, attestant son droit de posséder la terre y décrite.
Possession of lands in a reserve
20. (1) No Indian is lawfully in possession of land in a reserve unless, with the approval of the Minister, possession of the land has been allotted to him by the council of the band.
Certificate of Possession
(2) The Minister may issue to an Indian who is lawfully in possession of land in a reserve a certificate, to be called a Certificate of Possession, as evidence of his right to possession of the land described therein.
[12]
L'article 21 de la
Loi sur les Indiens
oblige le ministre à tenir un registre, appelé « Registre des terres de réserve », où sont inscrits les détails relatifs aux certificats de possession qu'il délivre en vertu de l'article 20 de la
Loi sur les Indiens
.
[13]
Aux termes des articles 18.1, 20, 24 et 25 de la
Loi sur les Indiens
, seuls les membres de la bande indienne pour laquelle les terres de réserve sont détenues peuvent se voir accorder un certificat de possession pour des terres situées dans la réserve. L'article 24 de la
Loi sur les Indiens
reconnaît le droit qu'ont les Indiens possédant légalement des terres de réserve de les transférer à la bande ou à un autre membre de celle-ci:
Transfert de possession
24. Un Indien qui est légalement en possession d'une terre dans une réserve peut transférer à la bande, ou à un autre membre de celle-ci, le droit à la possession de la terre, mais aucun transfert ou accord en vue du transfert du droit à la possession de terres dans une réserve n'est valable tant qu'il n'est pas approuvé par le ministre.
Transfer of possession
24. An Indian who is lawfully in possession of lands in a reserve may transfer to the band or another member of the band the right to possession of the land, but no transfer or agreement for the transfer of the right to possession of lands in a reserve is effective until it is approved by the Minister.
[14]
M. Jean Boucher, gestionnaire, Terres et ressources, au bureau régional du Québec d'Affaires autochtones et Développement du Nord Canada (AADNC), et Mme Cheryl Diabo, une ancienne employée du Bureau de gestion foncière (le BGF) qu'administre le Conseil, ont tous deux témoigné à propos de la façon dont ces dispositions sont appliquées dans la réserve de Kahnawake. Ils ont confirmé que le Conseil a décidé d'utiliser le système des certificats de possession établi sous le régime de la
Loi sur les Indiens
pour gérer les transferts de terres à Kahnawake. (M. Boucher a déclaré que le choix d'utiliser ou non ce système est facultatif et que la décision en revient à chaque Première Nation.)
[15]
À Kahnawake, les terres de réserve (ou, du moins, les terres qui sont en litige en l'espèce) sont divisées en parcelles, et des levés d'arpentage sont effectués en vue d'en délimiter les paramètres. Selon le système qu'AADNC a établi et que le Conseil applique, les personnes qui possèdent validement des parcelles obtiennent du ministre un certificat de possession. Lorsqu'un membre de la bande souhaite transférer des terres pour lesquelles il détient un certificat de possession, il doit se présenter au BGF du Conseil et signer un document intitulé « Transfert de terre dans une réserve indienne ». La signature du membre est attestée par un employé du BGF, qui remplit un affidavit, confirmant l'identité du signataire et l'authenticité de la signature.
[16]
Le document de transfert de terre que signe l'auteur du transfert (le cédant) est un document d'une page, qui nomme le cédant, qui confirme que celui-ci est membre de la bande indienne des Mohawks de Kahnawake et qu'il est le titulaire enregistré de la terre à transférer, et qui contient une description de la terre en question et, ensuite, un court paragraphe confirmant le transfert. Ce paragraphe confirme qu'il y a eu une contrepartie pour le transfert, nomme le bénéficiaire du transfert (le cessionnaire), confirme que celui-ci a reçu la contrepartie indiquée et mentionne ensuite que le cédant a transféré au cessionnaire « toute propriété et tout intérêt [qu'il] possède dans ladite/lesdites parcelle(s) de terre, en vertu de la
Loi sur les Indiens
».
[17]
Dans les modèles de formulaire de transfert de terre que l'on trouve dans le Guide du Registre des terres indiennes d'AADNC, aucun montant n'est précisé pour ce qui est de la contrepartie à payer dans le cas d'un transfert, et, si l'on se sert du modèle, n'importe quel montant peut donc être inscrit au moment de remplir le document de transfert. M. Boucher a déclaré toutefois qu'environ quatre-vingt-dix pour cent des transferts qu'il reçoit à son bureau n'indiquent qu'un dollar seulement comme montant de la contrepartie.
[18]
Les formulaires de transfert de terre préimprimés dont le Conseil s'est servi pendant toute la période en cause en l'espèce indiquaient la somme d'un dollar comme montant de la contrepartie du transfert, et Mme Diabo a déclaré que tous les transferts signés pendant la période où elle travaillait au BGF étaient présentés sous cette forme. Elle a donc dit que le montant réel (s'il était supérieur à 1 $) que payait un membre de la bande pour une parcelle de terre de réserve était une affaire purement privée entre le cédant et le cessionnaire et que ce montant n'était pas consigné dans le formulaire de transfert de terre.
[19]
Mme Diabo a également déclaré que ses activités consistaient principalement à vérifier si le cédant était légalement en possession de la terre à transférer (ce qui oblige à consulter le registre que tient le ministre), si le cédant et le cessionnaire étaient membres de la bande indienne des Mohawks de Kahnawake et si les formulaires étaient dûment remplis. Elle a ajouté que le BGF ne vérifiait pas si le prix d'achat convenu pour un transfert de terre avait été payé. Le manuel de procédure du Conseil, qui s'applique aux transferts de parcelles situées dans la réserve, prévoit qu'une fois que ces vérifications sont faites et que le formulaire de transfert de terre et l'attestation d'exécution sont remplis au BGF, il faut ensuite envoyer ces documents au président du Comité de gestion foncière de la Bande pour approbation. Mme Diabo a déclaré qu'à l'issue du processus, les formulaires dûment remplis sont généralement envoyés le vendredi de chaque semaine à AADNC, pour enregistrement et délivrance des certificats de possession.
[20]
M. Boucher a témoigné au sujet des procédures qu'applique AADNC; il a confirmé que le Ministère vérifie les documents présentés avant de délivrer un certificat de possession au cessionnaire et d'inscrire ce dernier dans le registre que tient le ministre sous le régime de la
Loi sur les Indiens
. AADNC vérifie, notamment, si les documents sont lisibles et bien remplis et si le cédant a la possession valide des terres à transférer. Il a indiqué que cela oblige à consulter le registre pour confirmer si, au moment du transfert, le cédant détenait le certificat de possession applicable. Cependant, cela n'empêche pas un cessionnaire de transférer immédiatement le terrain à quelqu'un d'autre (sans passer par l'étape intermédiaire de la délivrance d'un nouveau certificat de possession au nom du cessionnaire). M. Boucher a ajouté à cet égard que les documents présentés dans la présente affaire étaient enregistrables et qu'ils auraient donné lieu à la délivrance de certificats de possession en faveur de M. Beauvais, n'eût été l'intervention de l'avocat du demandeur, qui soutenait que M. Robertson avait signé les documents de transfert de terre par erreur.
[21]
Comme nous le verrons plus en détail ci-après, pour l'un des terrains en question, M. Robertson n'était pas le détenteur du certificat de possession connexe quand il a signé le document de transfert de terre en faveur de M. Beauvais, car ce terrain avait été transféré à M. Robertson le même jour où il avait signé un document de transfert en faveur de M. Beauvais. M. Boucher a toutefois indiqué que ce genre de transaction serait acceptable aux yeux du ministre, ce qui dénote que, du moins en ce qui le concernait, il n'est pas nécessaire d'être le détenteur d'un certificat de possession pour être reconnu par le ministre comme ayant le droit de transférer un terrain dans une réserve indienne, tant qu'il existe une chaîne de transfert valide qui mène jusqu'au cessionnaire ultime.
[22]
Le témoignage de ces deux témoins, les extraits des guides qui ont été déposés ainsi que la
Loi sur les Indiens
même établissent que les documents de transfert de terre ne sont pas assimilables à des actes que l'on enregistre en vue de procéder au transfert d'un titre foncier à l'extérieur d'une réserve. Il y a trois grandes différences entre les deux types de document: premièrement, les documents de transfert de terre ne transfèrent aucun titre; deuxièmement, ils n'indiquent pas nécessairement la contrepartie réellement payée pour un terrain qui est situé dans une réserve indienne; troisièmement, ils ne transfèrent pas en soi des droits de possession sur une terre de réserve, car le ministre a le pouvoir discrétionnaire de délivrer ou non un certificat de possession sous le régime de la
Loi sur les Indiens
, et ce certificat constitue simplement une preuve du droit qu'a la personne qui y est nommée de posséder la terre qui y est mentionnée. En fait, la jurisprudence reconnaît que le régime applicable aux terres de réserve qui a été établi sous le régime de la
Loi sur les Indiens
a un caractère
sui generis
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
R c Vanderpeet
, [1996] 2 RCS 507, 137 DLR (4th) 289).
[23]
Il est maintenant possible, sur cette toile de fond, d'examiner ce qui s'est passé entre M. Robertson et M. Beauvais.
Le contexte de l'entente conclue entre M. Robertson et M. Beauvais
[24]
En 1972, M. Robertson a fait l'acquisition des terres qui sont visées par la présente action, lesquelles étaient à l'époque décrites comme la totalité de la parcelle 3-8 bloc B, Réserve indienne de Kahnawake no 14 et la totalité de la parcelle 3-10 bloc B, Réserve indienne de Kahnawake no 14 (appelées ci-après, tout simplement, les parcelles 3-8 et 3-10). Quelques années plus tard, M. Robertson a bâti sur ces deux parcelles un garage dans lequel, jusqu'en 2005, il a exploité un atelier de carrosserie automobile ainsi qu'une entreprise de réparation d'automobiles, et où il a acheté et vendu des automobiles d'occasion. En 1995, M. Robertson a embauché Nathalie Leduc, qui a travaillé pour lui jusqu'en 2005. En 2001, les deux ont entamé une relation amoureuse et sont devenus - et sont toujours - conjoints de fait. Mme Leduc vit avec M. Robertson dans la maison que celui-ci possède dans la réserve de Kahnawake.
[25]
Mme Leduc et M. Robertson ont tous deux déclaré que cette dernière s'occupait de toutes les tâches de lecture et d'écriture concernant l'exploitation du garage et de l'entreprise de vente et de réparation d'automobiles parce que M. Robertson avait des problèmes de lecture et avait de la difficulté à transposer des caractères. Ils ont également déclaré que, même après avoir cessé d'exploiter le garage en 2005, M. Robertson se fiait encore à Mme Leduc pour tout ce qu'il devait lire et écrire, comme payer toutes les factures du ménage.
[26]
En plus de ses problèmes de lecture, M. Robertson a également eu des problèmes de vision et, en 2007, il a subi une intervention chirurgicale à un œil pour un glaucome, accessoire à une rétinopathie diabétique. Selon une note de l'ophtalmologiste qui l'a traité et qui a été produite sur consentement, en 2008 (l'année de son dernier examen) M. Robertson n'avait aucun problème de vision dans un œil, mais, dans l'autre, sa capacité était nettement altérée. Lors du procès, M. Robertson a pu lire du texte en très gros caractères, c'est-à-dire l'en-tête de grande taille des documents de transfert de terre, mais il a déclaré qu'il ne pouvait rien déchiffrer du reste du document, écrit en caractères plus petits. Il a reconnu toutefois qu'il conduit encore une automobile dans la réserve, et il est donc capable de voir jusqu'à un certain point.
[27]
En 2005, dans le cadre du règlement d'un litige antérieur avec l'une de ses filles au sujet d'une somme d'argent qu'il lui devait, M. Robertson a transféré les parcelles 3-8 et 3-10 à sa fille, Shelly Robertson. En 2007, cette dernière et son époux, Lester Norton, ont loué une partie du garage situé sur ces parcelles à Kyle Beauvais. M. Beauvais, de pair avec son frère Chris et un autre homme du nom de Davis Rice, a établi sur les lieux une entreprise de fabrication de cigarettes et a payé à M. Norton un loyer de 2 500 $ par mois.
[28]
En 2008, M. Robertson a emprunté la somme de 40 000 $ à l'un de ses gendres, Clive McComber, en vue de rembourser l'argent qu'il devait à Shelly. Après le remboursement, Shelly a signé deux documents de transfert de terre au BGF, de façon à rétrocéder les parcelles 3-8 et 3-10 à M. Robertson.
[29]
Mme Leduc et M. McComber ont rédigé une brève entente pour indiquer que la somme de 40 000 $ n'était prêtée que pour trente jours et que, si cette somme n'était pas remboursée, M. Robertson transférerait la totalité de la parcelle 3-8 à M. McComber. M. Robertson a signé cette entente. Par la suite, M. McComber et lui se sont rendus au BGF, où les employés du Conseil ont attesté la signature des deux hommes sur l'entente et M. Robertson a signé un document de transfert de terre en vue de transférer la totalité de la parcelle à M. McComber.
[30]
Dans leur témoignage, M. Robertson et Mme Leduc ont expliqué que M. McComber avait exigé que le terrain soit transféré à titre de garantie pour le prêt, l'entente étant que si l'argent était remboursé, M. McComber rétrocéderait la totalité de la parcelle 3-8, à l'exception d'une petite partie, à M. Robertson. Ce dernier a convenu de transférer à M. McComber, à titre d'intérêt, une petite partie de la parcelle 3-8, adjacente à d'autres terrains que celui-ci possédait.
[31]
Le Conseil a transmis à AADNC les documents de transferts de terre que Shelly avait signés pour la parcelle 3-10 ainsi que pour la parcelle 3-8. Le 15 décembre 2008, le ministre a délivré un certificat de possession concernant la parcelle 3-10 à M. Robertson et un certificat de possession concernant la parcelle 3-8 à M. McComber.
[32]
Peu après l'expiration du délai de trente jours fixé pour le remboursement de la somme de 40 000 $, M. Robertson a remboursé les 40 000 $ à M. McComber, cette fois-ci après l'avoir empruntée à Angela, une autre de ses filles. Le 25 novembre 2008, M. Robertson et M. McComber ont signé une autre brève entente écrite, qui confirmait le remboursement de l'argent et qui prévoyait que la partie de la parcelle 3-8 qui devait être restituée à M. Robertson lui serait rétrocédée par M. McComber. Mme Leduc a également rédigé cette entente et M. Robertson n'a fait que la signer.
[33]
M. Robertson a déclaré qu'il croyait que M. McComber avait signé un document de transfert de terre en vue de restituer la partie de la parcelle 3-8 qui devait lui être rétrocédée. Cependant, il s'est avéré que M. McComber ne l'a pas réellement fait avant 2010, après que M. Robertson eut décidé de vendre son garage, comme nous le verrons plus loin.
[34]
Avant que le BGF puisse accepter un document de transfert concernant la rétrocession du gros de la parcelle 3-8 à M. Robertson, il fallait qu'un plan de subdivision soit établi en vue de délimiter quelle partie de la parcelle M. McComber conservait. Il était également nécessaire de payer au Conseil des frais pour l'établissement de ce plan. Ce dernier a été établi en février 2009 par un arpenteur, mais n'a pas été déposé au BGF avant 2010.
[35]
À partir de 2008, cependant, M. Beauvais a payé un loyer à M. Robertson. Le montant du loyer était au départ de 2 500 $ par mois, soit le même montant que M. Beauvais payait auparavant à M. Norton. Au milieu de l'année 2008, M. Beauvais a agrandi son entreprise de fabrication de cigarettes et a loué la totalité du garage à M. Robertson, et le loyer a donc été majoré à 4 500 $ par mois. Tant M. Robertson que M. Beauvais ont confirmé que ce montant était payé mensuellement en argent comptant et que, habituellement, aucun reçu n'était donné pour les montants payés. (M. Robertson a toutefois déposé deux reçus qui, soutient-il, ont été délivrés par un employé de M. Beauvais, Garth Cross. Il semble toutefois qu'il était rare que l'on remette un reçu pour les paiements de loyer.)
[36]
À la fin de 2009 ou au début de 2010, M. Robertson a décidé de vendre son garage et de transférer la possession de la parcelle 3-10 et de la partie de la parcelle 3-8 que M. McComber lui avait censément restituée. M. Robertson a eu un certain nombre d'entretiens avec plusieurs acheteurs potentiels; il a été question d'un prix d'achat de 400 000 $, auquel, selon M. Robertson, aucun de ces acheteurs ne s'est opposé. Cette prétention a été corroborée par Darcy Lazore, un autre des gendres de M. Robertson, qui a témoigné qu'il avait tenté de négocier une entente pour qu'une tierce partie fasse l'acquisition des lieux en vue d'y exploiter une entreprise de fabrication de cigarettes. (Ce projet n'a jamais vu le jour, car M. Lazore et les acheteurs potentiels venaient d'Akwesasne, dans l'État de New York, et ne pouvaient donc pas obtenir de certificats de possession pour les parcelles sous le régime de la
Loi sur les Indiens
, puisqu'ils n'étaient pas membres de la bande de Kahnawake. Cependant, M. Lazore a confirmé que les personnes avec lesquelles il avait fait affaire auraient été disposées à payer la somme de 400 000 $ pour le garage et les parcelles.)
[37]
Tant M. Robertson que M. Beauvais conviennent qu'ils ont eu de premiers entretiens au sujet de la vente du garage et du transfert des parcelles aux environs des mois de février ou de mars 2010 et que M. Robertson a indiqué au départ qu'il voulait 400 000 $ pour les parcelles et le garage.
[38]
M. Beauvais a témoigné que, quelque temps avant le 1er avril 2010, il s'est rendu au BGF pour consulter le registre au sujet des parcelles 3-10 et 3-8 et qu'il a découvert que la parcelle 3-8 était toujours inscrite au nom de M. McComber. M. Robertson et M. Beauvais conviennent que, quelque temps avant le 1er avril, ce dernier a informé M. Robertson du fait que M. McComber n'avait rétrocédé aucune partie de la parcelle 3-8 à M. Robertson.
Que s'est-il passé entre M. Robertson et M. Beauvais et combien d'argent M. Beauvais a-t-il payé à M. Robertson?
[39]
À partir de ce moment, la version des faits de M. Robertson et celle de M. Beauvais divergent.
[40]
M. Robertson soutient qu'un jour du mois de mars 2010 il s'est présenté au garage et a eu une discussion avec M. Beauvais et que, au cours de cette discussion, celui-ci lui a demandé d'accepter un prix inférieur, lui rappelant que son père avait été un ami proche de son propre père. M. Robertson soutient qu'au cours de cette conversation, il a convenu de vendre le garage et de transférer les parcelles à M. Beauvais à un prix de 350 000 $, mais qu'aucune date de clôture n'a été fixée. Il soutient également que M. Beauvais lui a dit qu'il aurait besoin d'un financement pour conclure l'achat.
[41]
M. Robertson a déclaré s'être présenté au BGF le 1er avril 2010 en vue de régler la question du droit de possession concernant la parcelle 3-8, que M. McComber ne lui avait pas rétrocédée. Au BGF, M. Robertson s'est entretenu avec Mme Diabo. Dans son témoignage, M. Robertson a donné peu de détails sur ce dont il avait parlé avec Mme Diabo ce jour-là, à part indiquer qu'elle lui avait appris qu'il était impossible de traiter le transfert, de Clive McComber à lui, d'une partie de la parcelle 3-8, car il y avait des frais de 500 $ à payer pour le travail d'arpentage qui avait été fait en vue de subdiviser la parcelle 3-8 entre la partie que M. McComber devait conserver et celle qui devait être rétrocédée à M. Robertson.
[42]
Mme Diabo a donné un peu plus de détails sur la discussion qu'elle avait eue avec M. Robertson le 1er avril 2010 et, en plus de confirmer qu'elle lui avait parlé des frais de 500 $ à payer, elle a aussi ajouté que M. Robertson lui avait dit qu'il avait l'intention de vendre la parcelle 3-10 et sa partie de la parcelle 3-8 à M. Beauvais. C'est ce que confirme la preuve documentaire, car Mme Diabo a entrepris de remplir les documents nécessaires pour établir les deux documents de transfert de terre relatifs aux deux parcelles. Elle a ajouté que M. Beauvais ne s'était pas présenté au BGF après le 1er avril, ce qui veut dire qu'elle avait donc dû apprendre de M. Robertson lui-même qu'il avait l'intention de vendre les parcelles à M. Beauvais quand il s'était présenté au BGF le 1er avril 2010.
[43]
M. Robertson s'est rendu au bureau principal du Conseil le 1er avril 2010 pour payer les frais exigibles de 500 $ et on lui a remis pour ces derniers un reçu, qu'il a donné à Mme Leduc quand il est rentré chez lui. Une fois que les frais ont été payés, le BGF a pu traiter le transfert, de M. McComber à M. Robertson, de la partie de la parcelle 3-8 qui devait être restituée à M. Robertson. (Après avoir été subdivisée, la partie de la parcelle 3-8 qui allait être restituée à M. Robertson a été désignée comme la totalité de la parcelle 3-8-1 bloc B, Réserve indienne de Kahnawake no 14 (ci-après appelée la parcelle 3-8-1)).
[44]
Mme Diabo a déclaré avoir téléphoné à M. McComber le 7 avril 2010 pour lui demander de se présenter au bureau et de signer un document de transfert de terre pour la parcelle 3-8-1 en faveur de M. Robertson. Au cours de cette conversation, a-t-elle indiqué, M. McComber a dit qu'il y avait des questions qu'il fallait qu'il règle avec M. Robertson avant de signer le document de transfert. Tant M. Robertson que Mme Leduc ont corroboré ce fait, disant que M. McComber voulait récupérer quelques outils qui se trouvaient dans un contenant de stockage verrouillé situé sur les parcelles avant de signer le transfert. La preuve documentaire confirme également que Mme Diabo a téléphoné à M. McComber le 7 avril.
[45]
M. Robertson a déclaré être retourné au BGF le 12 avril, probablement à la suite d'un appel de Mme Diabo. (Elle a déclaré qu'elle avait téléphoné pour qu'il vienne au bureau.) Il a ajouté qu'à son arrivée au BGF le 12 avril, il avait demandé à Mme Diabo si M. McComber avait signé le document de transfert de la parcelle 3-8-1 et il s'était entretenu avec Carol Goodleaf, la superviseure de Mme Diabo. Selon M. Robertson et Mme Diabo, qui avait entendu leur conversation, Mme Goodleaf a d'abord dit à M. Robertson que M. McComber s'était présenté au BGF et qu'il avait bel et bien signé le document de transfert de terre concernant la parcelle 3-8-1 à rétrocéder à M. Robertson. Mme Goodleaf a ensuite expliqué à ce dernier qu'il était obligé d'accorder à M. McComber un droit de passage sur la parcelle 3-8-1 afin de permettre à ce dernier d'avoir accès à la partie de la parcelle 3-8 qu'il conservait. Le droit de passage était mentionné dans le document de transfert de M. McComber à M. Robertson. Tant M. Robertson que Mme Diabo ont confirmé que ce dernier a été contrarié par l'obligation de prévoir un droit de passage. Mme Diabo et M. Robertson diffèrent toutefois d'opinion sur ce qui s'est passé ensuite.
[46]
Mme Diabo a déclaré que M. Robertson s'est ensuite entretenu avec elle et a demandé de signer les documents de transfert des parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1 en faveur de M. Beauvais. M. Robertson, en revanche, prétend n'avoir rien demandé de tel et dit qu'il pensait qu'on lui remettait des documents concernant la parcelle 3-8-1 qu'on lui rétrocédait. Cependant, il a tout de même signé les deux documents de transfert des parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1 en faveur de M. Beauvais. Il soutient que Mme Diabo lui a remis deux originaux, et deux copies qui, lui a-t-elle dit, étaient destinées à M. Beauvais, pour qu'il s'en serve en lien avec l'obtention d'un financement de la Caisse populaire de la réserve. Il maintient toutefois qu'il croyait que les documents de transfert faisaient simplement état du fait que M. McComber lui rétrocédait la parcelle 3-8-1.
[47]
Mme Diabo, pour sa part, a déclaré avoir remis une série d'originaux à M. Robertson, de même qu'une copie à remettre à M. Beauvais, mais elle n'a rien dit du fait que ce dernier avait besoin d'un financement. Elle a déclaré aussi avoir lu à M. Robertson les noms du cédant (M. Robertson) et du cessionnaire (M. Beauvais) ainsi que la description des parcelles à transférer qui figurait sur les deux documents de transfert avant que M. Robertson les signe. M. Robertson ne nie pas que cela a peut-être bien eu lieu, mais il maintient qu'il n'a tout simplement pas compris ce qu'il signait.
[48]
Après avoir entendu les deux témoigner, et pris en considération leur témoignage à la lumière des documents pertinents qui ont été déposés en tant que pièces, je ne suis pas d'avis qu'il y a beaucoup de contradictions entre la version de M. Robertson et celle de Mme Diabo sur ce qui s'est passé le 12 avril au BGF. Il y a tout simplement eu un malentendu entre les deux quant à la raison pour laquelle M. Robertson était là. Mme Diabo croyait qu'il était venu chercher une copie du document de transfert de M. McComber et signer les documents de transfert en faveur de M. Beauvais. Compte tenu du temps écoulé, il est probablement impossible pour elle de se souvenir des paroles exactes de M. Robertson, mais elle a certainement compris qu'il demandait qu'on lui remette les documents de transfert en faveur de M. Beauvais afin qu'il puisse les signer. M. Robertson, en revanche, croyait qu'il se trouvait là juste pour confirmer la rétrocession d'un terrain que détenait M. McComber. Il était contrarié par ce que Mme Goodleaf lui avait dit à propos du droit de passage et il n'avait pas lu les documents qu'il avait signés - et il ne pouvait vraisemblablement pas les lire. Cependant, il les avait signés et Mme Diabo lui avait remis une série d'originaux et une série de copies. Je trouve peu probable, toutefois, qu'elle ait dit quoi que ce soit au sujet de la visite de M. Beauvais à la Caisse populaire, car elle ignorait tout à fait que ce dernier avait besoin d'un financement. Fait important, tant M. Robertson que Mme Diabo s'entendent pour dire que ce dernier n'a pas mentionné qu'il n'était pas capable de lire les documents qu'il signait et n'a pas indiqué qu'il avait des doutes quelconques sur ce qui était en train de se passer.
[49]
M. Robertson prétend ne pas avoir remis les documents de transfert à Mme Leduc quand il est rentré chez lui le 12 avril; il a plutôt mis l'enveloppe contenant les originaux dans sa serviette et a laissé les copies dans son automobile. Il a toutefois déclaré avoir dit à Mme Leduc qu'il avait reçu les documents de transfert de la parcelle 3-8-1 de M. McComber et qu'il allait amener les copies des documents qu'il avait reçus à M. Beauvais en vue de conclure la transaction avec lui. Il soutient par ailleurs qu'il a fait rédiger par Mme Leduc une lettre de recommandation à l'intention de M. Beauvais, pour confirmer que celui-ci avait toujours payé son loyer, de façon à ce qu'il puisse s'en servir dans le cadre de sa demande d'emprunt. Mme Leduc a corroboré ce témoignage et a confirmé avoir rédigé une lettre de recommandation, dont une copie a été déposée en tant que pièce.
[50]
M. Robertson a soutenu ensuite être allé voir M. Beauvais le 13 avril pour lui remettre la lettre de recommandation et les copies de ce qu'il croyait être des documents confirmant le transfert d'un terrain entre M. McComber et lui. (Il s'agissait en fait de copies des documents de transfert en faveur de M. Beauvais, que M. Robertson prétend avoir signés par erreur.) Il a déclaré de plus qu'au cours de cette rencontre, il avait demandé un acompte, que M. Beauvais avait dit à M. Cross de vérifier combien d'argent ils avaient dans le coffre-fort qui se trouvait au garage, qu'il avait découvert qu'il y avait au moins 5 000 $ et que les deux - M. Beauvais et M. Robertson - avaient convenu que M. Beauvais verserait un acompte de 5 000 $ sur le prix d'achat de 350 000 $ dont ils avaient convenu. Il a également déclaré qu'ils n'avaient pas fixé la date de clôture, car M. Beauvais devait encore se rendre à la Caisse populaire et avait dit qu'il lui faudrait un peu de temps pour obtenir le financement dont il avait besoin, puisqu'un membre de sa famille était décédé. Mme Leduc a déclaré qu'une fois que M. Robertson était rentré à la maison après avoir rencontré M. Beauvais, elle avait vu le reçu et avait compté les 5 000 $ d'acompte, qu'elle avait déposés dans le coffre-fort qui se trouvait dans leur maison.
[51]
Le fait suivant, selon M. Robertson et Mme Leduc, est que M. Beauvais a téléphoné à Mme Leduc le 21 avril 2010 pour demander de rencontrer M. Robertson. Ce dernier s'est présenté au garage le 21 et soutient que M. Beauvais lui a dit qu'il - M. Robertson - avait signé les documents de transfert, lesquels transféraient le terrain à M. Beauvais, et qu'il n'avait pas l'intention de payer davantage parce que M. Robertson devait au moins 400 000 $ à son père, et que M. Beauvais lui a donné l'ordre de sortir de sa propriété. M. Robertson soutient que le frère de M. Beauvais, Chris, l'a ensuite menacé, disant qu'il ne fallait pas qu'il se plaigne, car [traduction] « ils étaient les plus forts ». M. Robertson dit qu'il est ensuite rentré chez lui, que Mme Leduc et lui ont lu les documents de transfert qui se trouvaient dans sa serviette, qu'il a confirmé l'erreur qu'il avait commise, qu'il a consulté un avocat et qu'il s'est rendu au BGF pour tenter d'annuler la transaction.
[52]
Bien qu'il y ait une certaine divergence entre les témoignages de Mme Diabo, de M. Robertson et de Mme Leduc au sujet de ce qui s'est passé au BGF le 21 avril, rien de cela n'est pertinent. Il suffit de dire que M. Robertson et Mme Leduc, très contrariés, ont tenté de faire annuler les documents de transfert et se sont fait dire par Mme Diabo qu'il n'y avait rien à faire. Mme Diabo a déclaré spontanément qu'après leur départ, elle était si bouleversée qu'elle était allée pleurer dans la salle des toilettes.
[53]
Après cela, Mme Leduc et M. Robertson se sont présentés au poste des Gardiens de la paix de la réserve pour porter plainte contre Chris Beauvais. Mme Leduc a rédigé une déclaration en rapport avec cette plainte, que M. Robertson a signée et qui corrobore leur version des faits. Ils ont également laissé à l'agent Stacey une copie des documents de transfert que M. Robertson prétend avoir signés par erreur, de même qu'une copie du reçu que, soutient-il, M. Beauvais lui a remis.
[54]
M. Robertson allègue donc qu'on ne lui a payé que 5 000 $ sur le prix d'achat convenu de 350 000 $ et qu'on l'a privé à tort de la possession des parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1.
[55]
M. Beauvais, en revanche, a déclaré exactement le contraire. Il prétend avoir offert à M. Robertson une somme de 225 000 $ seulement pour le garage et que M. Robertson était, au départ, peu disposé à l'accepter. Il dit de plus avoir appris de Clive McComber, dans la matinée du 12 avril, que ce dernier s'était présenté au BGF pour signer un document de transfert de terre concernant la parcelle 3-8-1 en faveur de M. Robertson, que M. Robertson s'était présenté au garage plus tard dans la journée du 12, qu'il lui avait dit qu'il était maintenant prêt à vendre au prix de 225 000 $, qu'il avait alors accepté cette somme et qu'il avait ensuite payé à M. Robertson la somme de 225 000 $, en argent comptant, pour les terrains et le garage. M. Beauvais soutient qu'il tenait régulièrement dans le coffre-fort du garage une somme variant entre 300 000 $ et 500 000 $ en argent comptant, tirée de la vente de cigarettes et que, dans ce cas-ci, Garth Cross avait compté l'argent et l'avait remis à M. Robertson aussitôt après qu'ils avaient convenu du prix d'achat le 12 avril. Il a déclaré que son frère Chris était également présent au moment du paiement.
[56]
M. Beauvais prétend s'être rendu plus tard ce jour-là au BGF afin de vérifier si M. Robertson avait signé les documents de transfert de terre en sa faveur. Il a de plus déclaré qu'il n'avait pas donné d'acompte à M. Robertson et que ce dernier ne lui avait pas remis de reçu ou de lettre de recommandation.
[57]
M. Beauvais reconnaît avoir téléphoné à Mme Leduc pour demander que M. Robertson vienne le voir le 21 avril, mais il a dit que c'était parce qu'il avait appris que M. Robertson avait essayé à plusieurs reprises de communiquer avec lui en son absence. Il ajoute que, quand M. Robertson s'était présenté au garage le 21 avril, il avait demandé de recevoir plus d'argent, que M. Beauvais lui avait dit qu'il n'était pas disposé à payer davantage et qu'il lui avait demandé de quitter sa propriété. Il soutient qu'il était ensuite retourné dans le garage et n'avait donc pas entendu si son frère avait menacé M. Robertson; il a tout de même confirmé que son frère était fâché.
[58]
M. Robertson et M. Beauvais s'accordent pour dire que ce dernier a continué d'occuper le garage jusqu'au début de 2011, quand il a fermé son entreprise de fabrication de cigarettes. M. Beauvais a ensuite loué le garage à un ou plusieurs autres locataires, qui exploitaient un service d'échangeur thermique. À la date du procès, l'autre ou les autres locataires louaient toujours les lieux. Aucune preuve n'a été produite quant au montant de loyer que ce ou ces autres locataires ont payé à M. Beauvais depuis le début de 2011. M. Beauvais soutient avoir fait d'importantes améliorations au garage, dépensant plus de 50 000 $ en réparations, afin de pouvoir le louer à l'autre ou les autres locataires.
[59]
De ces deux versions des faits, je privilégie celle de M. Robertson, et ce, pour plusieurs raisons.
[60]
Premièrement, il y a une contradiction marquée entre ce que M. Beauvais a déclaré au procès et ce qu'il a dit lors de son interrogatoire préalable. À cet égard, il n'a pas mentionné lors de cet interrogatoire qu'il avait vérifié auprès de M. McComber si ce dernier avait cédé de nouveau le terrain à M. Robertson avant de payer à ce dernier la somme de 225 000 $. Cependant, lors de son contre-interrogatoire au procès, pressé de questions sur le caractère invraisemblable du fait qu'il avait déboursé la somme de 225 000 $ sans même avoir vérifié si la parcelle 3-8-1 était de nouveau inscrite au nom de M. Robertson, M. Beauvais a déclaré qu'il avait vérifié cela auprès de M. McComber avant de payer l'argent le 12 avril.
[61]
Deuxièmement, sur un aspect clé, le témoignage de M. Beauvais a été contredit par Mme Diabo, qui est essentiellement un témoin indépendant, car elle ne travaille plus pour le Conseil. Plus précisément, confronté une fois de plus en contre-interrogatoire au peu de vraisemblance de sa version des faits, M. Beauvais a déclaré qu'il était allé au BGF pour vérifier si M. Robertson avait bel et bien signé les documents de transfert, peu après lui avoir remis l'argent comptant. Cependant, Mme Diabo a dit que M. Beauvais n'était jamais revenu au BGF après sa première visite, qui avait eu lieu avant le 1er avril 2010.
[62]
Troisièmement, M. Beauvais n'a appelé aucun témoin pour corroborer qu'il avait fait le prétendu paiement de 225 000 $ en argent comptant et il n'a pas appelé M. McComber pour confirmer si et quand celui-ci avait déclaré à M. Beauvais qu'il fallait réinscrire le terrain au nom de M. Robertson. L'avocat de M. Beauvais a indiqué lors du procès que M. McComber avait été assigné à comparaître, mais qu'il n'avait pas été appelé à témoigner. Dans le même ordre d'idées, ni M. Cross ni Chris Beauvais n'ont été appelés pour confirmer que M. Beauvais avait payé la somme de 225 000 $ en argent comptant à M. Robertson, comme il le prétend.
[63]
Dans les circonstances, il m'est loisible de tirer une inférence défavorable du fait que M. Beauvais n'a pas appelé à témoigner M. McComber, M. Cross ou son frère en vue de corroborer sa version des faits. À cet égard, il est bien établi que, dans les affaires de nature civile, [traduction] « il est possible de tirer une déduction défavorable lorsque, en l'absence d'explication, une partie à un litige [...] omet de convoquer un témoin qui a connaissance des faits en litige et devrait être disposé à aider cette partie » (Sopinka, Lederman et Bryant,
The Law of Evidence in Canada
, 3e éd. (Canada: LexisNexis Canada Inc., 2009), à §6.449).
[64]
Quatrièmement, bien que cela ne soit pas déterminant, il convient de signaler que M. Beauvais n'a pas plaidé dans sa défense le paiement prétendu de 225 000 $. Si le paiement avait bel et bien été fait, on tiendrait normalement pour acquis que cela aurait été la pièce centrale d'une défense quelconque.
[65]
Enfin, la version de M. Beauvais est peu crédible sur au moins un aspect. Il prétend avoir vendu des cigarettes uniquement à d'autres membres de la réserve. La capacité d'une telle entreprise (par opposition à une entreprise vendant des cigarettes à des non-résidents de la réserve) de générer la quantité d'argent que M. Beauvais prétend avoir gagné est suspecte.
[66]
En revanche, M. Robertson n'a pas été ébranlé dans sa version des faits et, jusqu'à un certain point, son témoignage a été étayé par Mme Leduc, même si une bonne part du témoignage de cette dernière reposait sur ce que M. Robertson lui avait dit antérieurement et ne peut donc pas être considérée comme une corroboration indépendante.
[67]
Je conclus donc que M. Beauvais n'a payé que 5 000 $ pour le terrain, qui, selon son propre témoignage, vaut nettement plus - au moins 225 000 $, sinon 350 000 $.
M. Robertson savait-il qu'il signait des documents de transfert en faveur de M. Beauvais quand il y a apposé sa signature?
[68]
Compte tenu de la conclusion qui précède, je suis également d'avis que M. Robertson ne s'est pas rendu compte qu'il signait des documents de transfert en faveur de M. Beauvais quand il y a apposé sa signature le 12 avril et qu'il ignorait ce qu'ils étaient quand il en a remis des copies à M. Beauvais le 13 avril. À cet égard, je conviens avec l'avocat de M. Beauvais que le degré de connaissance de M. Robertson est directement lié à la question de savoir si la somme de 225 000 $ a été payée ou non, car il serait illogique que M. Robertson ait remis sciemment les documents de transfert à M. Beauvais si on ne l'avait pas payé.
[69]
La prétention de M. Robertson quant à son incapacité à lire est étayée par le témoignage de Mme Leduc et, jusqu'à un certain point, par les rapports médicaux qui ont été déposés. De plus, tous les documents antérieurs que M. Roberts a signés ont été établis par d'autres, ce qui tend là aussi à dénoter qu'il aurait probablement été incapable de lire les documents de transfert.
[70]
La réaction de Mme Diabo quand elle a pris connaissance de l'erreur - elle s'est mise à pleurer - tend également à corroborer la version des faits de M. Robertson, car Mme Leduc et lui étaient suffisamment contrariés le 21 avril pour la faire pleurer. Cela concorde avec le fait qu'ils n'ont pris connaissance de l'erreur que ce jour-là et du fait qu'une erreur avait été commise, car, si Mme Diabo ne croyait pas que M. Robertson s'était légitimement trompé, il aurait été moins justifié qu'elle fonde en larmes.
[71]
De plus, le fait que les documents aient été signés dans la foulée de la discussion sur le droit de passage qui avait contrarié M. Robertson rend vraisemblable le fait qu'il n'ait pas porté autant d'attention qu'il aurait dû à ce qu'il faisait au moment de signer les deux documents de transfert.
[72]
Enfin, ayant eu la possibilité d'observer M. Robertson au cours de la journée et demie pendant laquelle il a témoigné me porte à croire qu'il avait probablement l'esprit confus quand il a signé les documents de transfert, car, au cours du procès, il a paru avoir un peu de difficulté à comprendre des questions qui n'étaient pas très complexes. Je conclus de ce fait que M. Robertson s'est trompé quand il a signé les deux documents de transfert en faveur de M. Beauvais et qu'il ne s'est pas rendu compte de leur importance quand il les a signés ou quand il les a remis à M. Beauvais.
[73]
L'avocat de M. Beauvais fait valoir qu'il ne faudrait pas que je tire cette conclusion, parce qu'il est impensable que M. Robertson n'ait pas montré des documents aussi importants que les documents de transfert à Mme Leduc et que M. Robertson a admis en contre-interrogatoire qu'il savait que, habituellement, seul le cédant est tenu de signer un document de transfert de terre. Bien que M. Robertson ait effectivement fait cet aveu, et qu'aucune explication valable n'ait été donnée soit par Mme Leduc soit par M. Robertson pour le fait de ne pas avoir fait vérifier plus tôt les documents de transfert par Mme Leduc - surtout que celle-ci lisait ou écrivait tout le reste - aucune de ces questions n'a suffisamment de poids pour m'amener à inférer que M. Robertson savait ce qu'il signait eu égard au reste de la preuve. En bref, comme j'ai conclu que la somme de 225 000 $ n'a pas été payée, il est impossible d'inférer que M. Robertson a signé sciemment les documents de transfert ou qu'il les a remis sciemment à M. Beauvais, car cela ne concorde pas avec le fait qu'on ne l'ait pas payé pour la terre.
[74]
J'estime donc que M. Robertson a signé par erreur les deux documents de transfert en faveur de M. Beauvais, que l'entente verbale conclue entre M. Robertson et M. Beauvais portait sur un prix d'achat de 350 000 $, que M. Beauvais n'a payé que 5 000 $ à M. Robertson et que, malgré cela, il a conservé la terre et a continué d'occuper le garage et l'a ensuite loué.
Le Conseil a-t-il manqué à une obligation quelconque de sa part envers M. Robertson?
[75]
Voyons maintenant la prétention de M. Robertson à l'encontre du Conseil. Il fonde cette prétention sur l'affirmation selon laquelle le Conseil a manqué à ses obligations fiduciaires envers lui en ne s'assurant pas qu'il comprenait bien les documents de transfert avant de les signer et en ne s'assurant pas que le prix d'achat convenu avait été payé. L'avocat de M. Robertson a également laissé entendre que le fait que le BGF ait transmis les documents de transfert à AADNC un jeudi plutôt qu'un vendredi, soit le jour où le Conseil envoie habituellement de tels documents à AADNC, doit être considéré comme le signe d'une intention du Conseil d'agir délibérément d'une manière défavorable aux intérêts de M. Robertson, vraisemblablement en exécutant à la hâte le processus de délivrance des certificats de possession au nom de M. Beauvais.
[76]
À mon avis, il n'y a absolument rien qui permette de tirer une telle conclusion, ni de conclure que le Conseil a manqué à ses obligations fiduciaires envers M. Robertson. En général, un fiduciaire est tenu d'agir d'une manière conforme aux intérêts supérieurs de la partie à laquelle l'obligation est due et, plus précisément, de façon à éviter tout conflit d'intérêts (voir p. ex.
Bande de la Première Nation d' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] BCWLD 6951;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CSCB)). Cependant, l'obligation ne s'étend pas aussi loin que le prétend M. Robertson, parce que Mme Diabo et Mme Goodleaf, les deux employées du Conseil qui ont eu des échanges avec M. Robertson, se sont comportées raisonnablement.
[77]
Plus précisément, les deux n'avaient aucune raison de douter de la capacité de M. Robertson de bien comprendre les documents de transfert, et Mme Diabo a suivi avec M. Robertson la même procédure que le BGF appliquait toujours. Il n'était pas non plus nécessaire que le BGF confirme que le prix d'achat convenu, quel qu'il soit, avait été payé avant d'accepter d'enregistrer un document de transfert de terre. En bref, je ne souscris pas à l'idée selon laquelle l'obligation qu'a le Conseil d'agir au mieux des intérêts des membres de la bande l'oblige à « chaperonner » ces derniers à chacune des étapes du processus de transfert de terre. Quant à l'idée selon laquelle le fait que les documents de transfert aient été envoyés à AADNC un jeudi plutôt qu'un vendredi soit louche, il n'y a pas la moindre preuve à l'appui de cette affirmation.
[78]
Je conclus donc que le Conseil n'a manqué à aucune obligation de sa part envers M. Robertson et, de ce fait, il y a lieu de rejeter la demande visant le Conseil.
Quelles mesures de réparation convient-il d'accorder?
[79]
Si l'on passe maintenant à l'examen des diverses mesures de réparation que sollicite M. Robertson à l'égard de la terre et à l'encontre de M. Beauvais, il faut se souvenir que M. Robertson sollicite plusieurs déclarations, une ordonnance obligeant M. Beauvais à lui restituer la terre, des dommages-intérêts équivalant à 4 500 $ par mois entre le 1er mai 2010 et la date à laquelle M. Beauvais quittera la terre, des dommages-intérêts moraux d'un montant de 50 000 $, des dommages-intérêts exemplaires d'un montant de 100 000 $, de même qu'une ordonnance d'exécution provisoire malgré l'appel aux termes de l'article 547 du CPC.
[80]
Plusieurs de ces demandes soulèvent des questions complexes quant à la compétence de la Cour. Dans sa décision provisoire sur une requête en radiation de la présente action pour défaut de compétence que M. Beauvais avait déposée, mon collègue, le juge Barnes, a rejeté la requête dans le dossier 2011 CF 378, décrétant qu'il n'était pas évident et manifeste que la Cour n'avait pas compétence sur les demandes, et il a renvoyé au juge du procès la question de la décision définitive concernant l'étendue de la compétence de la Cour sur les diverses demandes formulées dans le cadre de l'action. Pour les motifs exposés ci-après, j'ai conclu que la Cour était bel et bien compétente pour accorder un grand nombre des mesures de réparation, dont les dommages-intérêts, que M. Robertson sollicite en l'espèce.
i.
Quelles mesures de réparation la Cour a-t-elle compétence pour accorder?
[81]
Pour ce qui est de la portée générale de la compétence de la Cour sur les demandes ou les réclamations qui sont formulées dans le cadre d'une action, comme l'a décrété la Cour suprême du Canada dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (
ITO
), au paragraphe 12, il est nécessaire de satisfaire à trois critères pour que la Cour soit compétente:
1. Il doit y avoir attribution de compétence par une loi du Parlement fédéral.
2. Il doit exister un ensemble de règles de droit fédérales qui soit essentiel à la solution du litige et constitue le fondement de l'attribution légale de compétence.
3. La loi invoquée dans l'affaire doit être « une loi du Canada » au sens où cette expression est employée à l'article 101 de la
Loi constitutionnelle de 1867
(R.-U.) c. 3.
[82]
Il ressort également de la jurisprudence que, dans les cas où la Cour est compétente d'après les critères qui précèdent, mais où les
Règles des Cours fédérales
, DORS/98-106 (les Règles) ou la jurisprudence fédérale ne couvrent pas un élément subsidiaire de la demande, il est permis d'examiner le droit provincial dans le ressort où la cause d'action a pris naissance en vue de combler les lacunes (voir p. ex.
ITO
, au paragraphe 34;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , aux paragraphes 40, 41, 74 et 75;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  DLR (4th) 103, au paragraphe 31).
[83]
Il a été conclu que l'on avait satisfait aux trois critères énoncés dans l'arrêt
ITO
dans des affaires mettant en cause des demandes de déclaration concernant la violation, par le défendeur, du droit de propriété sur un terrain situé dans une réserve indienne. Plus particulièrement, dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), une affaire dans laquelle une bande en poursuivait une autre pour violation du droit de propriété et où la question en litige avait trait au fait de savoir quelle bande avait l'usage et l'occupation légitimes de la réserve, la Cour suprême du Canada a statué que la Cour fédérale avait compétence pour statuer sur la demande. S'exprimant au nom de la Cour, la juge Wilson a tout d'abord indiqué que l'alinéa 17(3)
c
) [voir note 1] (aujourd'hui le paragraphe 17(4)) de la
Loi sur les Cours fédérales
, LRC 1985, c F-7 (la LCF)) satisfaisait à la première condition du critère énoncé dans l'arrêt
ITO
. Le texte du paragraphe 17(4) de la LCF est le suivant:
Demandes contradictoires contre la Couronne
(4) Elle a compétence concurrente, en première instance, dans les procédures visant à régler les différends mettant en cause la Couronne à propos d'une obligation réelle ou éventuelle pouvant faire l'objet de demandes contradictoires.
Conflicting claims against Crown
(4) The Federal Court has concurrent original jurisdiction to hear and determine proceedings to determine disputes in which the Crown is or may be under an obligation and in respect of which there are or may be conflicting claims.
[84]
En analysant cette question, la juge Wilson a écrit ce qui suit, au paragraphe 21 de l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
À mon avis, le juge Hugessen a procédé de la bonne manière en analysant l'al. 17(3)
c
) lui-même pour déterminer la portée de la compétence attribuée. Comme il l'a signalé, l'alinéa exige a) une procédure b) aux fins de juger une contestation c) dans laquelle la Couronne a ou peut avoir une obligation d) qui est ou peut être l'objet de demandes contradictoires. Une procédure d'
interpleader
entamée par la Couronne répondrait bien à cette description. Il est même difficile à première vue d'envisager des situations autres que la procédure d'
interpleader
où toutes les exigences de l'al. 17(3)
c
) seraient respectées. Je crois cependant que nous sommes en présence d'une telle situation en l'espèce. Il est certainement question d'une procédure visant à trancher le différend entre la bande demanderesse et la bande défenderesse. L'obligation à laquelle est tenue la Couronne en l'espèce découle de la nature même du titre aborigène. L'affirmation la plus récente de cette Cour que le droit des Indiens sur leurs terres est de nature
sui generis
se trouve dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Tel que souligné dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , l'obligation qu'a la Couronne à l'égard des terres détenues pour les Indiens est reconnue au par. 18(1) de la
Loi sur les Indiens
, bien qu'elle ne soit pas créée par ce paragraphe. La Couronne doit détenir les terres formant la réserve no 12 pour l'usage et le profit de l'une des bandes. La question est de savoir laquelle. Enfin, la présente affaire relève du texte de l'al. 17(3)
c
) parce que les demandes contradictoires visent sans aucun doute l'obligation de la Couronne. Chaque bande prétend que la Couronne, qui détient le titre de propriété sous-jacent des terres, a envers elle seule l'obligation de détenir les terres pour son usage et son occupation exclusifs.
[85]
La juge Wilson a ensuite décrété que les deuxième et troisième conditions du critère énoncé dans l'arrêt
ITO
étaient remplies par la
Loi sur les Indiens
, qui met de côté des réserves indiennes pour l'usage et l'occupation de bandes indiennes, ainsi que par la common law relative au titre « aborigène », qui sous-tend les obligations qu'a la Couronne envers les bandes indiennes (au paragraphe 30).
[86]
La Cour fédérale a appliqué l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (
Jones (Succession)
), où le juge MacKay a fait droit à l'action en jugement déclaratoire de la demanderesse au sujet du titre de possession d'un terrain situé dans une réserve indienne. Dans un post-scriptum joint à la décision, le juge MacKay, suivant l'arrêt rendu dans l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a déclaré que le paragraphe 17(4) de la LCF fondait la compétence requise, parce que la demande mettait en cause des obligations de la Couronne envers des Indiens et que l'affaire avait trait à une demande relative à des terres situées dans une réserve sous le régime de la
Loi sur les Indiens
, et ce, dans une situation où, comme c'est le cas en l'espèce, le droit sur ces terres était l'objet de prétentions contradictoires.
[87]
La Cour a donc compétence sur la demande de M. Robertson en vue d'obtenir une déclaration portant qu'il a droit à la possession des deux parcelles en question. Par ailleurs, cette déclaration comporte un examen de l'effet de l'entente de location antérieure, des clauses de l'entente de vente verbale, des certificats de possession délivrés à M. Robertson ainsi que de l'effet des documents de transfert de terre qu'il a signés. Elle consiste aussi à déterminer que M. Beauvais n'est pas légalement en possession des parcelles et n'est donc pas en droit de se faire délivrer des certificats de possession par le ministre, puisque le paragraphe 20(2) de la
Loi sur les Indiens
prescrit que le ministre a le pouvoir discrétionnaire de délivrer de tels certificats uniquement aux Indiens qui sont légalement en possession de terres de réserve. La Cour a donc compétence pour rendre le jugement déclaratoire que cherche à obtenir M. Robertson à l'égard de son droit de posséder les parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1.
[88]
Pour ce qui est de la demande d'injonction, l'article 44 de la LCF confère à la Cour la compétence de décerner une injonction aux conditions qu'elle juge appropriées dans tous les cas où il lui paraît juste ou opportun de le faire. Des injonctions comme celle que M. Robertson souhaite obtenir ont déjà été décernées par la Cour (voir p. ex.
Conseil de Bande des  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CNLR 51, où le juge Blais (tel était alors son titre) a ordonné à un défendeur de quitter une maison située dans une réserve indienne). C'est donc dire que l'injonction demandée peut elle aussi être décernée.
[89]
Cependant, pour ce qui est de la compétence requise pour accorder les dommages-intérêts demandés, la situation est plus compliquée parce que les parties n'ont cité aucune jurisprudence sur ce point et que les demandes de dommages-intérêts dépendent dans une large mesure du droit provincial.
[90]
Bien que la question ne semble pas avoir été tranchée de manière catégorique, il y a des précédents qui appuient la conclusion selon laquelle la Cour est bel et bien compétente pour accorder des dommages-intérêts semblables à ceux que demande M. Robertson en l'espèce, puisqu'il existe des affaires dans lesquelles des dommages-intérêts semblables ont été attribués et, aussi, plusieurs décisions dans lesquelles la Cour a refusé de radier des demandes de dommages-intérêts présentées en lien avec une allégation de possession illégitime de terres situées dans une réserve indienne.
[91]
À cet égard, dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , le protonotaire Hargrave a conclu que le conseil de bande défendeur avait porté atteinte au droit de propriété du demandeur sur une terre située dans une réserve en construisant une antenne radio sur une terre pour laquelle le demandeur détenait un certificat de possession. Le protonotaire a accordé au demandeur des dommages-intérêts en raison de l'atteinte au droit de propriété. Cependant, en ce faisant, il n'a pas traité de la compétence de la Cour pour rendre l'ordonnance réparatrice demandée, car ni l'une ni l'autre des parties ne semblent avoir soulevé la question.
[92]
Dans le même ordre d'idées, dans la décision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la Cour s'est déclarée compétente à l'égard d'une demande de dommages-intérêts concernant un affermage de terres de réserve, mais là aussi, la question de la compétence n'a pas été évoquée. Dans cette affaire, le demandeur, M. Hofer, un agriculteur non indien, disait avoir conclu une entente de prorogation de permis d'affermage de terres de réserve. Malgré cela, on lui avait dit que ses permis étaient expirés, et il avait été expulsé. Il avait tenté de poursuivre la bande en dommages-intérêts pour rupture des contrats d'affermage, mais seuls deux de ces derniers étaient étayés par un permis visé à l'article 28 de la
Loi sur les Indiens
(en vertu duquel le ministre peut accorder à un non-Indien le droit d'occuper des terres de réserve). Dans une décision préliminaire, le juge Hugessen a conclu que la demande de dommages-intérêts serait peut-être bien accueillie au sujet des terres pour lesquelles des permis avaient été délivrés en vertu de l'article 28, mais que les autres ententes n'avaient aucune chance de succès, et il a donc radié ces demandes. L'affaire a par la suite été réglée avant le procès.
[93]
Plus tard, un membre de la bande qui était prêt à louer des terres à M. Hofer a poursuivi la bande pour dommages-intérêts en se fondant sur la perte des revenus tirés de la location. Dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la juge Dawson s'est déclarée compétente à l'égard de la demande, a rejeté celle-ci sur le fond, mais a ensuite procédé à une évaluation provisoire des dommages-intérêts. Même si la Cour s'est déclarée compétente à l'égard de la demande et l'a tranchée provisoirement sur le fond, la question de la compétence de la Cour pour accorder des dommages-intérêts n'a pas été expressément analysée.
[94]
Par conséquent, alors que les affaires qui précèdent appuient la conclusion que j'ai bel et bien compétence pour accorder les dommages-intérêts demandés, elles ne traitent de la question qu'indirectement.
[95]
Dans plusieurs autres affaires, la Cour a refusé de radier les demandes de dommages-intérêts liées à l'occupation de terres dans une réserve indienne. Bien qu'elles ne soient pas déterminantes quant à la question de la compétence, vu que le critère qui s'applique dans le cas d'une requête en radiation est celui de savoir s'il est évident et manifeste qu'une demande ne peut être accueillie (voir p. ex.
Hunt c T & N plc
, [1990] 2 RCS 959, 74 DLR (4th) 321), ces affaires appuient d'une certaine façon la conclusion selon laquelle j'ai bel et bien compétence pour accorder des dommages-intérêts en l'espèce.
[96]
Par exemple, dans l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , conf. par [1993] 2 CNLR 134 (CAF), autorisation de pourvoi à la CSC refusée par 155 NR 320 (CSC), une bande poursuivait la Couronne en vue d'obtenir un jugement déclaratoire, une ordonnance de reddition de comptes concernant le produit de la vente des terres, des dommages-intérêts et une indemnité pour manquement à une obligation fiduciaire par suite d'une décision de céder des terres de réserve à deux bandes adjacentes. La Couronne avait déposé des avis de mise en cause, joignant les deux autres bandes indiennes et cherchant à obtenir une contribution, une indemnité ou une exonération de la part des autres bandes. Les bandes mises en cause avaient déposé une requête en vue de faire radier l'avis de mise en cause pour défaut de compétence. Le juge Strayer a rejeté la requête, statuant que la compétence sur la demande de mise en cause pouvait être dégagée du paragraphe 17(4) de la LCF.
[97]
Dans le même ordre d'idées, dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 132 FTR 145, un couple indien marié avait obtenu un certificat de possession à titre de copropriétaires d'un terrain situé dans une réserve et y avaient bâti une maison. Ils avaient divorcé par la suite. L'homme vivait à l'extérieur de la maison depuis quelques années et n'avait plus accès physique à la maison. Il avait intenté une action contre la Couronne et les occupants de la maison en vue d'obtenir une indemnisation pour sa contribution aux coûts de construction de la maison familiale. Les défendeurs (autres que la Couronne) avaient déposé une requête visant à faire suspendre l'action pour défaut de compétence. S'appuyant sur <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et
Jones (Succession)
, le juge en chef Lutfy a rejeté la requête et conclu qu'il n'était pas manifeste et évident que la Cour était incompétente, car il se pouvait fort bien que la compétence soit ancrée dans le paragraphe 17(4) de la LCF.
[98]
Il existe toutefois des affaires qui vont dans l'autre sens. Par exemple, dans une décision relativement succincte:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 1167, le juge Wetston a rejeté une demande déposée par un membre d'une bande indienne contre un autre membre de la même bande en vue de la restitution de fonds payés dans le cadre d'une entente d'achat et de vente de terres de réserve, soutenant que la Cour n'avait pas compétence pour entendre un différend de nature foncière entre deux Indiens à propos de la question de savoir qui avait le droit de propriété de terres dans une réserve. Cependant, il n'a pris en considération que l'alinéa 17(2)
a
) de la LCF (et non le paragraphe 17(4)) et n'a pas mentionné l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> de la Cour suprême. L'affaire date aussi d'avant la décision du juge MacKay dans l'affaire
Jones (Succession)
.
[99]
Dans la décision
Bande indienne de  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (
Bande indienne de Lower Similkameen
), le chef et conseiller d'une bande indienne poursuivait des membres de la bande pour violation du droit de propriété et détournement par suite de l'occupation illicite alléguée des bureaux du conseil de la bande. Le protonotaire Hargrave a radié ces demandes, faisant remarquer, au paragraphe 17:
M. le juge MacKay a adopté un point de vue différent, mais non contradictoire, dans l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  parties demandaient un jugement déclaratoire à l'égard de leurs droits sur un certain terrain situé sur des terres de réserve. La Couronne, à qui était dévolu le titre de propriété de la réserve, était partie à l'action et reconnaissait la compétence de la Cour pour régler les demandes relatives au titre de possession. M. le juge MacKay a conclu à l'existence de la compétence fondée sur le paragraphe 17(4) de la
Loi sur la Cour fédérale
, qui confère une compétence à la Section de première instance « dans les procédures visant à régler les différends mettant en cause la Couronne à propos d'une obligation réelle ou éventuelle pouvant faire l'objet de demandes contradictoires ». Il a ensuite fait remarquer que l'obligation avait trait à l'approbation d'un droit de possession sur certaines terres et sur des terres indiennes et qu'elle existait relativement aux Indiens, en vertu de la
Loi sur les Indiens
, à l'égard de la gestion des terres indiennes. En l'espèce, bien que les demanderesses puissent demander une déclaration quant à la légitimité de leur élection en tant que chef et conseiller, une action en dommages-intérêts pour violation du droit de propriété ne peut être intentée, ni en vertu de l'article 31 de la
Loi sur les Indiens
ni en vertu de l'alinéa 17(2)
a
) ou du paragraphe 17(4) de la
Loi sur la Cour fédérale
.
[100]
Dans cette affaire, cependant, la Couronne n'avait pas été désignée en tant que partie et la question de savoir qui avait droit à un certificat de possession sous le régime de la
Loi sur les Indiens
n'était pas en litige.
[101]
À mon avis, les affaires qui précèdent étayent la conclusion que je suis compétente pour accorder des dommages-intérêts en l'espèce, parce que la majorité d'entre elles appuient cette conclusion et aussi parce que, en fonction des principes établis, cette conclusion découle de la décision que la Cour suprême a rendue dans l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . À cet égard, les demandes de dommages-intérêts que M. Robertson a faites sont accessoires et découlent directement d'une conclusion selon laquelle M. Beauvais n'a pas le droit de posséder les parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1. Autrement dit, contrairement à la situation dont il était question dans l'affaire
Bande indienne de Lower Similkameen
, je n'ai pas affaire à une demande indépendante pour violation du droit de propriété qui repose sur des principes du droit civil privé, mais plutôt à la question de décider quelles sont les mesures de réparation, outre une déclaration et une injonction, qui conviennent pour remédier à la possession illicite, par M. Beauvais, des parcelles. Le choix de la mesure de réparation propice n'est pas une question de compétence selon moi, parce que l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> confère à la Cour une compétence
ratione materiae
sur les prétentions de possession illicite de terres dans une réserve indienne et, de ce fait, pleine autorité pour remédier aux situations de possession illicite. Bref, le jugement rendu dans l'arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ne se limite pas aux demandes de jugement déclaratoire et doit plutôt être interprété comme fondant la compétence de la Cour pour accorder toutes les mesures de réparation qui conviennent dans les cas où l'on a affaire à un différend portant sur un droit à des terres de réserve et où la Couronne est poursuivie.
[102]
Conclure autrement imposerait aux demandeurs un fardeau injustifié en les obligeant à scinder leurs demandes s'ils décidaient d'invoquer la compétence incontestable de la Cour pour ce qui est d'accorder un jugement déclaratoire et une injonction dans des situations telles que la présente. Procéder ainsi exposerait également les défendeurs aux dépens d'une seconde action devant une cour supérieure provinciale et donnerait lieu à des instances dédoublées, des résultats qu'il y a lieu d'éviter dans toute la mesure du possible. Il y a donc des raisons de principe valables qui éclairent également la question de savoir si la Cour a compétence sur les demandes de dommages-intérêts comme celles que M. Robertson a formulées en l'espèce.
[103]
Je conclus de ce fait que je suis bel et bien compétente pour accorder les dommages-intérêts demandés. Le fait que, pour ce faire, je doive peut-être prendre en considération des principes du droit civil ou la Charte du Québec ne fait pas obstacle à cette conclusion. Dans l'arrêt
ITO
, la Cour suprême a conclu que la Cour fédérale peut appliquer le droit provincial dans les cas où la demande en litige, de par son caractère véritable, relève de la compétence de la Cour. Écrivant au nom des juges majoritaires, le juge McIntyre a conclu au paragraphe 34:
La Cour fédérale est constituée pour la meilleure administration des lois du Canada. Elle n'est pas cependant restreinte à l'application du droit fédéral aux affaires dont elle est saisie.
Lorsqu'une affaire relève, de par son « caractère véritable », de sa compétence légale, la Cour fédérale peut appliquer accessoirement le droit provincial nécessaire à la solution des points litigieux soumis par les parties
: voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  un litige concernant des droits de brevet où la Cour fédérale était appelée à examiner l'effet d'un contrat de travail, et voir aussi l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  compensatoire soit appliqué par la Cour fédérale lorsque, par ailleurs, elle a compétence en vertu du droit fédéral.
[Non souligné dans l'original.]
ii.
Quelles mesures de réparation faut-il accorder?
[104]
Après avoir conclu que j'ai compétence pour ordonner les mesures de réparation demandées, j'examine maintenant les mesures de réparation qu'il convient d'accorder.
a) Les arguments des parties
[105]
Pour ce qui est des questions relatives aux mesures de réparation, l'avocat de M. Robertson fait valoir qu'en raison du simple fait que son client détient des certificats de possession pour les terrains et que le ministre n'en a pas délivré de nouveaux à M. Beauvais, il me faut conclure que M. Robertson a droit à toutes les mesures de réparation qu'il demande. Il se fonde à cet égard sur la décision
Jones (Succession)
, dans lequel le juge MacKay a conclu que le demandeur avait droit à la possession de la terre de réserve dont il était question dans cette affaire parce que le ministre n'avait pas délivré un certificat de possession au défendeur, qui se fondait sur un document de transfert très semblable à ceux que M. Robertson a signés. Le juge MacKay a conclu qu'un document de transfert de terre n'impose au cédant une obligation légalement exécutoire que si le ministre a approuvé le transfert, en raison des exigences de l'article 24 de la
Loi sur les Indiens
. Cette disposition prévoit, notamment, qu'« aucun transfert ou accord en vue du transfert du droit à la possession de terres dans une réserve n'est valable tant qu'il n'est pas approuvé par le ministre ».
[106]
Je conviens avec l'avocat de M. Robertson qu'un raison de l'article 24 de la
Loi sur les Indiens
, les documents de transfert de terre ne créent pas en soi d'obligations légalement exécutoires, mais je ne puis souscrire à son affirmation selon laquelle les certificats de possession que M. Robertson a reçus d'AADNC doivent forcément donner lieu à l'octroi des mesures de réparation qu'il souhaite obtenir. À cet égard, M. Boucher a déclaré que, n'eût été l'intervention de l'avocat de M. Robertson, le ministre aurait délivré à M. Beauvais des certificats de possession, en s'appuyant sur les documents de transfert que M. Robertson avait signés. Il ressort par ailleurs d'une lettre qu'AADNC a envoyée à l'avocat de M. Robertson que le ministre a confié à la Cour la tâche de décider si les documents de transfert étaient valides. Ce serait donc emprunter une voie tout à fait détournée que d'éviter de se prononcer sur les clauses du contrat conclu entre M. Beauvais et M. Robertson ainsi que sur la validité des documents de transfert en décrétant que M. Robertson a droit à la possession des terrains juste parce qu'il détient pour eux des certificats de possession. Il est plutôt nécessaire que je détermine quelles étaient les clauses de l'entente conclue entre ces deux hommes - ce que j'ai fait - et aussi l'effet des documents de transfert que M. Robertson a signés par erreur.
[107]
Sur ce point, l'avocat des défendeurs fait valoir que M. Robertson ne peut invoquer l'erreur qu'il a commise en ne se rendant pas compte de l'importance des documents de transfert, parce qu'il est coupable d'une « erreur inexcusable ». Selon le
Code civil du Québec
, un tribunal peut annuler un contrat s'il conclut à l'absence du consentement d'une des parties contractantes pour cause d'« erreur, [de] crainte ou [de] lésion » et si l'erreur commise, qui porte sur la nature du contrat, sur l'objet de la prestation ou sur tout élément essentiel qui a déterminé le consentement, est importante (articles 1416, 1385, 1399 et 1400 du CCQ). Cependant, une « erreur inexcusable » ne peut constituer un vice de consentement aux termes de l'article 1400 du CCQ. Pour déterminer si une erreur est inexcusable ou pas, le tribunal doit tenir compte de toutes les circonstances de l'affaire et procéder à un examen
in concreto
de l'erreur. Les facteurs qu'il faut prendre en considération comprennent l'âge, l'état mental, l'intelligence et la situation professionnelle ou économique des parties (Pierre-Gabriel Jobin et Nathalie Vézina,
Baudoin et Jobin: Les obligations
, 7e éd. (Cowansville, QC: Yvon Blais, 2013) à la page 328). La principale question que se posent les tribunaux est de savoir s'il y a eu une « négligence d'une certaine gravité » suffisante pour que l'on puisse qualifier l'erreur d'inexcusable (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAQC), au paragraphe 58;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAQC), au paragraphe 61).
[108]
Le comportement du cocontractant entre aussi en ligne de compte pour ce qui est de déterminer si l'on peut qualifier une erreur d'inexcusable. S'il y a eu mauvaise foi de la part de l'une des parties (p. ex., en induisant en erreur l'autre partie ou en ne fournissant pas des renseignements requis), une erreur qui serait par ailleurs inexcusable (comme le fait de ne pas lire un contrat) peut être considérée comme excusable (Jobin, à la page 329).
[109]
Le défaut de lire un contrat avant de le signer est habituellement considéré comme une erreur inexcusable, vu l'existence d'une obligation générale de s'informer avant de conclure un contrat (voir p. ex.
Corporation First Capital (Carrefour Don Quichotte) inc c Massé
, 2008 QCCS 4080, au paragraphe 62). Cependant, la non-lecture du contrat ne mène pas toujours à une conclusion d'erreur inexcusable, et les tribunaux doivent procéder à une analyse fondée sur le contexte, en tenant compte de facteurs tels que l'expérience de la personne qui a commis l'erreur et la relation qui existe entre les parties contractantes.
[110]
Par exemple, dans
Gingras Jacques Lajoie et Associés ltée c 9081-7263 Québec inc
, [2003] JQ no 18944, au paragraphe 37, la Cour du Québec a fait remarquer que le demandeur était un jeune homme ayant peu d'expérience dans le domaine des affaires, qui avait noué de bonnes relations avec la partie défenderesse et qui lui faisait donc confiance. Il avait également posé des questions sur le contrat avant de le signer, mais il ne l'avait pas lu. La Cour a conclu que son erreur était excusable dans les circonstances. Dans la même veine à peu près, dans la décision
Banque nationale du  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la Cour supérieure du Québec a annulé le contrat pour cause d'erreur excusable, bien que la demanderesse ait omis de lire le contrat avant de le signer, citant sa confiance aveugle envers la banque, dont elle était cliente depuis nombre d'années.
[111]
Dans le cas présent, je crois que le concept de l'erreur inexcusable ne s'applique pas, et ce, pour deux raisons.
[112]
Premièrement, ce concept s'applique aux contrats, mais les documents de transfert de terre ne sont pas un contrat et ne sont pas assimilables à un acte. Il faut plutôt les considérer simplement comme une preuve d'une intention de transférer une terre. Comme il a été indiqué, ces documents n'ont aucune valeur juridique, ainsi qu'il a été conclu dans la décision
Jones (Succession)
. C'est donc dire que les clauses du contrat conclu entre M. Robertson et M. Beauvais doivent être déterminées en fonction de ce dont ils ont convenu. Ici, comme je l'ai conclu, les clauses du contrat concernaient un prix d'achat de 350 000 $, ce qui implique que la terre n'aurait été transférée qu'après le paiement du prix d'achat. En conséquence, le fait que M. Robertson ait signé les documents de transfert sans les lire ne l'empêche pas d'obtenir réparation.
[113]
Deuxièmement, même si le concept de l'erreur inexcusable s'appliquait, je ne suis pas d'accord pour dire, au vu de tous les faits pertinents, que l'erreur de M. Robertson est inexcusable. Au moment de la signature des documents de transfert, M. Robertson était âgé de 70 ans et il était vraisemblablement distrait à cause de la discussion concernant le droit de passage. Il a des problèmes de lecture. Même s'il exploitait antérieurement un garage et une entreprise de vente et d'achat d'automobiles d'occasion, c'était Mme Leduc qui s'occupait de la plupart des tâches administratives, et je n'ai en main aucun élément qui dénote que M. Robertson avait de grandes connaissances en affaires. En fait, ce que j'ai pu observer chez lui m'indique le contraire. De plus, compte tenu de mes conclusions de fait, il est évident que M. Beauvais cherche à tirer profit de l'erreur de M. Robertson et que ce dernier ne s'est pas vraiment rendu compte que les documents qu'il signait avaient censément pour objet de consigner son intention de transférer les parcelles à M. Beauvais. Au vu de ces faits, je crois que l'erreur de M. Robertson est excusable.
b) Le jugement déclaratoire et l'injonction
[114]
Après avoir analysé les arguments des parties sur les mesures de réparation, voyons maintenant celles que je devrais accorder. Pour ce qui est des déclarations demandées, je crois qu'une seule est nécessaire, soit une déclaration portant que M. Robertson a légitimement droit à la possession des parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1. Comme nous l'avons déjà vu, compte tenu de cette conclusion, il est impossible que le ministre délivre des certificats de possession en faveur de M. Beauvais et il les a déjà délivrés en faveur de M. Robertson.
[115]
Je crois aussi qu'il y a lieu de rendre une ordonnance impérative reconnaissant les droits de possession de M. Robertson mais, étant donné qu'un ou des locataires occupaient le garage à la date du procès et l'occupent vraisemblablement toujours, ce ou ces locataires devraient avoir la possibilité de négocier avec M. Robertson l'occupation des lieux. J'ordonnerai donc qu'à compter de la date du présent jugement, le ou les locataires actuels des parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1 paieront un loyer à M. Robertson, plutôt qu'à M. Beauvais, et je laisserai à M. Robertson et au(x) locataire(s) actuel(s) le soin de décider si la location du garage se poursuivra, et à quelles conditions.
c) Les dommages-intérêts compensatoires
[116]
Pour ce qui est des dommages-intérêts compensatoires, M. Robertson réclame à M. Beauvais la perte de loyer, équivalant à 4 500 $ par mois, et ce, du 1er mai 2010 jusqu'à la date de jugement. Les éléments de preuve dont je dispose confirment l'existence de dommages de ce montant depuis le 1er mai 2010 jusqu'au début de 2011, quand M. Beauvais a cessé d'exploiter son entreprise de fabrication de cigarettes dans le garage, car le loyer qu'il payait antérieurement à M. Robertson était de 4 500 $ par mois. Aucune preuve n'a été produite quant à la date exacte de la dissolution de l'entreprise de fabrication de cigarettes, mais il ressort de la preuve que celle-ci a été exploitée du 1er mai 2010 jusqu'au 31 décembre 2010, soit une période de huit mois.
[117]
Par conséquent, un montant de 36 000 $ pour cette période est approprié, sous réserve des rajustements dont il est question ci-après.
[118]
Pour ce qui est de la période écoulée depuis janvier 2011, la preuve ne me permet pas de quantifier les dommages que M. Robertson a subis, car aucun élément de preuve n'a été produit quant au moment où le ou les locataires actuels ont commencé à louer les lieux. Il n'y a pas non plus de preuve du montant de loyer que ce ou ces locataires ont payé à M. Beauvais durant cette période, et rien ne permet de présumer qu'il s'agit de 4 500 $ par mois. De plus, M. Beauvais a déclaré qu'il a fait d'importantes améliorations au garage, qui lui ont coûté au moins 50 000 $. M. Robertson ne peut pas profiter de ces améliorations sans dédommager M. Beauvais. Enfin, il faut déduire des dommages la somme de 5 000 $ pour tenir compte du dépôt que, selon ma conclusion, M. Beauvais a payé à M. Robertson.
[119]
Dans les circonstances, je crois que la manière la plus juste et la plus expéditive de conclure l'évaluation du montant des dommages-intérêts compensatoires serait de donner à M. Robertson et à M. Beauvais la possibilité de régler ce montant, conformément aux directives suivantes. Le montant devrait être égal à 31 000 $ plus le montant du loyer mensuel que le ou les locataires ont payé à M. Beauvais, le tout multiplié par 38,13 mois (la période écoulée entre le 1er janvier 2011 et la date du présent jugement), moins la valeur des améliorations que M. Beauvais a apportées. Si jamais M. Robertson et M. Beauvais ne parviennent pas à régler la question de ce montant, l'un ou l'autre pourra demander que l'affaire me soit renvoyée pour règlement par voie de renvoi aux termes de l'article 153 des Règles.
d) Les dommages-intérêts moraux
[120]
M. Robertson réclame ensuite des dommages-intérêts moraux à M. Beauvais et au Conseil, d'un montant de 50 000 $ chacun. De façon générale, ce type de dommages-intérêts est conçu pour compenser la perte non pécuniaire ou la douleur et la souffrance qu'un demandeur peut subir par suite de la faute d'un défendeur. Même si des dommages-intérêts moraux ont déjà été accordés pour rétention fautive d'un bien immobilier (voir p. ex.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  EYB 2010-172586), il n'y a pas lieu selon moi d'accorder un montant quelconque en l'espèce, car M. Robertson n'a produit presque aucune preuve sur le préjudice moral dont il dit avoir souffert du fait d'avoir été privé du garage. À cet égard, aucune preuve médicale n'a été produite, et, dans le meilleur des cas, Mme Leduc et M. Robertson ont déclaré seulement que ce dernier a peut-être été un peu déprimé par la situation et que, en raison d'un manque de fonds, il n'a pas pu s'adonner à l'éventail complet des activités récréatives dont il jouissait auparavant. À mon avis, ce témoignage est loin d'établir le genre de préjudice qui est requis pour ouvrir droit à des dommages-intérêts moraux, et je n'accorderai donc pas de dommages-intérêts sous ce chef.
e) Les dommages-intérêts exemplaires
[121]
M. Robertson réclame finalement des dommages-intérêts exemplaires à M. Beauvais et au Conseil, d'un montant de 100 000 $ chacun. Il est possible d'accorder des dommages-intérêts punitifs en vertu de l'article 1621 du
Code civil du Québec
ou de l'article 49 de la Charte du Québec pour atteinte illicite ou intentionnelle à l'un des droits garantis par la Charte du Québec. Parmi ces derniers figure le droit à la jouissance paisible et à la libre disposition de ses biens, que consacre l'article 6 de la Charte du Québec.
[122]
Comme j'ai conclu que le Conseil n'a manqué à aucune obligation fiduciaire qu'il doit à M. Robertson, aucun montant de dommages-intérêts exemplaires à l'encontre du Conseil n'est justifié.
[123]
Pour ce qui est de la demande de dommages-intérêts exemplaires visant M. Beauvais, la jurisprudence interprétant l'article 49 de la Charte du Québec reconnaît qu'il y a lieu d'accorder de tels dommages-intérêts dans les cas où le défendeur saisit délibérément un bien et refuse de le restituer au demandeur (voir p. ex.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
Investissements Historia inc c Gervais Harding et Ass inc
, JE 2006-955 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  possession des parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1, car, comme je l'ai conclu, il a refusé de payer à M. Robertson le prix d'achat convenu et de lui restituer la terre. Dans des affaires quelque peu semblables, des dommages-intérêts d'un montant variant entre 3 000 $ et 10 000 $ ont été accordés (voir p. ex.
Aubry c 3370160 Canada inc
, JE 2001-908 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la somme de 5 000 $ est un montant approprié, compte tenu de la nature de la faute commise et des situations respectives de M. Beauvais et de M. Robertson.
f) L'ordonnance d'exécution provisoire malgré l'appel
[126]
Pour ce qui est de la demande d'une ordonnance d'exécution provisoire malgré l'appel aux termes de l'article 547 du CPC, cette disposition ne s'applique pas aux actions engagées devant la Cour fédérale, puisque les Règles traitent en détail de cette question. À cet égard, l'article 392 des Règles prévoit qu'une ordonnance prend effet au moment où elle est consignée et signée, à moins d'indication contraire, et l'article 398 des Règles régit le processus à suivre pour obtenir un sursis d'exécution à une ordonnance en attendant l'appel, ce qui oblige le défendeur à demander un sursis. Il n'y a donc aucun motif pour rendre l'ordonnance que sollicite M. Robertson au titre de cette disposition.
Les intérêts et les dépens
[127]
Pour ce qui est, en dernier lieu, des questions relatives aux intérêts et aux dépens, dans sa plaidoirie finale, l'avocat de M. Robertson a demandé que la Cour ordonne le paiement d'intérêts sur les dommages-intérêts accordés. Cependant, il n'a pas fait une telle demande dans la déclaration, et je refuse donc d'accorder des intérêts.
[128]
Quant aux dépens, ils suivront l'issue de la cause et, comme l'affaire a été d'une complexité moyenne, ils se situeront au milieu de la fourchette de la colonne III du tarif B des Règles. Par conséquent, en fonction de cette colonne du tarif, M. Beauvais devrait indemniser M. Robertson pour ses frais, et M. Robertson devra, à son tour, indemniser le conseil pour les siens. Rien ne justifie en l'espèce l'adjudication de dépens sur la base procureur-client.
[129]
Si les parties ne parviennent pas à s'entendre sur le montant des dépens, elles pourront déposer chacune des observations d'une longueur maximale de quinze pages sur la question, et ce, dans les trente jours suivant la date du jugement.
JUGEMENT
[130]
LA COUR STATUE que
:
1. Le demandeur a légalement droit à la possession des parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1 qui sont situées dans la Réserve indienne de Kahnawake;
2. Le ou les locataires actuels (s'il y en a) des parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1 qui sont situées dans la Réserve indienne de Kahnawake paieront au demandeur un loyer correspondant au taux actuel, et ce, jusqu'à ce que le demandeur et le ou les locataires actuels, s'ils le souhaitent, aient conclu une nouvelle entente;
3. Le demandeur et M. Beauvais tenteront de régler le montant des dommages-intérêts compensatoires que M. Beauvais doit au demandeur, conformément aux directives qui suivent: le montant sera égal à 31 000 $ plus un montant équivalant au loyer mensuel payé par le ou les locataires des parcelles 3-10 et 3-8-1 à M. Beauvais pendant 38,13 mois, moins la valeur des améliorations que M. Beauvais y a apportées. Si le demandeur et M. Beauvais ne parviennent pas à régler le montant des dommages-intérêts compensatoires à payer, l'un ou l'autre pourra demander que l'affaire me soit renvoyée pour règlement par voie de renvoi en vertu de l'article 153 des Règles;
4. M. Beauvais paiera au demandeur des dommages-intérêts exemplaires d'un montant de 5 000 $;
5. M. Beauvais paiera les dépens du demandeur selon le milieu de la fourchette de la colonne III du tarif B des Règles, et le demandeur paiera les dépens du Conseil des Mohawks de Kahnawake selon le milieu de la fourchette de la colonne III du tarif B des Règles. Si les parties ne parviennent pas à s'entendre sur le montant des dépens, elles pourront déposer chacune des observations écrites d'une longueur maximale de quinze (15) pages sur la question, et ce, dans les trente (30) jours suivant la date du présent jugement.
Jugement in consequence.
Arrêtiste: Rédactrice: J. Danielle King/vnh
Notes
1. Aux termes de l'ancien alinéa 17(3)
c
) de la LCF, la Cour fédérale avait compétence exclusive. Selon l'actuel paragraphe 17(4) de la LCF, la Cour a compétence concurrente.
[End of document/fin du document]