[1]
Rouleau, J.
[Translation]: The hearing of this application for a writ of prohibition took place at Montreal, Province of Quebec, on February 4, 1992. At the close of the hearing I dismissed the application and told counsel I would write brief reasons.
[2]
The case concerned the interpretation of s. 50 of the
Immigration Act
, which reads as follows:
"50(1) A removal order shall not be executed where
(a) the execution of the order would directly result in a contravention of any other order made by any judicial body or officer in Canada; or
(b) the presence in Canada of the person against whom the order was made is required in any criminal proceedings and the Minister stays the execution of the order pending the completion of those proceedings.
"50(2) A removal order that has been made against a person who was, at the time it was made, an inmate of a penitentiary, jail, reformatory or prison or becomes an inmate of such an institution before the order is executed shall not be executed until the person has completed the sentence or term of imprisonment imposed, in whole or as reduced by a statute or other law or by an act of clemency."
[3]
A deportation order was made against the applicant Mr. Mobtagha on September 30, 1991. He is an Iranian citizen who at present has no standing in Canada and who claimed refugee status when he arrived in the country on April 7, 1985. Criminal charges were laid against him and he was found not guilty due to insanity and was placed in custody in the Douglas Hospital in Verdun pursuant to an order by the Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Quebec dated December 20, 1988. On March 6, 1989, the requirement that the applicant be incarcerated was lifted on certain conditions, namely that he live in a place known and approved by the Douglas Hospital, that he keep appointments made by his attending physician or a therapeutist and that he take medication and keep the peace. On December 4, 1991 this order was extended for one year. Counsel for the applicant submitted that the deportation order is a contravention of an order made in Canada by a judicial body pursuant to s. 50(1)(a) of the
Immigration Act
.
[4]
The Minister is required to proceed with the execution of any deportation order. The point at issue is whether s. 50 authorizes or requires him to disregard his obligation so as not to impede the execution of a custody order made by the Lieutenant Governor of the Province of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  concluded that the Minister may defer execution only where the applicant is the subject of a court order containing specific requirements which would not be fulfilled if the deportation order were executed. In his decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  opinion.
[5]
In the case at bar I consider that the order made by the Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Quebec is not an "order made by any judicial body or officer in Canada", as provided in s. 50 of the
Immigration Act
.
[6]
Further, none of the conditions stated in the order of March 6, 1989 requires that the applicant be in Canada or that he appear before a tribunal at a particular time or place. The requirements imposed are that Mr. Mobtagha should live in a known place approved by the designated establishment, namely the Douglas Hospital in Verdun, that he should keep appointments made by his attending physician or a therapeutist, take his medication and keep the peace. It is clear that the ultimate purpose of these obligations is to protect the community and naturally the deportation order does not in any way conflict with that purpose.
[7]
The Minister, accordingly, is not under any duty to disregard his obligation to carry out the deportation order made against the applicant.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/blk