[1]
Dubé, J.
[Translation]: In this motion, the applicant appeals the decision of Prothonotary Richard Morneau dated March 12, 1998, in which he dismissed the applicant's application for an extension of time to file and serve her record.
[2]
It is an established fact that on January 7, 1998, the applicant, representing herself at the time, filed an application for leave and for judicial review of a decision by the Refugee Division dated December 17, 1997. Under rule 10 of the
Federal Court Immigration Rules, 1993
(the
Rules
), the applicant had until February 6, 1998 to perfect her leave application, which she did not do on time. As a result, on February 17, 1998, the respondent sent the applicant a copy of a letter to the Administrator of the Federal Court in which she requested that the leave application be disposed of.
[3]
On February 25, 1998, that is, nearly three weeks after the expiration of the prescribed time, the applicant, now through counsel, served a motion for an extension of time on the respondent. In her affidavit in support of the motion, the applicant explained the delay by stating that she was unaware of the periods provided for in the
Rules
.
[4]
The Prothonotary who heard this motion in writing under rule 324 of the old
Federal Court Rules
dismissed it for the reasons set out in the respondent's representations. In her representations, the respondent pointed out that the courts have consistently held that the applicant must give a reasonable explanation for the delay and satisfy the court that her application for judicial review is based on serious arguments. The respondent submits that unawareness of the periods prescribed by the
Rules
does not constitute a reasonable explanation.
[5]
The applicant bases her appeal on two grounds. First, she objects to the Prothonotary's exercise of his power and, second, she challenges the validity of the power in question.
[6]
Regarding the first ground, the applicant argues that the Prothonotary should not have disposed of the motion under rule 324 without ensuring that the applicant was aware of all the facts and should have allowed her to submit representations in writing in response to the respondent's representations. The respondent herself obtained an extension of time by means of a direction by a judge of this court, although the applicant was not told about it. The applicant submits that the Prothonotary could not therefore proceed unless the applicant was informed of what had been [Translation] "plotted in her absence".
[7]
The direction in the case at bar was by my colleague Mr. Justice Teitelbaum; he has already heard a motion by counsel for the applicant challenging the direction, and he dismissed it from the bench. Obviously, it is not open to me to hear arguments against this decision. Furthermore, the direction is immaterial in that it has absolutely nothing to do with the applicant's failure to comply with the above-mentioned rule 10.
[8]
As for the second ground, the applicant submits that s. 46(1) of the
Federal Court Act
(the
Act
), more specifically s. 46(1)(h), authorizes the rules committee to empower a prothonotary to exercise any authority or jurisdiction, subject to supervision by the court, even though the authority or jurisdiction may be of a judicial nature. The applicant therefore argues that the rules committee could not use the
Rules
to delegate its power to the Chief Justice or the Associate Chief Justice under rule 336 of the
Federal Court Rules
. Rule 336(1)(g) confers on a prothonotary the power to dispose of any interlocutory application assigned to him specially by special or general direction of the Chief Justice or of the Associate Chief Justice. The Prothonotary's order is based on rule 21(2), which was made by the Chief Justice pursuant to s. 84 of the
Immigration Act
. Section 84 gives the Chief Justice the authority to make rules governing the practice and procedure in relation to applications for leave to commence an application for judicial review.
[9]
The applicant further submits that the granting of judicial jurisdiction is not a matter of practice or procedure. Consequently, the power in question could not validly be conferred on the Prothonotary, since this delegation or authority did not lie within the province of the Chief Justice but came solely within that of the committee constituted for the purposes of the
Federal Court Act
.
[10]
This second argument, which is based on the well-known principle "delegatus non potest delegare", clever though it may seem, was already considered and dismissed by the Associate Chief Justice of this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  subdelegation of power. It is clear from s. 46(1)(h) of the
Federal Court Act
that Parliament did not intend simply to grant a procedural power to prothonotaries. It granted them jurisdiction of a judicial nature. The exercise of this jurisdiction requires a Federal Court rule, in this case rule 336, which gives a prothonotary the authority to dispose of any interlocutory application the Chief Justice or Associate Chief Justice Assigns him or her. Basically, a prothonotary's jurisdiction to hear interlocutory applications comes directly from the above-mentioned s. 46. The power to exercise this jurisdiction is based on the above-mentioned rule 336(1)(g), although a prothonotary's jurisdiction is not rooted in the court's
Rules
but in the
Act
itself, namely s. 40(1)(h).
[11]
As already mentioned, counsel for the applicant also complained about the fact that the Prothonotary did not give her an opportunity to file an answer or reply to the respondent's submissions. Rule 324 does not provide for an answer or reply. Rule 324 provides for only written representations by both parties. Strayer, J., as he then was, stated very clearly in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
2.	(1994), 79 F.T.R. 233 (T.D.).