[1]
Joyal, J.
: This trial arose out of a most unfortunate accident which occurred on March 9, 1982. The infant plaintiff (hereinafter the plaintiff), a young boy, age 13, slid under a moving mail service truck owned by the defendant, was run over by the truck's rear left wheel and suffered grievous injuries.
[2]
These injuries consisted of multiple fracture to the pelvis, haematuria and the tearing of the membranous portion of the urethra. There was considerable damage to the bladder and the urinary tract with a probability of some impairment to the boy's reproductive capacity. He was hospitalized for several weeks, underwent surgery and altogether went through a long period of pain and discomfort. On release from hospital, he required crutches until his pelvis had sufficiently healed. He lost a year of school. Although the prognosis is encouraging, there will be limits to the boy's physical activities. He is now sixteen years of age and still fearful of engaging in bodily-contact sports.
[3]
The accident occurred at approximately 8:45 a.m. The plaintiff was on his way to Saint Margaret's School in Calgary. Saint Margaret's School has a large play area at the rear of it. The play area slopes upward from the back of the school to its easterly limit on 14th Street.
[4]
Running along the easterly limit of 14th Street is a small escarpment of graduated length and pitch. The small escarpment extends beyond the northerly boundary of the school yard and runs into the easterly limit of a small shopping centre in which is located a postal station. At the back of the station and adjacent to the school yard, there is a loading platform from which mail service trucks take their load of mail bags to be delivered to various relay stations in the city there to be picked up by letter carriers on making their rounds.
[5]
Access to the rear of the complex of buildings where the postal station is located is by a roadway some twenty feet wide, which circles around the easterly wall of the complex and runs between that wall and the edge of the small escarpment I have already described. The roadway makes a 180
o
turn; that is, a vehicle approaching from the west makes a right turn at the easterly limit of the complex, proceeds along the side of the complex and makes another right turn to come to the rear of it. The escarpment at this point has a run of some 35 feet. Because it is on a route from bus stops close by, giving a kind of short cut to the school yard, it is used by school children. In the winter months, it is also used as a snow slide with the school children using heavy cardboard pieces as runners.
[6]
On the morning in question, the plaintiff was accompanied by two friends of the same age. They approached the snow slide. Other school children were already enjoying themselves sliding down the escarpment. It was approximately 8:30 to 8:35 a.m. and they had several minutes before the school bell would ring at 8:45. The plaintiff and his friends joined the school children already there. As the school time approached the children started to disperse towards their school. The plaintiff however wanted one last run. He climbed halfway to two-thirds of the way up the escarpment, turned around, and immediately, without looking, started to slide down the grade. He did not observe a mail truck approaching from the right on the roadway. He attempted to stop but to no avail. He hit the left side of the truck and was run over by its rear left wheel.
[7]
The evidence of the plaintiff, who is now 16 years of age, was straightforward. So was the evidence of his two friends, one of whom was on his way up the escarpment and the other already on his way toward the school yard. The two friends, Miachael Wildenborg and Laverne Richard, acknowledge that the slide was in current use by children on their way to school. They were both in agreement as to where the actual collision between the plaintiff and the truck had taken place. There were some discrepancies in their evidence, but these covered relatively innocuous matters.
[8]
The driver of the truck, Terry Sheepy, also testified he had been driving his truck for several years, and he enjoyed an excellent driving record. His routine at this location was to drive to the rear of the post office every morning at approximately 9:00, pick up his load of mail, deliver it, and return between 10:00 and 10:30 a.m. for a second round. He knew of the snow slide. Children would always leave their cardboard pieces around. He had never witnessed any children using it, however, probably by reason of the fact that at his usual arrival time at the loading dock, the children were already in school.
[9]
Mr. Sheepy stated that, as he was proceeding slowly on the roadway between the escarpment and the wall of the buildings, he observed two or three children on the slope to his left and some more children on his right. Those on his right were crossing the roadway on their way to the school yard. He stopped momentarily to let them pass and on proceeding further at the point where he would be executing his second right-hand turn to reach the rear of the building, he heard a noise and immediately felt his left rear wheel go over a bump. It was on looking through his left rearview mirror that he saw an object, which he quickly identified as a young boy. He rushed to his aid, went to the post office, had an ambulance called and thereafter assisted others in bringing the child to shelter while waiting for the ambulance to arrive.
[10]
In the course of the trial, counsel on both sides conceded that the Highway Traffic Act for the Province of Alberta applied with respect to the driver having to disprove negligence.
[11]
Counsel for the plaintiffs also agreed that the victim at the time of the accident was of sufficiently mature age that a finding of contributory negligence could be made against him. Counsel further agreed there were no serious disparities or conflicts in the written reports submitted by medical specialists as to the diagnosis of the injuries sustained by the plaintiff, as to the treatment or surgical interventions performed, and as to prognosis with regards to residual but continuing pain or discomfort to be suffered by the young lad.
[12]
As to the measure of general damages in respect to these injuries, counsel were not very much apart, their own individual estimates having an overlap factor of some 50 percent. I should think that a fair assessment of these damages would be $43,000.
[13]
I now come to the issue of liability. The evidentiary burden on a driver of a motor vehicle to disprove negligence where involved in an accident with a pedestrian is a very heavy one. To a considerable degree, the law simply recognizes that no pedestrian is ever a match for a two-ton vehicle. The driver of such vehicle must negative any or all elements of his conduct which would lead to a finding that his standard of care fell short of the mark. The onus on him however is not absolute. It is not a matter of strict liability. His conduct in all respects must nevertheless be measured in the light of all the circumstances of the accident. More than this, the standard of care expected of him will vary with such circumstances.
[14]
Some portions of this onus on the driver has been discharged by the plaintiff's own admission. The plaintiff honestly and forthrightly stated that as he was turning around part way up the slope for a last run down he did not look to see if the coast was clear. He only observed the defendant's truck when he was about halfway down his run. By reason of his momentum, however, he was unable to stop or to swerve. He came into contact with the left side of the truck and was run over by the truck's left rear wheel. I find that the plaintiff was negligent in proceeding as he did.
[15]
Should that be the end of the matter? I think not. With equal honesty and forthrightness, the driver admitted that he knew of the slope being used by the school children. On approaching the site of the accident, he observed several children, some of whom were on the slope to his left front, some of whom were on the roadway to his right front. He stopped his vehicle for the latter group in order to let them cross the roadway on their way to their school yard. He then put his vehicle into motion and was just about to negotiate his second righthand turn when the accident occurred. The driver stated that he didn't see the plaintiff sliding down the slope in his direction.
[16]
The question to which the court must address itself is should the driver have seen him? A conclusive determination on that issue is not easy to make. I have no doubt that if the driver had seen the plaintiff he could have brought his vehicle to a stop within a matter of a few feet. He had after all stopped his vehicle a few seconds earlier. In getting it moving again, he would still have been traveling at a snail's pace. This is not the case therefore where a more proper look out would not have avoided the accident in any event.
[17]
Understandably, the driver says that his attention was directed to the group of school children crossing the roadway on his right front. This is the reason he gives for not having seen the plaintiff sliding towards his vehicle. Counsel for the defendant made a strong plea on this factor urgin the court to find that the driver's attention being rivetted to his right front, he could not be reasonably expected to look to his left.
[18]
I must find nevertheless that there was failure on the part of the driver to look. This failure should not be interpreted as wanton or reckless conduct, nor can it be said that there is essential morality attached to it. It is not a matter of guilt on the part of the driver. It is much more a matter of responsibility which the law imposes on any driver of a motor vehicle in like circumstances. It is clear on the evidence that the driver was alerted to the presence of several school children at the relevant time. The propensity of children to run in all directions at once is well known. The driver had observed some children grouped on the slope, and he knew that the slope was being used as a slide.
[19]
I am urged by counsel for the defendant to find that the plaintiff was sliding towards the driver's blind side as it were. I fail to see this on the evidence. Admittedly, there are gaps in the evidence. There are links missing in the chain of events. Yet, in discharging the presumption of liability on the driver a court cannot fill these gaps or forge its own links in the chain in order to absolve the driver. Absent conclusive evidence of a blind side approach, the burden, in my respectful view, is not discharged.
[20]
The plaintiff, however, was also negligent. The plaintiff must suffer in part the burden of his own misfortune. The circumstances of the case making it impossible to fix an unbalanced attribution of responsibility, the law is clear that I should apportion it equally between both the plaintiffs and the defendant.
[21]
The plaintiffs are therefore entitled to judgment in the sum of one half of the damages which I have assessed together with one half of the special damages on which the parties have agreed.
[22]
I should not conclude without reflecting on the measure of respect which the parties, their counsel, and their witnesses have brought to the administration of justice in the course of this trial. One feels very strongly about the trauma visited upon the young plaintiff as well as the anxiety, the stress and the burden cast upon his mother. One also feels for the defendant's driver who has been justifiably proud of his excellent driving record. Nevertheless, all parties were able to speak in the courtroom in a manner which reflects their sense of honesty and propriety.
[23]
I should also address myself to the attitude of all three counsel before me in the course of the three-day trial. Their approach was exemplary throughout and they were mutually cooperative in expediting the conduct of the trial.
[24]
There shall be judgment for the plaintiffs for general damages in the amount of $21,500. The parties have also agreed that special damages consisted of medication $40.23, ambulance fee $65 and the subrogated claim of Alberta Hospitals and Medical Care $13,455. The plaintiffs are allowed one-half these amounts. This represents a total indemnity of $28,275.11.
[25]
When, at the conclusion of the trial, I delivered brief reasons for judgment, counsel for the parties raised the issue of pre-judgment interest on the award. I informed counsel that I would take that matter under advisement and decide on it when delivering the formal judgment.
[26]
I have since come to the conclusion that the plaintiffs are entitled to pre-judgment interest. Section 35 of the Federal Court Act provides that interest on a claim against the Crown is only allowed when it is stipulated by contract or by statute. Section 3(1) of the Crown Liability Act, R.S.C. 1970, s. C-38, states that:
"3.(1) The Crown is liable in tort for the damages for which, if it were a private person of full age and capacity, it would be liable
(a) in respect of a tort committed by a servant on the Crown, ..."
[27]
In this respect, it would appear that the law of the province where the tort occurred governs the Crown's liability to pay pre-judgment interest. I would refer counsel here to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), and to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of the Judgment Interest Act S.A. 1984, c. J-0.5, provide in sections 4.1 and 4.2 for pre-judgment interest as at April 1, 1984, at the rate of 4% on non-pecuniary damages and, as fixed by regulation, at the rate of 11% on pecuniary damages. Interest at these rates with respect to each head of damages will therefore run from April 1, 1984, to the date of judgment. Thereafter, interest will be in accordance with the Federal Court Act.
[29]
I have already indicated to the parties that although the liability for damages was shared between them, I was conscious of the fact that the plaintiffs had nevertheless the carriage of the action throughout. I should allow the plaintiffs full costs on a party-party basis.
Judgment for plaintiff.
Editor: David C.R. Olmstead/kam
[End of document]