[1]
Simpson, J.
[orally]: This application is for judicial review of a decision of a visa officer of the Canadian Embassy in Damascus, Syria, dated May 28th, 1993, wherein the officer refused the applicant landing on the grounds that his daughter was a medically inadmissible person under s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the "
Act
").
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Iran. In 1990, he applied for landing for his family (the "Application"). His family includes his daughter, Elnaz, (the "Daughter"), who was nine years old at the time. During a medical examination the Daughter's I.Q. was found to be 70. Her delay in mental growth was reported to be three years, which meant she had a mental age of six. She had not yet been to school and could only count to 10. It was reported by the designated medical practitioner that she would require special education classes and occupational therapy. The respondent's first and second medical officers (the "Medical Officers"), in Canada, concurred in the analysis of these medical reports and concluded that the Daughter "might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health and social services" and was, therefore, medically inadmissible under s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Act
. Since one of the applicant's dependents came within an inadmissible class, the application was refused.
[3]
On these facts, the applicant raises three issues and I will deal with each in turn: i) Was the conclusion of the medical officers unreasonable? ii)
Did the visa officer fetter her discretion to review the medical officer's conclusion? and iii) Was there a breach of the duty of fairness?
Reasonableness
[4]
The Daughter was classified as D5, which is a classification which provides that she is someone who "requires or probably will require regular social supervision or will probably require special education but may become self-supporting". The applicant's counsel accepted that this was a reasonable designation but argued that, in view of the fact that she might be self-supporting one day, it was inconsistent and unreasonable to conclude that she would place excessive demands on health and social services (the "Conclusion"). In my view, the Conclusion is not inconsistent with the possibility of self-sufficiency because there is no doubt that the Daughter will require special schooling and occupational therapy prior to ever reaching a point where self-sufficiency could be possible.
[5]
Evidence from a pilot project concerning health costs showed that the Daughter's schooling would be 260 percent more expensive than schooling for a healthy child. In these circumstances, I can see nothing unreasonable in the medical officer's Conclusion.
[6]
The applicant also suggested that the Conclusion was speculative and reached without regard for the Daughter's age. I am unable to agree that her age was disregarded as it was clearly stated in the materials. Further, while it is true that the Conclusion was speculative due to the daughter's young age, it was based on all the relevant information and was reasonable on its face. In these circumstances, I can find no reviewable error because I have concluded that any decision regarding a nine year old child would inevitably involve some element of speculation.
Discretion
[7]
As I have noted in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the visa officer has no discretion in cases where medical officers form an opinion under s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Act
. However, there is a duty to act fairly and to make sure that the medical officer's Conclusion is reasonable. In this case I have found that the Conclusion was reasonable and I have no reason to criticize the visa officer's handling of the matter.
Fairness
[8]
While I have no evidence before me on this issue, the applicant's counsel asked me to assume that the applicants were unaware that the medical inadmissibility of one family member would lead to the rejection of the application. Even if this were so, and it may have been so if the applicant was ill-advised or did not seek advice about Canadian procedures, there is no suggestion that immigration officials misled the applicant or that he was denied an opportunity to submit medical evidence. In these circumstances, even if this were a case where the duty of fairness arose, I can see no unfairness and no reviewable error on the facts before me. Accordingly, for these reasons, the application will be dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/saf
[End of document]