[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an application by the defendant for one or more of the following orders:
(1) An order to strike out the whole statement of claim, as amended on November 17, 1986 and particularized on March 13, 1987, on the grounds that it discloses no cause of action; or
(2) an order striking out, if I understand it correctly, paragraphs 9 and 11 of the statement of claim with respect to which the plaintiffs provided further particulars on March 13, 1987, on the ground that these disclose no reasonable cause of action; and
(3) an order staying my earlier order of October 31, 1986, requiring the defendant to file a statement of defence within thirty days of service on it of the amendments to the statement of claim and particulars; or
(4) an order extending the time for the defendant to file its statement of defence.
Both (3) and (4) contemplate postponement until the defendant has "exhausted" its appellate remedies with respect to my order of October 31, 1986.
[2]
My order of October 31, 1986, dealt with an application by the defendant by notice of motion dated July 4, 1986. In my order I dismissed the first two motions set out in that notice of motion which sought to have the entire statement of claim as amended up to that time struck out on the basis that it disclosed no cause of action or that it was frivolous and vexatious, or that the plaintiffs were not entitled to bring the action as constituted. With respect to the third motion in that notice of motion, I struck out the second sentence of paragraph 5 of the amended statement of claim and gave the plaintiffs leave to amend it within thirty days, if they wished, so as to allege that the Crown had recognized their bands prior to the making of Treaties 6, 7 and 8. With respect to the fourth motion in that notice of motion, I ordered that if the plaintiffs so amended paragraph 5 they should give particulars as to the nature, form and approximate dates of such acts of recognition; and I also ordered that if they wished to adduce any evidence to prove the existence of aboriginal rights as alleged in paragraphs 9 and 11 of the amended statement of claim they would have to provide particulars "as to the rights, customary laws and institutions of the bands (of which they claim to be the successors) which are alleged to be included in such aboriginal rights".
[3]
The defendant has since appealed that decision but has not, apparently, taken the necessary steps to have the appeal heard. Pending that appeal, the defendant has filed this application with four new motions as set out above.
[4]
With respect to the first motion to strike the whole statement of claim, I am satisfied that I have no jurisdiction to grant such an order unless the amendments made since my last order have somehow invalidated the whole statement of claim. Neither counsel provided me with any authority on the specific point of the extent to which a court having refused to strike out a statement of claim, can entertain a subsequent motion to strike out the statement of claim as subsequently amended. It appears to me on principle that I am functus officio in this matter unless the amendments, with or without the particulars, somehow have rendered the whole statement of claim invalid. That is clearly not the case here. In paragraphs (1) and (2) of my order of October 31, 1986, I dismissed unconditionally the defendants motion to have the whole statement of claim struck out. In other words, I found that as a whole the statement of claim raised an arguable case and was not a fit object for an order under rule 419. What I ordered in paragraphs (3) and (4) of my October 31, 1986, order, with respect to them motions (3) and (4) of the defendants, was the striking out of one sentence in paragraph 5 of the statement of claim and the granting of leave to amend it further subject to the provision of particulars; I also conditionally ordered the provision of further particulars with respect to paragraphs 9 and 11 of the statement of claim if the plaintiffs intended to call evidence to establish their aboriginal rights instead of simply relying on some general proposition of law that such rights exist. The plaintiffs have taken advantage of the opportunity I gave them with respect to amending paragraph 5 and in my view have provided appropriate particulars in respect to that amendment. With respect to the condition I imposed on them concerning paragraphs 9 and 11, in my view they have not properly provided particulars of facts on which they intend to rely (that is, facts to demonstrate customs, practices, or other forms of recognition of the aboriginal rights they claim). But that does not in any way invalidate paragraphs 9 and 11 of the statement of claim. In my view those paragraphs now can be taken to be only statements of law and not allegations of fact, but that of course will be a matter for the trial judge to determine at trial. Failure by the plaintiffs properly to particularize facts, however, in no way affects the validity of the statement of claim as a whole. It may be that they will be unable to sustain their apparent contention that such aboriginal rights existed as a general principle of law without reference to any customary exercise of those rights, but that is not a matter which can or should be decided at this time.
[5]
There was therefore nothing in the amendments to the statement of claim nor in the particulars - inadequate as they may be in certain respects - provided since my order of October 31st which in any way alters my conclusion of that time that the statement of claim is not a suitable object for an order to strike out.
[6]
The only other changed circumstance suggested by counsel for the defendant was that the Supreme Court of Canada in a judgment rendered April 9, 1987, as yet unreported, in Reference re Public Service Employee Regulations Act etc. had held that the "freedom of association" protected by paragraph 2(d) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms protected individual rights of association and not the rights of the group itself. [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. He therefore contended that I should reconsider my earlier decision not to strike out the prayer for relief for a declaration that the plaintiffs' freedom of association has been infringed by the amendments to the Indian Act. As a matter of procedure I find this suggestion surprising: I know of no authority for any court reopening its decision on the basis that since rendering it a higher court has issued a judgment inconsistent with the decision of the former. Even if this were procedurally or jurisdictionally legitimate, it would certainly not be open to me to conclude on the basis of the Supreme Court decision that in the particular circumstances of the plaintiffs there was now no basis for a claim to infringement of freedom of association. The issues are very different in respect of Indian bands and trade unions. It may be that the individual's freedom to associate with whom he or she wishes may have more relevance to the control of band membership than it has to industrial action by unions. In my view it is not possible or appropriate for me to decide this matter on a motion to strike.
[7]
Counsel for the defendant contended several times that the foregoing matters had to be raised by such an application and dealt with by me prior to the appeal being heard, so that the record would be complete for the Court of Appeal. I have had some difficulty understanding this point, and can only take it to refer to the possibility that as a result of the amendments to the statement of claim and the provision of certain particulars, all since my order of October 31, 1986, the appeal from that order may have become moot and could be dismissed on that basis as happened for example, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.). I am unable to see how the amendments and the particulars involved in this case could have that effect. Paragraphs (1) and (2) of my order of October 31, 1986, dismissed the defendant's motions that the entire statement of claim be struck out. Paragraph (3) of my order only dealt with striking out of one sentence leaving the possibility of an amendment, at the option of the plaintiffs, and paragraph (4) only dealt with the provision of particulars. In its notice of appeal dated November 10, 1986, the defendant only appeals against my order "dismissing the appellant's application for an order pursuant to rule 419 ... that the amended statement of claim herein be struck out". The defendant does not appeal paragraphs (3) and (4) of that order and it is only with respect to the application of those paragraphs that the amendment and particulars are relevant. Those matters are not under appeal and what has been done by way of amendment and particulars since my order does not, as I have indicated above, in any way affect my decisions with respect to refusing to strike out the statement of claim. I therefore consider that this aspect of the defendant's application is both futile and unnecessary.
[8]
As noted earlier, the defendant also seeks an order under either rule 1909 or rule 402 to delay the filing of the statement of defence until thirty days after the defendant has exhausted its appellate remedies in respect of my order of October 31, 1986. In that order I had allowed the defendant until thirty days after the receipt by it of the amendments and particulars filed by the plaintiffs. On April 15, 1987, I extended that time, with the consent of the plaintiffs, until such time as I had disposed of the present application. The defendant filed no evidence with respect to the stay now requested, counsel for the defendant arguing that the need was apparent from the record. The plaintiffs filed some evidence to indicate that the impugned amendments to the Indian Act are being applied while this case goes on.
[9]
It is clear from the authorities that there is no automatic or presumptive right to stay of an interlocutory order (such as my order of October 31, 1986) pending the determination of an appeal from that order. Applications for stays under section 50 of the Federal Court Act, under rule 1909, or through the extension of time for filing a defence under rule 402, would appear to me all to involve the same principle. What that principle should be is less clear. At times it has been suggested that the test should be that of balance of convenience: see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.). Elsewhere it has been said that the appropriate test is the one normally associated with section 50 of the Federal Court Act, namely that the onus is on the party seeking a stay of an order or judgment to show that the denial of a stay would cause an injustice to him and the grant of the stay will not cause an injustice to the other party: see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.); see also La Société Radio Canada contre l'Association des Réalisateurs, [1982] 2 F.C. 337 (T.D.). Again, it has been said elsewhere in this court that a stay pending appeal should not be issued unless "irreparable injury" will otherwise be caused;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 219 (F.C.T.D.). More recently, the Supreme Court of Canada has said in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  constitutionality of that order is in question are the same as for the grant of an interlocutory injunction sought against enforcement of an order or law whose constitutional validity has been challenged. Judgment rendered March 5, 1987, as yet unreported, at 14-40. [See 73 N.R. 341; 46 Man.R.(2d) 241]. For those purposes, the court regarded the balance of convenience as being the proper test. It emphasized that in constitutional cases the balance of convenience should be measured not just as between the interest of private parties attacking the validity of a law or order and the interests of the public officer or institution under direct attack. Rather, the interests of the public or portion of the public which would be furthered by the actions of the public agency or officer carrying out the impugned law or order must also be considered.
[10]
For present purposes I think it will be sufficient to consider the balance of convenience. I do not consider that the defendant has met the onus on it to demonstrate a clear balance of convenience in favour of the stay of this whole action pending the defendant's appeal of an interlocutory order. The defendant has shown no special injury that will be caused to it or to the many beneficiaries of the inpugned amendments to the Indian Act if preparations for trial continue. As far as I can see, the only disadvantage to be suffered would be the incurring of some legal costs with respect to filing a statement of defence, making discovery of documents, and proceeding to examination for discovery. At the same time I can take note of the plaintiffs' evidence that the composition of the plaintiff bands has been and is being affected by the amendments to the Indian Act. I think I can assume that these effects are not trivial and will be progressively more unsettling as time passes.
[11]
I have also considered the fact that, the appeal in question being from my exercise of discretion in refusing to strike out the statement of claim, the probabilities of its success are not very great.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 184 (F.C.A.). I also have applied the principle that the onus on the applicant for a stay is greater where the order sought to be stayed is not one which is the subject of execution procedures. Baxter Travenol  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  dismissal of an application to strike a statement of claim, is not the subject of execution procedures. I have also considered, in reaching my conclusion, the undertaking given by counsel for the plaintiffs to cooperate with counsel for the defendant in seeking an early date for the hearing of the appeal.
[12]
I will therefore refuse the stay as requested and require the defendant to file a statement of defence within fourteen days of the filing of the formal order in the present matter.
[13]
Because I have concluded that this application was not warranted, I am ordering costs against the defendant-applicant regardless of the outcome of the cause. Counsel for the plaintiffs-respondents requested at the end of argument that, should I dismiss the application with costs, she wished to make further written submissions that such costs should be awarded on a solicitor-client basis. I agreed to such a procedure, with of course provision being made for the defendant to respond to such submissions. I am therefore not entering a formal order at this time but leave it for counsel for the plaintiffs-respondents to apply under rule 324 for entry of the order, submitting therewith any written arguments she may wish to make concerning costs. Counsel for the defendant will have fourteen days after receipt of such written submissions to respond in writing and counsel for the plaintiffs-respondents will have seven days after receipt of any such submissions on behalf of the defendant-applicant to file a reply thereto.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]