[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: On February 5, 1990, the plaintiff, White Consolidated Industries Inc. commenced legal proceedings against the defendant Beam of Canada Inc. by filing a statement of claim, requesting an order to strike the defendant's registration of the trademark Beam and the registration of the slogan "Don't Lug A Vacuum ... Plug In A Beam" from the register, on the grounds that:
"(1) the defendant company was not entitled to secure registration pursuant to s. 16 of the
Trade Marks Act
.
"(2) pursuant to s. 18 of the
Trade Marks Act
, the registration is invalid since the trademark was not distinctive of the defendant company at the time of the proceedings, February 5, 1990."
[2]
The plaintiff further seeks a declaration that the defendant has directed and will direct attention to their wares in such a way as to cause and be likely to cause confusion between their wares and the wares of the plaintiff contrary to the provisions of s. 7(b) of the
Trade Marks Act
(R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13).
[3]
The facts may be set out as follows: Effective January 1, 1989, Beam Industries Inc. made an assignment to National Union Electric Corporation whereby National Union Electric Corporation obtained the business and all of the assets of Beam Industries Inc. including the goodwill of the business and any trademarks owned by Beam Industries. Pursuant to a merger effective December 31, 1989, National Union Electric Corporation was merged into its parent corporation White Consolidated Industries Inc. (hereinafter called White), an American company and the plaintiff in this action. As a result of the merger, White acquired all of the assets and interest then owned by National Union Electric Corporation.
[4]
The defendant, Beam of Canada, is a corporation having its principal place of business located in Ontario. The business was founded in 1976 by Mr. Oscar Paul Muser. Mr. and Mrs. Muser moved from South Africa to Canada in 1971 and began painting contracting. They lived in the prairies and since the weather did not allow for painting in the wintertime, the Musers entered the business of marketing central vacuum systems to carry on business during the winter. By the summer of 1976, Mr. Muser began to import central vacuum systems from Beam Industries and began to sell them to the dealer network.
[5]
Beam of Canada was first known by the name Vac-U-Matic Industries Limited. Following a suggestion made by Mr. Sampson, formerly the President of Beam Industries, Beam of Canada changed its name from Vac-U-Matic Industries Limited to Beam Central Vacuum Systems Inc. in 1978.
[6]
Since 1957 White and its predecessor in title, Beam Industries, have offered for sale and sold central vacuum systems and parts and accessories in the United States in association with the trademark Beam. A central vacuum system consists of three essential elements: a power unit, a tubing system, being the tubing which connects the power unit to the wall outlet and a hose and attachment set.
[7]
Since 1975, Beam of Canada has purchased central vacuum systems and/or parts and accessories bearing the trademark Beam from Beam Industries for resale in Canada. An oral agreement was entered into by Mr. Oscar Paul Muser, President of Beam Canada, and Mr. Bob Sampson, President of Beam Industries, whereby Mr. Sampson agreed not to sell his product that he was manufacturing to anyone else in the southern half of Saskatchewan for three months so that Mr. Muser could prove to him that he had the ability to really create a market for central vacuum systems.
[8]
From 1975 to 1985, every power unit sold in Canada and labelled with the trademark Beam originated from Beam Industries in Webster City, Iowa. From 1985 to January 1990, every canister for every power unit sold in Canada and labelled with the trademark Beam originated from Beam Industries. Since as early as 1985, Beam of Canada Inc. has purchased motors for power units directly from manufacturer (Ametek) and assembled some portions of the power units in Canada. Prior to 1985, the serial plate on Beam brand central vacuum systems sold in Canada bore the name Beam Industries Inc. Since 1985, the serial plates on Beam brand central vacuum systems sold in Canada have borne the name of Beam of Canada.
[9]
In September 1981, Mr. Oscar Paul Muser applied for the registration of the trademark Beam based on an alleged first use dating back to July 1976.
[10]
Beam of Canada was a registered user of the trademark registration no. 269550 for the word Beam registered by Oscar Paul Muser on May 28, 1982 for use in association with central vacuum systems and parts and accessories therefor, namely tools, hoses, wall brackets, mountings, face plates and fitting, attachments, motors, plastic, piping, joints and elbows. It remained the registered user of the Canadian trademark registration until June 8, 1987 when the registered user was cancelled. An assignment of the trademark was then made to Beam of Canada effective January 27, 1987 and registered April 10, 1987. As a result, Beam of Canada is the registered owner of the Canadian trademark registration no. 269550 (history taken from Agreed Book of Documents Exhibit P-2-2).
[11]
The Canadian trademark registration no. 306036 for the words "Don't Lug A Vacuum ... Plug In A Beam" was registered on August 16, 1985 by Paul Muser for use in association with central vacuum systems and parts and fittings, attachments, motors, plastic piping, joints and elbows. The trademark registration was subsequently assigned to its registered user, Beam of Canada effective January 27, 1987 and registered April 10, 1987 thereby making Beam of Canada the registered owner of the trademark (history taken from Agreed Book of Documents Exhibit P-2-3).
[12]
Despite the registrations, it is White's contention that Mr. Muser was not entitled to register the trademark Beam at the time he applied for the registration since he was not the first person to use the trademark in Canada. White claims that it and its predecessors in title had previously used the trademark in Canada. White further contends that no consent was given to the activities of the defendant (paragraph 22, Statement of Claim).
[13]
According to the defendant, until February 5, 1990, neither the plaintiff nor any of its alleged predecessors in title ever objected to the use of advertising of the trademark Beam by the defendant, to the use of the word Beam in the defendant's corporate name, or to the registration by Oscar Paul Muser of the trademark Beam. The defendant alleges that the plaintiff knew of the defendant's use of the trademark at all material times (paragraph 16, Statement of Defence). Beam of Canada further claims that it relied on the plaintiff's representations (i.e. knowledge, consent and encouragement of Beam Industries Inc.) when it obtained trademark registrations, established a Canada wide network of Beam dealers and distributors, and extensively used and advertised such trademarks in Canada (paragraph 28(b) ii Statement of Defence).
[14]
It is also Beam of Canada's position that the plaintiff is barred by acquiescence from all relief sought since (a) the plaintiff has known since at least June 1988 that the defendant owned the Canadian registrations for the trademarks; (b) the plaintiff's predecessor, Beam Industries Inc. has known of (1) the defendant's trademark registrations and the defendant's ownership of such trademarks since at least as early as 1983 and (2) the defendant's extensive use and advertising of the Beam trademark in Canada since 1978; and (c) the plaintiff, or its predecessors, has delayed for at least seven years before challenging the trademark and the trademark registration. The plaintiff is therefore guilty of prolonged, inordinate and inexcusable delay (paragraph 28(c), Statement of Defence).
[15]
It is the plaintiff's position that the trademark Beam was not distinctive of the applicant at the date the validity of the registrations was brought into question, February 5, 1990. Beam of Canada claims that by virtue of long and extensive use and advertising, by the defendant, in Canada of such goods in association with the trademark and trade name Beam, the trademark and trade name have become known in trade and to the general public as signifying exclusively the defendant's central vacuum systems and parts and accessories. It is therefore the defendant's position that it has acquired a substantial reputation by the use of the trademark Beam and trade name Beam. The defendant therefore asserts that at the time of the proceedings bringing into question the validity of the trademark registration, the trademark was distinctive of the registered owner.
[16]
White claims that Beam of Canada continued to act as a distributor of Beam central vacuum systems and parts and accessories manufactured in Webster City, Iowa and marked with the trademark Beam by Beam Industries from 1976 to January 1990. It is the defendant's position that it is not a distributor for the plaintiff.
[17]
On January 16, 1990, Beam of Canada advised Beam Industries that it had tooled up its own "power unit canisters" and that it would no longer be looking to Beam Industries for on-going supplies.
Issues
[18]
The main issue in this action is to determine who in fact owns the trademark Beam in Canada. The determination of this issue will determine as well whether the trademark "Don't Lug A Vacuum ... Plug In A Beam" will be able to be exclusively used throughout Canada by Beam of Canada.
[19]
In order to determine this issue, the following questions must be resolved:
(1) Is the registration of the trademark Beam valid?
(2) Did White or its predecessor in title at any time abandon the mark?
(3) Can White's passing off action under s. 7(b) succeed?
(4) Is White barred from relief based on the principles of laches and acquiescence or estoppel by representation?
(5) Was there an assignment of the mark Beam made by Beam Industries to Beam of Canada thereby barring White, the successor in title, from relief based on the principle of assignor estoppel?
Validity Of Registration
[20]
The sections in the
Trade Marks Act
which set out the grounds on which a registration of a trademark is invalid invoked by the plaintiff are ss. 16 and 18.
[21]
Section 18(1) provides:
"18(1) The registration of a trademark is invalid if
(a) the trademark was not registrable at the date of registration,
(b) the trademark is not distinctive at the time proceedings bringing the validity of the registration into question are commenced, or
(c) the trademark has been abandoned, and subject to s. 17, it is invalid if the applicant for registration was not the person entitled to secure the registration."
[22]
Section 16 dictates who is entitled to the registration of a trademark:
"16(1) Any applicant who has filed an application in accordance with s. 30 for registration of a trademark that is registrable and that he or his predecessor in title has used in Canada or made known in Canada in association with wares or services is entitled, subject to a s. 38 to secure its registration in respect of those wares or services, unless at the date on which he or his predecessor in title first so used it or made it known it was confusing with
(a) a trademark that had been previously used in Canada or made known in Canada by any other person;
(b) a trademark in respect of which an application for registration had been previously filed in Canada by any other person; or
(c) a trade name that had been previously used in Canada by any other person.
"16(5) The right of an applicant to secure registration of a registrable trademark is not affected by the previous use or making known of a confusing trademark or trade name by another person, if the confusing trademark or trade name was abandoned at the date of advertisement of the applicant's application in accordance with s. 37. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  wares if, at the time of the transfer of the property in or possession of the wares, in the normal course of trade, it is marked on the wares themselves or on the packages in which they are distributed or it is in any other manner so associated with the wares that notice of the association is then given to the person to whom the property or possession is transferred.
"4(2) A trademark is deemed to be used in association with services if it is used or displayed in the performance or advertising of those services.
"4(3) A trademark that is marked in Canada on wares or on the packages in which they are contained is, when the wares are exported from Canada, deemed to be used in Canada in association with those wares.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  registration on alleged first use in July 1976. Referring to paragraph 9 of Exhibit P-2, the plaintiff argues that since the defendant company purchased central vacuum systems, parts and accessories bearing the trademark Beam from Beam Industries for resale in Canada since 1975, it was first user of the trademark Beam in Canada prior to July 1976, the date of alleged first use by the defendant.
[25]
Under s. 16, an applicant is entitled to registration of the trademark if he has used or made it known in Canada in association with the wares, and it is not confusing with a trademark previously used in Canada.
[26]
In the case
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  wholesaler or distributor of goods bearing the mark of the foreign trademark owner was "use" by the foreign owner, not the Canadian importer. Mr. Justice Heald, explained the proper meaning of the word "use" in context of the normal course of trade, at pp. 16-17:
"I think that those words must surely mean that s. 4 contemplates the normal course of trade as beginning with the manufacturer, ending with the consumer and with a wholesaler and retailer or one of them as intermediary. When the applicant sold to the retailer and the retailer sold to the public, the public came to associate applicant's mark with the Harness House belt; s. 4 contemplates that the use between the retailer and the public enures to the benefit of the manufacturer and its use in Canada. In other words -- if any part of the chain takes place in Canada, this is 'use' in Canada within the meaning of s. 4."
[27]
This was applied in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).
[28]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (upheld on appeal), Mr. Justice McNair concluded that central power vacuum units which were ordered, packaged and shipped for distribution and marketing in Canada, in a normal course of trade situation, under the trademark Astro-Vac and under a commercial arrangement classified as an exclusive distributorship, constituted "use" of such a trademark in Canada within s. 4 of the
Trade Marks Act
. Mr. Justice McNair came to this conclusion despite the fact that the agreement was not registered under s. 50 of the
Act
. He states at p. 267:
"I find on the totality of evidence that the commercial arrangement between the parties was one of exclusive distributorship whereby the respondent's central power vacuum units were ordered, packaged and shipped for distribution and marketing in Canada in a normal course of trade situation which recognized the continuity of the transaction from manufacturer through distributor to ultimate consumer under the sanctioned use of the trademark Astro-Vac. In my view, this constituted use of such trademark in Canada within s. 4 of the
Trade Marks Act
. Moreover, I consider that it matters not for purposes of this case that the exclusive distributorship agreement between the parties authorizing or licensing the use of the respondent's trademark Astro-Vac was not registered under s. 50 of the
Trade Marks Act
."
[29]
Based on the evidence, specifically a letter written by Mr. Sampson, President of Beam Industries, to Mr. Paul Muser, President of Beam of Canada dated May 20, 1976 (Exhibit P-1-9), in which Mr. Sampson refers to Mr. Muser as Beam Industries' "exclusive beam factory representative", I am of the opinion that initially, Mr. Muser was in fact a distributor of Beam Industries. This letter represents the only document that sets forth the relationship, in that period of time, so far as Mr. Muser and Mr. Sampson were concerned.
[30]
Based on the reasoning of the cases listed above, Mr. Muser did not first use the trademark in association with central vacuum systems in Canada. There has been no "use" in Canada, at the material time, by the defendant, and therefore, it was not entitled to registration of the trademark. This point can be further evidenced by Mrs. Muser who admitted in her examination for discovery that Beam Industries, "indeed had rights to the trademark Beam in Canada prior to the application for registration of the trademark" (P-3, p. 67).
[31]
It is clear from the evidence, that the first use that Mr. Muser was alluding to when he applied for registration was based on the first shipments of central vacuum systems that Beam Industries exported to him in the summer of 1976.
[32]
In July 1976, the year of alleged first use by Mr. Muser, the evidence establishes that it was generally known to the Canadian distributors, dealers and customers that the central vacuum systems were imported from Webster City, Iowa in the United States and originated from Beam Industries Ltd.
[33]
In the examination for discovery of Mrs. Gillian Muser, she stated that the relationship with Beam Industries, in the beginning, was one where all the units distributed in Canada bore the Beam mark made by Beam Industries in the United States in Webster City. She added that in the earlier years, in each case, the unit had the Beam trademark on it, the trademarks were applied to the power units by Beam Industries and that the units bore the Beam Industries' name.
[34]
In terms of the distributors' impressions of the relationship, she stated that she assumed, but could not say for sure, that all the distributors knew that the power units were made in the United States by Beam Industries. She later stated, with regards to the dealers, that they "may have known" where the units were made.
[35]
I am satisfied that the dealers and the distributors, did in fact know where the power units originated from in 1976, the date of alleged first use. I am able to reach this conclusion not only from what Mrs. Muser had to say on this point but also from the testimony of Mr. Veron Kroeger, a Canadian distributor of Beam in 1977 until 1987 in Manitoba, in which he stated that he did not give any thought as to who owned the Beam name in Canada since to him it "was straightforward that the product came from Beam, Webster City, U.S.A. and that Mr. Muser was primarily a distributor for them in Canada".
[36]
Mr. Muser stated in cross-examination, that it was his intention, in the beginning at least, to tell the readers (i.e. customers, dealers and distributors) of his advertising literature, that the Beam central vacuum system and parts emanated and were sourced from Beam Industries. It was also his intention to tell the readers in the early period that the power units were sourced and emanated from Beam Industries in the United States. Mr. Muser further agreed that a reasonable reader would infer from the advertisements that he ran in July 1977 in Canada, that the power units and the kit under the Beam mark, emanated and were sourced from Beam Industries. He also agreed that until 1985, his dealers and distributors in Canada all understood and knew that each and every power unit that he sold to them under the Beam mark was made by Beam Industries Inc. in Webster City, Iowa.
[37]
Until at least 1984, on virtually all of the letterheads and stationery that Mr. Muser used to write letters on behalf of his company, it was indicated that the head office and manufacturing plant for Beam was in Webster City, Iowa, U.S.A.
[38]
Beam of Canada invoked the following reference from
Fox on Trade Marks
(1972) at p. 68:
"Whether in such a case the trademark is to be regarded as the property of the exporter or the importer depends upon the manner of its use and whether the public regards the goods as being those of the person selling them or as those of the exporter. If wares are sold by an importer under his trademark without reference to the person producing the goods and without the public being aware of any other than the importer having a connection in trade with the goods, then the mark properly belongs to the importer. But if the goods are sold as the product of a foreign producer then the trademark properly belongs to the foreign producer."
[39]
It is evident that the central vacuum systems were sold as the product of Beam Industries in 1976. Therefore, based on this quote, I am satisfied that Beam Industries owned the trademark at the date of alleged first use by the defendant. Furthermore, pursuant to the above cases, Mr. Muser's alleged first use constitutes "use" by the owner, not by him. Thus, it would appear that pursuant to s. 18 of the
Trade Marks Act
the registration is invalid.
Abandonment
A) At The Date Of The Advertisement Of
Beam Of Canada's Application
For Registration:
[40]
There are two relevant sections of the
Act
that deal with the question of abandonment.
[41]
Section 16(5) provides:
"The right of an applicant to secure registration of a registrable trademark is not affected by the previous use or making known of a confusing trademark or trade name by another person, if the confusing trademark or trade name was abandoned
at the date of advertisement of the applicant's application
in accordance with s. 37." (Emphasis added)
[42]
Section 17(1) states:
"... no registration of a trademark shall be expunged or amended or held invalid on the ground of any previous use or making known of a confusing trademark or trade name by a person other than the applicant for that registration or his predecessor in title, except at the instance of that other person or his successor in title, and the burden lies on that other person or his successor to establish that he had not abandoned the confusing trademark or trade name
at the date of advertisement of the applicant's application
." (Emphasis added)
[43]
Based on the above sections, the onus is on Beam Industries to show that it did not abandon the trademark Beam at the material time which was in the range between 1981 and 1982. In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 391 (F.C.T.D.), Madame Justice Reed explains the law of abandonment at p. 392:
"There is no dispute that in order to find abandonment of a trademark one has to find: (1) that the mark is no longer in use in Canada and (2) an intention to abandon the mark."
[44]
In this case, the mark in question is the word Beam in association with central vacuum systems. I am unable to find, based on the evidence, that the mark was no longer in use at the material time. Mr. Muser, in his testimony, stated that during the period between 1979 and 1984, specification sheets and brochures were supplied to the Canadian distributors by Beam Industries and Beam of Canada acted solely as an emergency supply warehouse. Furthermore, in respect of the installation manuals that Mr. Muser did distribute in Canada, some of them clearly indicated that the source of the vacuum systems was Beam Industries of Webster City, Iowa. In addition, all of the installation manuals that were sent to his western Canadian distributors indicated that they were sourced and emanated from Webster City, Iowa.
[45]
It is an agreed fact that from 1975 to 1985, every power unit sold in Canada and labelled with the trademark Beam originated from Beam Industries in Webster City, Iowa.
[46]
Based on the evidence, the power unit is the main component of the central vacuum system. Since every power unit labelled with the trademark Beam originated from Beam Industries, I am compelled to conclude that this activity constitutes "use".
[47]
Between 1979 and 1984, direct shipments from Beam Industries to western Canadian distributors had been made. This fact was confirmed by both Mr. Kroeger and Mr. Sampson. Based on this evidence, I am satisfied that the plaintiff has satisfied the burden of showing nonabandonment at the date of the advertisement of Beam of Canada's application for registration. Consequently, it is my opinion that the issue of abandonment by the defendant between 1981 and 1982 must be negated.
B) Subsequent Abandonment Or Use
[48]
As noted above, in order to conclude that there has been abandonment of a mark one must find nonuse and the intention to abandon. Moreover, based on the decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), (1986), 77 N.R. 399; 10 C.P.R.(3d) 434 (F.C.A.), mere nonuse of a trademark is not of itself sufficient to create abandonment for nonuse may be satisfactorily explained. In the case at bar, Beam of Canada submits that Beam Industries abandoned the trademark Beam approximately in 1985.
[49]
Beam of Canada claims that the mark was not in use in Canada by Beam Industries since 1985 because Beam Industries allowed Beam of Canada to put on its own serial plate bearing its name on the wares. Beam Industries also allowed the defendant to refer to Beam of Canada on the guarantee, the manual, the advertising, the box and so on.
[50]
Beam of Canada further claims that the relationship evolved to the point where Beam Industries became a supplier of Beam of Canada and thus was a private labeller. According to Beam of Canada, Beam Industries abandoned the mark since they allowed the message to the public to be that the trademark Beam is the trademark of Beam of Canada. The crux of Beam of Canada's argument is that since there are so many references made to Beam of Canada, the public has come to associate the trademark Beam with Beam of Canada and by allowing this to happen, Beam Industries has abandoned the mark.
[51]
In my opinion, public perception is a relevant consideration when dealing with the question of distinctiveness and not when dealing with the question of abandonment. The case law is clear, when dealing with abandonment, the important considerations are "use" and "intention to abandon".
[52]
Section 4 of the
Trade Marks Act
is clear. In order to establish use of a trademark with respect to wares, the following conditions must exist at the date of transfer of the property in or possession of the wares:
(1) the mark must be a trademark as defined in s. 2, that is, used for the purpose of distinguishing wares;
(2) the mark must be associated with the wares so that notice of the association is given; and
(3) the transfer of the property or possession therein must occur in the normal course of trade.
[53]
The section further provides for two specific manners of giving notice of association: namely, applying the mark to the wares themselves or on their packaging.
[54]
It is clear from the facts of this case that from 1985 to January 1990, every canister for every power unit sold in Canada and labelled with the trademark Beam originated from Beam Industries. Furthermore, it is my impression that by applying the mark Beam to the canisters, the plaintiff and its predecessor in title had the intention to use the mark so as to distinguish its wares.
[55]
The only essential question is whether this constitutes "use" for the purposes of the
Act
. If it does constitute "use" then the issue of abandonment does not arise. In my opinion, there was always use by the plaintiff of the trademark Beam in Canada. After reviewing the evidence, I am not satisfied that at any time, the plaintiff stopped using the trademark Beam in Canada.
[56]
It was suggested that since Mr. Sampson told Mr. Muser that he had no interest in registering the trademark in Canada, it meant that he was abandoning the trademark. When considering this statement made by Mr. Sampson, one's first impression is to conclude that there was in fact abandonment on the part of Mr. Sampson. However, in law, such action does not constitute abandonment of trademark rights.
[57]
Since I do not find anything in the evidence to show cessation of use of the trademark Beam at any time by the plaintiff, it is my view that the issue of abandonment does not arise in this case.
[58]
Another important piece of evidence is the fact that as soon as the plaintiff was advised of the intention of the defendant to seek out a third party source of the product, this action was launched for expungement. As a result, I find it difficult to conclude that there was in fact an abandonment of the mark by Beam Industries.
Distinctiveness
[59]
It is the plaintiff's contention that based on s. 18(1)(b), the defendant's registration is invalid since it was not distinctive on February 5, 1990, the critical date. Actual distinctiveness is a question of fact. The
Act
provides in s. 2 that "distinctive" in relation to a trademark means a trademark that actually distinguishes the wares or services, in association with which it is used by its owner, from the wares or services of others, or is adapted so as to distinguish them. In the case
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> /205-208 (S.C.C.) especially p. 208, it was stated that for a trademark to be distinctive of a person, the message to the public must be that such person is the source of the goods bearing the trademark. Based on the evidence in this case, I am satisfied that the message to the public certainly changed by February 1990 so that the trademark was distinctive of Beam of Canada.
[60]
A brief reference to the facts will show why I feel constrained to reach this conclusion.
[61]
Before Mr. Oscar Paul Muser started selling Beam Industries' central vacuum systems in Canada, I am satisfied, based on the evidence, that there were no or minimal sales by Beam Industries of Beam brand central vacuums in Canada therefore, Beam Industries did not build up a strong reputation in Canada before Beam of Canada came on the scene.
[62]
From as early as 1979 or 1980, virtually all newspaper advertising identified Beam Canada as the source of Beam products. Beam Industries did almost no newspaper advertising in Canada. Mr. Sampson stated in his cross-examination (transcript p. 438-439) that Beam Industries did no newspaper advertising in Canada since 1975. It was also shown in evidence that Beam of Canada's advertising expenses in 1988 and 1989 were 2.3 and 1.7 million dollars.
[63]
Mr. Claassen testified on behalf of the defendant. Both parties accepted that Mr. Claassen is an expert in the advertising field.
[64]
According to Mr. Claassen's testimony and affidavit (par. 29), newspaper or other media advertising is a more effective means of distributing advertising messages than is the use of flyers or brochures used as promotional literature distributed by hand at the place of business. This is true, since it is easier to reach a large segment of the population by newspaper advertising than it is for individual members of the public to visit a particular place of business.
[65]
It is Beam of Canada's contention that by virtue of extensive advertising identifying Beam Canada as the source, the message to the public is that Beam Canada owns the Beam trademark in Canada. Despite specification sheets on which Beam Industries appears prominently on the top, which were used from 1980 to 1989 in Canada, I agree with the defendant's submission that all the heavy advertising done by Beam of Canada swamps out all the advertising material like the brochures, stuffers and specification sheets that ever entered Canada and identified Beam Industries as the source of Beam brand goods.
[66]
Furthermore, since 1985, the serial plate on the power unit has identified the goods as emanating from Beam Canada. Since at least 1981-82, the guarantee for Beam brand central vacuum systems was given by Beam Canada. The installation and operating manuals have identified Beam Canada as the source of the goods since 1984.
[67]
Based on the above facts, I disagree with the plaintiff's allegation that the trademark Beam was not distinctive of the registered owner on the date of the commencement of the proceedings bringing into question the validity of the trademark registration pursuant to s. 18(1)(b) of the
Trade Marks Act
. I am satisfied that the message to the public at the material time was that the Beam systems emanated from Beam of Canada and not White Consolidated Industries.
[68]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  which dealt with the aspect of distinctiveness with respect to the message given to the public:
"In the final analysis the critical factor according to these cases is the message given to the public. In the present case I and see no basis on which the public could have received any message in the normal course of business other than that this mark, obviously placed on the china at the time of manufacture associating the name of the pattern with the name of the manufacturer, was a manufacturer's mark."
[69]
It is clear, from this passage, that the test when dealing with the question of distinctiveness is the message given to the public. In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  stringent by stating that the message given to the public must be a clear one. He states at p. 267:
"I feel there would have to have been a clear message given to the public that the wares and services with which the trademark Astro-Vac was associated and used were the applicant's and not those of the respondent and the weight of the evidence, in my view, is against any such finding."
[70]
When applying this test to the case at bar, it is clear that the weight of the evidence shows that the message given to the public over the years, was clearly that the central vacuum systems with which the trademark Beam was associated and used, were those of Beam of Canada.
Plaintiff's Passing Off Claim
[71]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the essential elements that a plaintiff must show in order to succeed in an action for passing off under s. 7(b) of the
Trade Marks Act
, are given at p. 155. To establish a passing off action, the plaintiff must establish the following:
"(1) that what he has done in relation to his wares, services or business has caused a certain part of the public or the public as a whole ... to associate such with his wares, services or business
"(2) an invasion of his rights
"(3) damage or likelihood of damage to him"
[72]
These three factors must be proven in order for White to succeed in its passing off action against Beam of Canada. Since I have already concluded that at the critical date, February 5, 1990, the trademark Beam was distinctive of Beam of Canada in Canada, and White had no reputation in the trademark in Canada at the material time, White's claim of passing off cannot succeed under s. 7(b).
Equitable Remedies
Estoppel By Laches And Acquiescence
[73]
The Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  outlined in the English decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  a very much broader approach which is directed rather at ascertaining whether, in particular individual circumstances, it would be unconscionable for a party to be permitted to deny that which, knowingly or unknowingly, he has allowed or encouraged another to assume to his detriment rather than to inquiring whether the circumstances can be fitted within the confines of some preconceived formula serving as a universal yardstick for every form of unconscionable behaviour."
[74]
The key factors to consider when applying the doctrine of acquiescence and laches outlined in the
Institut national des appellations d'origine des vins & eaux-de-vie v. Andres Wines Ltd.
(1987), 16 C.P.R.(3d) 385 (Ont. H.C.), are the length of the delay and the nature of the acts done during the interval, which might affect either party and cause a balance of justice or injustice in taking the one course or the other, so far as relates to the remedy. Mr. Justice Dupont further emphasizes at p. 443 that "mere delay is not enough to deprive a plaintiff of his legal rights. However, when combined with two other factors -- length of delay and nature of intervening acts -- it can be determinative of the issue". Mr. Justice Dupont then went on to explain at p. 445:
"The question for the court is, therefore, whether the plaintiffs acted in such a way as to encourage the defendants to believe that they would not enforce their legal rights against them; and, whether the defendants, relying on the plaintiffs' inaction, have acted to their detriment in the intervening period over the last 60 years. These factors, combined with the 'inordinate delay' by the plaintiffs in enforcing their rights, will be determinative of the issue of the propriety of injunctive relief in this case."
[75]
In the case at bar, Beam of Canada is pleading that the plaintiff is barred from any relief by virtue of the principle of laches and acquiescence. The argument put forth by Beam of Canada is that the plaintiff, as well as its successor in title, knew throughout their relationship with the defendant of its activities in Canada, and never objected to any of its undertakings with respect to the Beam trademark. As a result, they may be said to have acquiesced.
[76]
This argument may be justified pursuant to the decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  permits another to incur an expense in doing an act under the belief that it would not be objected to, and so a kind of permission may be said to be given to another to alter his condition, he may be said to acquiesce."
[77]
As stated above, the crucial factors to consider when applying the principle of laches and acquiescence are delay and intervening acts. With respect to delay, Mr. Sampson, in his testimony, stated that the first time that he had knowledge of the fact that Beam of Canada, Paul Muser, registered the trademark Beam, was in 1983 or late 1984 (transcript p. 450). To corroborate this evidence, Mrs. Muser, in her testimony, stated that Beam Industries was advised of the registration of the mark Beam by Beam of Canada soon after it had been granted (transcript p. 1311).
[78]
The evidence further shows that National Union Electric and White Industries knew at least as early as November 1988 that Beam of Canada owned the registration for the trademark Beam.
[79]
Despite their knowledge of the registration, they did not institute any legal proceedings against Beam of Canada until this action was started in 1990.
[80]
Notwithstanding these actions or nonactions, it is the plaintiff's position that Mr. Sampson did not proceed with any legal action to assert his rights against Beam of Canada for registering the trademark in Canada, since he was of the belief that Mr. Muser registered the mark to protect both Beam of Canada and Beam Industries alike.
[81]
The plaintiff refers to a letter at Exhibit P-1-33, written by Mr. Muser to Mr. Sampson, where he states: "I thought you should have copies of this correspondence which I thought was necessary to protect
ourselves
in Canada." I have great difficulty with this argument.
[82]
Mr. Sampson presented Mr. Muser with a licensing agreement in 1987 which in no way suggested that Mr. Sampson was of the belief that he was protected by the registration. In paragraph 5 of the agreement (Exhibit P-1-65), it requires Beam of Canada to assign its Canadian registration of the trademark Beam to Beam Industries. Paragraph 5 of the draft agreement reads as follows:
"To parties hereby acknowledge that, from and after October 1, 1957, Beam US has utilized the trademark in connection with the manufacture and sale of the product, which trademark was registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office as Registration No. 1,325,462 on March 19, 1985, in International Class 7 for stationary vacuum systems, that prior use of the trademark by Beam Canada in connection with sales of the Product within the Territory have been with the consent and approval of Beam US and that the trademark utilized by Beam Canada was derived from the Trademark.
Accordingly, Beam Canada agrees to assign the Canadian registration (No. 266,550, May 12, 1982, to Oscar Paul Muser for central vacs and parts thereof) of the Trademark to Beam US.
Furthermore, if the law permits, Beam US shall make application to register Beam Canada as permitted user or registered user of the Trademark and, if necessary, or if requested by Beam US or its duly authorized representative, Beam Canada agrees to join in such application under the conditions of this Agreement and to execute any such documents and to take such action as may be necessary or requested by Beam US to implement such application or retain, enforce or defend the Trademark." (Emphasis added)
[83]
I find these actions by Mr. Sampson somewhat inconsistent with the argument that he felt that Mr. Muser had registered the marks to protect Beam Industries as well as Beam of Canada.
[84]
After reviewing the evidence, I am satisfied that there was a delay between the period that the plaintiff had knowledge and the instituting of legal proceedings. It is well known however that mere delay is not sufficient grounds to invoke acquiescence and laches. This principle was enunciated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . It is, therefore, important to consider what took place during the period of delay.
[85]
Beam of Canada invested millions of dollars into advertising in order to promote the Beam name. Moreover, Beam of Canada extensively sold Beam brand central vacuum systems in Canada. Although these acts are significant, I find the most compelling act revolves once again around the licensing agreement presented by Mr. Sampson to Mr. Muser in 1987 before Beam Industries was sold to National Union Electric.
[86]
The evidence shows that the licensing agreement clearly says that Beam Industries is the owner of the trademark Beam, and when Mr. Muser refused to sign it, Mr. Sampson said: "If you don't want it, Paul, I don't want it." In addition, Mr. Sampson, in his testimony, stated that once Mr. Muser refused to sign the agreement it was "business as usual".
[87]
In explaining the licence agreement, paragraph 5 (Exhibit P-1-65), which reads "Accordingly, Beam of Canada agrees to assign the Canadian Registration No. 266550," ... to Beam U.S., Mr. Sampson, in his testimony (Transcript p. 394), stated that the Beam mark that was registered by Paul Muser was Beam Industries' mark to begin with and the agreement was to bring it back to Beam Industries where in his view it belonged. The fact that Mr. Sampson did not insist upon the signing of the agreement where Beam Industries clearly asserted its rights with respect to the trademark Beam and simply continued "business as usual", suggests to me that there was acquiescence in the circumstances.
[88]
It was apparent that by the year 1989, Beam of Canada was openly asserting ownership of the trademark Beam. This is clearly seen by a letter dated August 10, 1989 (Exhibit P-1-76) by Mrs. Muser to Mr. John Coughlin of Beam Industries.
[89]
In the letter, Mrs. Muser writes: "However, we wish to make clear that our acceptance of this product does not constitute our consent or agreement of Beam Industries Inc. manufacturing, selling or advertising the product bearing the trademark to anyone else in Canada or elsewhere, except in the United States."
[90]
It was also apparent that Beam of Canada was asserting ownership of the mark by the fact that Beam of Canada was applying the trademark Beam to a totally unrelated product such as water purifiers.
[91]
Mr. Dorsey, vice-president of White Consolidated Industries was fully aware of Mr. Muser's intention to use the Beam mark on the water purifiers but did not give him permission to do so and did not object. This further suggests acquiescence on the part of the plaintiff.
[92]
It is clear, by the evidence, that Beam of Canada was a very important customer of Beam Industries. Mr. Dorsey explained that approximately 40 percent of total production in dollars was shipped to Beam Canada in 1989 and 60 percent of total production of power units was shipped to Beam of Canada (Transcript p. 545 and 546). I believe that it is possible to draw the inference that both Mr. Sampson and White Consolidated never objected to Beam of Canada's dealings with the trademark because they stood to gain more by letting Beam of Canada proceed as it did than to insist on their ownership of the Beam mark in Canada. By forcing the issue, they risked losing Beam of Canada as a customer.
[93]
It appears likely to me that Mr. Sampson and White would have been satisfied to maintain the status quo had Beam of Canada not decided to source the power units from a third party. Long before this, Mr. Sampson was well aware of Mr. Muser's activities in Canada specifically the registering of the trademark Beam in Canada and did not choose to take any legal action to assert his rights with respect to the mark. As such, I find that laches and acquiescence operates against him and his successors in title, namely, White Consolidated Industries, the plaintiff in this action.
Assignment Of The Trademark Beam
[94]
The case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the proposition that an assignment may be inferred from the facts of a case. Mr. Justice Rouleau at p. 294 states:
"But it is not even necessary to have recourse to the notion of estoppel to conclude that the respondent has established, on a balance of probabilities, that an assignment of the Marlboro mark from the appellant's predecessor to the respondent's predecessor did in fact take place. It is not necessary for the respondent to demonstrate exactly how the assignment occurred. I find the inference irresistible that it did."
[95]
Based on the decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , formal assignment in writing is unnecessary. Mr. Justice Jackett at p. 119 states:
"While I am inclined to the view that a transfer of a registered trademark may be effective before the transfer is registered, and that a transfer may well be inferred from the facts even though the registered owner has not executed a formal transfer in writing."
[96]
Beam of Canada argues that Mr. Sampson, by his actions over the years, very clearly gave the message to Mr. Muser that he had no interest in the Beam trademark in Canada. I am inclined to accept this submission. The following evidence leads me to this conclusion.
[97]
In his testimony, Mr. Sampson stated that the trademark was never registered in Canada by Beam Industries since he didn't think that it was necessary. He couldn't conceive of anybody wanting to use the Beam name against Beam of Canada and couldn't see where an application for the trade name was going to do him any good. He was not afraid of somebody stealing the name.
[98]
By his own admission, Mr. Sampson knew since at least 1983-84 that Muser had registered the Beam mark in Canada. He did not do anything about this registration for a number of years after he knew that it was registered by Mr. Muser in his own name.
[99]
There is conflicting evidence with respect to what transpired between Mr. Sampson and Mr. Muser before Mr. Muser obtained registration for the trademark Beam in Canada. According to Mr. Muser, when he approached Mr. Sampson about registering the trademark in Canada, Mr. Sampson told him to "go ahead if you want to spend the money". Mr. Sampson, on the other hand, denies that he ever told Mr. Muser to go ahead and register the trademark in Canada.
[100]
I am inclined to accept Mr. Muser's testimony on this point simply because Mr. Sampson's subsequent actions with respect to Mr. Muser's registrations support Mr. Muser's evidence.
[101]
Mr. Sampson never complained about the registrations and I am inclined to presume that if Mr. Sampson did object to the registration, and believed that the mark belonged to Beam Industries and not to Mr. Muser, he would have done something. He would have done some action to show that the trademark was in fact Beam Industries' mark. Furthermore, he never controlled the manner of marketing, the manner or quality of advertising or set quotas of Beam systems sold by Beam of Canada.
[102]
Concerning the retail advertising plan (P-1-46) dated 1983, Mr. Sampson testified that he could see the Beam trademark on the page as well as a little "r". He stated that he knew that the "r" meant registered. He also acknowledged the words "Beam of Canada Inc., 'Don't lug a vacuum ... Plug in a Beam', Use of these trademarks is for the benefit of Beam of Canada an no proprietary rights shall accrue to any other party" on the page. When asked if he ever complained about use of these messages on the document used by the Musers, he said no because it was used to protect "us". He, therefore, did not have a problem with Beam of Canada telling the world that it owned the trademark Beam in Canada (Transcript pp. 328 to 330).
[103]
I am satisfied that an assignment by Mr. Sampson of the trademark Beam to Mr. Muser did occur.
[104]
The effects of an assignment are described in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 244:
"The appellant company, having assigned the trademarks to Dubiner, cannot derogate from its own grants and is, therefore, estopped as between itself and Dubiner from disputing the validity of the trademarks."
[105]
In addition, Mr. Justice Rouleau in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  effects of a transfer is to put the respondent in the shoes of the applicant/appellant; the latter cannot contend that the respondent was not the first user of the mark Marlboro in Canada."
[106]
Having concluded that there was in fact an assignment of the mark Beam by the plaintiff to the defendant, the plaintiff is estopped from disputing the trademark registration of the defendant.
Estoppel By Representation
[107]
The party relying upon estoppel must plead and prove a number of essential elements.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mr. Justice Cattanach reiterates the essential elements at p. 99:
"(1) a representation is made by one party
(2) there was the action by another party on the faith of the representation, and
(3) There was a resulting detriment to the party that acted upon the representation.
It is of the essence of estoppel that the person seeking to set up estoppel was induced to change his position, he must show that he was misled by the statement, that the person making the statement had a duty not to mislead the other and such misleading was the proximate cause of his loss."
[108]
Having concluded that the relief of laches and acquiescence and assignor estoppel are applicable in the circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to go into the question of estoppel by representation in great detail. However, I will say that I cannot accept the defendant's submission that Mr. Sampson's representations were relied on by Beam Canada by extensively using, selling and promoting Beam brand goods and developing a Canada wide network of dealers and distributors. Beam of Canada always made great efforts to promote the Beam name right from the start of its relationship with Beam Industries.
Conclusion
[109]
In the beginning, Beam of Canada was a distributor of Beam Industries and based on the case law, Beam Industries was first user of the mark Beam in Canada, and thus was entitled to secure registration in Canada. However, I am convinced that there is ample evidence to support the contention that this relationship changed over the years whereby Beam Industries adopted more of a role of supplier to Beam of Canada as opposed to the manufacturer.
[110]
Such a transition lead to a loss of distinctiveness of the trademark Beam in Canada of Beam Industries. It can be inferred from the evidence that the public would associate the Beam mark with Beam of Canada at the critical date of February 5, 1990.
[111]
I am also of the opinion, that by Mr. Sampson's conduct over the years, it is possible to conclude that he acquiesced to the undertakings of Beam of Canada with respect to the Beam mark in Canada, thus allowing the trademark Beam to become distinctive of Beam of Canada.
[112]
It is my impression that there was an assignment of the Beam mark by Mr. Sampson to Mr. Muser at some point in the relationship. As such, the point made by the defendant that pursuant to s. 57(1) and s. 2 of the
Trade Marks Act
, White is not an "interested person", is well taken.
[113]
When considering the validity of the registration number 269550 for the trademark Beam, I initially concluded that it was invalid. However, this point is moot since I have subsequently found that the equitable remedies of assignor estoppel and laches and acquiescence are applicable in the circumstances. As a result, an order for expungement of the registrations for the trademark Beam and the slogan "Don't Lug A Vacuum ... Plug In A Beam" is not possible.
[114]
The plaintiff's action is therefore dismissed with costs in favour of the defendant.
Action dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]