[1]
Walsh, J.
: During the week before trial plaintiffs sought, pursuant to rule 324, permission to desist from their action against the "Tug Irving Maple Ltd." and her owners and to amend the style of cause accordingly. At about the same time, defendant sought an adjournment of the hearing on the basis of location by plaintiffs of a document defendant had sought during examination for discovery of one of plaintiffs' witnesses which was only located and first seen by defendant a few days before trial. The adjournment was refused and an order given that the issue of the desistment by plaintiffs from their action against the "Tug Irving Maple" and her owners, be spoken to and dealt with at the commencement of trial. The desistment was opposed by defendant on the grounds that it should have been made much earlier in the proceedings and defendant's counsel were allegedly prejudiced in that much of the preparation of the defence had been done by counsel of the said "Tug Irving Maple" and her owners in collaboration with counsel for Atlantic Towing Limited and they would now have to undertake the defence alone. At the commencement of the trial, permission was given for plaintiffs to discontinue their action against the said defendant, the "Tug Irving Maple" and her owners, Universal Sales Limited, on terms that at the conclusion of the trial, counsel for said defendant and for plaintiffs would be heard on the issue of special terms to be imposed as to costs. The style of cause was ordered to be amended.
OUTLINE OF ISSUES
[2]
There is an admission that the plaintiffs, Engine and Leasing Company, Bultema Marine Transportation Inc., Trio Shipping Group and Duo Partnership, were the owners, and/or charterers of the barge "Trio Trader" and the parties having an interest in the said barge at all material times. The nature of their relationship with each other need not be dealt with since it is common ground that in the event of any judgment being rendered in their favour, they will decide between themselves how the amount so awarded is to be shared. Some of the principal factual witnesses were officers or employees of one or the other of the companies in question or of subsidiaries of them, and represented them in dealings with defendant, which explains the number of witnesses heard on behalf of plaintiffs.
[3]
The other plaintiff, Siderurgia De Yucatan S.A., hereinafter referred to as SDY, was owner of the cargo consisting of 2,918.145 metric tons of scrap steel. On or about January 6, 1981, plaintiffs entered into a contract of towage with defendant, Atlantic Towing Limited, for towage of the barge from Port Hawkesbury, Nova Scotia to Port Everglades, Florida. On or about January 8, 1981, defendant's tug arrived and was secured alongside the barge which was, at that time, secured to the south wall of Canso Lock in Nova Scotia in the area of Port Hawkesbury. It was noted that the barge had a three degree list to port and was down by the head as a result of which the master of the tug which was to undertake the tow to Florida and the planning/shore engineer of defendant boarded the barge and discovered the presence of some three hundred tons of water in the forward port compartment. A salvage association surveyor was also present, but not for the purpose of inspecting the barge since he had been retained only to inspect the tug and certify her fitness for the tow in question.
[4]
When the problem was reported to Trio Shipping Group they authorized Atlantic to engage a company known to defendant, Breton Industrial and Marine Ltd., to effect the necessary repairs to the barge for the account of plaintiffs. One of the issues is whether Atlantic itself was ever instructed to or undertook to effect the repairs to the barge on its own behalf, which it denies. The court was informed that Breton Industrial and Marine Ltd. is no longer in existence. Third party proceedings brought against Breton Industrial and Marine Ltd. by the "Tug Irving Maple" and her owners were therefore not proceeded with. Breton Industrial and Marine Ltd.'s counsel has obtained an order ceasing to act for it.
[5]
Repairs were made, defendant contending that Breton Industrial and Marine Ltd. repaired the observed source of ingress of water into the said compartment of the barge, but that defendant was not and never agreed to be responsible for assuring the seaworthiness of it, it being an implied term of all towing contracts and specifically of this towing contract that plaintiffs warranted the barge fit in all respects for the tow to be undertaken, defendant relies on this . Defendant's tug-master did however satisfy himself that the barge was fit for the tow and commenced towing her to sea on or about January 11, 1981. There was freezing spray, gale force to strong winds from time to time during the tow. The sea had moderated somewhat however when suddenly without warning at 6:58 on the morning of January 14, 1981 the barge capsized losing her cargo and subsequently sank at about 9:38 in the morning. Plaintiffs in their statement of claim seek an amount of $1,317,624.85 together with loss of interest at the commercial rate of 20% from the date of the sinking, said loss being made up of: 1) loss of the barge, $714,480; 2) loss of the cargo, $476,320; 3) freight paid, $93,823.04; 4) towage fee paid, $32,500; 5) surveyor fees paid, $501.81. Plaintiffs claim the loss was a result of defendant's failure to safely and properly repair, assist in repair work in breach of their contract of towage and barge repair, having failed to exercise due diligence prior to and at the commencement of the voyage to ensure that the barge was seaworthy for the voyage intended, and in a fit state of repair to undertake it. It is contended that the barge was not properly repaired by defendant, in breach of their contract to repair it adequately this obligation being totally beyond the ambit of the towage contract, and therefore as a result defendant cannot claim any of the rights, immunities or limitations of liability provided for in the towage contract or bylaw. Defendant, however, denies categorically that it assumed any obligation to ensure that the barge was seaworthy for the voyage intended.
[6]
Defendant further contends that the barge "Trio Trader" formerly known as "Maitland 1" was built in 1916 as a self-propelled Great Lakes railcar ferry and it was converted in about 1943 to a towed deck barge by the removal of the propulsion machinery and part of the superstructure. As a result of the construction, configuration and certification she was restricted to navigation on the Great Lakes. She had rivetted plates and frames holding the hull together, a procedure which has been abandoned and replaced by welded structures in the mid-1960s. As a result of her configuration she would roll heavily. It is contended that at no time before the voyage was her original or modified structural plans submitted or ever approved by a classification society or regulatory agency. When she loaded her full cargo of scrap steel at Holland, Michigan on or about November 20, 1980 some of the modifications made had not yet been completed. She was towed by one of plaintiffs' tugs, the "Trio Bravo", to Quebec City on or about December 8, 1980 where some additional work was carried out by a local ship repair company. It had been necessary to get her through the St. Lawrence Seaway before it was closed for the winter. Defendant further contends that after the repairs performed in Quebec City there was no inspection or testing to ensure the watertight integrity and seaworthiness of the barge. When trading in the Great Lakes she had a load line certification issued by the American Bureau of Shipping on behalf of the United States Coast Guard. The international load line certificate required for the voyage to Florida was issued by the Republic of Honduras to which flag the ownership of the barge was being transferred, without any survey or inspection having been made, or the establishment of her free board in accordance with the 1966 International Load Line Convention. Defendant further contends that before undertaking her voyage in the North Atlantic she should have undergone a special survey in dry dock. After leaving Quebec City on December 12, the towing bridle parted and she had to return. After other towing gear was obtained she departed again on December 15 in tow of a stronger tug, the "Captain Ioannis", proceeding through ice for some twenty-three hours to Escoumins whereupon the "Trio Bravo" took her in tow again and brought her to Port Hawkesbury.
[7]
None of these problems were made known to defendant nor were any representatives or surveyors present at Port Hawkesbury to re-examine her as had been recommended by plaintiffs' surveyors in Quebec City. No effort was made to ascertain whether she had suffered any damage while being towed through the ice. Defendant also pleads limitation of liability pursuant to the provisions of Part XIV of the
Canada Shipping Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. S-9, as amended.
[8]
Aside from the various legal issues which will have to be dealt with in due course as to the responsibility if any of defendant to plaintiffs the principal issue to be dealt with is a factual one to determine, if possible on the basis of the evidence, what caused the barge to suddenly and unexpectedly turn turtle and capsize and eventually sink while under tow. Plaintiffs' theory, supported by its expert witnesses, is that after departure from Port Hawkesbury water leaked into number one port hold as a result of faulty repairs made there, for which it claims defendant must assume responsibility, the said leak gradually filling the hold and decreasing her stability until she finally lost same and turned over in wind conditions much less severe than those on the preceding day.
[9]
Defendant for its part contends, based on the evidence of its experts, that the barge was overloaded and that accumulation of ice from spray in severe weather conditions had added to the overload, decreasing the stability of the barge so that without warning, possibly as a result of a rogue wave, she suddenly turned over. A combination of the two factors is possible according to defendant which also contends that plaintiffs furnished an old and unseaworthy barge without proper inspection and certification for towing in the Atlantic.
[10]
The written admissions made by the parties add little of significance save for the agreement that the value of the cargo was U.S. $358,931.84, the rate of exchange of the American dollar on January 14, 1981 was $1.1908 Bank of Canada rate and that the weighted average prime rate of interest of Canadian banks for the period from January 14, 1981 to September 3, 1991 was 12.6% per annum.
[11]
Three individuals were involved in the intricate dealings and agreements between plaintiff companies. Donald Campbell operated barges carrying cargo in the Caribbean, notably Costa Rica and had a continuing contract with Siderurgia De Yucatan to carry scrap steel from Port Everglades, Florida to Progresso, Mexico, the port for SDY's steel mill which required a constant supply of scrap steel. Donald Hannah had a barge, the "Chalmed 1", a former Great Lakes railcar ferry, similar to the subject barge, working with Campbell in moving the steel from Florida to Mexico, which was very satisfactory for their purposes. It was operated under Honduran Registry which was convenient when trading in an area predominantly Spanish. He felt another similar barge was needed. Stan Andrie represented the Bultema Group of companies which had a shipyard in the Great Lakes and owned the subject barge, then called the "Maitland 1". Hannah and Andrie formed DUO to buy the barge and a tug ("Trio Bravo") from Bultema, using the name Engine and Leasing Company for the financing, ownership being put in its name. Together with Campbell, they formed Trio, which chartered the barge and tug from Duo on November 10, 1980 to be used to move the scrap steel from Florida to Mexico. It was expected that the income earned by Trio from its contract with SDY would in about five years repay DUO for the cost of purchasing and reconditioning the barge for use in the Caribbean. The initial reconditioning work was done for the most part in Andrie's Bultema shipyards.
[12]
When the vessel was ready to be towed to Florida, they started looking for a cargo that would defray some of the cost of the voyage. They were able to purchase the type of steel required by SDY. Bultema invoiced SDY in the amount of $358,931.84 U.S., the agreed amount of the value of the cargo and this was paid to Bultema on January 2, 1981 before the loss of the cargo.
PREPARATION OF BARGE IN
GREAT LAKES AND AT QUEBEC
[13]
Andrie, Hannah and Donald Sexton, Port Captain for Bultema shipyards at the time, but now employed by another company, who supervised the work done on the barge, all testified, giving details of the work done at Muskegon, Michigan, as well as George Leithner of Hunt Leithner, an experienced surveyor acting for the underwriters. Victor Leira, another surveyor, came from Florida on behalf of the Maritime Inspection Corp. and did an inspection required for transfer of the registry of the barge from American to Honduran Registry. He did not testify at trial, being reluctant to come from Florida, and neither party subpoenaed him to force his attendance. Claude Lemay, a marine engineer who supervised further minor work done at Quebec, also testified.
[14]
Considerable detail was given, supported by a series of exhibits outlining the work done and cost of same for labour and equipment. It is unnecessary to go into full detail, since summarizing this evidence will be sufficient.
[15]
The barge had been bought by Bultema in 1978, with no thought at the time of the use to which it was intended to put her in 1980. Extensive work was done on it at Muskegon by Bultema's own crews, as this was cheaper. Bultema did not have a drydock so it was taken to one and whatever work had to be done in drydock was done there before bringing her back to Muskegon. Drydocking was required to upgrade the load line certificate. A certificate for a renewal of load line was then signed by an ABS (American Bureau of Shipping) surveyor subject to certain recommendations. On June 5, 1978, a Great Lakes load line certificate was issued, valid to June 1983. Annual inspections are made, however, and on June 7, 1980 an annual load line inspection report was carried out by an ABS surveyor.
[16]
Leira, a qualified surveyor representing the Government of Honduras, visited the shipyard three times in the spring of 1980 and issued a certificate, subject to certain work which he recommended being done. He recommended drydocking but was satisfied that this could be done in Florida and was willing to issue what is referred to as a "trip ticket" for the voyage there. Such one voyage tickets are not unusual to go to a shipyard or coastal port. Leira's certificate stated the barge "was found to be in a reasonable and fair condition and would qualify for registration in the Republic of Honduras subject to satisfactory compliance with the aforementioned conditions". The recommendations were carried out as directed, and in October, Leira, flew to the shipyard accompanied by Hannah, Campbell, Deno Fabre, superintendent of a shipyard owned by Hannah and Maynack Jains, Hannah's naval architect who now works for the Maritime Administration. Fabre was very experienced having worked for General Dynamics for 35 years before coming to Hannah.
[17]
Subsequently, after the cargo of scrap steel had been loaded, a draft survey was made by Hunt Leithner & Co. Marine Surveyors, acting for underwriters. This was done on November 19th and 20th, Jim McNulty, an employee of Leithner being present on the 19th and Leithner himself on the 20th. They were accompanied by Donald Sexton, who has a degree in nautical science from the United States Merchant Marine Academy and who had supervised the repairs for the shipyard.
[18]
Leithner's report states that at the time of his survey, all tank soundings, gauge readings and draft readings were taken jointly with terminal representatives and computations were agreed to. The light draft forward was 8 feet 6 inches and 8 feet 7 inches aft, the mean draft being 8 feet 6.50 inches. When loaded the draft forward was 14 feet 6 inches, aft 15 feet 9.50 inches, the mean draft being 15 feet 1.75 inches. The dead weight light was 2,647 net tons and when loaded 5868.75 net tons, the quantity of cargo therefore being 3,221.75 net tons which converts to 2923.54 metric tons. Leithner states that the calculations are based on the capacity scale furnished by the barge owners and adds a note that the examination of the disclosed vessel showed it to be reasonably dry and cargo deck reasonably free of previous cargo residue. Leithner's certificate was referred to as a suitability for tow certificate.
[19]
Leithner testified that he is familiar with the barge, having been on it when it was owned by previous owners and at the time Bultema purchased it probably some four or five years earlier. He recommended that the vessel be drydocked before commencing its ocean service, primarily to clean, paint the bottom and apply anodes as this was a fresh water vessel and anodes are necessary to prevent deterioration due to salt in ocean service. Paint suitable for sea water would also be applied. He stated unequivocally that he was content to give a suitability for tow for one trip certificate approval without the vessel being drydocked in advance. He was aware that the vessel had been inspected the previous May in connection with a Honduras load line certificate, but was not given a copy of Mr. Leira's report nor did he communicate with Mr. Leira before doing his survey. He was aware that the registry was going to be changed at Quebec and understood that at least a temporary international load line certificate would be issued effective there. It was under the jurisdiction of the Honduran surveyor to issue a load line certificate.
[20]
He has never met the surveyor Lemay of a company Delmare at Quebec, which was recommended to him to do the work required at Quebec but spoke to him by phone.
[21]
His written report detailing his recommendations, entitled "Tow Suitability Survey", was actually dated January 23, 1981 - that is to say after the sinking. He points out that the ocean load line certificate was not available at the time of his survey in November but it was reported to him that it had been issued effective in Quebec City for the Republic of Honduras. He had recommended, inter alia, that the original ballast piping be cropped at transverse bulkheads and bulkhead openings plated over to make transverse bulkheads watertight, that the rudder be secured, and anchor windless pawl be replaced, and some changes be made with respect to the emergency tow hawser, and that the bilge pump sea chest and all manifold valves be closed. The first three recommendations were to be carried out at Quebec City although recommendations with respect to the emergency tow hawser and the closing the bilge pump sea chest and manifold valves would be carried out at Holland, Michigan before departure. The drydocking was to be carried out upon return from the port of discharge of the scrap cargo. That is to say, as far as he was concerned, it was acceptable to carry out the drydocking in Florida as plaintiffs planned. He concluded that the vessel was suitable for the intended voyage upon the fulfillment of the conditions set out prior to departure from Quebec City.
[22]
Mr. Leithner further testified that it was on November 20 that he made a general inspection of the vessel along with Don Sexton who was the port captain of Bultema Marine and Transportation. He stated that the vessel was still loading and when finished would be some 15 feet in the water so that any leaking rivets or problems of that nature would have been readily apparent just from walking along the catwalk above the longitudinal bulkhead over the holds. He stated that there were pieces of old pipes passing through some of the transverse bulkheads and in the number 4 hold he found that one section was breaking where it passed through the bulkhead. He pointed this out to Sexton and suggested that all the old existing pipes should be cut at each transverse bulkhead and the bulkheads blanked and the pipe welded over to that point. He said that his welding hammer with which he was testing plates and pipes may have just found a bad section of the said pipe but nevertheless he felt it prudent to be sure that all such pipes were fully blanked off.
[23]
With respect to his recommendation that the bilge pump, sea chest and all manifolds be closed he stated that they had been installed by Bultema recently and his recommendation was that every valve and connection with them, starting with the sea chest and the manifold should be closed. The sea chest was in the forward port side, well below the lower deck area in the number one hold. The vessel had a fore-peak, six holds and an after-peak. A partial longitudinal bulkhead ran the length of the vessel, but not in holds 2 and 4. A catwalk from which it was possible to go from the bow to the stern of the vessel to the various holds was above this bulkhead. The longitudinal bulkhead did not go right up to the bottom of the main deck. He saw no ingress of water whatsoever in any of the holds and knows of no other valve anywhere on the barge that could have been opened which would have let water in. He saw a small pipe about one inch in diameter on the aft-peak which was leaking so they put a cap on it. He added that the water may have come from some type of scupper or deck drain and was not a head of water rushing in as if there were any pressure on it. Captain Wellington, the master of the tug which was to tow the barge to Quebec City, was also with him and Mr. Sexton and aware of the importance of what was to be done in Quebec City where both he and Sexton would be going. His written report entitled Tow Suitability Survey was therefore not necessary at that time and in fact he only made it on January 23, 1981, after the sinking. He had written Mr. Koppenhofer who looked after insurance for Bultema outlining his recommendations on November 24, however.
[24]
Donald Sexton testified with respect to the new ballast system installed at Muskegon the work consisted of fabricating a distribution manifold, the installation of a pump on the machinery level along with a manifold, the running of piping from the manifold to various compartments of the barge, and in the case of those which were separated by a centerline bulkhead, a pipe to either side, and installation of new piping from the pump to the sea chest and from the pump to an overboard discharge. The valve system was tested after installation, the sea chest being flooded, water pumped into the manifold and into the various compartments and then removed. The sea chest was packed with biodegradable material and secured and the system was then drained. He said that as a standard operating procedure they wire sealed the valve shut. They also went from stem to stern to make sure there were no other sea chests in the vessel, and there were none. There was an old 4 inch piping system installed on the vessel still in place but this old bilge system was not connected to anything. No water could get into it from outside as the only sea chest was in number one port which was the sea chest to which they connected their new 3 inch pipe. He explained that there is a petcock used to drain the system on the other side of the valve which was now blocked shut by the biodegradable material. He explained that biodegradable material is put in for winterizing a vessel intended to stay at dock but not designed for a vessel under way, because although soft material when pumped in, it tends to harden up and can develop little cracks if it gets very cold, through which water can work its way into the material which may then erode out of the sea chest.
[25]
He corroborated Mr. Leithner's evidence as to being on board with Mr. Leithner's employee, Jim McNulty on November 19 and Mr. Leithner himself on the 20th, stating that the general condition of the barge was very good. There was some rusting which was typical but no major rusting. There were some loose rivets on the deck which was however covered with an asphalt layer. The general condition of the compartments was dry including the new pipes which were installed which had to pass through the bulkheads, and they made sure that the welds were correct and that they were watertight. They went down into the bottom of the holds and Leithner suggested cutting the old ballast piping and welding it shut at the bulkheads.
[26]
He consulted with various seaway authorities in connection with the towing of the barge through the various locks, being on board himself part of the way, and was on board from Montreal to Quebec City where there was to be a change of crew and where an agent had arranged for local people to do certain work on the barge that still had to be done. The tug engineer and master were to remain on board below Quebec to act as consultants since they were familiar with the equipment. The tug-master was licensed for the Great Lakes and it was necessary to get an ocean master on board for the tow from Quebec City to ocean waters. The work to be done in Quebec City, as already stated, was mainly to crop the old unused ballast lines at the bulkheads and weld the openings tightly shut and also to put a welded cap over the small pipe nipple which had been found leaking water in the aft-peak which they had capped. Since some of the welding and cropping involved hot work for which there had to be ventilation, the barge was opened up in Quebec City between the various compartments. He stated that he went through the vessel with Mr. Lemay and any pipe that wasn't an active pipe in the new ballast system was cut off and blanked. He was satisfied that the barge was in a condition to tow when the work was completed. It is the master of the tug who must be satisfied with the work, but if he himself was not satisfied he would have reported this to the master. It was therefore Captain Wellington who signed the work list.
[27]
Sexton admitted that he had no specific instructions as to the location of the old pipes to be cropped and blanked, the instructions being of a general nature that all such pipes should be dealt with. In cross-examination he counted that there would be 17 places where 4 inch piping would have gone through the bulkheads according to the original drawings which go back to 1916, the only plans available, which were only obtained from the Great Lakes Research Institute archives later, and would not indicate any changes made thereafter.
[28]
Lemay testified that there were 6 pipes which had to be cut and blanked that he inspected, towards the stern of the vessel. There were many pipes, however, some of which had been cut previously. Mr. Sexton indicated to him which had to be cut now. Subsequently he learned from Talbot Hunter, the people doing the work, that they had actually fitted 12 blanks on piping, so evidently the other 6 were done when he was not there.
[29]
Claude Lemay, the marine engineer in charge of the relatively minor work to be done in Quebec was not on the ship at all times during the repairs. He was working on a major job across the river in the Davie Shipyard in Levis. He went on board on the evening of January 10 and met Sexton who was supervising the work for plaintiffs, who showed him what work was to be done. He returned on the 11th and 12th. He checked the sea chest and valve and new work which had been done and found that the ship's structure looked safe to him. He looked in the fore-peak compartment enclosed by a watertight door and found it in very good condition. He made the same finding with respect to the no. 1 compartment, finding no serious rust. The Plimsoll marking presumably placed by the American Bureau of Shipping was looked at by him. He stated that there is perhaps a foot difference between summer and winter draft. When he arrived on the barge the third day, Campbell was there and the hatch had already been sealed so he did not go down into the engineering area but he asked the foreman of Talbot Hunter who had been doing the work if the piping repairs had been completed. He was assured that this had been done. Campbell and Captain Wellington were present at the time. He was aware of the initial difficulty when the barge left Quebec under tow through ice flows with one tug pushing her and another pulling. One chain of the towing bridle broke presumably because of the very heavy load, so it was necessary to return for repairs. When the barge left again on the 15th under tow by a more powerful tug, the Captain Ioannis, he did not note any list. While inspecting the ship he had walked throughout the length of the walkway with Sexton and verified the condition of the gaskets on the watertight doors. He had stated that his responsibility was to see that whatever Sexton wanted done was done properly, but not to himself decide what had to be done, although he added a few more minor recommendations to those suggested by Leithner, which were carried out. His report concluded that it was not supposed to be a full tow approval as he understood this was to be done in Port Hawkesbury if deemed necessary. He calculated the draft of the barge as 14 feet 5 inches forward (which compares well with Leithner's 14 feet 6 inches) but the afterdraft had to be estimated because of the ice accumulating around it. He estimates that it would have been about 17 feet, on commencing the voyage from Quebec to Canso Locks.
[30]
Ulf Huzell, a graduate mechanical engineer from Sweden in 1969 obtained a captain's licence in 1972 which was upgraded in 1978 for coastal and ocean towing. By 1980 he had done two or three years of international towing and was offered a job in Florida where he now resides and works. He joined the tug "Trio Bravo" on December 10, 1980, for the tow from Quebec to Canso, where Campbell gave him the certificate indicating the change to Honduran registry and load line certificate valid for one voyage to Port Everglades to be completed before January 23, 1981. He stated that these temporary certificates are quite common especially when the vessel is about to change registry, the processing of which may take time. He brought a new crew with him to Quebec. Captain Wellington was to remain on board to familiarize the witness with the tug and the chief engineer also briefed him. He was satisfied with the result of the repairs done to the barge at Quebec. He found the draft and trim the same as on the initial departure from the Great Lakes. He took and logged the draft of the barge and calculated her to be about 100 tons short of full capacity. He believes that the towing shackle broke because of lack of coordination between the pilots of the supporting tug and the pulling tug. The barge started swinging to port and the assisting tug tied to the stern to help steer and push the barge used too much power in the wrong direction putting most of the weight on one chain of the bridle which then broke. When they could not get a suitable new chain for the bridle they used a wire cable instead which worked satisfactorily. Captain Ioannis, a more powerful tug, now became the towing tug with his tug the "Trio Bravo" pushing. He considered the weight of snow accumulating on the cargo insignificant. The Captain Ioannis released the tow three or four hours before the pilot station at Escoumins where the pilot was taken off and the "Trio Bravo" took over the tow. It was still very cold with the sea spray rising up over the pilot house and screening the windshield. The tug "Trio Bravo" itself was becoming top heavy and as he still had about thirty hours to go he decided to put into Gaspe Bay to clear the ice from the tug, but it continued to accumulate in the bay. He stated however that although ice would also have accumulated on the barge her draft marks were of no concern to him, his principal concern being that the radar antenna on the tug might stop revolving.
[31]
When the weather improved, he was able to cross St. Lawrence Bay as there was no longer any icing spray and then to enter Canso Strait arriving about December 21 where he tied up just after passing through the lock permitting entry into the Atlantic. He checked the condition of the barge having noticed a slower rolling pattern when crossing St. Lawrence Bay. There was some water in the bilges but only to a nominal extent, perhaps ten to fifteen tons for the whole barge, and this was of no concern to him. Some spray ice would have formed inside the cargo and the reading of the draft indicated there was about 800 tons of added weight. The cargo itself weighing some 3,000 tons, the barge was now overloaded and he reported this to the owner. He stated that an adjustment to the draft would be made for salt water. He kept checking the weather hoping that the ice would melt, and advised that there might be some delay for this. Eventually he received permission to proceed south where his tug was needed for work in the Caribbean. He personally inspected the barge at Canso, entering the holds through the machinery compartment, and walked along the catwalk. It was necessary to open the dogged down bulkhead doors and use flashlights as there was no source of power on the barge at that time. A new clearance at Port Hawkesbury was required for the ocean voyage, but if a survey were needed there because of the changed conditions, this was no concern of his. He had a seaworthy certificate on board valid for the voyage to Florida.
WORK DONE AT CANSO
[32]
Plaintiffs arranged with defendant Atlantic Towing Limited in St. John, New Brunswick for the towing of the barge from Canso Bay to Florida. When Atlantic's representatives arrived at Port Canso, the barge was noted to be listing to port. Leo St-Amand, General Manager of Atlantic Towing, when told of the listing and the apparent presence of water in the hold, tried to call Mr. Campbell with whom he had been dealing in connection with the towing contract but Mr. Campbell was not available. The office told him to speak to Mr. Hannah of the Trio Group in Chicago. On January 7 he reported this to him and he gave Hannah the name of Breton Marine Industries in Port Hawkesbury as people experienced in this type of work. He spoke to Hannah again on January 9. Hannah passed Mr. St-Amand's phone call to John Ducich of the Trio Shipping Group in Muskegon. (Details of the various communications between the parties will be dealt with fully when discussing the legal issues, but at present in dealing with factual issues it is only necessary to look into the work which was done, who did it, and under whose supervision.)
[33]
William Cape who had been at sea since 1947 in the United Kingdom and by 1962 had become a chief engineer before coming to Canada in 1968, and was at the time working for Breton Marine Industries in Port Hawkesbury, being their marine superintendent testified, in January 1981, he was sent on board the barge to check the repairs. Some of Breton's people had already pumped out water. He could see that a pipe in the bottom of the vessel was leaking in no. 1 port hold about 8 to 10 feet forward of the transverse bulkhead. According to him there was a 4 inch pipe on the sea chest and a 2 inch pipe flange on top which ran aft. He saw no valves on the pipe. The 4 inch one was old enough to be corroded and was leaking. The 2 inch one was not. The leak was next to the flange and consisted of a series of interconnected small holes. The water was spurting out which could be stopped however by putting a hand on it. The shore engineer, Ron Kaye, of Atlantic Towing gave him his instructions as to what should be done and he concurred. The holes were first plugged with wooden wedges and a neoprene bandage was then wound around it and held in place with steel clamps. A frame was then built on top of this and filled with hydraulic cement which sets quickly forming a box over where the leak formerly was. They also repaired a 2 inch line coming from above to 3 to 4 inches from the ship's side which he thinks may have been a sewage pipe. He does not know where it led and saw no valve on it. His recollections of this pipe are hazy. It was dark and there was very little light. He stated that no one from the crew of the tug supervised or participated in the repairs which were finished by 5 or 6 a.m. from the time they commenced at about 8 p.m. the preceding evening. He then went back on board the tug and got Kaye out of bed and they went back on the barge to examine the work done. The compartment was dry and no more water was coming in. He considers that the 2 inch pipe which was the subject of the second repair was also old. His evidence was quite vague and is in conflict with that given by other witnesses.
[34]
Gordon Henwood, the chief engineer of the tug "Irving Maple" which was to undertake the tow to Florida for Atlantic Towing proceeded from St. Johns on the tug to the Canso area and saw the barge tied up to the wall. At first they pumped from the tug. The air pump on the barge was freezing and the no. 1 port hold was nearly full, the water being within one to one and one-half feet of the level of the longitudinal divider. They therefore took their gasoline pump aboard arranging an exhaust system because of the fumes. This was causing the engine to heat up. Eventually the pumping was completed late in the evening. He himself had nothing to do with the repairs. The following night after the Breton people had gone, he saw some water spraying in badly. Mr. Kaye had also left. This was from a 2 inch pipe running from the fore-peak. To cut off the flow which could not be completely stopped at the valve, he removed some bolts from the flange, cut a blank of steel and placed it inside the flange. The pipe itself was fairly sound. He has no recollection of the other pipes which were fixed previously but saw the cement boxes with pipes coming out of them. The only valve he saw was on the 2 foot line at the forward peak which he repaired. His work was finished at 3 or 4 a.m. and Captain Newman checked this periodically. Whatever further water had leaked into the hold was pumped out, and it was then dry. If there had been much water in the fore-peak before the repair which he did the vessel would have been low on the bow. He does not recall seeing the new ballast system piping or a sea chest in no. 1 hold. The only 4 inch pipe he saw was the one with the cement box repairs on it and he did not check where it was going. The second repair was very minor and nothing to be concerned about. On January 10 he went through the other compartments and found no water in any of them or any seepage around any of the hull plates although he may not have walked the whole way down the ship.
[35]
Captain Roger Newman, the master of the tug "Irving Maple", also had gone on board during the work being done by the Breton people and he was satisfied with the repairs which had been made by way of a cement box. They had found a second light leak in no. 2 port and that was bandaged also. He did not know where it was coming from or where it was going. After the Breton people left, another repair was needed on a smaller pipe in no. 1. This pipe was flanged by his engineer and he inspected it later early in the morning of January 10 when he intended to sail. He did a general walk through the barge along the catwalk and was satisfied that everything was correct, but because of bad weather did not set sail that day. He finally left at around 18:15 hours on January 11 releasing the pilot at the pilot station. The draft of the barge on leaving Canso according to him was 15 feet 6 inches forward and 16 feet 2 inches aft which satisfied him.
[36]
He testified that during the repairs in Port Hawkesbury he had never seen any representatives of the owners on board nor any documents pertaining to the barge. Customs were cleared in Port Hawkesbury, two or three miles from Canso. The barge requires a certificate of registry and a load line certificate. These were received from Mr. Kaye on the 10th. He was not concerned about the small openings at the fair leads where the towing arrangements enter, due to their height above the waterline. In cross-examination he stated that the second pipe repaired, which was in no. 2 hold, must run through into no. 1 being a 4 inch line running horizontally above the frame. This was not the 2 inch one repaired by his chief engineer coming from the forepeak. Nothing bothered him about the barge save for the leaks, which were repaired, and he felt no need for more information since Kaye was the planning engineer with Atlantic Towing and regularly assisted in certification inspections, drydocking and maintenance of the company's tugs in general as the owner's representative. Captain Newman stated that he merely had to be satisfied that the barge was watertight, since he would not tow something that was not seaworthy.
CONCLUSIONS OF FACT
[37]
The first factual issue to be dealt with based on evidence which I have summarized at some length is whether defendant's contentions can be sustained that plaintiffs provided a vessel which was old and defective, unsuitable for the service for which it was intended, improperly converted, inadequately inspected and repaired at plaintiffs' shipyards and at Quebec, and following the repairs when the leak was discovered at Canso, overloaded, and generally unseaworthy and unfit for the tow. I do not conclude on the facts that this defence succeeds. The vessel was admittedly very old and had seen heavy duty service in the Great Lakes as a railcar ferry for which she was built and where severe storms and winter weather can be encountered. As a result she was heavily constructed and while hull plates were rivetted rather than welded at that time, one witness stated that ships were built better then than the more modern vessels. Moreover, there is no evidence whatsoever to indicate that there was any leak or defect in any of the hull plates which led to the entry of water and the eventual capsizing. She had a pointed bow as in a normal vessel rather than a squared bow more commonly used in barges, which caused some difference as to how she would react when under tow, but again there is nothing to indicate that this in any way contributed to the capsizing.
[38]
Conversion from a railcar ferry to a barge involved considerable alterations, including removal of all propulsion equipment, blocking off 4 inch bilge lines going from hold to hold, no longer in use, closing off some unused sea chests and so forth. A full inspection, including drydocking was made in 1978. An ABS drydocking survey and ultrasonic readings were made at that time. A Great Lakes load line certificate was issued valid until June 1983. Whatever work had to be done was done in plaintiffs' own shipyards in Muskegon. There is nothing to indicate that their shipyard crews were inexperienced or incompetent and it was reasonable that the owners would have the work done in their own shipyards when this was possible. The vessel was not used thereafter. The stern was stiffened however, in 1979, for a project in connection with the laying of large diameter pipe that was very heavy, which would involve the installing of a derrick on deck, but eventually she was not used when another suitable barge was located.
[39]
When it was decided to use the vessel for hauling scrap steel on deck to Florida and from there to Mexico, further work was done in 1980 costing some $218,000. Mr. Hannah had a marine architect and a marine engineer from his company who were involved in the work done. The old bilge ballast system was replaced by a new one and a new ballasting system which has already been described was installed, operated from the machinery deck where there was a pump which distributed water to either side of the various holds when needed for ballasting, and also functioned by suction as a discharge system. Ballasting is not a system designed to be used when the vessel is under way. Alongside a dock if it is necessary to drop the level of the cargo deck or the main deck to assist in loading cargo on or off, the vessel can be ballasted for this purpose by putting water in certain compartments.
[40]
In order to change the valves in the event a leak is found in one of them it would be necessary to have a diver go outside and block the ingress of the water by putting a temporary plate over the opening into the sea chest or else to do this work in drydock. In order to get water out of the sea chest, however, the valve is shut off and through a nipple above it, biodegradable material is pumped into the sea chest forcing the water out. It coagulates and fills it up and prevents any water coming from outside of the hull into the sea chest. There is also a little pet-cock in the valve which can be opened up to drain the line going up to the pump from it, as water should not be left in the piping since it would freeze. Normally, for ballasting, water gets to the pumping manifold system starting from the flange of the valve above the sea chest by piping leading up to the machinery deck about 3 feet horizontally and 10 feet vertically. If the valve is not seated properly and closed there can be a leak into the pipe since the water level outside the vessel is much higher than the pipe so the water under pressure would force its way into the pipe. When the new ballast system was installed the system was tested according to the evidence of the witness Sexton. The sea chest was flooded and water pumped up into the manifold and into the various compartments and then the water was suctioned out. The sea chest had been unpacked in order to enable this to be done. The sea chest was then repacked and secured and the system drained. The valves apparently worked satisfactorily then. After closing the valve on the sea chest shut it was wired shut so they could tell if anybody had opened the valve after the sea chest had been packed. There is nothing to indicate that the system installed was improper or defective.
[41]
The survey reports of Victor Liera and Hunt Leithner and Company have already been dealt with.
[42]
It is evident that plaintiffs had done everything that they were required to do to the satisfaction of two competent surveyors, before the vessel left the Great Lakes to proceed to Quebec City.
[43]
Because of the necessity of getting her through the seaway before it was closed some of the work involving the cutting and the sealing off of the unused old ballast lines which passed through the transverse bulkheads, was left to be done in Quebec.
[44]
At Quebec City, Sexton went down to supervise the carrying out of the work there. Mr. Lemay of the Delmare Company, the surveyor engaged there, was present during the work from time to time, the actual work being done by a firm known as Talbot Hunter. There is considerable doubt as to how many of these old ballast pipes were blanked. Sexton looking at old plans suggested during his evidence that there might have been 17 such openings but apparently only 12 were blanked off at Quebec. This does not appear to be of major significance since there was no water in these pipes, the only danger being that if there were a leak in one hold in such a pipe which was old and rusting such as the one Mr. Leithner had found in no. 4 hold, and water entered the hold with the leaking pipe, water could get into the pipe and if it were not properly blanked off be transferred through it to an adjacent hold. It was merely as a matter of precaution and to ensure the total watertight integrity of the transverse bulkheads that this work was recommended. There is not the slightest evidence however to indicate that there was ever such transfer of water through such an old pipe from one hold to another except possibly, according to some witnesses, a leaking pipe found in no. 2 hold, through which some water may have passed from the flooded no. 1 hold. No. 2 hold had not become flooded from the leak however, which appears to have been of minor nature. There is no indication that subsequent water in no. 2 hold, or any other hold than no. 1 led to the capsizing of the barge, so if a few such pipes were not totally blanked off, there is no causal connection between that and the disaster. The surveyor's direction to blank them off was a general one, to blank them wherever they could be found. It must be remembered that the work in Quebec was done in poor lighting, some of it at night, and in conditions of extreme cold, so it would not be surprising if some such pipes were not located and dealt with. I am satisfied by the evidence that when the vessel left Quebec she was in a sound and watertight condition.
[45]
The weather between Quebec and Port Canso was extraordinarily bad and certainly hard on the vessel and on the tug or tugs towing her. It is evident that in Port Canso, a substantial quantity of water got into the port side of no. 1 hold and also probably into the fore-peak although the leak from that compartment appears to have been relatively minor and easily repaired by defendant's own tug crew. After the pumping out of some 300 tons of water which had given the barge a list was done, it was found that there was a leak in the nature of a series of small perforated holes in what witnesses described as an old pipe adjacent to the flange of the valve on the sea chest. There is an extraordinary amount of contradiction and confusion in the evidence of the various witnesses who during the course of this repair work had occasion to see what was being done. The better opinion seems to be that there was only one pipe coming from the sea chest and this would be the new pipe installed by plaintiffs to connect the pump to the new manifold system. The only general agreement seems to be that the method of repairing, described as a bandaid repair by plaintiffs, is that such a repair by a means of a cement box after first sealing the leak with a watertight binding is frequently used and is acceptable. Soon after, a second leak was discovered however, this apparently resulting in a crack in the pipe. Again there is a suggestion from some witnesses that this was not in the same pipe, but was in a pipe that went from no. 1 to no. 2 hold. Whether it was on the same pipe or not it was repaired in the same manner. An expert witness, Captain Baker, although of course not present at the time, stated that if it were a cracked pipe this most likely resulted from pressure of freezing water within it, the force of ice freezing being sufficient to crack even a new pipe. The third leak, discovered by the tug's crew after the people engaged to make the repairs had left came from the fore-peak, and was apparently minor in extent and of little significance, save that it indicated the presence of some water which should not have been there. It was blanked off by the tug's engineer. The fact that there was some water in the fore-peak might indicate that some structural damage had occurred to it as a result of the tow through ice in severe conditions from Quebec but there is no evidence to indicate that this was the case. The captain of the tug performing the tow stated that had the fore-peak subsequently filled with water during the tow he would have noticed it by the manner in which the barge performed during the tow as if she had been down at the head she would have veered dramatically from side to side in view of her pointed bow configuration. In any event, the volume of the fore-peak is substantially smaller than that of no. 1 hold, or the other holds and the evidence does not indicate that the capsizing can be attributed to water entering no. 1 hold.
[46]
What seems surprising is that none of the people involved in the repair work or who saw it thereafter appear to have addressed the question as to how water got into the leaking pipes which were supposed to be drained and dry. The most probable speculation is that the biodegradable material in the sea chest, which hardens in cold weather, had cracked and come out of the sea chest so that water could enter it, and that the valve on top of it was not tightly seated so that outside water pressure forced water through the valve and up into the pipes above and when they were leaking, or cracked as a result of this water freezing, entered into the hold gradually filling it. The work was being done largely in darkness or semi-darkness, lighted by a spotlight in severe weather conditions and no one took the pains to trace the damaged pipeline. There were no representatives of plaintiffs present during this repair work. There is unanimity however that after the repair work was done and the other minor leak located by the tug's crew was also repaired by them, the hold was dry, or as nearly so as holds can be, and no further leaks were taking place, the barge being now on an even trim. Here again, plaintiffs relied on presumably reliable people to make the repairs and these appear to have been satisfactorily done. The legal responsibility for these repairs is something to be dealt with later, but insofar as the leakage is concerned, the barge appeared to be fit for tow, although no further survey was made.
[47]
The defendant also alleges that the vessel was overloaded to the knowledge of the owners and that this added to her instability which, if not wholly responsible for the capsizing, contributed to it. The barge had a valid Great Lakes load line certificate indicating free board from the deckline of 4 feet 6 inches in summer with 8 inches additional free board required for winter. Evidence discloses that the vessel was not overloaded when she left Holland, Michigan, loaded with the scrap. Ice accumulation during the tow in very difficult winter conditions from Quebec City to Port Canso most probably created an overload but no difficulties were encountered during the tow from Gaspe Bay to Port Canso after the tug doing the tow freed herself from an excessive accumulation of ice. The listing observed at Port Canso was clearly the result of the 300 or more tons of water which had entered no. 1 port hold, but after it was pumped out and repaired no further listing was noticed. An international load line certificate given to Captain Huzell for the voyage from Quebec to Port Everglades, Florida indicated that the free board for the North Atlantic should be 4 feet 10 inches in winter.
[48]
Before leaving Quebec City as already stated, Captain Huzell had found the draft and trim the same as at departure from the Great Lakes and he found the barge was loaded a few hundred tons short of full capacity. On arrival at Canso he testified that as a result of the ice accumulated the draft now indicated 800 tons of added weight and reported this to the owners. He realized there might be some delay while the ice melted. His tug, the "Trio Bravo", was needed by the owners in Florida so he obtained permission to proceed there leaving the barge tied up just beyond the lock. It was as a result of this that defendant was engaged to provide a tug for the voyage to Florida.
[49]
The only direct evidence of the weight of the barge on leaving Canso to undertake the voyage to Florida is that of the captain of defendant's tug, Roger Newman, who took the readings, finding them to be 15 feet 6 inches forward and 16 feet 2 inches aft from the marks on the side of the vessel which he considered to be satisfactory. Captain Newman, a very experienced tug-master, stated categorically that he would not tow something that was not seaworthy at the commencement of the tow. He stated that, although he did not know the weight of the cargo at the time, by reading the marks he was satisfied that the barge was not overloaded. Unfortunately, he did not record the marked readings in his log. He was satisfied that as the diamond load line mark was out the vessel was not overloaded. The draft readings were of course taken fore and aft but the load line mark was amid ships.
[50]
On the basis of this evidence, I cannot conclude that the barge on departure from Canso was overloaded to such an extent as to make her unsuitable for tow. It was after all the responsibility of Captain Newman to satisfy himself as to this. Even if the barge was actually somewhat overloaded (which would require an assumption that Captain Newman's readings were wrong), no blame can be attributed to plaintiffs for this. They did not place too much steel on board and if weather conditions added some ice, the amount of which is not known, they cannot be blamed for this. They did not order Captain Newman to proceed with the tow of the barge in the condition in which it was when the tow commenced, the decision being his.
DESCRIPTION OF CAPSIZING
[51]
The weather in Chedabucto Bay was bad, worse than in the Strait of Canso, Captain Newman testified, so he jogged around with a short tow line at slow speeds until the morning of the 12th when the wind had diminished. The wind had been from the west at 30 to 35 knots. By 10 a.m. the wind had diminished and the barge in tow was following well. By the early evening the wind came from the northeast, increasing during the night up to 40 to 50 knots so he reduced his speed at 6:20 a.m. He stated that a following wind provides less strain on the tow, however. The winds started backing counter-clockwise and diminished gradually turning into west northwest and then to west. The sea was 8 to 10 feet. He had two searchlights of 3,000 watts and binoculars so he could see the barge which was still following well and the trim looked the same. He stated that if there had been water in the head the barge would have started yawing badly. During the evening his tug was rolling up to about 20 feet but a big vessel such as the barge would roll less. During the night he gradually increased speed and by early a.m. on the 14th visibility was good and the snow had cleared up during the night. At 6:58 a.m. his lookout shouted: "The barge is going." He immediately slowed down and shortened his tow line hoping that they might be able to tow the barge upside down but the barge indicated a tendency to go in circles, though she did not seem to have too much list even upside down. Eventually she began to list to starboard, however getting heavier by the bow. He shortened his tow line to 200 feet and then cut it. At 9:38, the barge sank. They had noted that 15 feet of the port bulwark was missing near the center of the vessel.
[52]
Further evidence of events preceding the capsizing, corroborating Captain Newman was given by Gordon Henwood, his Chief Engineer and by Kenneth Welch, oiler on the "Irving Maple" who took some photos after the capsizing. He had been on watch from 12 p.m. to 6 a.m. the morning of January 14 and had noticed the barge skeening and gaining from port to starboard and back and rolling. The day previous freezing spray had been building up in the tug.
EXPERT EVIDENCE AS TO
PROBABLE CAUSE OF CAPSIZING
[53]
Both parties called several expert witnesses, David Doust was plaintiffs' principal expert as to the probable cause of the capsizing and for defendant, Pierre Boisseau and Captain Michael Airey gave their views as to the likely cause. Doctor Doust is an extremely competent naval architect, a fellow of the Royal Institute of Naval Architects in England and a fellow of the Institute of Marine Engineers there. He is also a member of the corporation of Engineers of Quebec where he now resides, and the Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers in New York. He graduated in naval architecture from King's College Durham, England in 1948 and received his M.Sc. in naval architecture in 1956, and has been awarded gold medals from the North Coast Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders of England. For 18 years he was scientific officer of the National Maritime Institute in London, becoming principal scientific officer, responsible for design and testing of a wide variety of ships, working on ship design problems and design modifications. He has written numerous papers on ship design and been awarded a doctorate by the University of Trondheim, Norway for this work. He has frequently been an expert witness in connection with sinking and damages to vessels.
[54]
He gave very extensive and technical evidence for plaintiffs accompanied by a number of calculations, charts and drawings. Among the particulars on which he based his report, was an estimated draft leaving Port Hawkesbury of 14 feet 5 inches forward and 17 feet 0 inches aft or 15 feet 8.5 inches mean, displacement leaving Port Hawkesbury being 5,600 long tons. His calculations of hull strength of the barge based on her midship section scantlings show that she very nearly complied with A.B.S. rules for ocean going ships and therefore was overstrength as a coastal barge under tow at the time of the capsizing. Permissible free board according to the Solas (Load Line Regulation Sea) show that she could be loaded in excess of 16 feet 3 inches according to international free board rules which compares with the stated mean draft of 15 feet 8.5 inches when leaving Port Hawkesbury. His calculations of the likely rates of water flow through her sea chest on the assumption that the valve was only throttled at 5 percent of the fully opened position would lead to an entry of 7.63 to 10 tons per hour into the leaking pipe, so that over a 60 hour period from the time the tow commenced to the time the barge capsized there would, on this hypothesis, have been an ingress of water leaking of between 457.8 and 600 tons, sufficient to submerge the center line bulkhead. His calculations of the upsetting moments in excess of restoring moments to right the vessel, indicate that the barge would have passed the return to the upright, beyond roll angles of between 17.5 and 25 degrees if the no. 1 hold was flooded so as to immerse the center line bulkhead. He calculated the hydrostatic data for five conditions of trim including a trim of 2.5 feet by the stern corresponding closely to the condition in which the barge left Port Hawkesbury. His calculations also show the appropriate parameters for a 4 foot trim by the bow, a condition which was quite close to the estimated flooded attitude of the barge before she capsized.
[55]
Other charts show cross-curves of stability calculated at 10, 20 and 30 degrees heel for a combination of 7 water lines and 11 stations in sea water. He states in his report that his calculations demonstrate that the range of stability of the barge "Trio Trader" extends up to 37 degrees when all holds are dry but on the other hand with one hold flooded the range of stability reduces to 25 degrees under static conditions of heel and to 17.5 degrees when rolling in a seaway. The center line bulkhead in hold no. 1 has a depth of 13 feet above which the hold is open to the main deck a distance of some 7.5 feet. At a depth of over 13 feet therefore the water would move to both sides of the hold as the ship rolled.
[56]
He makes further calculations of the dynamic effects of wind speeds in the early morning of January 14, 1981 between 10 and 20 knots, and of the barge rolling in a swell of 3 to 5 feet as described by Captain Newman, on the lateral area of the barge and cargo. He states that in order for the barge to capsize in a matter of 10 to 15 seconds, as reported, she would have had to be subjected to either a shift of cargo or a sudden loss of inherent stability. Observations by Captain Newman immediately after the capsize showed no missing plates in the hull bottom and as the vessel foundered on the starboard side this would have required rivets to have slackened on only one side of the vessel which he considers not to be possible so he rules out this possible cause. With respect to the possible shift of cargo, this could happen when side bulwarks either collapse or the bulwark doors open due to pressure exerted by the cargo at maximum angle roll. However, the vessel capsized to starboard indicating if this theory were to be accepted that the starboard bulwark would have collapsed, but it was the port bulwark which was found to be opened for some 15 feet after the capsize, which was noted when Captain Newman steamed around the vessel. When a capsize to starboard develops however the deck cargo provides a support to the starboard bulwark when it is exposed to the high hydrodynamic force and impact with the sea surface. As the cargo spills out and sinks the port side bulwarks are exposed to greater impact force of the sea as the vessel completes its capsize and it is likely that this was when this section of the bulwarks opened. Moreover, roll angles of 15 degrees increasing to 20 degrees as reported by Captain Newman prior to the capsizing would not produce large lateral forces on the deck cargo and therefore on the side bulwarks, so he rejects shifting of cargo as a cause of the capsize. The barge finally sank bow first, consistent with leakage into the hull forward and not with a shift of the deck cargo.
[57]
Progressive leakage into the hull at levels below 13 feet do not create any dramatic reduction in transverse stability but when it reaches the 13 foot level the free surface effect creates a sudden loss of stability of four times the previous loss. As to how the water got into the hold he can only speculate that the repairs to the piping system prior to the departure from Port Hawkesbury had deteriorated when under tow and opened up. The source of water into the hull at Canso had not been investigated other than to repair the leaks found in certain pipes. His final conclusion is that due to the increase in free surface effects there was a severe loss in transverse stability of the vessel sufficient to cause her to capsize when the water level reached above 13 feet in no. 1 hold.
[58]
He also commented on the written report of defendant's expert Mr. Boisseau, which had found fault with some of his calculations of the free surface effect of water in no. 1 hold and also of the time to flood no. 1 hold with 560 tons of water. He testified that the fresh water free board assigned to the "Trio Trader" as a Great Lakes vessel was 5 feet 2 inches (winter). Winter in North Atlantic regulations do not apply to her because of her length. He made calculations of the free board and calculated that the winter draft Atlantic would be 15.78 feet. He stated that when the vessel turned over to starboard he believes water ran down the starboard side hatch and this had nothing to do with failed rivets. As a matter of fact, since there was no leak after 280 tons of water had been pumped out of the port side no. 1 hold at Canso and no water in no. 2 hold, this constitutes a good hydraulic test of the rivets which would have been under considerable pressure from the outside water.
[59]
Defendant called two expert witnesses with respect to the sinking. Pierre Boisseau, a naval architect and marine engineer, is also well qualified having obtained a B.Sc. in Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering from M.I.T. in Cambridge, Mass. He is, inter alia, a member of the Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers. He has participated in studies in design of over 400 ocean going vessels, of between 5,000 and 400,000 dead-weight tons including barges, bulk carriers and container ships and has also participated in conversion design of more than 50 vessels and in salvage analysis and plans for refloating vessels of various types. He has also participated in the conversion of a Great Lakes bulk carrier to an ocean going self-unloading unmanned barge. While plaintiffs admit his eminent qualifications they point out that he is not a practising hydrodynamicist, unlike Dr. Doust. He states that with round bilges and in the absence of bilge keels, the "Trio Trader" would roll heavily in ocean waves with half angles of roll in excess of 30 degrees and at an angle of heel of 11 degrees, the deck edge would be submerged. He suggests that stresses caused by distribution of cargo, impact of ice and waves had loosened rivets which of course were old, allowing leakage. He states that A.B.S. and U.S. Coast Guard Standards for an ocean going barge are more stringent than those applicable to a Great Lakes barge. He states that all classification societies would have required drydocking, ultrasonic gauging and determination of a new international load line for foreign and ocean going voyages in salt water with an inspection and submission of plans and calculations. He does not consider that the superficial surveys carried out in November and December 1980 show that the overall structural condition of the barge was generally verified. He states that what is now referred to as the old bilge or ballast piping supposed to be cropped off and blanked was most probably fitted when the longitudinal bulkhead was installed. He criticizes the report of Leithner as superficial. With respect to the work done in Quebec City he states that due to lack of information, Delmare inspected only six of the twelve blanks fitted and welded at Quebec and did not test any of the repairs for water tightness. Nevertheless, Talbot Hunter, doing the work allegedly identified nine items of lack of water tightness in bulkheads and other openings which had been overlooked by Leithner (stating, however, that they have dealt with all these items). He states that in January 1981 when the owners were informed of the ingress of sea water and lack of watertight integrity of the barge, they failed to notify proper authorities for inspection of the defect as required under international load line regulations. He criticizes the new bilge pumping system which was installed which he states was never approved or certified to meet recognized minimal classification or regulatory body standards.
[60]
He suggests that the bulwarks were defective as referred to in the Leithner report and could have been unable to absorb loads of shifting cargo in heavy rolling at sea causing an uneven load distribution, and if broken would lead to a heel on the opposite side causing capsizing. He criticizes the design of the towing gear and states that the sea chest and valves could not have been properly closed or sea water would not have entered the vessel at Canso. He criticizes the fact that the owners or the owners' representatives were not present during the repairs at Canso, leaving this to Breton Marine Industries.
[61]
He states that the international load line certificate issued on behalf of Honduras was suspect and invalid since no survey final inspection was made prior to departure of the barge from Quebec City. He criticizes the fact that international load line markings identified by a circle symbol were not painted on the hull when it left Quebec City. It is therefore false to say that the load lines had been marked in accordance to the International Convention of Load Lines 1966. Instead, he said the Great Lakes diamond shape load line was used with necessary adjustments for salt water. He points out that in the absence of hydrostatic data the displacement of the "Trio Trader" in Quebec City was estimated to be 5,520 long tons and calculates that this would be 280 long tons heavier than that in the Great Lakes. He speculates that this would indicate an ingress of water into the hull compartments.
[62]
He states that the breach in the water tight integrity of the hull at Canso would have voided a valid load line certificate and have required an inspection and the damage being repaired before a load line certificate could be reinstated. This was strongly disputed in argument by plaintiffs who stated that every time minor repairs have to be made a new load line certificate is not required. The load line certificate itself remains in force unless cancelled. He states that the tow of the barge through ice by a powerful ice-breaking tug, the Captain Ioannis, inevitably caused damage to the barge in the form of deformed plates or rivet heads. (There is no evidence to support this, however.)
[63]
He concludes that the barge "Trio Trader" was lost at sea due to a combination of main and secondary causes which could have been prevented had the owners taken a prudent and professional manner in planning and executing the conversion work. He then goes on to state however that the barge was put in ocean going service for which she was not designed or in a condition to withstand, that ingress of water started before the barge left Quebec City, and that further ingress through the hull structure may have been produced by ice damage to the bow structure, that the old piping system was never completely or adequately blanked off to ensure water tightness of the transverse bulkheads, that the riveted structure and water tight integrity of the tow, hull and bulkheads were never tested or inspected, and that the bulwark structure was damaged and inadequate for supporting scrap material loaded above the main deck, so that wave action at sea combined with ship motions of roll, pitch, and heave caused stresses in the seams allowing new uncontrolled ingress of water, cross-flooding through nonwater tight bulkheads, loss of stability inducing a static heel, which combined with a dynamic roll produced by waves caused part of the cargo to shift and collapse the damaged bulwark and fall overboard. He finds that the resulting instantaneous uneven loading condition was a heeling moment to the opposite side which was unopposed by a lack of reverse dynamic stability due to the partially flooded condition of the barge. He states that existing faulty or damaged sea cocks or sea chest could also allow ingress of sea water into a compartment with the same results. The barge rolled over, dumped its deck cargo of loose scrap, floated upside down in lighter conditions in which she could have floated indefinitely had the hull plating rivetted seams and butts and bottom sea chests been watertight. Instead, the sea water further entered the hull through the hull structure.
[64]
Plaintiffs had called two witnesses as to how water may have got into no. 1 port hold, and the quantity of it increased until it crossed the longitudinal bulkhead which, in the view of the expert witness Doust, was the principal cause of the capsizing. Leonard A. Perrigo, a marine surveyor for three decades had been dealing with all facets of marine investigations including sinking, on behalf of insurance interests, classification societies, financial institutions, carriers and shippers. He served in the British Royal Navy, as a Chief Engineer and is a member of the Canadian Institute of Marine Engineers. He concludes that the extremely low temperatures encountered by the vessel in Quebec City prior to proceeding to Canso resulted in freezing of the water in the pipes caused additional fractures which were not discovered at the time of effecting the repairs to the fractured pipes at Canso. He states that subsequent sun and milder temperatures on leaving Canso caused the no. 1 port tank to become full of water because the sea inlet valve was not properly seated, allowing ingress of water through the fractures. He states that this opinion is strengthened by the fact that during the entire voyage from Michigan to Canso including encounters of ice en route there is no evidence of any water having entered any of the vessel's holds other than in no. 1 hold. Apparently no rivets had commenced leaking in the holds during the transit through the ice or there would have been water in the other holds. Plates of vessels that operate in fresh water in the Great Lakes do not deteriorate quickly. There is no reason to believe that there would be any serious or rapid deterioration in the intervening period from the time that the sonar readings were taken and the time of the voyage now under review. In referring to Mr. Kaye's examination for discovery he states that the valve was obviously leaking and the fracture found on the pipe was inboard of the said valve. Water previously frozen must have been in the pipe but due to milder temperatures at Canso the ice had thawed and the fracture was found. He believes that in addition to the two fractures found at Canso there is reason to believe that there were probably still more fractures in the pipe which were not observed because the ice had not yet melted in the area of them. The pipes found to be leaking were not thoroughly examined throughout their length. A diver should have been brought from Halifax to block off the water intake into the hull and ensure that there was no further ingress of water during the voyage through the leaking valve. If he as an independent surveyor had been inspecting the vessel with the view of issuing a certificate of seaworthiness prior to its departure from Port Hawkesbury, he would have refused this because the repairs carried out on the pipes were incomplete. In testifying he stated that biodegradable material washes out when the vessel is under way so that if the valve was not tightly closed water could get into the pipe and continue up to the pump which is 12 feet above the valve. Since the outside water level was about 17 feet the ingress of water into the pipe would rise to that level. Sea water temperatures in the area were consistently above freezing between January 8 and January 10 and maximum air temperature at Port Hastings, only a mile or two away for which readings are available, were well above freezing on January 8 and 10.
[65]
Captain Stewart Baker, a marine consultant, also testified as an expert witness for plaintiffs. He has been an operations manager so is widely experienced in classifications and repairs of vessels and is a consultant on ship design and changes in existing vessel design and working with insurance brokers. When the towage approval was issued to the master of the tug and rescinded the following day by a telex from a salvage association in Halifax, the normal procedure would be to have the surveyor attend the vessel again after the repairs had been made. He believes that any certification which had been in place prior to the inspection by Captain Newman and Mr. Kaye, accompanied by the surveyor, Mr. Herbert, would be voided as soon as the discovery of water in the hold which would change the vessel's condition had become apparent. He agrees that the inlet should have been sealed by a diver, a relatively simple procedure which would then allow either the removal or repair of the valve or the blanking of the flange at the valve position. He comments on the apparent failure of the management of the Atlantic Towing to inform the master of the tug and the superintendent Mr. Kaye that the Salvage Association considered the barge unfit for the intended voyage and as a result there was no second visit of the surveyor to determine that the vessel had been properly dewatered and repairs to the broken pipe and sea inlet valve had been properly done. He suggests that such a second visit would have certainly prompted further investigation of the pipe system which was still open to the sea and showed that the valve was still leaking after the pipe was repaired with cement boxes. His final conclusion is that the final capsizing of the vessel in relatively good weather conditions having recently survived gale force conditions without any sign of visible alteration of the tow indicates that the loss was probably caused due to the flooding either from the failure of one or both cement boxes or failure of the same suspect line at some other point other than that at which the repairs were made due to the rise in temperatures as the barge proceeded into warmer water allowing defrosting of the pipe and possible leakage from other cracks not previously noted and flooding directly from the sea via the valve. He stated that a vessel under tow is subject to two types of spray, wind spray and wave spray. Travelling into the wind in severe conditions can accrue ice rapidly from the spray. However, conditions on departure from Port Hawkesbury would not be conducive to a rapid formation of ice - there was a following sea for the first part of the tow and mean sea temperature of 0-2C. and for the last 15 or 20 hours before the sinking the sea temperature was above 5C. Air temperatures, however, insofar as they can be determined by readings in the general area were for the most part well below freezing and the witness admitted that sublimation or instant freezing can take place on contact of spray with the cargo in the barge.
[66]
During his testimony he stated that there is no international requirement for a seaworthy certificate for an unmanned barge, and in fact it is not included in the majority of contracts he is familiar with. More frequently, a warranty that the vessel being towed is seaworthy is all that is required.
[67]
The evidence of defendant's other expert witness, Anthony M. Airey, is largely devoted to a rebuttal of the evidence of plaintiffs' expert witnesses Perrigo and Baker. Captain Airey, a fellow of the Institute of Marine Engineers (U.K.) and a member of the Canadian Institute of Marine Engineers has a first class certificate of competency and is a member of the Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers (U.S.A.). He has had 30 years experience in various classification societies, doing condition surveys and evaluations. He states that the "Trio Trader" having been laid up for three years was inadequately maintained, poorly inspected and not given proper attention as to her watertight integrity before embarking on the voyage outside of her design condition and certificated area. He states that the owners substantially ignored recommendations of the surveyors representing their underwriters and the Honduran registry and that a prudent owner should never delegate the responsibility to establish her fitness to tow to third parties. He states that the work done of asphalting the deck in a flimsy grid of retaining metal strips in no way constitutes a strengthening of the deck. Drydocking recommended by their reports was not done and only verbal instructions were given to Delmare, the company carrying on the surveyor's recommendations in Quebec. He criticizes towing in ice by the tug "Trio Bravo" which he states was too small for the voyage. He notes that Atlantic Towing in their contract required a certificate that the vessel to be towed was seaworthy and fit for the intended voyage which is a normal towing requirement.
[68]
While he agrees that, in principle, the master of the tug assumes command responsibility for an unmanned tow he states that this only applies once the voyage has been commenced and does not deal with the question of fitness for tow which is the responsibility of the owners. He disagrees with Mr. Baker's suggestion that it would have been simple for a diver to plug the sea chest in the prevailing circumstances.
[69]
He points out that Captain Baker's opinion that the capsize of the vessel was probably caused due to flooding by further leaking pipes or failure of the cement boxes is pure conjecture. He himself conjectures that the working of the vessel in sea and ice, the possible displacement of the cargo, combined with partial flooding or total flooding of a number of other compartments or a combination of these factors could have caused the capsize and that there is no specific evidence of freezing damage to internal pipes followed by thawing resulted in the ingress of water to a specific individual compartment. He finds the more probable cause is the lack of integrity of the vessel in terms of hull, piping systems, sea valves, fittings, cracks from ice impact, and working rivets, bulkheads or skin fittings, all of which could have provided a source for ingress of water in the type of weather which was obviously going to be experienced. Commenting on Mr. Perrigo's evidence, specifically directed to freezing damage to piping, he states that Mr. Perrigo does not address any of the other possibilities of lack of integrity and his report is aimed at theorizing on the possibility of water ingress in the particular situation contained in Doctor Doust's report.
[70]
During his evidence he stated that when the applications were made for transfer to Honduran registry, he finds it difficult to understand that a certificate could be issued without strength calculations having been made, and added that such a certificate would not be issued under any other registry. He criticizes the Leithner survey also, stating that such a survey cannot be properly done when the vessel is loaded and the fittings on the main deck cannot be examined. He stated that he cannot understand why the owners did not send a representative to Canso if they knew that the vessel was below her marks due to icing conditions, or why they did not pass this information on to the Honduran authorities in order to have it resurveyed. He criticizes the new piping system which is a hybrid system being part bilge and part ballast and part an emergency pumping system and not watertight under all conditions. He stated that the pumping system itself is not far above the actual draft of the vessel before pitching and can sometimes be below the water line. He admitted in cross-examination that an unmanned barge does not have to be classified. With respect to Captain Newman's evidence that there was no discernible ice on the cargo before leaving Port Hawkesbury, he pointed out that ice inside the cargo would not be visible. He speculated that there might have been other sea chests or connections through the bulkheads, despite the fact that there is evidence to the contrary. He stated that despite the fact that for forty days after loading there was no indication of water entering any of the holds, the barge had not been exposed to the hydrostatic forces subsequently encountered in the North Atlantic. He now tends to the theory that the capsizing was due to a lack of stability, possibly aggravated by ingress of water. He insisted that the original seaworthy certificate would be invalid once the leaks in the holds were discovered and that a new seaworthy certificate would then be necessary. Atlantic never received one but undertook the tow anyway.
[71]
In a subsequent rebuttal answering expert Boisseau's criticism of his report, Dr. Doust stated that on his hypothetical calculation of a 5% opening of the valve the flow of water would be at the rate of one cubic foot a second which is a very low flow. At a higher opening the flow would be turbulent but at one foot per second the influence of friction around the valve would be minimal. With respect to his strength calculation there is a difference of three feet in location of the neutral axis above the keel from Boisseau's calculation but there would be little difference when the ship is fully loaded. His initial calculations were before information was received as to later additions which were added. The difference when recalculated for the weight of the deck plating would only be three inches. He stated that although the barge did not need to be classified he nevertheless took Solas standards for new ships to come up with his calculations of freeboard. He found that for a ship in unrestricted ocean service the barge would meet these standards because there is a 25% allowance for barges. Lloyd's Register permits decreased stress for unmanned barges by as much as 50% in sheltered waters and 20% in ocean voyages. ABS and other classification societies have very similar rules.
[72]
He strongly disputes Boisseau's impression that movement in the tank (sloshing) would have no effect on the vessel as a whole. He states Boisseau does not seem to understand the effect of sloshing, where he states in his rebuttal report D-59 that transference of water in the hold when the vessel is rolling would not have the apparent effect of that stated in Doust's report. In his calculations Dr. Doust also took into consideration what happens when part of the free surface of the water reaches the top of the hold which would occur with a roll of 20 to 30 degrees which decreases the moment. He has combined two effects, the free surface which raises the center of gravity and the sloshing effect. Since his calculations in themselves account for the capsizing he rejects other theories such as icing. From his wide experience sailing on fishing vessels from Grimsby with much icing over ten years, he states that had the "Trio Trader" iced to the extent claimed by Boisseau it would have required a 30% increase of power on the tug to tow her at any given speed which would certainly have been noticed by the tug captain. With respect to the strength of the vessel he stated that the pressure increases four-fold if the speed doubles, and she had undergone 60 years of service in the Great Lakes withstanding bow waves at 14 to 15 knots. The speed and the hence the force of water on the vessel at the moment of capsizing was negligible compared to that. He stated that the wheel house is above the no. 1 compartment and if water got into the wheel house after capsizing, it would go in the funnel and other points of entry, contributing to the final sinking.
CONCLUSIONS AS TO CAUSE OF
CAPSIZING
[73]
Regrettably in any case involving expert witnesses, their evidence is frequently contradictory and the court must endeavour to decide which version appears more credible and in accord with the facts. Frequently, as in the present case, the qualifications of these experts are impeccable and no aspersions are intended or doubt indicated with respect to the integrity or sincerity of any expert whose evidence is rejected by the court. Unfortunately, however, experts tend to strongly support the version of the party retaining them, so it is rare to encounter a completely neutral expert. This is especially apparent in a case such as the present when the cause of the capsizing of the barge must rest on various theories and speculations, based on a very limited amount of factual evidence as to the condition of the barge on departure from Port Hawkesbury.
[74]
I reject, however, the suggestion of defendant that the court is not bound to come to any conclusion as to the cause of the capsizing on the basis of the facts or theories advanced by factual and expert witnesses, and instead to decide on the basis of burden of proof. In support of this they cite the cases of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  avoided if at all possible, especially in an action involving nearly six weeks of hearing and argument. Fortunately, there appears to be sufficient evidence to enable the court to reach a conclusion as to what is a reasonable conjecture of the probable cause of the capsizing and sinking of the barge - a conjecture which seems to accord with what facts are known.
[75]
I also reject plaintiffs' suggestion that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur applies. It cannot be a basis for deciding the case.
[76]
Looking carefully then at the evidence of the various experts I reach the conclusion that it is the evidence of Dr. Doust which is most credible and in accord with the facts.
[77]
Boisseau's report gives many indications of bias, being especially unfair in criticizing the work done by eminent surveyors and rejecting out of hand evidence given by other highly competent and experienced witnesses. He also totally rejects the evidence of Hannah and Campbell (although of course they are representatives of plaintiffs and therefore not independent). He rejects the evidence of Captain Newman that ice accumulation on the tug itself during the tow was minimal, saying "That's his statement. That's not my conclusion."
[78]
His theory of icing as a major contributing factor was not in his original report, but only reached after hearing other evidence. Although he admits having no expertise in how ice will freeze or melt he states it would probably drip down and form inside the cargo, but his calculations on stability are based on its being on top of the cargo. He states the cargo height is 12 feet but Captain Newman, who saw it, gives the height as 7 to 8 feet. In trying to explain why, on the basis of his theory the capsizing did not take place the day previously when the sea was much rougher than when the event took place, he is forced to give the rather lame explanation that it was "icing up continuously until the point that either a big wave happened even if it was relatively calm or something happened which nobody saw, because it was dark, whatever the conditions" and later "Well, even if it was calmer water it doesn't mean that you didn't have a ground swell come which was a bigger wave mixed with other small waves." This is pure speculation to support a previously reached conclusion.
[79]
He suggests that the ABS five year survey was inadequate and incomplete, that Leithner was incompetent in approving the tow, that Leira was incompetent in also giving his approval without first requiring drydocking, and that the work done at Quebec was incompetently done and inspected also. In short, everyone who had anything to do with the modifications and repairs of the vessel, or the inspection of it, whatever their qualifications, did not do as thorough a job as he considers was necessary.
[80]
The expert witness Airey's report suffers from the same defect of unwillingness to accept the evidence of other witnesses. He does not believe that the surveyor Leira did his job properly and has no confidence in the validity of a Honduran load line certificate. He suggests that no stability calculations were ever made, despite Hannah's evidence as to the calculations made by his naval architect in the shipyard when the renovations were made. He speculates that the vessel was damaged when under tow by the Captain Ioannis through ice, although there is no evidence of this, and the holds were still dry on arrival at Canso.
[81]
He seems to attribute the disaster to the invalidity of certificates and suggests possible points of water entry at areas not surveyed.
[82]
While Boisseau found some minor errors in Dr. Doust's calculations, Dr. Doust in rebuttal was able to establish that they resulted in no serious changes in his conclusions, and, on the other hand there were serious errors in some of the calculations Boisseau had made in criticizing his conclusions. The strongest reason for accepting Dr. Doust's theory that gradual entry of water over a period of time into no. 1 port hold due most probably to a leaking valve on the sea chest and possibly another rupture of the pipe leading from it, (possibly as a result of thawing of previously frozen water in the pipe which may have cracked it at another place, which leaking only started when it thawed, as suggested by the witness Perrigo), gradually built up until it reached the top of the longitudinal bulkhead, after which the free surface effect (sloshing) took place, creating instability which led to the capsizing, is that the capsizing took place when the sea was much calmer than on the previous day, when the waves and resulting roll of the vessel were much greater. Had defendants' theory that the capsizing was due to overload of the vessel, primarily from ice accumulation, been accepted the capsizing would have taken place the preceding day. Temperature and other conditions were less severe and indicate that there would certainly not be more, and in fact probably less, ice on or in the cargo at the time of capsizing, due to some melting in warmer temperatures.
[83]
Having reached a conclusion on the facts as to what caused the capsizing by no means disposes of the case however, as defendant has raised a number of very serious legal arguments as to the responsibility for same.
LEGAL ARGUMENTS
FACTS RELATING TO CONTRACT
FOR TOWAGE AND REPAIRS
[84]
Before dealing with the various legal issues raised it is necessary to go in some detail into the facts of the relationship between plaintiffs and defendant with respect to the contract for towage and repairs of the vessel at Canso in order to determine who was responsible for the renewed leakage which eventually caused the capsizing. Hannah testified that he had a phone call on January 8 at around 12:30 from Rio St-Amand of Atlantic Towing who told him that the vessel needed some work and he passed the message on to Mr. Ducich as St-Amand had told him he had had difficulty getting in touch with Campbell. Ducich was the port captain working for Mr. Andrie at the Bultema Company. St-Amand told him the vessel was listing to port. Hannah told him that they wanted to make the vessel fit for sea, to get it repaired and St-Amand indicated that they could take care of it. This is the information which the witness passed on to Mr. Ducich. That was the limit of his involvement.
[85]
Campbell testified that he knew of Atlantic Towing from their regular trade in Port Everglades. When it was decided not to use their own tug he called Atlantic Towing and St-Amand returned the call. This was followed by a series of telexes. He telexed Mr. St-Amand on January 6 giving details of the barge "Maitland 1" (now "Trio Trader") and her cargo and agreeing to the price of $65,000 Canadian and asking for the proposed contract form for confirmation. He received a reply later the same day by telex. It stated, inter alia, that 50% of the towing money was to be payable when the tug arrived to pick up the tow, the final payment to be made at destination prior to release of tow. The telex stated that towage would commence on January 9 or soon thereafter as the schedule of the towing tug allowed. One clause in the telex states: "Prior to departure you will produce to the tug-master a certificate by a competent marine surveyor certifying that the vessel is seaworthy and fit for the intended voyage." The telex further states that if for any reason the tow is not ready for sea within 12 hours of arrival of the tug, Atlantic will be paid at the rate of $4,500 Canadian per day or pro rata until the tow is ready. Campbell telexed a reply the following day, January 7, accepting the contract but expressing a desire to clarify certain terms and details including confirmation that it was the tug's responsibility to connect the towing bridle. An important postscript is added however, reading as follows: "Please have your surveyor provide seaworthiness certificate to avoid delay. We accept to pay our share of surveyor's fees and expenses." Campbell explained that he put that in because he wanted the same surveyor as Atlantic, being aware that one was going to be there to provide a seaworthy certificate for the tug. Later he was told at one point in time by Mr. St-Amand that the surveyor was on board the barge, but he never received a certificate of seaworthiness.
[86]
A further telex from Mr. St-Amand, dated January 7, gave details about the "Irving Maple" and indicated that it had departed from Saint John, New Brunswick at 1830 hours January 6 and was estimated to arrive 0700 January 8, and take approximately ten hours for hooking up. A subsequent telex from Mr. St-Amand advised of the arrival at 7:00 a.m. but it is undated. The next telex was from Ducich to St-Amand stating that the Trio Shipping Group would reimburse any and all repair expenses if any connected with the barge "Maitland 1" (the "Trio Trader") and furthermore "We have authorized repairs by Britton (sic) Industrial Marine that were requested by the master of 'Irving Maple' to be completed to his satisfaction. Britton will bill Trio Shipping Group directly."
[87]
In testifying, Campbell stated his conversations with Mr. St-Amand were very limited. At one time St-Amand had advised him that he had found some water and didn't know where the water was coming from; after that Mr. Ducich took over. Campbell had told Mr. St-Amand to treat the vessel as if it were his own, to repair it and that plaintiffs would pay the expenses, whatever they might be. Mr. St-Amand told him that he was directing his personnel, both shoreside personnel and ship's crew to take care of the repairs on the vessel. He learned from Mr. Ducich that some outside assistance had been used as well which would be the Breton Industrial and Marine Limited, whose invoice was only received after the sinking.
[88]
When Mr. Campbell was advised by a telex from Mr. St-Amand of the loss of the barge, he replied by a telex dated January 15: "Due vessel in your control and under the tow of the tug 'Irving Maple' at time of loss we hold you responsible for loss of barge and resulting loss of cargo."
[89]
William Cape, whose evidence has already been referred to in connection with the work done at Canso testified that the decision as to the nature of the repairs to be done had already been made when he got there by Mr. Ron Kaye, the shore engineer of Atlantic Towing who had instructed them as to what they should do. Cape could not find any fault with these instructions.
[90]
Gordon Henwood, Chief Engineer of Atlantic Towing since 1976, had served on most of the Irving tugs. He was on the "Irving Maple" when the call came to go from Saint John to Port Hawkesbury. He stated that Mr. Kaye acts as a sort of owner's representative when work is being given to an outside shipyard, overseeing it, being Atlantic's representative. He was present when the work was completed and the master (Captain Newman) inspected the work done on the morning of the 10th.
[91]
Captain Newman corroborated this testimony stating that Mr. Kaye was planning engineer with Atlantic Towing and assisted in the certification inspections and general duties of the company pertaining to the maintenance of its tugs. Mr. Kaye had told him that they were to get out the water, proceed with the repairs and get ready to make the voyage.
[92]
Mr. St-Amand testified with respect to the footnote on Mr. Campbell's telex requesting that Atlantic's surveyor provide the seaworthy certificate that they had discussed this on the 6th, at which time it was mentioned to him that plaintiffs had a certificate, giving authority for the barge to go to Port Everglades and that it would be sent to him. He understood therefore that the request for a survey of seaworthiness related to the tug rather than to the barge. He therefore made no reply to this telex. On or about the 7th he had called the Salvage Association in Halifax to make a survey of the tug and towing equipment which is what is done on every occasion of a tow to a foreign port. He spoke to a Mr. Minnikin of the association who stated that their surveyor had surveyed the tug and everything was alright but that the barge could not be surveyed because he had information that the barge already had a certificate valid from the Lakes to Port Everglades.
[93]
When it was reported to him by Mr. Kaye that he and the captain had gone on board the barge and observed that she was approximately 17 feet by the bow and 15 feet by the stern which is not a possible draft for towing, he tried to call Campbell, Campbell's office told him to get in touch with Mr. Hannah. He then discussed the situation with Hannah who said he would call back but meanwhile would they assist in pumping the 300 tons of water found in the leaking compartment out. The witness stated that they could do that but were not specialists in repairing ships but he would give them the name of somebody who was doing that kind of work in the area. This was Breton Industrial and Marine. He left it that Mr. Hannah would get in touch with Mr. Osborne of Breton whose phone number he had given him. He never communicated with Osborne or Breton himself. Breton Industrial and Marine sent its account for repairs to Atlantic and Mr. St-Amand returned it and advised them to bill the "Trio Trader", sending them a copy of the telex he had received from the Trio Trader Group stating that they would take care of the expenses.
[94]
In cross-examination, Mr. St-Amand conceded that Atlantic Towing was to assist Breton in doing the repairs and that he had so indicated to Mr. Hannah when he spoke to him on January 8. He did not request plaintiffs to have anybody present to represent the owners. His offer to assist in making the repairs was just a matter of good client relationship. When Mr. Kaye confirmed to him that the barge was fit to be towed and that the repairs had been carried out they did not get a surveyor to look at the barge and felt that she was seaworthy prior to the commencement of the tow. As far as he was concerned she was on an even keel and the owners had advised him that they had a certificate for the intended voyage which covered Atlantic Towing.
[95]
Kaye on discovery had stated that St-Amand had told him in discussion words to the effect of "fix it and keep track of the expenses". He stated that it was he who had called Murray Osborne whom he had known for many years and asked him for men to assist him in fixing the situation. Kaye and the chief engineer of the tug showed Breton's men what was required.
[96]
The contract of towage contained the standard clauses of the Eastern Canadian Tug Boat Owners' Association. Clauses 2, 3, 4 and 5 of it read as follows:
"2. The services will be supplied upon the condition that all towing, moving, shifting, docking, unloading or other handling of a vessel or craft of any charterer by a tug or tugs owned or employed by the tug company is done at the sole risk of such vessel or craft and of the owners, charterers or operators thereof, and that the master and crew of such tug or tugs used in the said services become the servants of an identified with such vessel or craft and their owners, and that the tug company only undertakes to provide motive power.
"3. The tug company will not be responsible for the acts or defaults of the master, or crew of such tug or tugs or any of their servants or agents or else whosoever, nor for any damages, injuries, losses or delays from whatsoever cause arising that may occur either to such vessel or craft, or property or persons on board thereof, or to any other ship or vessel or property of any kind whether fixed or movable and the company shall be held harmless and indemnified by the hirer against all such damages, injuries, losses and delays, and against all claims in respect thereof.
"4. Such exemption from liability shall apply regardless of whether such vessel or craft assist in the services with its own steam or power or in any other way, and irrespective of whether any employee of the tug company or the master, or any of the crew of such tug or tugs is at the time of said services on board of such vessel or craft, or in command thereof.
"5. The foregoing conditions shall apply to any damages, injuries or loss from whatsoever cause arising that may occur to the vessel or craft requiring the tug or tugs or to any other vessel or craft, or to any person or property on board thereof, or to any other property whether fixed or movable, while such tug or tugs is or are in attendance upon or fast to or engaged in any manoeuvre for the purpose of making fast to, or discharging from or proceeding clear from the vessel or craft requiring the tug or tugs, provided however said conditions shall not apply to loss or damage to the tug or tugs to property on board the tug or tugs or to damages for personal injuries to or loss of life of members of the crew of the tug or tugs or persons on board thereof, unless such loss or damage or such damages for personal injuries or loss of life shall have been caused or contributed to by the fault or negligence of the vessel or craft requiring the tug or tugs."
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
PLAINTIFFS AND DEFENDANT
WITH RESPECT TO REPAIRS AT
CANSO
[97]
It would appear from the foregoing that, with everyone acting in good faith and being helpful, defendant really undertook, whether as a result of verbal agreement or as a matter of good customer relations, to arrange for necessary repairs to be made to the leaking hold in the barge. Plaintiffs had no representative present and no one expressed very serious concern that once the water had been pumped out the leakage could not be satisfactorily repaired for the voyage. Plaintiffs would of course have to pay for this and were content to have Breton Industrial and Marine undertake the work. This company was known to defendant and to some slight extent to plaintiffs as it appears that they had retained them to assist in the mooring of the barge when she tied up after passing through the Canso locks.
[98]
It is not difficult to be wise by hindsight and perhaps plaintiffs should have sent Sexton or someone else to oversee the repairs. Had they done so they could then no longer claim that defendant had assumed responsibility for seeing that they were properly done. However, the vessel was a long way from both Muskegon in the Great Lakes and Port Everglades in Florida and plaintiffs' tug with its master and engineer were at the scene and their marine superintendent Mr. Kaye was in St. John. The work done was approved by Mr. Kaye, Captain Newman and the engineer Henwood. While Mr. St-Amand was not personally present he kept in touch with his representatives in whom he understandably had considerable confidence and was convinced that after the repairs had been made the barge was watertight and fit to tow. None of the people doing the work or approving the work apparently exhibited sufficient curiosity as to trace the pipe or pipes being repaired or to try to ascertain how water had gone into them when no water should have been present. Had defendant's representatives considered it necessary to require that a diver be brought from Halifax to seal the outside of the sea chest under water so that no further water could enter, whether or not the valve on top of the pipe emanating therefrom continued to leak, this would certainly have solved the problem and plaintiffs undoubtedly would have agreed, as the expense involved was relatively small - one witness suggested about $3,000 - and divers were readily available in Halifax who could come over with little delay. All plaintiffs wanted was to have the vessel fixed so that the tow could get under way. It ill behoves defendants to now state that plaintiffs should have done this on their own accord. Plaintiffs were certainly entitled to rely on defendant's experienced people who were satisfied that the work done would be sufficient to permit the tow to proceed safely. In tort law fault does not have to rest on a positive act but can also result from acts of omission or errors of judgment.
REQUIREMENT OF NEW
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
[99]
It was argued that the certificate of the surveyor Leira for the voyage from Port Hawkesbury to Florida was no longer valid in view of the leak which had been discovered at Canso and that a new survey should have been done and a new certificate obtained. It was argued, however, that a certificate itself is not automatically cancelled, so it becomes a question of balancing how serious the changed condition of the vessel was to deem the existing certificate invalid and require a new one. Certainly every time a minor repair is done to a vessel or a small leak repaired it would be unreasonable to require the engagement of a surveyor to issue a new certificate of seaworthiness. In the present case, all the parties involved in doing or inspecting the repairs were satisfied that the problem had been solved and that the vessel was now dry and no longer listing, and therefore ready to tow. Mr. St-Amand may not have actually seen the Honduran certificate at that time but it certainly existed and was eventually provided. Moreover, the witnesses agree that there is no legal requirement for such a certificate for an unmanned barge. The requirement is a matter arising from the contract to tow, not from operation of law.
[100]
The contract to tow included in clause 4 the following: "Prior to departure you will produce to the tug-master a certificate by a competent marine surveyor certifying that the vessel is seaworthy and fit for the intended voyage." Captain Newman testified that seaworthy certificates are often forwarded to the office. He had been told by St-Amand that this had been done. (This would be Leira's certificate.) He was satisfied with the condition of the barge after the repairs had been completed. He stated that he did not require anyone to survey these repairs.
[101]
Captain Ivan Herbert, the surveyor from Halifax, stated that his mandate from the Salvage Association, his employers, was to give tow approval, restricted to the condition of the tug and the towing arrangements for towing the barge. In order to do this he had to go on the barge and noticed the list on it. He had to walk across it to get to the tug. His restriction to approving the tug and towing arrangements only and not the barge appeared normal to him as he was aware that there had been an earlier survey of the barge. He did discuss the list with Captain Newman and Mr. Kaye. He did go below and along the catwalk and did not find any significant water elsewhere than in no. 1 port hold. He stated that a suitability for tow certificate is not a certificate of seaworthiness which normally requires drydocking. He was not required to issue any certificate however but looked at the barge merely as a matter of interest and to determine the adequacy of the towing shackle arrangements. He signed the Salvage Association's report of survey of the tug and towing arrangements on the barge, but not until January 30, 1981. However, annexed to it is his Survey Certificate dated January 8, the day of his visit. While the survey certificate refers to the vessel "Maitland 1" in tow of the "Irving Maple" and the first page refers to vessels in the plural, concluding that they are fit to proceed in tow subject to certain recommendations respecting the speed and wind and wave force, there is a second page which states "This certificate applies to the tug and towing equipment only and specifically excludes the barge."
[102]
Probably to emphasize that no approval had been given for the barge, which had water in the hold and was listing at the time and down by the head, the Salvage Association sent a telex the following day, January 9, to Mr. St-Amand referring to this and stating "Do not consider barge in fit condition to be towed."
[103]
In accepting the towing contract, Campbell had added a postscript already referred to "Please have your surveyor provide seaworthiness certificate to avoid delay. We accept to pay our share of surveyor's fees and expenses." Whether such a certificate was necessary or not, therefore, he appears to have been willing to provide it, but again, as in the case of the repairs, asked defendant to arrange it, which was practical since defendant's surveyor Herbert eventually attended in any event and could readily have returned to survey the barge after the leaks had been repaired, as well as the tug had he been requested to do so. Although St-Amand in testifying stated that he understood the postscript to refer to a seaworthy certificate for the tug, this appears an unlikely interpretation as there is no reason why plaintiffs would have agreed to pay their share of it if only the tug were to be surveyed. In any event defendant was apparently satisfied with the certificate already in existence from the Honduran authority as being in sufficient compliance with clause 4 of the contract and did not insist that plaintiffs provide a further certificate after the repairs had been done. By hindsight and in view of what happened they now contend that plaintiffs breached the contract by not providing such a certificate, arguing that silence does not mean assent, and that the request by plaintiffs to have defendant's surveyor provide a certificate was not part of the contract in any event, being merely added as a postscript to the acceptance.
[104]
Finally, even if there were an obligation on plaintiffs to provide such a further certificate, it is evident that the capsizing did not take place as a result of the absence of such a certificate, although it was argued that if Mr. Herbert or some other competent surveyor had been instructed to make a survey following the repair work done at Canso, a certificate would not have been issued, and hence the voyage would never have been undertaken unless further work had been done, possibly by blocking off in a permanent manner any ingress of water from outside into the sea chest by employment of a diver.
[105]
However, none of the people involved in the repair, many with considerable experience, seemed to consider this necessary, so it is highly speculative to assume that Captain Herbert would not have issued a certificate had he been instructed to make a full survey and that it would not have confirmed the one voyage approval given by the Honduran certificate.
WAIVER
[106]
Defendant contends that, even if it is assumed that they did in fact waive the condition requiring production of a certificate of seaworthiness, this does not result in a waiver of the barge owner's fundamental obligation to tender a seaworthy vessel. Jurisprudence, both British and Canadian, was cited to support this proposition. In other words, the duty imposed by clause 4 would be that a certificate by a marine surveyor be presented or produced for the tug-master before departure of the tug and was only the right to this certificate which was waived. Defendant contends that this had the effect only of estopping it from subsequently demanding the production of a certificate of seaworthiness, but is not authority for the proposition that the waiver precludes it from relying on the duty of the barge owners to tender a seaworthy vessel. While this legal argument is sound, it merely brings us back to the factual situation which has already been dealt with, in which I have concluded that the vessel was not unseaworthy when the tow commenced after the repairs had been made, although subsequent developments during the voyage rendered her unseaworthy at the time of the capsizing.
NONRESPONSIBILITY CLAUSES IN
TOWAGE CONTRACT
[107]
As already stated, the towage contract incorporated the standard towing conditions agreed between the Shipping Federation of Canada and Eastern Canada Tug Boat Owners Association (supra) which provides exceptionally strict nonresponsibility protection for tugs. Certainly whatever happened after the towing from Canso commenced cannot be attributable to defendant, which explains the desistment from proceedings against the tug "Irving Maple" and her owners. Plaintiffs strongly urge however that there were really two contracts, the towing contract itself subject to the conditions contained therein, and a separate contract, whether verbal or written as a result of the telex exchanges between plaintiffs and defendant to have the necessary repairs made before the actual tow commenced. This is a very crucial part of the case since otherwise defendant would be relieved of all contractual responsibility by virtue of the exculpatory clauses in the towage contract. In arguing that there was only one contract, defendant refers to the words in these conditions (supra) "or other handling" in clause 2, stating that the repair work done involved tying the tug up to the barge and in fact using the tug's pumps to evacuate the water from the hold which constituted "handling". Reference was also made to the words "from whatsoever cause" in clause 3 and the words in clause 4 "regardless of whether such vessel or craft assisted in the services with its own steam or power or in any other way".
[108]
The crucial words however appear to be in clause 5
"while such tug or tugs is or are in attendance upon or fast to or engaged in any manoeuvre for the purpose of making fast to or discharging from or proceeding clear from the vessel or craft requiring the tug or tugs."
[109]
It appears that a careful interpretation of these clauses indicates that they are designed to protect a tug, not only while it is towing a vessel in question or is engaged in making fast to or releasing it. By no stretch of the imagination can it be held that the repair work done on the barge was part of the towing contract. The fact that as a matter of convenience the tug may have been attached to the barge which was moored at the sea wall near the Canso Locks, and assisted in pumping water from the flooded hold, does not seem to involve "handling" of the barge. The exculpatory provisions of clause 3, while stating that the tug company will not be responsible for acts or defaults of the master or crew of the tug or tugs or any of their servants or agents nor for any damages which may be caused by them, must be read in the light of the towing contract. Clearly if as a result of any fault on their part damage is caused to a third person, as in this case the barge, for something which had nothing to do with the towing of a vessel the tug owners would not be protected against this.
[110]
While plaintiffs have referred to considerable jurisprudence as to the very wide interpretation which must be given to the words "from any cause whatsoever" as being broad enough to cover even negligence of the other party, that is not really the issue, since this exculpatory clause would apply only to the actual tow and I have concluded that the repair work was entirely separate and apart from the tow.
[111]
In support of this conclusion there is the case of
The West Cock
(1911), 12 Asp. M.L.C. 57 (C.A.), in which the exculpatory clause was invoked when the towing gear of the tug parted and the vessel towed was then driven against a pier which was damaged. Vaughan-Williams, L.J., found that the cause of the damage was the defective condition of the rivets attaching the towing gear of the tug to her bunker casing, which defect was not covered by the contract which only applied to circumstances occurring after the commencement of and during the towage and not to a state of things existing before the towage began. He states categorically at page 64: "This particular exception is limited to matters coming into existence after the time the towage began and does not apply to matters arising before it began."
[112]
I conclude therefore that the repair contract must be disassociated from the towage contract.
AGENCY OR MANDATE
[113]
Even if it is found that the contract to arrange for and oversee repairs to the barge was separate and distinct from the contract of towage, then defendant argues that whatever it was doing was done as an agent or mandatory of plaintiffs and not on its own account and that moreover the agency was gratuitous. On the facts, there is considerable force to this argument. It would appear that defendant acted as plaintiffs' agents in arranging for repairs to be done by Breton Industries and Marine Ltd. and in approving the repairs done. Plaintiffs approved this procedure, expressly in connection with the engagement of Breton, if in fact they did not actually engage them themselves, agreeing to direct billing by Breton, although having no direct contact with them in connection with the repair or work. They certainly tacitly approved defendant's representatives conferring with Breton as to the nature of the repairs to be done and subsequently approving these repairs in which they played no part, not having any representative present. Whether or not the agency was gratuitous is more debatable. Defendant allegedly undertook this work as a matter of good business relations with a customer and was being paid substantially for the actual towage which contract it wished to undertake, although it could have claimed demurrage for any delays resulting from repairs to the barge or a survey of it thereafter. They do not appear to have been under any pressure from plaintiffs to depart if they were not satisfied that the barge was suitable for tow after the repairs had been made, although plaintiffs were of course anxious to have the barge delivered to Florida as soon as possible in order to fulfill their contract with SDY. There had already been substantial delays for which defendant can certainly not be blamed while the barge was tied up at the Canso wall, hopefully to melt some of the ice which had accumulated in the cargo, and subsequently when the water was found in no. 1 hold to arrange for and make the repairs.
[114]
Defendant argues that Atlantic did not hold itself out to be an agent specially skilled with regard to ship repairs and the inspection, and approval thereof. The standard of care of a gratuitous agent varies. A passage quoted from Fridman,
The
Law of Agency
(6th Ed.), at page 145, referred to by defendant states:
"It is for the principal to satisfy himself as to the degree of skill and care he can expect from the agent. In particular, this means that it is for the principal to make sure that the agent is one who will be likely to perform the undertaking; hence there is no liability on the part of a gratuitous agent for nonfeasance even though there may be liability for misfeasance if there has been a failure to observe the standard of care described above."
[115]
On the facts of the present case, however, it appears that although Atlantic did not hold themselves out to be experts in ship repairs, Mr. Kaye, Captain Newman, and his engineer, Gordon Henwood were all very experienced persons, quite capable of approving the repairs done, and appear to have readily assumed the responsibility for this.
[116]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , referred to by plaintiffs, MacPherson, J., in the Saskatchewan Court of Queen's Bench, in a case involving a real estate agent, found that "once a gratuitous agent starts to perform the agency, his duty is not less than that of a contractual agent". The same judgment at p. 497 states:
"The authors of
Bowstead On Agency
(13th Ed.), p. 124, comment that nice distinctions between the standards of care to be exercised by different classes of persons seem curiously out of place in the law today. They quote with approval the following words of Ormerod, L.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 698:
'The question that we have to consider in a case of this kind, if it is necessary to consider negligence, is whether in the circumstances of this particular case a sufficient standard of care has been observed by the defendants or their servants.'"
[117]
I conclude that if the repair work is considered as a contract of agency, defendant did not exercise a sufficient standard of care in carrying it out and specifically in not determining where the water which was leaking out of the pipe or pipes and filling the hold was coming from and assuring that this was not a condition which would be repeated. They cannot now by hindsight pass the responsibility on to plaintiffs by stating that plaintiffs should have had a representative there themselves to approve the work done or should have directed that it be done differently (by sealing the sea chest under water to prevent any further water entering it), or by having a surveyor approve the work which was done. I have already discussed this when dealing with negligence of defendant.
CLAIM OF PLAINTIFF
SIDERURGICA DE YUCATAN
S.A. (SDY)
[118]
The claim of the plaintiffs other than SDY is based on both contract and tort, on the basis that the agreements relating to the repairs done at Canso were the result of a contract with defendant separate and apart from the contract of towing and therefore not subject to the exclusions of liability contained therein. A finding to this effect has already been made (supra). The claim in tort arises out of imprudence and want of skill, resulting in negligent acts of omission, details of which need not be repeated here. With respect to the claim of SDY however, it had no part in the towing contract so its claim must rely solely on tort which I have already accepted as a valid alternative claim of the plaintiffs against defendant.
[119]
Defendant raises an interesting secondary issue however in connection with SDY's claim, stating that SDY has already collected from its insurers the full amount for which the cargo was insured (which is allegedly greater than the value of the cargo now agreed upon of $358,931.84 (U.S.) referred to in the admissions). Defendant contends that a judgment against it in the present proceedings for this amount would constitute a duplication of benefit, resulting in unjust enrichment to said plaintiff. The contract of sale of the scrap steel from Bultema to SDY provides in part
"charterer agrees to insure cargo with waiver of subrogation against carrier and name Bultema Marine Transportation Inc. and Trio Shipping Group as additional named insured as their interest may appear."
Trio Shipping Group entered into the contract of carriage, subject to Gencon Charter conditions which need not be gone into here. In due course they substituted defendant's tug the "Irving Maple" for their own tug, the "Trio Bravo", but this would not change the situation (see in this connection
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  was entitled to claim the benefit of nonliability under a towage contract notwithstanding that it only mentioned the tug owner rather than the tug-master, finding that the contract must intend the services to be performed by a delegate who would then have no higher duty than the defendant). Defendant argues that the same principle applies here, and that Atlantic became a delegate and stood in the shoes of Trio and Bultema Marine Transportation with respect to their obligations to SDY, so that the waiver of subrogation clause referred to would also apply to Atlantic.
[120]
There is no evidence with respect to the insurance policy of SDY with its insurers, and I do not believe that this is a matter which should be gone into in the present proceedings, which should be decided solely on the basis that defendant is liable in tort to SDY for the loss of its cargo, leaving aside the question of whether SDY's insurers, not a party to the present proceedings, can eventually claim any amounts so awarded from SDY on the basis of having allegedly already paid it the full amount due under the policy.
QUANTUM OF DAMAGES
[121]
As already stated, there is an agreed figure as to the value of the lost cargo. It is with respect to the evaluation of the barge that there is considerable disagreement. There is no dispute that in principle, the value of any object is market value at the time of loss, - that is to say what a willing buyer would pay to acquire from a willing vendor. This may have little relation to replacement value for which insurance is frequently carried, and even less connection to value to the owner, who may have paid a certain sum to acquire it and expended considerable money to improve it, so that the value to him is considerably in excess of what a willing buyer would pay for it on an open market. However, market prices can vary dramatically from time to time if a similar object is difficult to replace or to obtain on the market and the demand for it is great. One point on which all the witnesses agreed is that the market for large barges capable of carrying over 3,000 tons of cargo was at its peak in the years 1979-1981. Oil fields in the Gulf of Mexico were operating at capacity and the shipyards in the region were unable to build barges fast enough to service the oil rigs, and it was not until 1982 when foreign oil became cheaper than that being produced in the Gulf that the industry became depressed and barge prices fell. Plaintiffs had had great success in operating a nearly identical barge, the "Chalmed 1", formerly a Great Lakes car ferry in the Gulf of Mexico shipping steel from Port Everglades to Progresso, Mexico for use in the SDY mill and required a similar barge for this use there and to relieve the "Chalmed 1" from time to time for other cargo carrying use in the Gulf. The "Maitland 1" suited their purposes admirably although substantial work had to be done to prepare her for ocean service. It is true that while she was laid up prior to the autumn of 1980, she was offered for sale for $150,000 but that was on an "as is" basis. The work done in the Bultema shipyards, supported by Exhibits, amounted to $161,564 and other costs were incurred by Hannah's companies for labour and equipment totalling $36,211.98, making total preparation expenses of $197,775 which when added to the asking price of $150,000 before the work was done makes a total of $347,775 which the plaintiffs had invested in the barge herself. In addition to this there is a claim for en route costs to bring her to the Eastern Seaboard by Bultema in the amount of $151,599 and by Hannah of $37,524, or a total of $189,123, making a total claim of $536,898 (U.S.). If these amounts, which were itemized by plaintiffs' counsel in argument, at the request of the court, were to be used as a basis of the claim, the items comprising them would have to be scrutinized carefully. There is a document emanating from Bultema Marine Transport showing how the total of $161,564 for preparation costs is arrived at but with respect to the claim for en route costs the figures in exhibits show a total of $218,853.30 rather than the $151,599 claimed. The Hannah Marine's claims are well detailed in Exhibits produced.
[122]
All the above figures were given in a list prepared, at the request of the court during argument. At the opening of the hearing it was agreed that there would be a reference as to damages if this were necessary. While there was no detailed examination of these figures during the trial, the supporting exhibits are quite extensive. Defendant's contestation of the amounts is based primarily on issues of principle as to what should be included or what should not. The parties did not speak with respect to a reference at the conclusion of the hearing and I have concluded that it is not necessary and would cause further delay.
[123]
Historically, the measure of damages in the case of a total loss of a vessel has been the value of the vessel at the time of her loss. Defendant quotes the
Philadelphia
, [1917] p. 101 (C.A.), in which Sir Samuel Evans stated:
"In my opinion the right rule for arriving at the damages in the case of a total loss of a vessel under charter is to value the ship at the time of its destruction or loss and to add the proper sum for freight or profits at the end of the voyage, fixed by her existing charters subject to proper deductions for contingencies and wear and tear."
This was upheld in appeal.
[124]
Plaintiffs refer to the case of the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  although it concerned a dredge built for special use. At page 457, reference is made to the purchase in Holland for 4,000 to which must be added as part of the cost the sum of 2,000 expended in fitting her out and transporting her to Patras. At page 459, Lord Wright states:
"The substantial issue is what in such a case as the present is the true measure of damage. It is not questioned that when the vessel is lost by collision due to the sole negligence of the ongoing vessel that the owners of the former vessel are entitled to what is called restitutio in integrum which means that they should recover such a sum as will replace them, so far as can be done by compensation in money, in the same position as if the loss had not been inflicted on them, subject to the rules of law as to remoteness of damage. The respondents contend that all that is recoverable in damages is the true value to the owners of the lost vessel as at the time and place of loss."
[125]
At page 462 it is stated that it is a wrong basis to assume damages must be assessed as if the appellants had been able to go to the market and buy a dredge to replace the Liesbosch. The judgment states:
"On that basis it is necessary to decide between the conflicting views put forward, on the one hand by the respondents that all that is recoverable is the market price of the dredge, together with cost of transport to Patras and interest, and on the other hand by the appellants that they are also entitled to damages in addition for loss during the period of inevitable delay before the substitute dredger could arrive and start work at Patras."
(In the present case there is no claim for loss of profits from the use of the vessel but there is a claim for transporting her to Port Hawkesbury).
[126]
Reference is again made with approval in the Liesbosch case at page 466 to the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  entitled, if they were to be placed in the same position as if the injury had not been done them to have a value placed on their dredger as the value to them based on three elements: (1) the cost of procuring a comparable dredger, (2) cost of adapting it to their requirements, (3) compensation for loss of user. The court rejected the contention that there was any absolute rule fixing the compensation at the market value with interest from the date of the collision."
[127]
This case is authority for including in addition the cost of adaptation, the cost of transport, insurance and so forth to the proposed destination. It would seem to justify the inclusion of these costs in the claim of plaintiffs (other of course than SDY).
[128]
In their statement of claim, which, in the absence of amendment must govern, plaintiffs claim for loss of barge $714,480, freight paid $93,823.04, towage fee paid $32,500 and surveyor fees paid $501.81, in addition to the claim for loss of cargo which has already been dealt with.
[129]
With respect to the claim for freight paid, this would appear to be a duplication. The Bultema invoice rendered to SDY included in addition to the cost of the steel an amount for $78,789.92 for transportation to Progresso to arrive at the total of $358,931.84 (U.S.). Plaintiffs (other than SDY) would appear to have been paid for the freight by SDY and this is included in its claim for loss of cargo. A similar situation arose in the appeal judgment in the
Philadelphia
case (supra), [1917] p. 101, in which Bankes, L.J., states at page 113:
"The charter or engagement resembles the case of a growing crop; if a growing crop is destroyed its value has to be taken into consideration when it yields fruit and after deducting the expenses of gathering it; in that way the true amount of damages would be ascertained. But in this particular case, it would result in an entire refusal of justice because the freight has already been paid and in assessing the damages due to the ship owner regard should not be had to the end of the voyage at all; it would be making the defendants pay or probably taking the first step towards making them pay, twice over, because when they have to settle with the cargo owner he would bring that freight into account as a credit; so that a proper assessment of the damage sustained would be completely destroyed."
[130]
With respect to the claim for $32,500 for towage fee paid, this should be looked at in connection with plaintiff's pleading that an invoice for a balance of $24,944.56 alleged to be owing to the defendant, as the balance due under the contract of towage be cancelled. This latter figure is based on a towage claim from January 6 to the date of the loss on January 14, worked out pursuant to the towage agreement in the amount of $36,913.54, to which were added other items including towing equipment $19,979.85, charges of Atlantic Pilotage Authority $368, purchase of goods $139.14, material $14.03 and Customs Clearance $30, making a total of $57,444.56 from which credit of $32,500 paid in advance is given, making a final claim of $24,944.56. The towage contract called for a flat rate of $65,000 of which one-half was payable in advance and the balance at destination, with the towing equipment to be provided by the tug. Since the judgment is against it, it cannot claim for loss of towing equipment. The claim against plaintiffs, for towing equipment therefore would not seem to have validity, nor for towing, except for the difference between the $32,500 paid and the $36,913.54 for the time under tow before the capsizing or a matter of $4,413.54. The other minor items would also seem to have been items for the account of defendant itself, with the possible exception of Customs Clearance which was not argued. Probably the best way to deal with this is to vary the claim of plaintiffs for towage fees paid in the amount of $32,500 by adding to this the amount of $4,443.54 making total towage fees paid or due of $36,413.54 and cancel the claim by defendant for the amount of $24,944.56.
[131]
With respect to the value of the barge itself one must look, on the basis of the jurisprudence, to its value to the owners at the time of the loss in order to apply the restitutio in integrum principle and this would include the preparation costs of bringing the barge to the Eastern Seaboard for the tow which, while they do not add to the value of the barge, would be costs thrown away as a result of the loss. Leaving these figures aside however, for the moment, we have to look at the asking price for the barge in the autumn of 1980 plus the cost of preparation for the service for which it was intended, reaching a total of $347,775 Canadian according to the figures provided by plaintiffs in argument. It is necessary to compare this with the values given by the expert witnesses.
[132]
Turning now to the experts' valuation of the barge, plaintiffs' expert, Joseph Hughes, Vice-President of Hughes Brothers, a large barge charterer which has in excess of 50 barges to charter, and also does barge transportation and has acted as barge brokers since 1884, testified that he has done valuations for some of the largest tug boat fleets on the east coast. He estimates that the value of the barge after the work was completed to make her fit for the voyage to Florida and eventually to Progresso in Mexico would in January 1981 be $375,000 (U.S.). In a letter written in March 1980 the Great Lakes Towing Company apparently had been looking for barges of similar capacity which had Great Lakes load lines, but the prices differ widely. One, just built in 1979 had an asking price of $2,500,000. Another built in 1969 with a charter rate of $600 per day was priced at $625,000. Another with somewhat less carrying capacity had a charter rate of $700 per day but the asking price was not shown. A fourth, although far too small for plaintiffs' purpose, and therefore not really comparable, had a purchase price of $250,000. He enclosed in his report a letter he received in April 1979 in reply to a request by him for information about deck barges for ocean or Great Lakes service which states that there are some of 3,000 ton capacity starting at $600,000 and going abruptly upwards from there. Another internal memo from a member of his firm making an investigation, dated August 1983, states that in February 1980, they sold one of their barges, about this size, for what is believed to be between $400,000 and $450,000 (U.S.). This memo also refers to a barge sold in August 1981 for $425,000. He conceded that some of the barges referred to would be more modern and would have been built as deck barges, with square sterns and raked bows. He stated that in his view the fact that the barge in question had a Honduran load line would not reduce its value for use in foreign trade. He conceded that U.S. purchasers would prefer one with an A.B.S. load line.
[133]
Disputing this evidence we have defendant's expert, Thomas Mowbray, President of Mowbray's Tug and Barge Sales, New Jersey, an expert of wide experience throughout the United States who has testified in many courts there and made market valuations for a number of companies. In evaluating the subject barge, "Trio Trader", at a market value of between $125,000 to $150,000 (U.S.) in 1981, he states that he has taken into consideration the vessel's age, size and characteristics as well as comparison market sales. Some of his comparisons however are vessels which he had for sale in 1976 for an asking price of $150,000, one sold in 1975 for $100,000, and another sold in 1980 for $75,000, this latter having been built in 1898. He agrees that the year 1981 was the height of the market for ocean barges. With respect to the barge for which the asking price was $150,000 in the Great Lakes in 1976 of one of his comparables, she was sold after conversion for $1,150,000, between $600,000 and $750,000 conversion work having been done on her. He states that some of the comparisons used in Hughes' report were for modern vessels built as ocean barges in the 1970s, being built for speed with light draft. With respect to the "Chalmed 1" he stated that he had had her for sale many years ago before she left the Great Lakes, the asking price being $250,000, but does not know what she sold for in the Caribbean. He stated that the location of a vessel at the time of the loss only affects the market value by the cost of towing. He conceded that he only looked for converted car ferries in seeking comparables, not for any suitable barge which is what plaintiffs wanted. He was unable to explain satisfactorily why a Great Lakes barge offered for $150,000 in 1976 was sold for $1,150,000 in the late 70s as a result of an expenditure of $600,000 to $750,000 to convert her, or why he would not apply this reasoning to the present case where $150,000 plus cost of conversion brings the value to nearly $375,000 being plaintiffs' expert's valuation, without adding anything for costs of loaning her to the Atlantic Seaboard.
[134]
In his evidence he indicated quite clearly that a vessel with an ABS certification would be worth at least 25 to 30% more than if she was under another flag. While this may be so for a vessel trading between U.S. ports however, there is no need for this for a vessel going to be used in the Caribbean. In fact there might be some advantage as the tugs towing the barge would be of Honduran registry in any event and it might arouse some antagonism in that area if the barge being towed flew an American flag. In common with defendant's other expert witnesses, he seemed to attribute little faith to the survey of Mr. Leira for transfer to Honduran registry or the one voyage ticket issued, despite the fact that the qualifications of Leira as a surveyor representing the Maritime Inspection Corporation are impeccable.
[135]
In short, I found Mr. Mowbray, while undoubtedly experienced in appraisals, to be a very opinionated witness, giving little weight to price differentials between 1976 and 1980 on barges of this type, which were admittedly very difficult to find, fully convinced that barges as old as the "Trio Trader" are of little value even after renovation for ocean use, despite especially sturdy construction because of prior use as railcar ferries, and he certainly wanted an ABS certification for any vessel he would deal with. I therefore find the valuation of Mr. Hughes in the amount of $375,000, taking into consideration the time and all the other factors involved to be far more realistic and in accord with the facts. No one in their right senses, certainly plaintiffs, who are experienced ship owners would spend nearly $200,000 on a barge worth $150,000 to start with, if it would still be only worth $150,000 on the market after all this expense. Since there was a great demand at the time for a barge such as the "Trio Trader", and practically none for sale, there was no real market on which comparable market prices could be based.
[136]
I therefore accept the value of $375,000 which converts to $446,550 Canadian at the agreed on conversion rate of 1.1908 for the barge including preparation to which should be added the en route costs of $189,123 for bringing the barge to the Eastern Seaboard for tow, making a total of $635,673 Canadian for the loss of the barge. It was already agreed that the amount to be allowed for loss of cargo is $358,931.84 (U.S.) which converts to $427,416.03 Canadian. I have already rejected the claim of $93,823.04 (Canadian) in paragraph 14 of the statement of claim, as being included in the claim of plaintiff SDY for loss of cargo and I have increased the claim for towage fee paid by adding an additional $4,413.54 still to be paid to the amount of $32,500 claimed, making a total of $36,913.54 Canadian and have added $30 for Customs clearance by defendant. The claim for surveyor fees paid in the amount of $501.81 was not discussed but can be allowed. A judgment will therefore be rendered in favour of plaintiffs Engine Leasing Company, Bultema Marine Transportation Inc., Trio Shipping Group, and Duo Partnership jointly in the amount of $635,673 for loss of the barge, $36,943.54 for towage fees, paid and to be paid, and Customs clearance, $501.81 for surveyor fees paid, making a total of $673,118.35 and in favour of plaintiffs SDY for $427,416.03. The sum of $24,944.56 Canadian alleged to be owing to defendant as the balance due under the contract for towage is cancelled. Only one set of costs is allowed for all plaintiffs. Amounts expressed in U.S. funds will be converted to Canadian funds at the rate of 1.1908, the rate of exchange on January 14, 1981 as agreed in the admissions of the parties.
INTEREST
[137]
Plaintiffs claim prejudgment interest from the date of capsize January 14, 1981, to the date of judgment at the rate of 12.6% agreed upon, being the weighted average rate from January 14, 1981, to September 3, 1991, the commencement of trial, and postjudgment interest from date of judgment to date of payment, at the weighted average rate for that period. They ask that it be compounded semi-annually in each case.
[138]
In support of this they cite the leading case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  which established that in Maritime law, the rate of interest forms part of the damage caused for which defendant is responsible; under the principle of restitutio in integrum.
[139]
The idea of compounding arose in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 58, in which the Supreme Court, without discussing the question of interest specifically, upheld the judgment of McNair, J., in the Trial Division, who in rendering judgment awarded interest, compounded annually.
[140]
An unreported judgment of Strayer, J., Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , states:
"With respect to interest, this is a matter within my discretion. After considering the circumstances I am awarding the plaintiff prejudgment interest at the rate of 11.58% per annum, the rate agreed by the parties as being the 'weighted average' prime commercial rate of interest from October 25, 1985 to April 23, 1991. This interest will be compounded semi-annually as requested by plaintiff. This prejudgment interest will run from the date of discharge, October 25, 1985, up to and including the date of these reasons. Interest after that date will be payable at the rate of interest paid on money paid into the Federal Court and subject to such rules for compounding as apply to monies so paid into court."
[141]
I do not believe, however, that the principle of compounding interest on awards can be said to be firmly established. Interest still remains in the discretion of the court. The
Mar-Tirreno
case states that the awarding of interest should not depend on whether there was gross negligence or not and is not punitive damages. Certainly in the present case the negligence of defendant, consisting of not exercising sufficient care in approving repairs done as a matter of good customer relations, not insisting on further inspection as they could have and erroneously concluding that the barge was fully fit to tow in the prevailing winter conditions, was not a matter of gross negligence in any event.
[142]
In Justice Strayer's judgment in the
Ontario Bus Industries
case (supra) he takes into consideration the "circumstances" which included the fact that defendants were able to invoke limitation of liability.
[143]
While it is established that interest should be awarded (unless of course plaintiffs are to blame for delays in bringing the matter to trial, which is not the case here) compounding is still relatively unusual. Awarding of interest is based on the principle that defendant has had the use of the money in the meanwhile and plaintiffs have been deprived of it, and the parties have agreed in this case that the rate should be 12.6%, the weighted average from January 14, 1981 to September 3, 1991, but as always it is speculative that plaintiffs would have had to borrow this amount, or would have done so at that rate, or per contra that defendant would have invested the amount in the meantime at that rate. Moreover if this had occurred, plaintiffs would have benefitted from tax deductions each year on interest paid on their borrowings, or, if they had had the money to invest, would have paid tax on the income from it each year. The same applies to defendant on the hypothesis that it had the money for investment, whereas when paid a lump sum amount as part of the judgment, this is not the case.
[144]
I am not suggesting that the whole concept of awarding interest from the occurrence of an event giving rise to the award should be changed so as to take tax consequences into consideration, as this would be too complex to be feasible, but I believe it can properly be taken into consideration when deciding whether to award compound interest or not. Moreover in the statement of claim, plaintiffs only ask for "interest and costs" with no mention of compounding.
[145]
I will therefore in the exercise of my discretion award only simple interest at 12.6% from January 14, 1981 to September 3, 1991. After that date to the date of this judgment, rather than accept the agreed on weighted average for said period, I prefer to adopt the simpler and easier to calculate finding of Justice Strayer in the
Ontario Bus Industries
case that the rate be based on that for money paid into Federal Court.
[146]
Judgment will be rendered in accordance with these reasons.
Judgment for plaintiffs.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]