[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an appeal from a decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary dated February 24, 1987 concerning a motion by the defendants requiring Edmund D. Neuberger, an officer of the plaintiffs, to reattend for further examination for discovery. The defendants appeal certain aspects of that order in which Giles, A.S.P., declined to order certain answers or the production of certain documents.
[2]
It was common ground on appeal that I should reverse the decision of the learned Associate Senior Prothonotary only if I was satisfied that he had based his decision on a wrong principle or it was manifestly wrong.
[3]
The first category of decisions appealed are described by the defendants as related to the "Common general knowledge in the art at the date of invention". The defendants take the position that the state of such knowledge will be relevant to both the question of obviousness and of anticipation. The questions involved all relate to the state of knowledge of the plaintiffs' officers and employees, and the information held by the plaintiffs, in respect of prior art. With respect to requests 42, 46, 47, 48, 50, 58, 62, 64 and 65 the defendants claim discovery on the basis that the information would show the plaintiffs' knowledge of the prior art and this would tend to prove the existence of common general knowledge of such art. Further, it is argued in respect of requests 62 and 65 that some of the documents in question might contain "admissions" - that is, opinions or comment, in internal memoranda of, or correspondence by, the employees of the plaintiffs, in respect of the prior art on which the defendants now rely. I am unable to conclude that the Associate Senior Prothonotary applied any wrong principle or was manifestly wrong in the decisions which he reached to refuse to order answers in respect to these matters. He appears to have taken the position that common general knowledge as to prior art is to be proven by the evidence of experts and the knowledge of these particular plaintiffs or their employees could be of very little use, if any, in proving such knowledge. I agree that the test of common general knowledge must be an objective one and I therefore do not think the learned Prothonotary was wrong in refusing to order discovery with respect to the knowledge of these particular plaintiffs, their officers and employees. For the same reason I believe that it was open to him to reject the request for production of documents which might amount to "admissions" in respect of the prior art. He obviously considered that their probative value could only relate to the plaintiffs supposed knowledge of the art and I am unable to say that this is manifestly wrong.
[4]
Request # 67 is somewhat different in that it seeks
"all documents prepared by or for or addressed to or received by Mr. S. Aronson and Mr. J. Belle ... and relating to the alleged invention or the field of the alleged invention."
The defendants seek to justify this request on the basis that in their statement of defence they have, in paragraph 9, alleged the invalidity of the plaintiffs' patent on the basis of prior knowledge and use by certain persons including Aronson and Belle. They have provided no further particulars as to what is intended by this. I do not think they are entitled, even if the plaintiffs have not asked for particulars, to use this kind of pleading as a basis for such a broad "fishing expedition". While counsel for the defendants explained that this kind of information is sought because Aronson and Belle published an article in July 1958 which may suggest that they were the inventors of the invention in question, request 67 is so broadly worded as to cover potentially any documents passing to or from Aronson and Belle relating to the whole field of the invention, without any specification as to time or nature of such documents. While the Associate Senior Prothonotary did, I believe, misunderstand the request as suggested by the defendants, and his ruling on this might for that reason be said to be "manifestly wrong", I would have found the request to be much too broad to order an answer. The possible relevance of some documents that might be produced would not warrant the sweeping production which the request, by its own terms, demands. The request is in no way made specific by reference to the pleadings which are themselves vague in this respect.
[5]
With respect to the category of questions under the heading "development of the invention", I will order that request 55 be responded to. It appears that the Associate Senior Prothonotary misapprehended the purpose of this request which is to provide the "hierarchy" of the Research and Development Department of the plaintiffs at the time of the invention. It is not primarily for the purpose of obtaining names of potential witnesses but could assist the defendants in their understanding of events surrounding the invention. I will also order a response to request 135 as the Associate Senior Prothonotary seems to have overlooked this request and it appears to me to be reasonable.
[6]
With respect to the category of "Translations" I will order a response to requests 57 and 76 as these do not, as the Associate Senior Prothonotary believed, involve an order to make translations but only for the production of translations which have already been made.
[7]
With respect to items under the heading "Invalidity", request 62 calls for the production of "complete correspondence and other files relating to" the application for the Canadian patent in suit and to three U.S. patent applications. As I understand it, the Associate Senior Prothonotary has already ordered production of the patents and correspondence with the respective patent granting authorities. Further, at the hearing before me counsel for the plaintiffs undertook to produce such material and it was agreed that I confirm this undertaking in my order. I therefore need not decide whether the production of such material should be ordered, a matter about which I would have some doubt. I will not order any further production in this respect as encompassed by request 62 which would involve not only the provision of the material ordered or agreed to be produced, but also any other correspondence or any files within the control of the plaintiffs which might have dealt directly or indirectly with the applications to the respective patent offices. The Associate Senior Prothonotary considered such a demand to be "too broad" and I agree with his conclusion. The Associate Senior Prothonotary also regarded the request based on Exhibit N-2, paragraph 17 to be too broad and I agree. Paragraph 18 of that Exhibit N-2 describes
"all internal memoranda of the plaintiffs in which the patentability of the alleged invention or the validity of issued patents for the alleged invention in any country is referred to or discussed ..."
The Associate Senior Prothonotary rejected discovery of such material on the basis that it might contain the opinion of persons "whose expertise is not sufficient to qualify their opinions as expert evidence". He also noted that any legal opinions would not be discoverable. He concluded that this item was also "too broad". I am not sure that the right principle was applied here, in that if there are opinions included in this material objection can be taken at trial to their use. Further, if there are legal opinions therein, privilege can be claimed in them. However, the request suffers from the same defect as others mentioned above; it involves in part a search for the particular knowledge of the plaintiffs' employees as to the validity of prior art patents and of the patent in suit. These are matters of law for the court, as assisted by expert evidence, and I fail to see how the internal musings of the plaintiffs' staff can be probative of any fact in issue. The Associate Senior Prothonotary refused to order discovery with respect to the items referred to in paragraphs 19, 20 and 21 of this same exhibit. In each case he regarded the request as too broad and in the context of his decision I understand this to mean that he concluded that the value of such materials as tending to prove or disprove any allegation of fact would be slight in comparison to the problems of production. I fully agree with the principle which he has applied and am unable to see that he was manifestly wrong in its application. Indeed, the defendants in respect of these demands appear to be engaged in a fishing expedition trying to find indications of doubt within the plaintiffs' own organization concerning patentability, doubts which may inspire the defendants but which, as far as I can see, are not logically probative as to the validity of the patent which is a matter for the court to determine by looking at the patent as explained by experts and by consideration of the law. Numerous affirmations within the plaintiffs' files as to the validity of the patent would not be logically probative of its validity, which is a matter of law, and I am unable to see how expressions of doubt in the same files would be of assistance to the defendants in presenting its case to the court.
[8]
The success being divided in the motion, costs will be in the cause.
Appeal allowed in part.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]