[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The plaintiff sues to recover compensation and exemplary damages for negligence or the intentional tort of unlawful imprisonment. He is entitled to succeed, but not for the sums he seeks, and he is entitled to his costs of this action.
[2]
The plaintiff's statement of claim together with his motion for interim injunctive relief, being release from custody, and his affidavit in support thereof, were lodged in Court on September 14, 1982. The motion was returnable on September 23, 1982. The plaintiff, in his examination in chief (transcript: p. 17), recalled that he was released from the penitentiary on the day before he was to go to Court, thus placing his date of release as having been September 22, 1982.
[3]
During the summer of 1982, the plaintiff was serving a term of imprisonment of 14 years for having committed armed robbery and a subsequent term to which he had been sentenced for escape pursuant to section 137 of the Criminal Code. It is a matter of agreement by the respective parties' counsel (transcript: p. 3) that the plaintiff's expected release date then was October 22, 1982.
[4]
On July 19, 1982, the Appeal Division of this Court released its decision in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . At the trial, the parties' respective counsel agreed (transcript: p. 2) that paragraph 3 of the statement of defence might be amended to state - and they agreed that the fact is:
"3. ... The effect of that decision, if it were applied to the plaintiff, would be to vary the plaintiff's sentence calculation so as to entitle the plaintiff to release on August 10, 1982."
[5]
The salient dates may be tabulated in summary, thus:
1982
- Summer - the parties were expecting that the plaintiff would be entitled to be released from Collins Bay Penitentiary on October 22, 1982;
July 19
- Federal Court of Appeal released its unanimous decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
August 10
- Plaintiff's correct date for release according to the law's interpretation which was expressed and decided  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
August 13
- The Correctional Service of Canada, through notification of the sentence administrator at Collins Bay Penitentiary, (all servants of the defendant) were notified that the MacIntyre decision affected the plaintiff's duration of his term and that his solicitor opined that the plaintiff ought to be released forthwith; (transcript: p. 4)
September 14
- Statement of claim and notice of motion for interim injunction filed, the latter returnable on September 23;
September 22
- The plaintiff was released from incarceration:
- Defendant's solicitor confirms consent to the plaintiff's withdrawal of the above-mentioned motion, without costs;
March 3, 1983
- Statement of defence filed; and
April 11
- Discontinuance of action in regard to all defendants other than Her Majesty. (The title of this action has been amended as a consequence.)
[6]
This action came on for trial on October 2, 1986, at Kingston, Ontario. The reason for the lengthy passage of time from the date on which this action was at issue in 1983, until the trial in 1986, is probably related to the plaintiff's conviction for breaking and entering in March, 1983. The plaintiff explained this situation in testimony which is recorded at pages 26 to 28 of the transcript. The plaintiff testified that he was released on or about September 5, 1986, and that he might nearly have been unable to attend at this trial in October because of a miscalculation of his term of imprisonment which would have run until December, 1986, had his counsel not succeeded in having the error rectified.
LIABILITY
[7]
The defendant's counsel argues that the Crown is not legally responsible for the plaintiff's extra 43 days of incarceration being the period from and including August 11, 1982, to and including September 22, 1982. Counsel argues that the method of computation of the term of imprisonment which was defined in the MacIntyre case was not applicable to the plaintiff and that the Crown's servants were not obliged to apply it to the plaintiff and, therefore, the Crown is not liable for their failure to do so. The basis of the defendant's contention is not a denial that the prescribed method of computation applied to the plaintiff's circumstances. It did, and it would still apply to such circumstances. That is a crucial factor. The defendant's counsel adduced no evidence at the trial. The defendant's servants' conduct is factually unexplained and, as will be perceived, legally unexplainable. Both counsel are commended for their agreement about the plaintiff's release date being August 10, 1982, which they discovered only by application of the Appeal Division's interpretation of the law in the MacIntyre case.
[8]
The basis of the defendant's contention is, rather, that because the MacIntyre case resulted in declaratory relief it is and was "not coercive against the Crown; that no obligations flow from a declaratory judgment". (Transcript: p. 62.) Counsel for the defendant concedes that,
in practice
, governmental authorities implement declaratory judgments in regard to all persons in the same plight and circumstances as a successful plaintiff, but he adamantly asserts that
in law
the Crown is quite free to ignore such a judicial declaration unless and until each similarly placed person becomes a plaintiff and wins his or her own particular declaration. Counsel suggested (transcript: p. 67) "that the proposition of law goes this far: Even with respect to MacIntyre, MacIntyre's declaratory judgment alone does not guarantee his release by virtue of the nature of (a) declaration. He would have to couple it, properly, with an application for habeas corpus, or any other coercive remedy. Of course, Mr. MacIntyre didn't have to do that". It may be noted that the remedy could be mandamus or mandatory injunction (as the plaintiff sought here) in this Court, to the same effect as the writ of habeas corpus which a provincial superior court could issue. The plaintiff's counsel here chose the most apt proceedings by commencing an action in which declaratory relief, injunctive relief and damages are all sought concurrently, in avoidance of multiplicity of proceedings.
[9]
The defendant's counsel did acknowledge that if the earlier plaintiff, MacIntyre, had only sued pursuant to rules 1708 and 1711, in a representative capacity on behalf of himself, MacIntyre and all other prisoners serving time for escape, having escaped prior to the relevant date, the MacIntyre decision might well have bound this same defendant in regard to the present plaintiff, LeBar. (Transcript: pp. 72 to 74.) In that event, counsel noted, rule 1711(4) would have operated so as to render MacIntyre's decision res judicata between the Crown and the plaintiff herein.
[10]
In support of the defendant's contentions, counsel cites the following jurisprudence, statutes and learned writings:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. 10 (2nd Supp.), section 33;
Supreme Court Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. S-19, c. 44 (1st Supp.), S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 18, sections 14 and 64;
Zamir, The Declaratory Judgment, Stevens & Sons, London 1962, pp. 1 to 3, 247 to 252, 282 to 284;
Sarna, L., The Law of Declaratory Judgments, Carswell, 1978, pp. 87, 176 to 178.
[11]
It is readily apparent that this Court's decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  reasons for judgment of Mr. Justice Pigeon for a unanimous Supreme Court of Canada in the Canadian Warehousing case can be even more shortly excerpted in order to extract the pertinent kernel of authority. By agreement, the parties submitted a question of law to the Exchequer Court, in regard to which Pigeon, J., is quoted thus at p. 178:
"The question was answered in the affirmative by Gibson, J. An appeal is now brought to this Court by leave granted by Fauteux, J., under s. 83 of the Exchequer Court Act as relating to a 'matter or thing where rights in future might be bound'.
. . . . .
"A declaratory judgment is undoubtedly binding on the parties as res judicata, not merely by application of the doctrine of stare decisis. As a direct result of the judgment of the Exchequer Court it is no longer open to the appellant to contend in other judicial proceedings that the storage or transportation of household goods does not come within the purview of s. 32(2) of the Combines Investigation Act."
[13]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Canada, writing the majority opinion. He is reported (S.C.R.) to express these cameo explanations of res judicata, including issue estoppel, at pp. 253 to 255:
"In earlier times res judicata in its operation as estoppel was referred to as estoppel by record, that is to say, estoppel by the written record of a Court of record, but now the generic term more frequently found is estoppel per rem judicatam. This form of estoppel, as Diplock, L.J., said in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 198, has two species. The first, 'cause of actions estoppel', precludes a person from bringing an action against another when that same cause of action has been determined in earlier proceedings by a Court of competent jurisdiction.
. . . . .
"The second species of estoppel per rem judicatam is known as 'issue estoppel' a phrase coined by Higgins, J., of the High Court of Australia in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 560-1:
'I fully recognize the distinction between the doctrine of res judicata where another action is brought for the same cause of action as has been the subject of previous adjudication, and the doctrine of estoppel where, the cause of action being different, some point or issue of fact has already been decided (I may call it "issue estoppel").'
"Lord Guest in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 935, defined the requirements of issue estoppel as:
'(1) that the same question has been decided; (2) that the judicial decision which is said to create the estoppel was final; and, (3) that the parties to the judicial decision or their privies were the same persons as the parties to the proceedings in which the estoppel is raised or their privies.'
. . . . .
"The question out of which the estoppel is said to arise must have been 'fundamental to the decision arrived at' in the earlier proceedings: per Lord Shaw in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The authors of Spencer Bower and Turner, Doctrine of Res Judicata, 2nd ed. (1969), pp. 181, 182, quoted by Megarry, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  inquiry which must be made:
'... whether the determination on which it is sought to found the estoppel is "so fundamental" to the substantive decision that the latter
cannot stand
without the former. Nothing less than this will do.'"
Dickson, J., further explained at p. 257, S.C.R.:
"As long ago as 1893, Lord Hobhouse said in the Privy Council in A.-G. Trinidad and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 522-3:
'It is hardly necessary to refer at length to authorities for the elementary principle that in order to establish the plea of res judicata the judgment relied on must have been pronounced by a Court having concurrent or exclusive jurisdiction directly upon the point. In the Duchess of Kingston's Case, Sm. L.C. vol. ii, p. 642, which is constantly referred to for the law on this subject, it laid down that in order to establish the plea of res judicata the Court whose judgment is invoked must have had jurisdiction and have given judgment directly upon the matter in question; but that if the matter came collaterally into question in the first Court, or were only incidentally cognizable by it, or merely to be inferred by argument from the judgment, the judgment is not conclusive.'
"The question not being eadem questio, I am of the opinion that this is not a case for application of the principle of issue estoppel."
[14]
Here, in the case at bar, the issue being indeed eadem questio, and the Appeal Division's resolution of that same question having been a final decision, the only deficiency from perfect issue estoppel is that, whereas the Crown is the same defendant both in the MacIntyre case and the case at bar, this present plaintiff is LeBar and not MacIntyre. Thus there is no exact mutuality of parties, but in light of the circumstances it will be observed that such lack affords no comfort to the defendant.
[15]
The same question in both cases does not, of course, exact the very same record of convictions nor yet the very same release date for both prisoners. Those factors are different.
[16]
The same question or issue in the two cases is the judicial interpretation of the words "the sentence he was then serving" found in section 24.2 of the Penitentiary Act in relation to the provisions of section 14(1) of the Parole Act and of sections 137(1) and (2) of the Criminal Code which latter provide for the imposition of terms of imprisonment as punishment for the offence of escaping while undergoing imprisonment. The identical issue then is the judicially declared correct method of computation of the remaining days to be served in the term of imprisonment imposed by sentence of the court of criminal jurisdiction. The plaintiff articulates that same question in paragraphs 9 through 13 of his statement of claim.
[17]
The case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  concurring in the disposition or result of the adjudication by the Supreme Court of Canada. The majority judgment written by Mr. Justice Martland, in which Messrs. Justices Beetz and Estey concur, is marvellously brief and pithy. The plaintiff Emms had sued for reinstatement and compensation for having been rejected as a permanent public servant, wrongfully as he claimed, during a purported extension of his probationary employment period. Here are the pertinent passages of the reasons of Martland, J., at pp. 1151 and 1152, S.C.R.:
"Briefly stated, s. 28 of the statute provides for the position of employees on probation. The period of probation is to be established by the Commission. The deputy head may reduce or waive the probationary period if an appointment is made from within the Public Service. The deputy head may at any time during the probationary period, upon giving required notices to the employee and the Commission of his intention to reject the employee, set in motion the procedure which results in his ceasing to be an employee.
"The
Regulations
establish the probationary periods for defined groups or classes of employees. The probationary period applicable to the appellant was 12 months. No notice of an intention to reject the appellant was given during that period. Instead, the deputy head purported to extend the probationary period for a further six months and the rejection of the appellant occurred during the extended period.
"The extension of the probationary period by the deputy head was based upon s. 30(2) of the
Regulations
.
. . . . .
"If the deputy head did not have power to extend the probationary period, then the rejection of the appellant occurred after his probationary period had expired and could not legally be justified. The respondent's case, therefore, depends upon the validity of s. 30(2) of the
Regulations
.
"Subsequent to the judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal in the present case, that Court, in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , confirmed the judgment in the Trial Division [[1978] 1 F.C. 672] that s. 30(2) of the
Regulations
was
ultra vires
of the Commission to enact. I agree with the reasons delivered by Jackett, C.J., for the Court, for reaching that conclusion.
"I am therefore of the opinion that this appeal should succeed. I agree with the
disposition of the appeal
proposed by my brother Pigeon." (emphasis added)
[18]
It will be noted that the majority express neither concern about, nor mention of, the question of res judicata. Nor does the majority judgment trouble even to consider mutuality of parties. They simply applied the pronouncement that the impugned subregulation was ultra vires asserted by and in the Ouimet case, to the issues raised by, and the plight of, the plaintiff Emms, in the matter before them. They accepted that the unappealed decision of the Appeal Division  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  was correct and, that being so, it interpreted and proclaimed the law to which servants of the Crown, and the Crown itself, are bound to render acquiescence and obedience. That surely is little different, if at all, from the state of affairs in the case here at bar.
[19]
The majority's reasons  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  were not cited by the defendant's counsel. Instead, he relied on the minority opinion, with whose final
disposition of the appeal
, only, the majority agreed. Mr. Justice Pigeon, with whom Mr. Justice Pratte concurred, wrote these passages at p. 1158 (S.C.R.) cited by the defendant's counsel:
"At the hearing in the instant case, counsel for the respondent informed the Court that no appeal had been taken from the Ouimet judgment but invited us to overrule it. When asked why leave to appeal had not been sought, he could only say that he did not know but he did not apply for leave or for an extension of time in which to apply.
"I must confess being troubled by this situation. The Crown is faced with a formal declaration made by the Court below of the invalidity of the very provision of the Public Service Employment Regulations on which its appeal in this case depends. This declaration was made in another case and it is allowed to stand in favour of another claimant but the Court is asked to decide otherwise as against the appellant herein."
The situation created some anxiety on the part of Pigeon and Pratte, JJ., but no head-on solution or stated principle, as evinced at pp. 1161 and 1162 (S.C.R.), thus:
"Thus it will be seen that if a formal declaration of invalidity of an administrative regulation is not considered effective towards all those who are subject thereto, it may mean that all other persons concerned with the application of the regulation, including subordinate administrative agencies, have to keep on giving effect to what has been declared a nullity. It is obviously for the purpose of avoiding this undesirable consequence that, in municipal law, the quashing of a bylaw is held to be effective 'in rem'.
"Should it be possible for an administrative agency to allow a declaration of invalidity to stand in a given case while ignoring it towards other parties, on the chance that in another case it might succeed in having it overruled by a higher Court, if not by a different Judge? Should the situation be viewed in the same way as in the case of declarations of invalidity of statutes which seem to have always been considered only as precedents?
"After anxious consideration, I find it unnecessary to express an opinion on this difficult question because, assuming the respondent is entitled to ask that the judgment  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  be overruled, I find no reason to do so. No argument was submitted to support the validity of s. 30(2) of the Public Service Employment Regulations which had not been considered and dealt with by the trial Judge and the Federal Court of Appeal and no error was shown in the decisions rendered thereupon."
[20]
The important aspect of this jurisprudence resides in the common law's notion of stare decisis, which is imported into all of the public law in and of Canada, being absent only from the private law of Québec. The action at bar sounds in tort, which is a matter of private domestic law, but requires the interpretation of public law statutes as was performed by the Appeal Division in the MacIntyre case, above cited. As mentioned in passing by Pigeon, J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , one ought, in application of his dictum, to accept that the MacIntyre decision stands here as a binding precedent. It is, if not perfectly res judicata so as to bind these parties in an issue estoppel, then at least it is a matter of stare decisis by which the defendant ought to abide in computing the plaintiff's term of imprisonment.
[21]
The defendant's effort in avoidance of a finding of res judicata because of lack of mutuality of parties is irrelevant. The legal consequence of the different facts in this case and that of MacIntyre is of no consequence. The legal consequence of conviction of escaping lawful imprisonment - that is, the correct interpretation of the law - in identical circumstances to which the law is to be uniformly applied, is the gravamen of the issue. That correct interpretation, in such circumstances, now stands decided. In their commendable article, Issue Estoppel and Mutuality of Parties, (1986) 64 C.B.R. 437, the authors Herman and Hayden urge Canadian courts to obviate the necessity of mutuality, as U.S. courts have done. This is not necessarily the case in which to embrace their attractive advice.
[22]
Of course, if the defendant, by her servants, decline to abide by the law as proclaimed by the unappealed and firmly standing decision of the Federal Court of Appeal, then this Court, which is bound by the MacIntyre decision, must accordingly visit upon the defendant the consequences of neglecting or otherwise failing to comply with the law. The practical approach of the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada in the Emms case can hardly be denied. After all it was the same regal defendant who declined to seek leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada from the MacIntyre decision, thereby assuring its finality and authority as a precedent in and for the case at bar.
[23]
Indeed, it would appear that the matter of staying the operation and effect of the MacIntyre judgment was never raised by the defendant, for it is not mentioned in the Court's reasons. A case involving the same solicitor, the Deputy Attorney General of Canada, was decided somewhat later with a different appeal panel, but it evinces a technique which may be useful where serious consequences can be set in motion before an appeal can be taken. Thus, in Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mr. Justice Mahoney, for the majority, is reported as staying execution of the judgment "until the later of the expiration of the time fixed for the respondent to apply for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada, the refusal of such leave if sought, or the rendering of its judgment should leave be granted". Nor does it appear that the respondent in the MacIntyre case sought to have that judgment postdated pursuant to rule 338(2). It is not certain that either sort of application by the respondent there (the defendant here) would have succeeded. However, no record of an attempt either to have a stay or to persuade the Court to postdate its judgment being evident leads to the conclusion that the defendant was content to see the MacIntyre judgment serve as a definitive and authoritative expression of the law unless or until it were reversed on appeal. The defendant here, who was the respondent  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , never sought leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada.
[24]
The computation of terms of imprisonment is rendered difficult because of the complexity and dispersion of the statute law. In the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the file discloses an affidavit sworn by an affiant who described himself as "Chief of Sentence Administration in the Canadian Penitentiary Service". His duty is to supervise the calculation of terms of incarceration imposed on penitentiary inmates in accordance with advice in law received from lawyers in the Department of Justice. While that affiant ought to be an expert, he nevertheless made six possible computations, each resulting in a different release date in the Maxie case. Provisions of law which keep on generating Court decisions cry out for reform.
[25]
However, notwithstanding the difficulty of calculating release dates, the Appeal Division  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  expressed the method of computing the terms of imprisonment to which escapers are sentenced. The judgment of the Appeal Division expressed the law just as authoritatively as if its prescribed interpretation of the statute law had been veritably articulated in the statute law.
[26]
The defendant's counsel avers that in the time constraints of the circumstances the defendant's servants were not negligent, nor wilfully or wantonly oblivious of the unlawfulness of keeping the plaintiff imprisoned for 43 days without any warrant for so doing. The judgment of a superior court, it is trite to emphasize, has full force and effect unless and until stayed or reversed on appeal:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , per Jackett, C.J., at p. 587 F.C. (F.C.A.). The Court's record reveals that the MacIntyre judgment was in fact signed on July 19, 1982. The defendant's servants were notified of its effect in regard to the plaintiff by his solicitor on August 13, 1982. He was not released until September 22, 1982. The defendant's solicitor knows the law. The clear inference of that unexplained prodigious delay is negligence and wilful or wanton disregard of the plaintiff's right to liberty. This court so finds. Pondering the possibility of seeking leave to appeal further to the Supreme Court of Canada does not excuse the unlawful imprisonment. Accordingly, this Court finds that the plaintiff was, and remains, entitled to have the term of his imprisonment calculated in accordance with the judgment in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The Crown's servants were obliged to apply it to the plaintiff. They refused or neglected to do so. Accordingly, the defendant is liable to the plaintiff in damages for having kept him involuntarily and unnecessarily imprisoned in Collins Bay penitentiary during the 43 days from and including August 11, 1982, through September 22, 1982.
[27]
Upon the finding of liability being determined, the considerations of quantum, or perhaps distinct quanta, of damages, and whether exemplary or punitive damages are to be awarded, must now be addressed.
QUANTA OF DAMAGES
GENERAL DAMAGES
[28]
The subject of general damages presents itself at once, since the plaintiff neither claimed nor proved any specific damages.
[29]
As noted by Linden, Canadian Tort Law (3rd Ed., 1982, Butterworths, Toronto), at pp. 44 and 45, "because this tort [unlawful imprisonment] is a descendant of the trespass action, no actual loss is required as a prerequisite of recovery".
[30]
In addition to the trespass of unlawful imprisonment and concurrently blended with it, there was the tort of negligence on the part of the defendant's servants. The two torts are so intertwined here as to be almost indistinguishable except to note that among the distinct ingredients of the latter tort is the element of damage having resulted from the breach of duty. It is possible to argue that the deprivation of the plaintiff's liberty deprived him of monetary returns at least the equivalent of the minimum wage during the days in prison after he ought to have been released. The evidence of the plaintiff's past performances in securing legitimately gainful employment supports that argument. In view of the other evidence of the plaintiff's squandering of his liberty both before and after his unlawful imprisonment, that argument presents only scant possibilities of quantifying the plaintiff's true damages. However, for purposes of assessing a quantum of damages, the court considers that the tort of negligence has been made out at a notionally real, but negligible quantum of damages.
[31]
It must be found on the plaintiff's behalf that, through his solicitor, he did everything which could be reasonably exacted, in order to minimize the damages. It is now known that application of the law as enunciated in the MacIntyre decision rendered on July 19, 1982, produced a release date for the plaintiff of August 10, 1982. Counsel announced their agreement on that date only at the opening of the trial. (The need for a clear and straightforward, consolidated method of computing terms of imprisonment enacted in just one statute, perhaps with tables on graphs, if needed, is surely illustrated in the attempts to fix an agreed date for release in this litigation.) In any event, the plaintiff's solicitor did notify the sentence administrator at Collins Bay Penitentiary on August 13, 1982, that the plaintiff's term of incarceration was affected by the MacIntyre decision and that, in his solicitor's opinion, the plaintiff ought to have been released forthwith. That is admitted by paragraph 4 of the statement of defence amended nunc pro tunc on the agreement of counsel at the trial. (Transcript: p. 4.)
[32]
A further attempt at mitigation was undertaken and is revealed by the pleadings. In paragraph 5 of the statement of defence the defendant admits paragraph 17 of the statement of claim, which runs thus:
"By letter, dated August 18th, 1982, the Solicitor-General of Canada, a servant of the defendant, was notified personally of the plaintiff's situation. By a letter dated September 1st, 1982, the Solicitor-General of Canada personally acknowledged receipt of the said letter."
[33]
Because the effect of the MacIntyre decision had been known, or ought to have been known, and appreciated, by the defendant's solicitor and counsel during the 3-week period following July 19, 1982, the defendant must bear compensatory responsibility from and after August 10, 1982, even although the sentence administrator was formally notified only three days later.
[34]
Had the Appeal Division's judgment become effective on or after the correct release date, the Court would have allowed the defendant a reasonable time of a few days either after the date of the judgment, or after the date of notice to the defendant in mitigation of damages, but, in effect, no such adjudication needs to be effected in this case. However, since the judgment took effect long before the plaintiff's correct release date, it is reasonable to assess damages for the wrong done to the plaintiff from and after midnight on August 10, 1982, up to which time the plaintiff could have been lawfully imprisoned, but not thereafter.
[35]
The plaintiff's counsel urges that an apt method of reckoning the quantum of general damages would be per diem compensation. That is a reasonable method in this case.
[36]
Cases in which compensatory general damages have been awarded for imprisonment of one day or a very much shorter period are these, which were cited for the plaintiff:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 345 (Nfld. S.C.); and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. D.C.).
In the Hayward case, exemplary damages were awarded. In the Carpenter case damages were separately assessed under two heads, one being false arrest and false imprisonment and the other being malicious prosecution.
[37]
Cases in which damages were assessed for allegedly false imprisonment of a few separated days, and for a term of imprisonment of 30 days, were these which were also cited by counsel for the plaintiff:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Alta. S.C.); and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.).
[38]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  incidents, and exemplary damages for the latter two. (Counsel did not disclose to the Court the utter reversal of liability found by the trial judge on the part of a unanimous panel of the Alberta Court of Appeal, [1980] 4 W.W.R. 33; 21 A.R. 372, nor the refusal of leave on the part of the Supreme Court of Canada, [1980] 1 S.C.R. xiii; 25 A.R. 274).
[39]
Lieberman, J.A., in wholly allowing Nory's appeal in regard to liability, wrote (at p. 66, W.W.R.):
"In view of the conclusions at which I have arrived, it is unnecessary for me to deal with the question of damages either as posed by the appeal or by the cross-appeal."
Because the trial judge in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and outrageous conduct regarding the plaintiff, and his totally unjustified disregard for the liberty of the plaintiff and the sanctity of his person", but the appeal judges unanimously held the trial judge's conclusions totally wrong and that the defendant's conduct was justified, one must regard the trial judge's awards in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  damages alone of $10,000 awarded by the trial judge for the third incident in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  expressed no more than that in effecting that assessment in the Hejduk case.
[41]
The cited cases are of interest, of course, but in none are there analogous circumstances or a similar situation with those of Norman Lawrence LeBar this plaintiff or his lifestyle. Liberty is sweet. Some folks assert that liberty is essential for human fulfilment and happiness. In Canada liberty is highly prized and is, accordingly, a conditional right of everyone, which right is conditionally protected by the Constitution. The liberty to come and go, to achieve one's best position and status in society, to be as useful a member of thereof as one can, to pursue happiness, and ultimately, so long as one does not subordinate the rights of others or generally the rights of their legitimate collectivity, the freedom to be left unmolested by governmental authorities, are the hallmarks of a civilized, if not also a free and democratic, society. Liberty, however, is a conditional right. One can forfeit it by personal misconduct, or waive it by the free, informed consent of oneself, or even that of the majority of Canadians in times of great and dangerous emergency. In the above cited jurisprudence all of the plaintiffs appeared to be individuals who, all their lives, prized, cherished and respected their own liberty. All were, in that regard, very differently situated from the plaintiff herein.
[42]
How has this plaintiff valued and cherished his own liberty all his life? Since he invokes the power of the Court to compensate him for a 43-day deprivation of his liberty, he is to be compensated according to the value of that, and only that, of which he has been deprived. Now, because liberty is a constitutionally protected value, to which everyone is conditionally entitled, a Canadian court would always be reluctant to assess liberty's monetary compensation at naught in any individual case. A desparate, depraved and determined terrorist, a career contract-killer, and any preditory person who dedicates his life and talents to preying on society by habitually fraudulent or violent misconduct, would however be prime candidates to have the value of their liberty - to themselves and to society - assessed at zero. There is, of course, the eternal hope of rehabilitation, but it does not enter into the calculus of compensation for past squandering of one's own liberty.
[43]
It must be acknowledged that there is the possibility, if not the likelihood, of the plaintiff's upbringing having been morally deficient or even savagely brutal, but, if so, he made no mention of that in his pleadings or oral testimony. One cannot be blamed for an inadequate moral formation or a dismal deformation inflicted in childhood. However, enjoyment of the right to liberty exacts from everyone the prudent effort to preserve it, by not jeopardizing it through criminal activities.
[44]
The plaintiff was first incarcerated in Guelph, Ontario, in 1942, when he was about fifteen or sixteen years of age, for a term of two years or less. He had been previously employed as a stock-chaser for parts in a factory which manufactured tanks during the war years. Upon release he again achieved legitimately gainful employment with Colonial Dress Company in Guelph, for about eighteen months. He joined the army, remained in Canada and was discharged upon the end of hostilities in 1945. After he left the army, in Guelph, he was convicted for "a car incident" as he put it and again lost his liberty. In 1949 he was convicted for car theft, he seems to recall, and sentenced to a term of three years in Kingston Penitentiary from which he was released in 1952. After holding a job with Humber Cleaners in Toronto for about four months he lost his liberty again, having been sentenced to Burwash provincial reformatory for a 6-month term upon conviction for taking a car without its owner's consent. He worked in Guelph for a dry-cleaning firm and for a Toronto firm making radar components, but the plaintiff says he was released from that job because of his criminal record. The sequence of events, related by the plaintiff on cross-examination, (transcript: pp. 17 to 28) is somewhat blurred, no doubt because of lapses of the plaintiff's memory and his distaste for relating it all in public.
[45]
After being released from his job in the radar factory, the plaintiff found further employment under a pseudonym in the United States, managing two dry cleaning shops in Pittsburgh. He was living in the U.S.A. for about two years. In 1962, in Hamilton, Ontario, the plaintiff was convicted of two offences of armed robbery and was sentenced to concurrent terms of 10 and 14 years imprisonment respectively. He was lodged in the penitentiaries in Kingston, Millhaven, Joyceville and Collins Bay, from which he escaped, and returned to the U.S.A. staying there about five years. The plaintiff again found employment, again under a pseudonym, but was convicted in the U.S.A. of possession of stolen goods, a cheque writing machine and a pistol, for which offence he was sentenced to a term of five years. Upon release from the U.S. prison the plaintiff was returned to Toronto where he was taken into custody by the Ontario Provincial Police to face the charge of escape. He was returned to Collins Bay, where he remained until he was released on that significant 22nd day of September, 1982. He was under sentence of imprisonment from 1962 until 1982.
[46]
Even after he instituted this action, the plaintiff again squandered his liberty when in March, 1983, he was convicted, at Toronto, of breaking and entry and sentenced to a term of two years in prison. In August, 1983, while in custody for revocation of mandatory supervision, the plaintiff suffered a cardiac crisis and received appropriate medical treatment and medication which he must continue to take. It is provided free of charge to him. He also suffers from hernia which has been surgically treated. He obtained a divorce in 1973. The plaintiff, at the time of the trial, said he resides with his sister in Toronto. He said he was then unemployed but received welfare benefits of "about $50 a month".
[47]
The above recitation indicates why the damages awarded in the cases cited for the plaintiff are greater than he can expect to recover here. Upon becoming sui juris, if one does not exercise that restraint which nourishes personal liberty but continually victimizes others by means of criminal depredations, one is responsible for the devaluation of one's own liberty. Such a person cannot reasonably require the people and government of Canada to pay him a princely price for the liberty which he himself has constantly under-valued and squandered. The plaintiff is a virtually life-long tax consumer who seeks to impose the price of his 43 days of loss of his cheap liberty on the taxpayers of Canada. Indeed, if all monetary values were counterpoised as sums, it is almost certain that the plaintiff would owe the people of Canada, whom he has cheated and robbed, more for food and lodging, social burden and criminal misconduct than he could ever pay. In that regard, it may be wondered why the defendant did not assert a set-off herein.
[48]
How, then, is the plaintiff to be compensated for his self-devalued, squandered liberty? His behavioural record and his subsequent misconduct indicate the probability that, left at large to his own devices on August 10, 1982, the plaintiff could well have incurred negative gain during the following 43 days. Yet, he would (but for how long?) have been able to draw the sweet air of liberty and, arguably, might have been able to find legitimate employment. That counts for something, but in the plaintiff's particular case, not much. In 1982 he was being paid a wage of $35 per week in Collins Bay. If that were his measure of fixed compensation - $5 per day - his damages would be assessed at $215 for the 43 days. But even to the Norman LeBars of this world loss of liberty is worth more than that. Doubling that sum to $10, and realizing that if he had been so paid over the last 20 years, 1962 to 1982, when he was incarcerated (generously overlooking his periods of being unlawfully at large, when self-help was his necessity), it is evident that he could have emerged from prison in 1982 with ($ 10 x 365 days x 20) $73,000, plus interest if he had frugally saved it all. The taxpayers of Canada cannot reasonably be expected to pay more than $10 per day in general damages for the liberty which Mr. LeBar himself has so apparently despised both before and after August 10, 1982. The Court therefore awards the plaintiff $430 in general damages for his unlawful imprisonment between midnight of August 10, 1982, and whatever time he was released on September 22, 1982.
EXEMPLARY DAMAGES
[49]
Counsel for the defendant pleaded in argument that there was at the relevant time no computer whereby the defendant's servants could immediately identify the "20 or so" prison inmates (transcript: pp. 73 & 74) out of a total inmate population of "13,000 people incarcerated in some seven provinces" (transcript: p. 89) who were in the same plight as the plaintiff's. As counsel rightly noted, there is no evidence before the Court about the necessity of effecting a manual search of inmate records, but even so, one may in law ask, "so, what?". Complex as the legislative provisions are, the judgment in the MacIntyre case did not further complicate computation of terms of imprisonment. The statutory provisions remain as complex as before.
[50]
It must be remembered that, through his solicitor and counsel the plaintiff attempted appropriately to mitigate damages by reasonably timely notification of the defendant's proper servants, and even the Minister, to the effect that he ought to be released on the basis of a proper method of calculation declared by the Federal Court of Appeal. If the prison authorities had set a sentence administrator immediately to the task of computing and verifying the plaintiff's release date, and if he had thereupon been released, the Court would not now be considering exemplary damages. No one would begrudge the defendant's officials taking several hours, even a day, after notification, to calculate the plaintiff's correct date of release.
[51]
To ignore the Court's decision rendered the previous July 19 until September 22, 1982, was to evade the duty which it lawfully imposed for a period of 65 days. To ignore the solicitor's notification of the effect of the Court's decision from August 13 to September 22 was to purport to repudiate both the decision and the duty it imposed for a period of 40 days. That is high-handed and arbitrary detention of the plaintff. The Court's interpretation of the pertinent law, as already noted, became operative and authoritative upon its judgment having been rendered.
[52]
Exemplary damages are those which are also called "punitive", "aggravated", "retributory" and according to Linden op. cit. p. 51) even "vindictive" and "penal". Such a varied, but single-minded and strong nonmenclature certainly conveys the judicial intention to denounce the defendant's misconduct. Although keeping the plaintiff unlawfully for 43 days after his 20 years of imprisonment, excepting periods of his being unlawfully at large, could hardly inflict any additional humiliation or loss of reputation upon him, it did constitute oppressive, arbitrary and fundamentally unconstitutional conduct by servants of the defendant. In this country where liberty is a constitutionally, albeit conditionally, protected individual right and societal value, it is not tolerable to treat even this plaintiff's self-cheapened liberty, or anyone else's precious liberty, which insouciant disregard.
[53]
In all the circumstances here, however, there is one pejorative quality of the defendant's servants' misconduct which was not proved on the part of anyone in particular and which cannot be inferred, and that is malice. Their negligence and their oppressive and wilful or wanton disregard of the plaintiff's right to be released were amply abusive to support the award of exemplary damages. Despite reasonably timely notification, they persisted in deliberately detaining him in prison until the day before his motion for a mandatory injunction was returnable in this Court in September, 1982. Unjustified by any explanation, their misconduct is legally unjustifiable.
[54]
Here in the matter of exemplary damages, the taxpayers again will have to pay but now a more substantial assessment for the misconduct of the defendant's servants. This task of assessment is not an exact science. The assessment of exemplary damages must be an adequate disapproval of those servants' reprehensible misconduct in ignoring the law whose authoritative interpretation was clearly signalled to them, and in oppressively, abusively and deliberately disregarding the plaintiff's right to regain his conditional liberty and liberation from unlawful imprisonment. In light of the jurisprudence, which, unfortunately for the assessor of damages, does not present any exactly, or even nearly, similar situation, the Court awards the plaintiff the sum of $10,000 exemplary damages.
[55]
The plaintiff is also entitled to his taxable costs of this action.
CONCLUSION
[56]
In summation: the plaintiff will have the judicial declaration which he seeks, that he is entitled to have the term of imprisonment to which he was sentenced calculated in accordance with the Federal Court of Appeal's decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the defendant; and the plaintiff is to be paid exemplary damages in the amount of $10,000 by the defendant; together with his taxable costs of this action.
Judgment for plaintiff.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]