[1]
Rothstein, J.
[orally]: This is a judicial review of a January 21, 1994 decision of the Public Service Commission Appeal Board which found that the selection of the applicant to perform the duties of Manager, International Operations, Department of National Health and Welfare, was not made in accordance with the merit principle.
[2]
The Department of National Health and Welfare conducted a closed competition, which is defined in s. 2(1) of the
Public Service Employment Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-33, as amended ("
Act
"), as follows:
"2(1) In this Act,
'closed competition' means a competition that is open only to persons employed in the Public Service;"
The competition was for appointments as Manager, International Operations. There were five positions to be filled. Twenty-two persons applied. Nine were screened out at the earliest stage. The next step was a written test for knowledge requirements. A Selection Board had been appointed to deal with the written examination (and other aspects of the selection). Six candidates, including the applicant, passed the test. The pass mark was 55 out of 90. The applicant scored 55.
[3]
The respondent received only 19 out of 90. However, she felt that the entire process was conducted in an unfair manner and not in accordance with the merit principle. Section 10 of the
Act
, provides in part:
"10(1) Appointments to or from within the Public Service shall be based on selection according to merit... ."
The respondent says that, at random, she asked if she could see the examinations of the applicant and one other candidate. The other candidate's examination was written in French and the applicant was not able to read and understand it. She therefore contented herself with reviewing the applicant's examination and discovered a number of questions that, in her opinion, had been marked incorrectly.
[4]
The respondent appealed to the Public Service Commission Appeal Board pursuant to s. 21(1) of the
Act
, which provides:
"21(1) Where a person is appointed or is about to be appointed under this Act and the selection of the person for appointment was made from within the Public Service, every unsuccessful candidate, in the case of selection by closed competition, or, in the case of selection without competition, every person whose opportunity for advancement, in the opinion of the Commission, has been prejudicially affected, may, within such period as the Commission prescribes, appeal against the appointment to a board established by the Commission to conduct an inquiry at which the person appealing and the deputy head concerned, or their representatives, shall be given an opportunity to be heard."
The Appeal Board considered the appeal, which was taken against all the selections made for appointment in the closed competition. Before the Appeal Board, the respondent concentrated on the improper marking of the applicant's examination. The Appeal Board concluded that the award of marks to the applicant in all questions but one was not unreasonable. With respect to question 4, the Appeal Board stated at pages 6 and 7 of its decision:
"However I have concluded that the Selection Board erred in awarding Mr. Scarizzi full marks for his answer to question 4. I cannot agree with the Selection Board chairperson that Mr. Scarizzi demonstrated that he understood the legislation by his answer 'overlapping contributions with another country'. As Mr. Thivierge explained, the
Old Age Security Act
is a residence-based security scheme, not a contributory scheme. Therefore contributions in another country could not overlap with contributions to the Old Age Security scheme. Because of this, the Board then assumed that the candidate must be referring to periods of residence in Canada that were coinciding with periods when contributions were made in another country. However that was not the answer given by the candidate. His answer was simply 'overlapping contributions with another country'. On this basis I conclude that the Selection Board's award of full marks for Mr. Scarizzi's answer was clearly unreasonable. At most the Board should have awarded him two marks, thus bringing his total marks for the knowledge qualification to 53. Since the minimum required was 55 marks, he should not have been found to be qualified in this area."
The Appeal Board concluded that the appeal against the appointment of the applicant should be allowed, but dismissed the appeal against the other candidates who had been selected.
[5]
The jurisdiction of an Appeal Board to interfere with the decision of a Selection Board has been set out in a number of authorities. See for example,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). At page 804  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of the latter decision Heald, J., stated:
"The Appeal Board has a right and duty to satisfy itself that the opinion required by subparagraph 5(c)(i) of the
Regulations
, supra, was in fact formed but it cannot review the reasonableness of the opinion so long as there was some basis for it. The opinion formed would have to be so unreasonable that no reasonable person could form that opinion. The Appeal Board is not entitled to substitute its opinion for that of the Department exercising the delegated authority to form that opinion. The question whether there has been the required opinion formed is relevant to the application of the merit principle, but as to the reasonableness of such opinion, an Appeal Board should be bound by the same limits as a court exercising judicial review or sitting on a statutory appeal."
[6]
It is clear that one of the functions of the Appeal Board is to ensure, as far as possible, that Selection Boards adhere to the merit principle in selecting candidates for positions from within the Public Service in accordance with s. 10 of the
Act
. However, it is not empowered to substitute its opinion with respect to a candidate's assessment or examination for that of the Selection Board. Only if a Selection Board forms an opinion that no reasonable person could form, may an Appeal Board interfere with the decision of the Selection Board.
[7]
The Appeal Board had before it the evidence of André Thivierge, Director, International Operations at the Department of National Health & Welfare, who was a member of the Selection Board. That evidence, which the Appeal Board reproduced at page 4 of its decision, sets forth question 4, the applicant's answer, and the Selection Board's explanation of why it awarded the applicant full marks for his answer:
"The question states 'that certain periods in Canada will
not
be considered periods of residence for purposes of the
Old Age Security Act
. What are these "certain periods"?'
"'Certain periods', of course, refers to periods of residence. The candidate responded that these certain periods are periods 'overlapping contributions with another country'. In other words, these are periods of residence which overlap or coincide with periods of contributions to the social security scheme of the other country.
"The expected response is: periods in Canada during which an individual is subject to the legislation of the other country. 'Subject to the legislation' is equivalent to 'making contributions'. The candidate's response is entirely correct."
[8]
The Appeal Board considered Mr. Thivierge's evidence but, having regard to the literal words of the applicant's answer, "overlapping contributions with another country", concluded that it was clearly unreasonable to award the applicant a full four marks for the answer. At most, it thought he should have been awarded two out of four marks. Having been awarded two out of four marks, he would not have met the minimum pass mark of 55 marks.
[9]
In my respectful opinion, the Appeal Board, in this case, substituted its opinion as to the appropriateness of the applicant's answer for that of the Selection Board and, in so doing, erred in law. I come to this conclusion for two reasons.
[10]
First, the fact that the Appeal Board would have awarded, at most, two marks, suggests that there is room for judgment with respect to the answer given by the applicant. This is not a case in which marks were given when no answer was recorded or where, objectively, it could have been determined that the answer for which the marks were given was wrong. In these examples, the unreasonableness standard might well be met. But in the case at bar, the willingness of the Appeal Board to award part marks is evidence, in my view, that the rightness or wrongness of the applicant's answer to question 4 was a matter of opinion. That opinion is exclusively that of the Selection Board.
[11]
Second, Mr. Thivierge's evidence before the Appeal Board explains why the Selection Board was of the opinion that the applicant's answer was entirely correct. This is not a case in which an Appeal Board is left to speculate or draw its own conclusion. It has been given an explanation for the award of a full four marks by the Selection Board which, while based on some assumptions, is not incoherent or illogical.
[12]
The respondent was of the view that the applicant's answer, "overlapping contributions with another country", suggested that he incorrectly believed that Old Age Security in Canada was a contributory scheme and that therefore his answer wrongly implied that contributions in Canada to Old Age Security overlapped with contributions to a contributory scheme in a foreign country. While I cannot rule out this interpretation of the applicant's answer, neither can I say it is the only possible meaning to be given to the answer. The Selection Board was prepared to interpret the applicant's answer as "periods during which an individual is in Canada which overlapped or coincided with periods of contributions to the social security scheme of another country" which it considered to be sufficiently close to the expected response to entitle the applicant to full marks. This is not an approach which is clearly wrong or that no reasonable person could adopt.
[13]
Perhaps it could be said that the Selection Board was generous in its award of full marks to the applicant for his answer to this question. Even if this is true, and the Appeal Board seems to have been of the opinion that it was, I think an Appeal Board must be cautious, and must resist, except in only the most straightforward case, remarking a few answers on the examination of one candidate. The role of the Appeal Board is not to ensure that examinations have been marked properly. It is to ensure that a Selection Board has adhered to the merit principle in the process it adopts. As applicant's counsel has pointed out, remarking a few answers on the examination of one candidate can give rise to serious problems of inconsistency, both within that candidate's examination, and as between candidates' examinations. It may well be that such a selective approach would result more in a departure from the merit principle than in adherence to it.
[14]
For proper adherence to the merit principle, it might be necessary for an Appeal Board to remark all the examinations of all the candidates. In view of the obvious impracticality of such an approach in most cases, an Appeal Board should restrict itself to interfering with a decision of a Selection Board only where the Selection Board's decision was obviously unreasonable. In making this observation I do not rule out an Appeal Board looking at only one examination if the Selection Board's error, with respect to that examination, is obvious. If marks have not been added correctly or if an objective answer is clearly incorrect, it may be appropriate to consider one examination only. But the circumstances must be such that the awarding of marks by the Selection Board is clearly unreasonable in that case.
[15]
The judicial review is allowed, the decision of the Appeal Board is quashed and the decision of the Selection Board is restored.
[16]
The applicant seeks costs from the respondent. Applicant's counsel submits that the applicant has been victimized in having been singled out in the Appeal Board decision and having been forced to incur significant legal costs in this judicial review. Party and party fees and disbursements that could be awarded were indicated to be in the range of $4,000. Counsel for the applicant says that the respondent was put on notice that the applicant would seek costs in these proceedings.
[17]
I have considerable sympathy for the applicant and appreciate that he has incurred legal costs to obtain the remedy to which he believes he is entitled. The respondent says that she only took the steps which the law provides and that she should not be penalized for doing so.
[18]
Rule 1618 of the
Federal Court Rules
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 663, as amended, requires that in a judicial review, special circumstances be demonstrated to justify an award of costs. I am satisfied that there are special circumstances here. Whether by deliberate act or otherwise, the applicant was singled out from all other successful candidates. I do not think it would be fair that he should have to bear all his legal costs when he did nothing to cause these proceedings in the first place. I am mindful of the fact that the respondent has said that her resources are limited. For this reason, I shall award costs in the sum of $1,500 although I think a higher figure might well be justified.
[19]
Public servants should be aware that the Appeal Board process is intended to ensure that the merit principle is adhered to in the selection for positions from within the Public Service
. The Appeal Board may only interfere with the findings of a Selection Board when the Selection Board's findings are obviously unreasonable. The Appeal Board process is not a means for one disgruntled employee to cause difficulty for other employees. An award of costs in a case such as this in the future may well be much higher.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/blk
[End of document]