[1]
Wetston, J.
: This is a motion by the defendant to strike out the plaintiff's statement of claim pursuant to rule 419(a) of the
Federal Court Rules
. The plaintiff has also brought a motion for abuse of process and disclosure of documents.
[2]
The plaintiff, a former member of the Canadian Forces, has alleged in her statement of claim that she is entitled to certain benefits due to her employment with the military as a class "c" reservist. She alleges that the failure of the military to pay those benefits amounts to a breach of contract. In addition, the plaintiff claims that the failure of the military to fulfil the alleged terms of employment gives rise to a cause of action in tort as well as breaches her rights under the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
(the "
Charter
").
[3]
The defendant submits that the plaintiff's statement of claim discloses no reasonable cause of action. The defendant contends that members of the Canadian Forces do not have a contractual relationship with the Crown. The Crown further submits that, moreover, an extensive statutory grievance procedure is provided and the plaintiff was required to fully avail herself of that prior to seeking the assistance of the court.
[4]
The issue before the court on the cross-motion is whether the defendant's motion to strike is an abuse of process. The plaintiff submits that the length of time it took to bring the motion to strike amounts to unacceptable delay.
[5]
On a motion to strike the court must consider whether, assuming that the facts alleged in the Statement of Claim are true, a cause of action lies. A pleading may be struck where it is plain and obvious that the pleading discloses no reasonable cause of action and where the case is beyond doubt
Inuit Tapirisat of Canada and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; rule 419(a)).
[6]
The plaintiff's statement of claim alleges breach of contract, tort and
Charter
violations. The defendant submits that a member of the military does not enjoy a contractual relationship with the Crown and cannot, therefore, maintain a civil action for breach of contract. The plaintiff submits that the action is not one for wrongful dismissal, but rather the failure of the Crown to pay certain benefits pursuant to a signed contract and, therefore, the principles cited by the applicant do not apply in this case.
[7]
The principle was first established in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), that members of the military serve at the pleasure of the Queen and do not, therefore, have a contractual relationship with the Crown. Canadian courts have subsequently adopted this principle and held that: "Military service is an enrolment of service to one's country, not a contract of, or for, services" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.)). These authorities clearly establish, therefore, that a member of the Canadian Forces has no contractual relationship with the Crown.
[8]
The
National Defence Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-5, s. 29, provides for a redress of grievance procedure wherein members of the military may have any issue adjudicated which deals with "personal oppression, injustice or other ill-treatment" or "any other cause for grievance". This court has held that where such an expansive resolution mechanism exists the complainant is required to pursue a remedy through this statutory mechanism before turning to the civil courts for relief (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
[9]
In my opinion, it is plain and obvious that the plaintiff has no contractual relationship with the Crown and that, while plaintiff's counsel characterizes the breach as being one that relates to benefits agreed to under certain terms and conditions, I do not accept that this means that there is a post-employment contractual relationship with the Crown. As a reservist she was a member of the military and, therefore, the right to benefits arises from her position in the military. The action in tort, while not paramount, arises out of the same facts with regard to the action in contract. However, the plaintiff does have access to the grievance procedure and is required to avail herself of that procedure. The plaintiff argued that s. 29 does not oust the jurisdiction of the civil courts to entertain this action. Plaintiff's counsel relied on a number of cases, for example,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 321; 24 O.R.(3d) 358. In my opinion, these cases are clearly distinguishable. The plaintiff must fully utilize the s. 29 grievance procedure. If unsatisfied, the plaintiff's recourse is by way of judicial review pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
.
[10]
The plaintiff's statement of claim also alleges that the actions of the defendant amount to discrimination contrary to s. 15 of the
Charter
. In order to succeed in a claim for discrimination under the
Charter
it must be proven that the complainant, due to a distinction created by an impugned law, has been subject to a distinction between themselves and others based on irrelevant personal characteristics. Only those persons who belong to an enumerated or analogous group, as identified in s. 15, and can establish that one of their four basic equality rights have been denied, may qualify for the protections of s. 15 (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1989] 2 W.W.R. 289; 56 D.L.R.(4th) 1; 34 B.C.L.R.(2d) 273; 36 C.R.R. 193; 25 C.C.E.L. 255;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 81). The group to which the plaintiff belongs, members of the military reserve who enroll outside of the country, are clearly not an enumerated group under the
Charter
. Moreover, it is plain and obvious that the alleged group, in this case, does not constitute a "discrete and insular minority" deserving of the protection of s. 15(1) of the
Charter
.
[11]
In regards to the cross-motion, I am not satisfied that the defendant's delay in bringing the motion to strike amounts to an abuse of process. While two years lapsed from the initiation of the action to the filing of this motion, I am not satisfied that the delay, in any way, prejudiced the plaintiff.
[12]
For the reasons contained herein, the motion shall be granted and the statement of claim struck. The cross-motion shall be dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
Motion allowed;
cross-motion denied.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sg
[End of document]