[1]
MacKay, J.
: The applicant seeks judicial review of, and an order setting aside the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division, dated December 3, 1993, that the applicant is not a Convention refugee within s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
.
[2]
The case raises issues concerning the assessment of a refugee claim based on fear of persecution on grounds of membership in a social group, said to be comprised of women abused by their former spouses who profess fear of persecution at the hands of a former spouse if returned to the country from which the claimant hails. It also raises questions concerning the significance of the Guidelines issued by the Chairperson pursuant to s. 65(3) of the
Immigration Act
, concerning Women Refugee Claimants Fearing Gender-Related Persecution, issued by the Immigration and Refugee Board, dated March 9, 1993, (hereinafter "the Guidelines").
[3]
Important as those issues are, and while I here find shortcomings in the decision of the tribunal I dismiss this application for judicial review because ultimately the conclusion of the tribunal, that protection of the applicant can be expected from authorities in Grenada, cannot be said to be unreasonable on the evidence before the tribunal.
[4]
The applicant is a citizen of Grenada, born in 1963. She there met her husband in 1985 and they were married in 1986. She claims that he beat and sexually abused her even before their marriage, that the abuse and beatings, with threats of death, continued thereafter. On one occasion in 1987 she reported to police an incident when her husband threatened her with a machete, and on another occasion when her father reported an incident to police, the police did nothing but advised her to go home and make up with her husband. Following a beating in 1988, she determined to come to Canada where she had a cousin. She arrived as a visitor in March 1988, and claimed status as a Convention refugee in June 1988.
[5]
The applicant got a divorce in Ontario in 1992, apparently with agreement of her husband, to sign papers requiring his signature, on condition there be payment to him of $500. She did not send any such payment to him and he is reported to her by others as being very angry, unwilling to accept the divorce and threatening harm to her in Canada, or if she should ever return to Grenada. On one occasion soon after her arrival in this country he did come to Canada looking for her but he did not manage to find her, and he returned to Grenada. He has telephoned since her divorce and on the only occasion she has talked to him by telephone he threatened harm to her.
[6]
Her claim to refugee status was based upon her fear of persecution, at the hands of her ex-husband, on grounds of her membership in a social group, essentially a group comprised of women who were victims of domestic abuse and violence who could not obtain protection from the state. Submissions of her counsel to the tribunal referred to the Guidelines, as did the RHO in response.
[7]
In regard to her claim to membership in a particular social group the tribunal, deciding the matter after the decision of the Supreme Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 1, said, in part:
"... The claim, on the facts, does not fit with any of the groups established in jurisprudence as constituting a particular social group within the ambit of the definition. The claimant does not appear to fit within any of those groups. ... The Supreme Court of Canada recently set out the three categories of persons who may fall within the grounds of membership in a particular social group. The claimant quite obviously does not fit into any of these categories."
Further, the tribunal's conclusion is set out thus:
"The facts are that the claimant fears physical attacks by her ex-husband should she return to Grenada. This is not a situation of spousal abuse. This is a situation where the claimant fears criminal attacks by a former spouse. The fear is of a criminal action and is not related in any way to the definition of a Convention refugee. Counsel for the claimant made the submission that the claimant's husband may not respect the divorce and may still consider the claimant to be his property. Surely the perceptions or beliefs of the perpetrator cannot be determinative of the issue, but rather the nature of his actions and whether state protection is available. Grenada is a functioning democracy with a police force and criminal sanctions for just the type of abuse feared by the claimant. The claimant stands on the same footing as any other citizen of Grenada with respect to seeking police protection from her former spouse. Considering the length of time that the claimant has been out of Grenada and the fact that she is fearful of a person with whom she has no relationship, the claim is extraordinarily weak on the merits. The claimant has not proved a well-founded fear of persecution."
[8]
The applicant contends that the tribunal erred in law in its interpretation of "membership in a particular social group" and further in the circumstances of this case it erred by not explicitly relating the Guidelines to the applicant's claim and in its assessment that Grenada is a functioning democracy with a police force and criminal sanctions for just the type of abuse feared by the claimant.
[9]
I am persuaded in light of decisions of the Court of Appeal in
Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 81, and the Supreme Court in
Ward
that the tribunal in this case did not properly assess whether there was merit to the applicant's claim to membership in a particular social group in terms of the principles set out by Mr. Justice La Forest in
Ward
. Rather its conclusion was based on an absence of prior judicial determination of the question in relation to similar facts. I do not imply that I endorse the applicant's claim to membership in a particular social group for I am also persuaded by the respondent that in the application of the principles he outlined, La Forest, J., makes clear in
Ward
that it is not an apt criteria to define a social group solely by reason of the common victimization of members of the group.
[10]
I am further persuaded that in the circumstances of this case the tribunal erred in its failure to explicitly assess the applicant's claim in relation to the Guidelines, because here submissions of counsel made specific reference to those in relation to the applicant's claim. The Guidelines are not law, but they are authorized under s. 65(3) of the
Act
. They are not binding but they are intended to be considered by members of the tribunal in appropriate cases. In a memorandum accompanying their circulation, the Chairperson of the I.R.B. advised, inter alia, that while they are not to be considered binding
"Refugee ... Division Members are expected to follow the Guidelines unless there are compelling or exceptional reasons for adopting a different analysis.
"Individuals have a right to expect the Guidelines will be followed unless compelling or exceptional reasons exist for departure from them."
[11]
Neither the terms of the Guidelines nor of the Chairperson's memorandum of advice create the basis for the court to determine that in this case the tribunal erred by not explicitly referring to the Guidelines. The basis of my conclusion is the nature of the applicant's claim and the reference by counsel at the hearing to the use of the Guidelines in assessing the claim. In fairness the claim could not be assessed without reference to the Guidelines. I do not suggest what the outcome of that assessment might be but in the circumstances in which this claim was made and presented, it was not sufficient for the tribunal to simply set out in its conclusion, "This is not a situation of spousal abuse. This is a situation where the claimant fears criminal attacks by a former spouse".
[12]
I turn to the final issue here raised, the expectations of protection from authorities in Grenada if the applicant were to return. Her experience during the course of her marriage in the mid 1980's may give her little reason to rely on Grenadian authorities. Nevertheless, there was documentary evidence indicating increasing concern and developmental measures to protect women who are victims of spousal or family abuse, or otherwise victimized by violence contrary to the law.
[13]
The circumstances in Grenada as elsewhere may well need improvement but the conclusion of the tribunal cannot be said to be unreasonable, that there is, in Grenada, "a police force and criminal sanctions for just the type of abuse feared by the claimant. The claimant stands on the same footing as any other citizen of Grenada with respect to seeking police protection from her former spouse".
[14]
The only evidence that might have led the tribunal to conclude that the authorities could not or would not provide protection to the applicant was her testimony concerning two incidents in 1987-88 when reports of her then husband's violence to her brought no reaction, and her testimony that from comments of others, attitudes and practices remained unchanged. On the other hand there was documentary evidence concerning the efforts of government in Grenada to provide protection for victims of violence, particularly women. I am not persuaded that the tribunal's conclusion, that state protection is available, was without support on the evidence before it. Indeed, it is assumed in law that state protection is available in the absence of clear evidence that the state cannot or will not provide it. Where that protection is available, from causes of fear of persecution because of a Convention reason, there can be no well-founded basis, no objective basis for that fear.
[15]
For these reasons an order goes dismissing this application for judicial review.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/blk
[End of document]