[1]
Wetston, J.
: This is an application for judicial review to set aside a decision of the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "Appeal Division"), dated February 7, 1995, wherein Chaman Jit Sharma's appeal from the refusal to approve the sponsored application for landing of Vaneet Sharma, his "adopted" son, was allowed.
[2]
The respondent, a permanent resident, was landed in Canada on February 12, 1986. He married his wife, Rishma Sharma, on April 2, 1988, in British Columbia. Following two unfortunate miscarriages, one in 1988 and one in December 1989, the respondent and his wife visited the respondent's brother and his family in India. Concerned that they may not be able to have children of their own, the respondent and his wife spoke to the respondent's brother about adopting one their children, Vaneet. Vaneet's natural parents agreed to the adoption. On January 15, 1990, a small ceremony was held at the ancestral home in India, whereat Vaneet was physically passed by his natural mother, in the presence and with the consent of his natural father, to the respondent's wife in the respondent's presence and with his consent. On February 28, 1990, the respondent, his wife, and Vaneet's natural parents attended court and obtained a deed of adoption, signed by the respondent, his wife, and Vaneet's natural parents, which stated that Vaneet was given in adoption on January 15, 1990. At the court proceeding before the Tehsildar the same sequence of events occurred in that Vaneet's natural mother physically passed Vaneet to the respondent's wife.
[3]
The respondent and his wife returned to Canada in March 1990, following the purported adoption. Vaneet, however, remained in India where he continues to reside with his natural parents. In March 1990, the respondent executed an undertaking of assistance to sponsor Vaneet to Canada. In the undertaking of assistance the respondent identified Vaneet as his son. An application for permanent residence in Canada, dated December 17, 1992, was made on behalf of Vaneet to the Canadian High Commission in New Delhi, India. In the meantime, the respondent's wife gave birth to two children, one in November 1990 and a second in May 1992.
[4]
By letter dated January 11, 1993, the application for permanent residence was denied on the grounds that Vaneet was not a person admissible to Canada by virtue of s. 19(2)(d) of the
Immigration Act
in that he was not a member of the family class described in s. 4(1)(b) of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978.
[5]
This judicial review raises two issues:
1. Did the Appeal Division err in finding that Vaneet was adopted in accordance with the provisions of the
Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act 1956
("
HAMA
")?; and
2. Did the Appeal Division err in failing to assess the factual circumstances surrounding the adoption and the issue of whether the adoption created a relationship of parent and child as described the definition of "adoption" contained in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978?
1. Hama
[6]
Adoption is a question of status and as a general rule is determined by the law of the place where the adoption has taken place:
Singh (Ajaib) and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 1 (F.C.A.), at p. 4. However, unlike the
Singh
case, the issue of whether a legal adoption has occurred is very much at issue in this case.
[7]
It is clear on the facts that the respondent's brother, Vaneet's natural father, consented but did not physically give Vaneet in adoption, as required on a literal reading of s. 9(2) of
HAMA
. Section 9(2) provides as follows:
"9(2) Subject to the provisions of ... the father, if alive, shall alone have the right to give in adoption, but such right shall not be exercised save with the consent of the mother ..."
In this instance, in the presence of and with the consent of both the respondent and his brother, Vaneet's natural father, Vaneet's natural mother physically gave Vaneet to the respondent's wife.
[8]
The Appeal Division recognized that on a review of the appropriate sections of
HAMA
it would appear that the passing of the child by the natural mother to the adoptive mother would make this adoption void. However, in light of the circumstances, the adoption was determined to have been valid. The applicant's position with regard to the Appeal Division's determination is straight forward. To give means to physically give which is different than to consent and since the child's natural father was alive, and
HAMA
provides that the father alone has the right to give in adoption, then the adoption is void.
[9]
While it is clear that to give, means something other than to consent, what does it mean under Hindu law? The Appeal Division did have before it a decision of the Supreme Court of India which, while not dealing specifically with the giving and taking of a child in an adoption ceremony, did provide them with some guidance regarding the nature of adoption under  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The Minister, in arguing the adoption in this instance was void under
HAMA
, relies only on its interpretation of the provisions of
HAMA
and provided no other jurisprudence regarding the requirements and interpretation of
HAMA
by the Indian courts.
[10]
The issue herein is whether there was any basis for the Appeal Division to have found that in law and in fact that Vaneet was adopted in accordance with the various applicable provision of
HAMA
. On the basis of the record before the Appeal Division, this court is unable to determine, with any certainty, whether under Hindu law this would not be a valid adoption, despite the literal interpretive approach urged by counsel for the applicant. In this instance, I am unable to conclude that an error of law was made. The content of the foreign law is a question of fact. How the foreign law is applied is a question of law. I am of the opinion that the application of the foreign law to the facts as found by the Division does not warrant the intervention of this court.
2. Parent And Child Relationship?
[11]
With respect to the second issue as to whether the adoption created a relationship of parent and child, it is clear that the Appeal Division erred in failing to assess the factual circumstances surrounding the adoption. In concluding that a valid foreign adoption results in the creation of a parent and child relationship, the Appeal Division cannot have considered the Federal Court of Appeal's decision in
Singh
, supra. A parent and child relationship is not automatically established once the requirements of a foreign adoption have been demonstrated. In other words, even if the adoption was within the provisions of
HAMA
, whether the adoption created a relationship of parent and child, thereby satisfying the requirements of the definition of "adoption" contained in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978, must still be examined. While I doubt, on these facts, that the requisite parent and child relationship has been established, that is a determination which ought to be made by the Appeal Division.
[12]
Accordingly, the application for judicial review is granted and the matter is referred back to the Appeal Division for rehearing and reconsideration.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/saf
[End of document]