[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of a visa officer dated January 20, 1992 determining that the applicant is medically inadmissible to Canada pursuant to s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the "
Act
").
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Bangladesh. In March 1990 she and her husband applied for permanent residence in Canada as members of the Retired Class of persons, described under the former s. 8(1) of the
Immigration
Regulations
, 1978, SOR/78-178 (the "
Regulations
"), which provision was revoked by SOR/91-433, s. 3. The applicant sought to enter Canada as a dependant of her husband. An interview was held on October 10, 1990 at which time a visa officer determined that the applicant's husband appeared to meet the requirements under the
Regulations
for members of the Retired Class of persons.
[3]
By letter dated October 10, 1991 the applicant was instructed to undergo a medical examination and to send the results of such examination to Health and Welfare Canada. A physician examined the applicant and prepared a report on January 7, 1991.
[4]
The physician who reported on the medical examination stated that the applicant had previously suffered from breast cancer, but that, after undergoing a mastectomy in 1989, there was no evidence of recurrence of cancer and her prognosis was excellent. In addition, a letter dated October 30, 1991 from a doctor at the Aga Khan University Hospital in Pakistan indicated that the applicant did not show signs of recurrence of cancer, that she had responded well to treatment and that she was, at that time, disease-free.
[5]
The medical officer, to whom the applicant's medical reports were referred, by affidavit states that he considered these reports as well as medical reports prepared at an earlier time in relation to the applicant's diagnosis of breast cancer and in relation to the surgery she had undergone. The medical officer noted that simply because all cancerous tissue had been removed and subsequent examinations did not disclose a recurrence of cancer did not mean that a person was "free from the disease of cancer". Referring to the Guidelines in the
Medical Officer's Handbook
, the medical officer noted that it was necessary for at least five years to pass without a sign of cancer in order for a physician to conclude with some confidence that the applicant would not suffer a significant recurrence. Based on the stage and size of the applicant's malignancy when the mastectomy was performed, the medical officer concluded that the applicant would in all probability suffer a significant recurrence of the disease and that she had less than a 70% chance of survival over a five year period. In accordance with the Guidelines, the applicant was then classified as "M5", a category described as follows: "Has a condition which might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services to the extent that the person is not at present admissible but for which the expected response to treatment is such that future admission could be considered". A second medical officer of Health and Welfare Canada, relying on the same evidence, concurred with that assessment.
[6]
On December 12, 1991 a medical officer determined that the applicant was medically inadmissible pursuant to s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Act
which provides as follows:
"19(1) No person shall be granted admission who is a member of any of the following classes:
(a) Persons who are suffering from any disease, disorder, disability or other health impairment as a result of the nature, severity or probable duration of which, in the opinion of a medical officer concurred in by at least one other medical officer,
. . . . .
(ii) their admission would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services;"
[7]
In the completed Medical Notification, forwarded to the visa officer, the medical officer stated:
"This 58 year old lady was treated in 1989 for an infiltrating lobular carcinoma of the left breast with 18 axillary lymph nodes positive out of 18. Her condition is likely to deteriorate requiring additional highly specialized medical care. Has a condition which is likely to cause demand on health services to such an extent that the applicant is not at present admissible under s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Immigration Act
."
As noted above, the determination that the applicant was medically inadmissible was concurred in by a second medical officer, and the Medical Notification included the names of the two doctors.
[8]
By letter dated January 20, 1992 from the visa officer, the applicant's husband was advised that both he and the applicant are inadmissible on the following basis:
"I regret to inform you that your wife has been unable to meet the medical requirements for admission to Canada as a permanent resident. The medical report for your wife indicates that she has a condition, specifically an extensive infiltrating lobular carcinoma of the left breast and will require highly specialized medical care. This is likely to cause excessive demand on health services in Canada. For this reason, your wife is deemed to be an inadmissible person to Canada as described in s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Immigration Act
. By extension, you are also deemed to be an inadmissible person as described in s. 19(2)(a) of the
Immigration Act
.
"On the basis of the above-noted diagnosis and the inadmissibility of your wife and yourself as immigrants to Canada, I have no option but to refuse your application for permanent residence in Canada as retired individuals. I regret very much that no other decision is possible under the circumstances."
[9]
The applicant challenges the determination that she is inadmissible under s. 19(1)(a)(ii) on two grounds. The first of these is that, in the applicant's view, the visa officer has a duty to assess the reasonableness of the opinion of the medical officers, and in failing to do so here, the visa officer fettered his discretion. It is submitted that the fact that the visa officer stated that he had "no option but to refuse" the applicant's application for permanent residence indicates that he believed he was bound by the report of the medical officers and that he failed to assess the reasonableness of the determination by them. It is said that their determination is not reasonable in light of the overwhelming evidence from other medical personnel who had examined the applicant personally, that the applicant was in good health and that her prognosis was positive. Moreover, the applicant submits that the statement by the visa officer that the applicant "has a condition" indicates a misunderstanding of the opinion of the medical officers because they did not make a determination as to the applicant's current condition, but assessed the likelihood of her remaining healthy in the future.
[10]
The second ground relied upon by the applicant is that it is said the respondent's medical officers made a determination that is unreasonable in that it is unsupportable by the evidence before them. For the applicant it is submitted that the medical reports submitted to Health and Welfare Canada stated that the applicant had not had a recurrence of cancer and that her prognosis was excellent. In addition, one letter provided to the medical officers indicated that the applicant was "disease free". In the opinion of the applicant, all medical evidence indicated that she was healthy and unlikely to suffer a recurrence of cancer.
[11]
On behalf of the respondent it is submitted that the visa officer does not have a responsibility to assess the reasonableness of the opinion of the medical officers. In the respondent's view, s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Act
clearly states that a person is inadmissible where a medical officer is of the opinion that his or her admission would reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services and that opinion is concurred in by another medical officer. In the respondent's view, that section provides for a determination to be made only by medical officers, and no where does it provide that a visa officer must evaluate the reasonableness of that determination. Once the medical officers have concluded that the individual in question is inadmissible under that paragraph, it is said, there is no discretion for the visa officer to review that conclusion.
[12]
Further, the respondent submits that the opinion of the medical officers was not unreasonable in these circumstances. That opinion was here arrived at after thorough review of all medical evidence, and after considering s. 22 of the
Regulations
, which sets out criteria for determining medical inadmissibility, and the Guidelines contained in the
Medical Officer's Handbook
. For the respondent it is submitted that the opinion of the medical officers was coherent, consistent and supported by medical evidence, including the Guidelines. The respondent submits that the medical officers had medical evidence before them indicating that it was necessary for a five year period to elapse, in circumstances such as the applicant's, in order to determine with some confidence whether or not cancer was likely to recur. Here, the applicant had waited only two years since her surgery before applying to immigrate to Canada, an insufficient time it is said, to make a prognosis.
[13]
The respondent maintains that the
Medical Officer's Handbook
provides that "Patients with carcinoma of the breast treated by surgical removal of the breast and dissection of axillary nodes -- axillary contents who have no evidence of axillary node tumor involvement pathologically, have a 75 per cent or greater possibility of five year survival". Here, it is said, the applicant was not in that group described for she had eighteen nodes infiltrated out of a total of eighteen nodes. In those circumstances she was considered to have less than a 70% possibility of survival for five years. Thus, it is said, that medical officers had evidence before them to draw the conclusion that the applicant is medically inadmissible and that determination is not unreasonable in these circumstances.
[14]
Section 19(1)(a)(ii) appears to require that only the medical officers make a determination about an immigration applicant's health status and whether that would cause or is reasonably expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 163 (F.C.A.) the Court of Appeal determined that an adjudicator, when conducting an inquiry in order to determine if a person is a member of an inadmissible class, is required to consider the reasonableness of the expectation by the medical officers that the person will cause excessive demands on health or social services.
[15]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 1, at pp. 16-17 (F.C.T.D.) my colleague Mr. Justice Cullen stated:
"Although the decision in
Ahir
, supra, refers only to an adjudicator or the Appeal Board, it is only logical that the same power would be extended to a visa officer ...
"The Court of Appeal has clarified this power of inquiry and directed that a visa officer must also decide whether there is a linkage between the evidence of the medical condition and the issue of whether applicant might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services.
. . . . .
"The visa officer - wholly apart from the decision of the medical officers - is obliged to consider whether the applicant's medical condition would place excessive demands on health or social services. The visa officer, without second-guessing the medical, diagnostic opinion, must consider all of the available evidence."
Thus, it is urged, a visa officer has a responsibility and the authority to consider the reasonableness of the assessment by medical officers.
[16]
Both
Ahir
and
Ismaili
do support the principle that an adjudicator or a visa officer has a responsibility to consider reasonableness of the assessment by medical doctors, but in each of those cases there were circumstances which ought to have caused the immigration officer to question the reasonableness of the doctors' opinion, not on medical grounds but upon an apparent defect in the record. In
Ahir
, the Court of Appeal set aside a decision of the Immigration Appeal Board which had reversed the determination of an adjudicator who allowed an alien to continue as a visitor in Canada. That determination the Court of Appeal found to be reasonable. That case has little relevance here. In
Ismaili
the visa officer's negative decision was set aside where it was said to be based on medical grounds but the medical report indicated a likely requirement for special education services for a prospective immigrant child, but made no reference to health and social services. In that case, Cullen, J., referred the matter back to the visa officer for assessment of health and social service implications of the child's health circumstances.
[17]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R.(2d) 233; 18 Imm. L.R.(2d) 306 (T.D.) my colleague Mr. Justice Dubé stated, in the circumstances of that case, that fairness required that a visa officer inform the applicant of a negative assessment and provide an opportunity to respond to concerns of the medical officers before determining the person concerned was inadmissible. Implicitly, the visa officer has authority to decide on the reasonableness of the determination by medical officers after providing an opportunity for the applicant to respond to their concerns. In the circumstances of that case the immigration officer was aware of the reports on health circumstances of a prospective immigrant child made prior to the negative assessment of health officers.
[18]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at 72 of 61 F.T.R.; 243-4 of 14 Admin. L.R.(2d); 318 of 18 Imm. L.R.(2d), Mr. Justice Dubé summarized the jurisprudence concerning judicial review of a decision of an immigration officer based on medical grounds, as follows (footnotes are here omitted):
"The governing principle arising from this body of jurisprudence is that reviewing or appellate courts are not competent to make findings of fact relating to the medical diagnosis, but are competent to review the evidence to determine whether the medical officers' opinion is reasonable in the circumstances of the case. The reasonableness of a medical opinion is to be assessed not only as of the time it was given, but also as of the time it was relied upon by the Immigration Officer, since it is that decision which is being reviewed or appealed. The grounds of unreasonableness include incoherence or inconsistency, absence of supporting evidence, failure to consider cogent evidence, or failure to consider the factors stipulated in s. 22 of the
Regulations
."
[19]
The circumstances of this case are much like those dealt with by my colleague Mr. Justice Gibson in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), where he declined to set aside the determination by an immigration officer that an applicant for immigration to Canada was inadmissible on medical grounds. In that case it was found that the opinion of medical officers was not unreasonable, that the applicant was a person suffering from a health impairment which, if admission to Canada were granted, would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services.
[20]
The visa officer has no authority to review the diagnostic assessment of medical officers. Moreover, under s. 19(1)(a)(ii) it is the medical officers, not the visa officer, who must reach the opinion that admission of the person concerned "would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services".
[21]
The reasonableness of the opinion of the medical officers may be an issue for the visa officer. Where on the evidence before him or her a question arises whether the opinion is reasonable the visa officer may elect to seek further medical advice. Where no serious question arises on the record before him or her, the visa officer may act on the basis of the opinion as it is presented to him or her.
[22]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 313; 11 Imm. L.R.(2d) 14, at p. 18 (F.C.A.), Mr. Justice Stone, relying upon
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 79 (F.C.A.) stated:
"... immigration authorities concerned may properly act upon their assessment of the medical notification provided it is not tainted by any misconception of the law or any patently erroneous understanding of the opinion expressed by the medical officer ... ."
[23]
In my opinion, in the circumstances of this case the visa officer acted on the basis of the opinion of the medical officers in circumstances where no question of the reasonableness of that opinion arose. The only medical information available to the visa officer at the time of his decision was the advice included in the form of the Medical Notification from the medical officers. On that basis he determined the applicant to be inadmissible under s. 19(1)(a)(ii). The applicant having been described by the diagnosis and the opinion of medical officers to fall within a class of persons defined by the
Act
as inadmissible to Canada, the visa officer had no discretion in the circumstances. He could only find that the applicant was inadmissible. His letter conveying his decision relates to his lack of discretion where the applicant is found to be a person described by the
Act
as inadmissible. He had "no option" but to refuse the application. There was no fettering of discretion, since there was no discretion in the circumstances.
[24]
The second ground raised by the applicant is that the medical officer's determination is, on the evidence, unreasonable. If that is so, the decision of the visa officer, based on an unreasonable opinion, may be set aside. As noted in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a reviewing court is competent to review the evidence to determine whether the medical officers' opinion is reasonable in the circumstances of the case. A medical opinion will be considered unreasonable because of incoherence or inconsistency, absence of supporting evidence, failure to consider cogent evidence or failure to consider the factors set out in s. 22 of the
Regulations
: see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and
Bola
, supra.
[25]
Here, it is said that the opinion of the medical officers was unreasonable because they followed the directives of the
Medical Officer's Handbook
and did not properly consider the medical evidence indicating that the applicant was in good health, had an excellent prognosis and was disease free.
[26]
The
Medical Officer's Handbook
is utilized by medical officers for guidance in assessing the medical conditions of persons seeking admission to Canada. It is a compilation of commonly known and accepted medical information. The question here is whether those guidelines provide sufficient evidence for the medical officers to draw a conclusion which is seemingly inconsistent with the medical reports submitted by an applicant's examining physician.
[27]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 35; 9 Imm. L.R.(2d) 243, at p. 259 (T.D.) Associate Chief Justice Jerome, quoting Professor J. M. Evans, in
deSmith's Judicial Review of Administrative Action
, Fourth Edition, stated that "a factor that may be properly taken into account in exercising a discretion may become an unlawful fetter upon discretion if it is elevated to the status of a general rule that results in the pursuit of consistency at the expense of the merits of individual cases". The proper function of guidelines was described by Mr. Justice Cullen in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 204 (T.D.) "Care must be taken so that any guidelines formulated to structure the use of discretion do not crystallize into binding and conclusive rules. If the discretion of the administrator becomes too tightly circumscribed by guidelines, the flexibility and judgment that are an integral part of discretion may be lost". In that case the court did recognize the importance which guidelines play in ensuring consistent exercise of discretion and enforcement of government policy, while seeking to deal with individual cases.
[28]
Medical officers may utilize and apply the rules set out in the
Medical Officer's Handbook
, but they must be flexible and look beyond the guidelines to decide whether an applicant is medically inadmissible on the basis of his or her individual circumstances. The medical officers must look upon the
Medical Officer's Handbook
as simply one element of evidence to be considered in assessing individual cases. The weight assigned to guidelines in the
Handbook
may vary from case to case in light of the circumstances of each case.
[29]
I am not persuaded that the medical officers' opinion here was unreasonable in light of the evidence. Their determination was supported by the guidelines set out in the
Medical Officer's Handbook
. In my view, there is no evidence that the medical officers failed to assess medical evidence submitted by the applicant and her physicians. Rather, these reports were used by the medical officers to reach the conclusion that the applicant has less than a 70% possibility of surviving five years from her surgery. Although the applicant had adduced evidence indicating that her prognosis was excellent, the medical officers were concerned with assessing her medical condition in light of the requirements of the
Act
and
Regulations
. In that assessment the Guidelines, based on generally accepted medical experience, indicated that for the applicant there was a significant chance of recurrence of cancer within five years, and that five years is required after surgery in such a case to conclude with confidence a prognosis that would not be reasonably expected to impose excessive demand on health and social services.
[30]
In my view, the opinion of the medical officers in this case cannot be said to be incoherent or inconsistent in any way, nor is there an absence of supporting evidence. In addition, the medical officers have indicated that they considered all of the evidence, including the factors set out in s. 22 of the
Regulations
, in reaching their decision. Thus, in my opinion, the determination by the medical officers cannot be said to be unreasonable.
[31]
For these reasons, the application for judicial review is dismissed.
[32]
Counsel for the respondent Ministers, following the hearing, with my invitation to both counsel, suggested two questions for consideration for certification under s. 83(1) of the
Act
. The first concerned reliance upon the
Medical Officer's Handbook
as it relates to the applicant's medical condition in this case, a question which, in my view, concerns the facts of this case and is not "a question of general importance" within s. 83(1). The second question concerned the validity in terms of enabling legislation of s. 22 of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978 as s. 114(1)(m) of the
Act
read prior to February 1, 1993, a matter similar to that discussed by Mr. Justice Cullen in
Ismaili
, supra, and one that is not an issue upon which my determination in this case is based. In the circumstances, no question is certified for consideration by the Court of Appeal.
[33]
The order now issued provides that one of the respondents is changed to the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, the Minister now responsible for administration of the
Act
, and the style of cause shall be as set out at the commencement of these reasons and the accompanying Order.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/kaw
[End of document]