[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for judicial review and for an order setting aside the decision made July 5, 1991, by the Convention Refugee Determination Division that the applicant is not a Convention refugee within the meaning of s. 2(1)(a) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended.
[2]
The matter was heard at St. John's, Newfoundland, on December 16, 1993, when the application was allowed and reasons for that decision were rendered orally. An order allowing the application, and referring the matter back to the Immigration and Refugee Board for reconsideration by a newly constituted panel, was issued following the hearing. These are brief reasons for that order, filed to comply with s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended.
[3]
The applicant is a native and a citizen of Bulgaria, now 43 years of age, who came to Canada after leaving Bulgaria on March 4, 1990. On arrival in Canada he claimed refugee status because of his fear of persecution based on his political opinion and his membership in a particular social group. The applicant's claim to refugee status was considered by the CRDD at hearings, which concluded in January 1991, when a decision was reserved.
[4]
Before a decision was rendered on July 5, 1991, the applicant received a letter from his parents in Bulgaria which contained information said to be regarding a State Security Investigation of the applicant since he had left Bulgaria and regarding problems his parents expected would confront the applicant if he were to return home. After receiving the letter from his parents, the applicant suffered a state of depression, for which he received medication and continuing psychiatric care arranged through a hospital in St. John's, as dealt with in a letter from his physician, dated May 27, 1991.
[5]
By letter of June 3, 1991, then counsel for the applicant wrote to the CRDD enclosing a copy of the letter from the applicant's parents with a translation, and a copy of the letter from Mr. Mladenov's physician in St. John's. Counsel referred to the applicant's claim to refugee status and requested that the enclosed letters be considered in relation to the decision which was then in reserve. A month later, on July 5, 1991, that decision was rendered, the board then finding the applicant was not a Convention refugee. In that decision no reference is made by the board members to the letters received from counsel and the decision includes no reference to the matters dealt with in those letters.
[6]
In my opinion, the decision rendered failed to observe principles of fairness, and thus erred in law, by neglecting to make reference to the two letters, or to matters raised in those letters, sent by counsel for the applicant after the hearing, but a month before the decision was rendered. We simply do not know whether those letters were considered by the members of the board concerned, even to assess their relevance.
[7]
On their face, the letters would appear to have some relevance, if only in relation to the issue of the applicant's objective fear of persecution, perhaps to other things as well.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), a case dealing with an application to reopen an Immigration Appeal Board decision on the basis of new evidence, the Court of Appeal determined that subsequent evidence may be a basis for reopening a decision if the evidence is relevant to the application to reopen. The test for relevance is whether or not it might affect or change the original decision of the tribunal. By analogy, that test has significance in this case where the evidence is available after the hearing but before the decision of the tribunal. It has some relevance, and it ought to be considered, where that might affect the decision.
[8]
Secondly, counsel for the applicant noted the decision does review in considerable detail the evidence of various incidents involving the applicant, which he claims gave rise to his fear of persecution. Yet, no reference is made to the letter from his parents, the latest evidence, relating to events since his departure from Bulgaria said to affect him. That is all the more surprising in my view, in light of the decision and its very brief reference to a change of circumstances within Bulgaria after the applicant left. In its decision the board stated:
"With the current political changes in Bulgaria the claimant need not fear persecution for defecting nor for making a refugee claim."
The decision includes a further statement drawn from a Canadian Embassy telex, of the Department of External Affairs, but it adds nothing to this particular case. It is a general statement of Bulgarian law in 1990 that refers to minimal fines for returning Bulgarians who overstay an authorized visit abroad.
[9]
That reference quoted above, is very brief indeed, in light of the fairly substantial submissions made at the earlier hearing by counsel for the applicant, which appear at pp. 32 to 36 of the record, as to why any change in circumstances in Bulgaria ought not to be considered to defeat the applicant's claim to refugee status.
[10]
But assuming the board's conclusion in relation to changes in the circumstances in Bulgaria is a significant factor in its ultimate decision, as I believe it to be, then the board clearly ought to have considered the letter from the applicant's parents, giving it such weight as the board might determine in assessing whether the change in circumstances since the applicant left Bulgaria affected his claim to fear persecution were he to return. The decision does not show in any way that the letter was considered.
[11]
Thirdly, as I read the decision, the tribunal appears to accept the evidence put forward by the applicant, at least in relation to various incidents, apparently accepting, but without expressly so stating, that he had a subjective fear of persecution. It does not clearly state that it finds no objective basis for that fear or that the fear of the applicant is not well-founded. It is clear in its assessment of each of the several incidents reviewed, that the particular incident in itself was not considered to constitute persecution. Nor did the various incidents, viewed cumulatively, constitute persecution. This implies that the Board found no objective basis for the fear claimed by the applicant, but such a finding is not expressly made.
[12]
It appears that the board's conclusion ultimately was based on three reasons: first, that each of the series of incidents referred to did not itself constitute persecution, second, that the series of incidents reviewed cumulatively did not constitute persecution, and third, that changes in circumstances within Bulgaria were such that the applicant's fear of persecution in the future, were he to return, was not well-founded.
[13]
In my view, the evidence here of concern, in particular the letter from the applicant's parents, whatever weight the board might assign to it, on its face has relevance to at least two of these principal reasons relied on by the board, the second and the third, the cumulative assessment of his fear of persecution and the issue of change in country circumstances. It would not be consistent, in my view, with the principles of fairness applicable to the operations of the CRDD that a decision should stand when it makes no reference to relevant evidence proffered in the letters submitted before the decision, leaving the applicant and this court uncertain whether or not that evidence was considered at all.
[14]
For these reasons, while the applicant's application does refer to other issues not here dealt with, the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division, made on July 5, 1991, is set aside. The matter is referred back for reconsideration by a differently constituted panel.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/nmg
[End of document]