[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The parties by their solicitors have agreed upon a form of judgment herein, as the court invited them to do in the original reasons for judgment issued on October 21, 1987.
[2]
They could not, however, agree upon the question of whether or not each successful plaintiff would be entitled to prejudgment interest. It is no small matter for the various plaintiffs because it has been a long while since, in accordance with the terms of the lease, they paid the extra unjustified amounts fixed by the Minister, for which they will now be entitled to refunds. The plaintiff's claim interest on those sums. Hence, these second reasons.
[3]
Two provisions of the Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10, bear closely on the resolution of the question. They are:
"35. In adjudicating upon any claim against the Crown, the court shall not allow interest on any sum of money that the court considers to be due to the claimant, in the absence of any contract stipulating for payment of such interest or of a statute providing in such a case for the payment of interest by the Crown.
"40. Unless otherwise ordered by the court, a judgment, including a judgment against the Crown, bears interest from the time of giving the judgment at the rate prescribed by section 3 of the Interest Act."
[4]
In 1981, in his reasons for judgment in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mr. Justice Collier of this court wrote the following pertinent passages found on pages 448 and 449:
"The plaintiffs brought their action in this court. It is true they had no other choice of forum. But this is a statutory court. Its jurisdiction, in respect of the subject-matter of claims, and over persons, and its jurisdiction in respect of the remedies and other relief it can grant, must be found in existing federal statute or federal common law.
"[ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 658.]
. . . . .
"Even if the plaintiffs' submission as to section 35 were sound, they are confronted with the Canadian common law principle as laid down by the Supreme Court of Canada:
'... It is settled jurisprudence that interest may not be allowed against the Crown, unless there is a statute or a contract providing for it.'
"Counsel for the plaintiffs contended there was no such rule; the Supreme Court of Canada decisions were either incorrectly decided or distinguishable.
"The principle laid down by the Supreme Court of Canada, whether it be correct or incorrect is clear. As a trial judge I am bound to follow the decisions of the Supreme Court.
"[ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 55 N.R. 161) which was unanimous in the result. Three of the eight judges who participated in the Supreme Court's judgment, speaking through Madam Justice Wilson, specifically and directly (at page 364) approved of the denial of prejudgment interest effected by Collier, J. A fourth judge, Estey, J., agreed (at page 391) with the disposition of the facts and issues stated by Wilson, J. The other four judges whose opinion was expressed by Mr. Justice Dickson (the present Chief Justice) found, as reported on page 391, that Mr. Justice Collier's judgment "discloses no error in principle". It was thereupon reinstated without variation.
[6]
The only matter of law which could now dilute the validity of Mr. Justice Collier's disposition relating to interest, according to the plaintiffs' counsel, is the intervening emplacement, in 1982, of the equality rights provision in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. That provision is s. 15, which came into force on April 17, 1985. Section 15(1) runs as follows:
"15(1) Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination and, in particular, [in ways which are not relevant here.]"
At first impression, it would seem that the plaintiffs can derive precious little comfort from s. 15(1) in their quest for prejudgment interest.
[7]
In January 1987 however, the Appeal Division of the Supreme Court of Nova Scotia, unanimously speaking through the reasons of Mr. Justice Jones, held that s. 15(1) of the Charter overrides the exclusive jurisdiction of Trial Division in suits against the Crown, which is provided in s. 17(1) and (2) of the Federal Court Act, above cited. That decision of 1987 is cited as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 189 A.P.R. 398; 35 D.L.R.(4th) 433 (hereinafter: Zutphen.) The relevant reasoning of Jones, J.A., is encapsulated in the headnote, at page 434 [D.L.R.], which, for present purposes, it will be convenient to quote.
"Before the enactment of the Charter it was not questioned that Parliament under s. 101 of the British North America Act, 1867 (now the Constitution Act, 1867) could create a Federal Court and confer jurisdiction on it to try actions against the federal Crown. However, s. 101 is subject to s. 15 of the Charter and while Parliament may confer exclusive jurisdiction on the Federal Court it must now do so in a manner which does not offend the equality provisions of s. 15. The effect of s. 17 of the Federal Court Act in conferring exclusive jurisdiction on the Federal Court is to place the subject in a different position from the Crown as a litigant. While the Crown can sue the subject in the Supreme Court, the subject does not have the same right to sue the Crown. It follows that the subject is not equal before and under the law and does not have the equal protection and benefit of the law without discrimination. Subsections (1) and (2) of s. 17 of the Federal Court Act are inconsistent with the provisions of s. 15(1) of the Charter in so far as those provisions purport to confer exclusive jurisdiction on the Federal Court for actions listed in s. 17(2) of the Act or for negligence. There is no violation of the Charter in so far as those provisions simply confer jurisdiction on the Federal Court. These provisions are not saved by s. 1 of the Charter. The onus of satisfying the requirements under s. 1 is on the Crown. It had not shown the necessity of conferring exclusive jurisdiction on the Federal Court under s. 17(1) and (2). The authors who have written on the Federal Court all agree that there is no need for those provisions and indeed that they result in great inconvenience and expense. It cannot be said that these provisions relate 'to concerns which are pressing and substantial'. Having failed on the first test for determining whether the provisions constitute reasonable limits under s. 1 of the Charter set forth in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the learned judges of appeal in Nova Scotia, it is noted that their reasoning  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  exhibits two flaws which negate the validity of their conclusion. In the first place, s. 101 of the Constitution Act, 1867, is not subject to s. 15(1) of the Charter for they are both constitutional provisions which operate together on the same plane of constitutional force and effect. Secondly, it cannot be lawfully held that the "individual" whose equality is guaranteed by s. 15(1) of the Charter is guaranteed equality with the Crown, or enjoys legal rights on the same constitutional plane as the Crown.
[9]
The first proposition resides in the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in Re: An Act to amend The Education Act, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 1148; 77 N.R. 241; 22 O.A.C. 321. That case involved a reference by the Lieutenant Govenor in Council of Ontario respecting Bill 30, an Act to amend the Education Act to provide full funding for Roman Catholic separate high schools. The opponents of the amendments contended that those amendments infringe the equality guaranteed in s. 15(1) of the Charter, and that the new provisions for public funding of violate freedom of religion guaranteed by s. 2(a) thereof, despite the provisions of s. 29. This latter section of the Charter provides:
"29. Nothing in this Charter abrogates or derogates from any rights or privileges guaranteed by or under the Constitution of Canada in respect of denominational separate or dissentient schools."
[10]
Here are certain pertinent passages from the Supreme Court's various reasons for judgment in that Education Act Reference. Madam Justice Wilson, with whom Chief Justice Dickson and Messrs. Justices McIntyre and LaForest concurred, is reported at pages 1197 and 1198  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , thus:
"This does not mean, however, that such rights or privileges are vulnerable to attack under ss. 2(a) and 15 of the
Charter
. I have indicated that the rights or privileges protected by s. 93(1) are immune from
Charter
review under s. 29 of the
Charter
. I think this is clear. What is less clear is whether s. 29 of the Charter was required in order to achieve that result. In my view, it was not. I believe it was put there simply to emphasize that the special treatment guaranteed by the constitution to denominational, separate or dissentient schools, even if it sits uncomfortably with the concept of equality embodied in the
Charter
because not available to other schools, is nevertheless not impaired by the
Charter
.
It was never intended in my opinion, that the
Charter
could be used to invalidate other provisions of the Constitution
, particularly a provision such as s. 93 which represented a fundamental part of the Confederation compromise.
Section 29, in my view, is present in the
Charter
only for greater certainty
, at least in so far as the Province of Ontario is concerned.
"To put it another way, s. 29 is there to render immune from
Charter
review rights or privileges which would otherwise, i.e., but for s. 29 be subject to such review. The question then becomes: does s. 29 protect rights or privileges conferred by legislation passed under the province's plenary power in relation to education under the opening words of s. 93? In my view, it does
although again I do not believe it is required for this purpose
."
(Emphasis not in original text)
Further in the Education Act Reference, Mr. Justice Estey, with whom Mr. Justice Beetz concurred, is reported at page 1207  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in these words:
"I therefore would conclude that s. 93(3) does indeed introduce a recognition of a legislative power granted in the opening words of s. 93 and surviving the operations of s. 93(1). This legislative power in the province is not subject to regulation by other parts of the Constitution in any way which would be tantamount to its repeal. The Charter would not be available to disallow the implementation of s. 93(1), or legislation for the protection of the rights embedded by s. 93(1), or legislation contemplated in s. 93(3).
"This conclusion, that Bill 30 finds its validity in the exercise of provincial power under s. 93 and that the exercise of this power cannot be abolished or truncated by the Charter, is sufficient to dispose of this appeal."
Finally, Mr. Justice Lamer, at page 1209  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , wrote:
"I have had the benefit of reading the reasons for judgment prepared in this appeal by my colleagues, Wilson and Estey, JJ. I agree with them that this appeal should be dismissed. However, I would dismiss the appeal only on the basis of the opening words of s. 93 and s. 93(3) of the Constitution Act, 1867, for the reasons given by Wilson, J. I also agree with Wilson, J., as to the effect of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms on s. 93 of the Constitution Act, 1867."
[11]
Thus, the Supreme Court of Canada in the Education Act Reference gives no basis for supporting the thesis of the Zutphen decision, in regard to which leave to appeal has been accorded (June 29, 1987). All of the nine judges, in effect, held that the putatively discriminatory law enacted pursuant to provincial power prescribed in the Constitution Act, 1867 is immune from review under the Charter and does not even need that protective provision emplaced in the Charter in order to stand valid. It goes without saying, of course, that even if enacted in apparent accord with the distribution of constitutional powers, ordinary legislation whether in the provincial domain, for example, of real property, or in the federal domain, for example, of criminal law, is always subject to judicial scrutiny in regard to its accord with, or violation of, rights and freedoms guaranteed in and by the Charter. More of this later.
[12]
The second proposition concerning the flaws of reasoning in the Zutphen case, asserts that s. 15(1) of the Charter guarantees the equality only of individuals in relation only to each other and not vis-à-vis the Crown. In July 1987 the Ontario Court of Appeal, unanimously speaking through Mr. Justice Tarnopolsky in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.(3d) 134, considered the same proposition about equality and rejected the thesis enunciated  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as reported at pages 142 through 147 [C.R.]. At page 145, Tarnopolsky, J.A., stated decisively: "The Crown is not an 'individual' with whom a comparison can be made to determine a s. 15(1) violation." At page 146, he is reported as holding: "If I am wrong in this conclusion then, because of their very different roles, as just outlined, I would hold that an accused and the Crown are not similarly situated with respect to the purpose of the law." These brief exacts should not deter a reader from fuller, more detailed and leisurely appreciation of the Stoddart judgment. Later yet, in October 1987 Chief Justice Moore, of the Alberta Queen's Bench, in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (# 8201-03713, Oct.22/87), considered whether to accord leave to amend the statement of claim in order to add Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada as a party. The proceeding before Chief Justice Moore is closely similar to that which was adjudicated by the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In both specifically referring to that case and rejecting its conclusion, Moore, C.J.Q.B., wrote the following necessarily selected passages:
"I am satisfied the applicants cannot seek relief against the federal Crown in this court despite the finding of the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (N.S.S.C.A.D.). In this case the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal allowed an application to join the Crown in right of Canada as a third party.
. . . . .
"The Nova Scotia Court of Appeal held that section 17(1) and (2) of the Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1970 (2nd Supp.), c. 10 and section 7(1) of the Crown Liability Act, R.S.C. 1970 c. 38 was [sic] inconsistent with section 15 of the Charter.
. . . . .
"I am of the view the word 'individual' in section 15 of the Charter does not include the Crown and the meaning of the word as used in section 15 has been misinterpreted by the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal.
. . . . .
"Section 101 of the Constitution Act, 1867 gives the Parliament of Canada power to establish additional courts for the better administration of the laws of Canada. Parliament established the Federal Court and gave it exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine claims for damages, and to deal with claims where a party seeks relief against the federal Crown. In my view section 15 cannot be made paramount over section 101 of the Constitution Act.
"I simply do not agree that I should exercise my discretion under Alberta rule 38(3) to add the federal Crown as a party defendant."
The Ominayak decision will reward a careful reader with much more learning than is recited above.
[13]
Does s. 35, if not also s. 40 of the Federal Court Act entirely overleap the constitutional challenge levied by invocation of the Charter? Yes, if one considers that in defining the exposure to liability, if any, of the Crown and the forum for determining the extent of such exposure, if any, one accepts - as has long been accepted - that Parliament may for the purposes of "the better administration of the laws of Canada" (s. 101) limit the Crown's exposure by immunizing the Crown in Right of Canada from liability to pay interest to claimants as is effected in s. 35 of the Act.
[14]
So it was held by Mr. Justice Strayer, of this court, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where at page 729 [D.L.R.] he is reported as holding:
"... By virtue of ss. 35 and 40 of the Federal Court Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. 10 (2nd Supp.), I am precluded from awarding prejudgment interest against the Crown unless such interest is stipulated by contract or provided for by statute: see, e.g.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . While by virtue of s. 3 of the Crown Liability Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-38, prejudgment interest may be awarded against the federal Crown in tort actions where such interest would be payable pursuant to the law of the province applicable to the tort in question, there is no such general authority with respect to actions for contract such as the present one. Counsel for the plaintiff was unable to direct me to any contractual stipulation or statutory authority providing for the payment of prejudgment interest in the circumstances of the present case. While by virtue of s. 40 of the Federal Court Act, it would be open to me to increase the rate of postjudgment interest beyond that prescribed in the Interest Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. I-18, counsel for the plaintiff did not make any specific request for this nor did I have the opportunity to hear submissions pro and con as to what a proper rate would be. I shall therefore make no special award in this respect."
[15]
This dispute is referred to this court in order to resolve the parties' opposing contentions about the payments to be made pursuant to a contract, the lease of the Indian lands to the plaintiffs. There is no tort involved, as the original reasons for judgment herein disclose. If, in opposite circumstances, the Crown could claim prejudgment interest from the tenants, which in terms of the parties' contract is not absolutely certain, then it is apparent that the parties ought to amend their contract in a spirit of parity. This court cannot compel them to do that and, of course, the Crown may always have the unequal benefit of its refuge in s. 35 of the Act. In any event, prejudgment interest cannot be awarded here, unfortunately for the otherwise successful plaintiffs.
[16]
Costs, however, have been and are still awarded. The provision for costs in the final judgment may be expressed thus:
"... the remaining plaintiffs whose actions have not been dismissed shall as if one plaintiff have full costs, being actual disbursements with double fees, to be paid by the defendant on a party and party basis forthwith after taxation thereof."
[17]
It would appear that the parties will now most probably agree upon the form in which the judgment is to be expressed. The draft already presented contains awards of interest which cannot be allowed. Accordingly, and so as to help insure the avoidance of errors, the parties' solicitors are still directed to approach the task of preparing a draft judgment in order to implement the court's decision as they have been proceeding in compliance with the last paragraph of the court's reasons dated October 21, 1987.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/mja
[End of document]