[1]
MacKay, J.
: These are brief reasons, filed in accord with s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
, to record in writing the background, and oral reasons delivered from the bench, when I allowed the application by the respondent Apotex when the matter was heard in Toronto on August 23, 1994.
[2]
The Order then issued grants leave for the respondent Apotex to file an affidavit of Robert Allan McClelland sworn August 18, 1994 in reply to affidavits filed by the applicant Bayer A.G., and to extend times fixed for cross-examination upon affidavits and for filing the applicant's record to new dates, later than earlier fixed by Order of Joyal, J., dated January 12, 1994.
[3]
The main proceedings are under the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, SOR/93-133 (the "
Regulations
"), in which the applicant Bayer A.G. seeks to prohibit issuance of a notice of compliance to Apotex. Those proceedings are underway in accord with the court's Rules for Judicial Review under Part V.1 of the
Rules
, as directed by the Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 329.
[4]
Apotex was required by Order of McKeown, J., dated November 18, 1993, to deliver a Detailed Statement of Fact and Law, under the
Regulations
, by December 13, 1993. That was done but subsequently the applicant Bayer sought a more detailed statement and its motion for this was granted by Rothstein, J., on July 27, 1994 which required delivery of a supplemental Detailed Statement of Fact and Law, a requirement met by Apotex on July 6, 1994.
[5]
Affidavits of the evidence of Apotex, sworn by Robert G. Hirons, Robert Allan McClelland and Bernard Sherman were served and filed in July and July 1993, and a further affidavit of McClelland was sworn, and presumably filed, in January 1994. The evidence of the applicants was served on August 3, 1994, within the delay fixed from determination of the applicants' motion for a supplemental Detailed Statement of Fact and Law.
[6]
In support of the application herein by Apotex, Dr. McClelland avers that he has sworn two previous affidavits in this matter in each of which, as in the affidavit of Robert G. Hirons, the evidence provided was based upon the opinion, clearly expressed, that the patent here in issue, Canadian Patent No. 1,218,067 only claims two independent claims pertaining to cyprofloxacin. Those are said to be claims 1 and 10 each of which is said to be a final step for producing cyprofloxacin. It was and remains McClelland's expert opinion that steps preliminary to the final step in the process have no relevance for the issue whether or not the Apotex process would infringe the two independent claims of Canadian Patent No. 1,218,067.
[7]
The applicants' evidence, filed in August 1994 includes the affidavits of James D. Wuest and Elias J. Corey. In McClelland's understanding those two affidavits, in dealing with the issue of whether the Apotex process to make cyprofloxacin is the same as the Bayer process or an obvious chemical equivalent thereof, consider all of the steps preliminary to the final step, and the final step, in the process. It is urged by McClelland that this analysis requires a response, presumably in the interests of justice and fairness to the parties, as well as the understanding of the court.
[8]
Counsel urges there is no prejudice to Bayer in filing further affidavit material provided opportunity is directed for cross-examination and filing of the applicants' Record thereafter. Thus, the request for delays in those procedural stages.
[9]
The applicants oppose the motion. It is urged that since the proposed affidavit of McClelland, to be filed if leave be granted, is not before the court, the court cannot assess whether it is proper reply evidence. It is urged that in seeking leave to file, the principle of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 470 (F.C.A.) should apply; the proposed affidavit should be before the court so that it may assess the seriousness of delay which its filing would cause and the potential value of the evidence. That case was concerned with the issue of extending the time to file pursuant to rule 704(7) of the
Federal Court Rules
which relates to trademark proceedings, including appeals from the Registrar and expungement proceedings. Those proceedings, it is urged, ought to provide the model for the court's process in this matter.
[10]
I am not persuaded that proceedings under rule 704, concerned with expungement applications, are the appropriate model in this case. Part V.1 of the
Rules
, concerning judicial review, have been determined to be the rules applicable to these proceedings. Difficult as it may be to accommodate all aspects of the proceedings under the
Regulations
within those rules, the court must do its best to do so.
[11]
As I interpret the earlier Order of Rothstein, J., made in June 1994 and directing a supplemental Detailed Statement of Fact and Law, he sought to keep open, for resolution by the court which ultimately hears the application for prohibition by the applicant, the issue of whether the preliminary steps in the Apotex process are relevant to the question of its prospective infringement of the applicants' patent interests, which Apotex of course protests is not the case. That is the ultimate purpose of the Order I granted, with leave for Apotex to file the affidavit in reply to affidavits filed in August, 1994 by Bayer AG.
[12]
It is true Part V.1 Rules do not specifically provide for affidavits to be filed in reply by an applicant or by a respondent. Nevertheless, in my view, this court has discretion to permit that where it will serve the interests of justice, will assist the court and will not seriously prejudice the other party.
[13]
It is my opinion, that while the significance of those steps previous to the final step in the Apotex process may have been a difference in perception obvious to the parties from an early date, as the applicant Bayer here contends, it became a difference of significance on the record only as of the filing of the expert affidavits of Bayer in August 1994. Bayer is the original applicant in these proceedings, seeking an order of prohibition. In the ordinary course, under Part V.1 Rules, Bayer's evidence in support of its application would have been filed with its Record before the respondent would be expected to reply. While that process is varied under the
Regulations
now applicable, the general principle that the party seeking relief should provide its evidence first has some significance, in my view, in considering whether Apotex should here be permitted to file an affidavit in reply to those of the applicants. Permitting that does not, in my opinion, permit Apotex to "split its case" as here alleged for the case is not considered until this matter be heard. At this stage, concern must be to ensure fair opportunities for both parties to adduce affidavit evidence on the issues as it perceives them and to respond to other issues advanced by the other party.
[14]
If evidence of experts on both sides of the issue is to be available at the hearing of this matter, then in my view, filing of the affidavit in reply serves the interests of justice between the parties and is necessary for the court to determine that issue. While it is urged this will further delay a hearing of the application by Bayer in this matter, there is no reason suggested why the times now provided by Order will extend the time beyond that contemplated for proceedings under the
Regulations
.
[15]
For the reasons set out the Order as requested, approved as to form by counsel for the applicant Bayer, was issued.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/saf
[End of document]