[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This application was heard at Toronto, on October 20, 1986. The applicant seeks a writ of certiorari to quash a decision of the Registrar of Trademarks dated July 18, 1985, allowing the trademark NO-GRO and a writ of mandamus or relief in the nature thereof to consider the applicant's request for an extension of time to file a Notice of Opposition and Opposition to the trademark application.
[2]
The facts may be briefly summarized as follows. The respondent Sanex Inc. filed an application under the Trade Marks Act to register the name NO-GRO on the basis of the proposed use in association with herbicides, insecticides, etc. The application was advertised May 14, 1986, in the Trade Marks Journal (Vol. 33, No. 1646).
[3]
Counsel for Uniroyal Ltd. was familiar with the use of the trademark SLO-GRO by the applicant in association with certain wares including herbicides and, as a result, contacted his client and sought instructions regarding possible opposition. Instructions were received by counsel to first obtain an extension of time to consider filing materials in opposition to the application. On June 13, 1986, within the one-month period prescribed by section 37(1) of the Trade Marks Act, a letter was filed with the Registrar requesting an extension of time of three months to file a statement of opposition.
[4]
The letter on behalf of Uniroyal dated June 13, 1986, made reference to Sanex Inc. and referred to the serial number contained in the advertisement which appeared in the Trade Marks Journal. This letter was stamped as acknowledged by the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs on the same day it was written, June 13, 1986. By letter dated August 22, 1986, the Chairman of the Trademarks Opposition Board acknowledged receipt of the letter dated June 13th and wrote that unfortunately the letter was brought to his attention until the NO-GRO application had proceeded to allowance. The Chairman went on to state that in light of certain decisions of the Federal Court he was unable to reconsider at this stage the request for an extension of time to file an opposition.
[5]
As of October 1, 1986, the certificate of registration for the trademark NO-GRO had not yet been issued because the respondent Sanex Inc. had not yet filed a declaration of use.
[6]
The relevant sections of the Trade Marks Act are as follows:
"37.(1) Within one month of the advertisement of an application any person may, upon payment of the prescribed fee, file a statement of opposition with the Registrar.
"38.(1) When an application either has not been opposed and the time for the filing of a statement of opposition has expired or it has been opposed and the opposition has been decided finally in favour of the applicant, the Registrar thereupon shall allow it.
"46.(1) If, in any case, the Registrar is satisfied that the circumstances justify an extension of the time fixed by this Act or prescribed by the regulations for the doing of any act, he may, except as in this Act otherwise provided, extend the time after such notice to other persons and upon such terms as he may direct."
[7]
In the Trade Marks Journal dated June 13, 1979, the Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs issued a Practice Notice concerning opposition proceedings governed by section 37(1) and section 46 among others. It had determined that extensions of time created problems within the office and required parties involved to submit repeated requests for extensions. The Practice Notice directed that when extensions of time were requested under subsection 37(1) and section 46 an extension of up to three months would be granted.
[8]
Counsel for the applicant submitted that, pursuant to the discretion granted the Registrar under section 46(1), it has been customary for an automatic extension of three months to be allowed; that his request was made on time pursuant to section 37(1); that the Registrar when making his decision, though unaware of the intended opposition, had a duty to consider the request and pursuant to the doctrine of procedural fairness the decision should be set aside; that the matter as it now stood essentially divested him of a fundamental right because of an administrative error.
[9]
The resondents rely on the decision of Mr. Justice Collier in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . They argue that the Court as well as the Registrar of Trademarks is without jurisdiction at this stage of the proceedings to alter the decision; that in light of the Silverwood decision the Registrar was compelled to proceed under section 38 of the Act and allow the trademark. They further submit that the applicant is not necessarily deprived of his fundamental rights since expungement proceedings are available under the Trade Marks Act and the applicant could avail himself of this remedy; that there is no statutory right for an extension of time; that it is purely discretionary and still may be refused. Further, that the letter of June 13, 1986, submitted on behalf of the applicant should not only have requested an extension of time but should have described in some detail the intended opposition.
[10]
I have reviewed the decision in the Silverwood case and I am satisfied that the facts are distinguishable. The application heard by Mr. Justice Collier was for mandamus requiring the Registrar to register a mark in a situation where, within the prescribed one-month period, no letter seeking an extension of time had been filed nor had opposition proceedings been initiated. In fact the request in the Silverwood case had been made after the Registrar had "allowed the application". Collier, J., determined that at that stage of the proceedings the Registrar had no further discretion and was required to register the trademark. This decision, in my view, does not close the door on a request for an extension of time filed within one month as required under section 37(1) and subsequently misplaced.
[11]
I have reviewed the letter of June 13, 1986 and I find as a fact that it disclosed sufficient detail to adquately inform the Registrar as well as other interested parties that the applicant was clearly initiating an application for an extension of time for the eventual filing of opposition.
[12]
A decision more on point was rendered by Mr. Justice Mahoney in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that particular case the Registrar deemed the opposition to have been abandoned and allowed the application because the Trademarks office had misfiled a request for an extension of time to file further evidence and, as a result, the Registrar was not in a position to consider the additional evidence before rendering his decision. The Court declared the application to be a nullity and ruled that the request for a further extension of time be referred back to the Registrar for further consideration. Similarly as in this situation the letter was not located until after the trademark had been allowed. Justice Mahoney wrote at p. 64:
"[...] The decision allowing the application is a nullity inasmuch as the appellant was denied the right to the hearing afforded it by the Act."
[13]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 671, has determined that tribunals which exercise executive or administrative powers are not bound by the rules of natural justice as such, however, they are under a general duty of fairness and shall provide opportunities for parties to respond. The long established principle governing discretionary and prerogative decisions in this Court, as derived from  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , is succinctly summarized in the headnote at p. 604 S.C.R. and it reads as follows:
"[...] Though a duty to act fairly may not be relevant to the question of jurisdiction under s. 28, s. 18 vests in the Trial Division of the Federal Court the jurisdiction to grant the common law remedy of certiorari and that remedy avails at common law wherever a public body has the power to decide any matter affecting the rights, interests, property, privileges or liberties of any person. The basis for the broad reach of the remedy is the general duty of fairness resting on all public decision-makers."
[14]
I am satisfied that the Registrar's decision in these circumstances was purely administrative and he had a duty to act fairly in exercising his powers.
[15]
The admininstrative decision-maker must consider and take into account all relevant factors. Though I am satisfied that the Registrar has no jurisdiction under the Trade Marks Act to suspend the application for the allowance of the trademark, this Court has that discretionary power.
[16]
In situations where discretionary powers are exercised without having regard to all relevant facts or where there may be an error on the face of the record, or there exists a procedural irregularity which eventually had an influence on the final determination made by the decision-maker, the exercise of that discretion should be subject to review by the Court in its supervisory capacity. If the disregard for the facts or the overlooking of some procedure was a relative factor in determining the outcome, the Court should exercise its discretion and set aside the decision or order. The granting of a writ of certiorari by this Court is well established and its discretion when or when not to grant it was summarized by Pratte, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where he wrote at p. 544:
"[...] A violation of natural justice (in the case of judicial or quasi-judicial decisions) and lack of procedural fairness (in the case of administrative decisions) are merely grounds on which certiorari may issue; but it may also issue on other grounds, irrespective of the judicial or administrative character of the decision under attack, namely, lack of jurisdiction and error of law on the face of the record. Once it is accepted, as it must be since the decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (supra) and Martineau (supra), that purely administrative decisions are no longer immune from certiorari, it quashed by certiorari not only, in appropriate cases, for lack of procedural fairness but also for lack of jurisdiction and error of law on the face of the record."
It is hereby ordered and determined that:
1) Certiorari will issue quashing the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks dated July 22, 1986.
2) Mandamus will issue granting that the extension of time be referred back to the Registrar for his consideration along with such further request as may be based on the time elapsed since the decision.
3) The opposition proceedings be resumed within the time allowed by the Registrar.
[17]
I make no order as to costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]