[1]
Campbell, J.
: This judicial review application concerns the fairness of the procedure which was used in considering Mr. Al-Joubeh's application under s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
R.S.C. 1985 c. 1-2 for an exemption from the visa requirements of the
Act
. The section provides:
"s. 114(2) The Governor-in-Council may, by regulation, authorize the Minister to exempt any person from any regulation made under subsection (1) or otherwise facilitate the admission of any person where the Minister is satisfied that the person should be exempted from that regulation or that the person's admission should be facilitated owing to the existence of compassionate or humanitarian consideration."
[2]
As the initial step in the procedure which has been generally adopted in processing s. 114(2) applications, an Immigration Officer conducts an inquiry into the circumstances and makes a decision on the merits of the application which then forms a recommendation to the Minister on whether the application should receive acceptance. The issue is whether a duty of fairness was breached in reaching the recommendation in Mr. Al-Joubeh's case, and if so, is it of such a nature to allow relief on judicial review?
[3]
The following facts are uncontested:
1) In September 1989, Mr. Al-Joubeh fled Lebanon for Switzerland and subsequently Canada where he applied for Convention refugee status on the ground of fear of persecution from the Hizbollah. In 1993, the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board decided he was not a refugee, and his subsequent judicial review application of this decision was dismissed.
2) As a result of being an unsuccessful refugee claimant, Mr. Al-Joubeh was assessed to determine if he could be admitted to Canada as a member of the "Post-Determination Refugee Claimants in Canada" (PDRCC) class. In May 1995 it was decided that he could not, and his subsequent judicial review application of this decision was dismissed in September 1995.
3) As evidence considered in the PDRCC assessment, an opinion of whether Mr. Al-Joubeh would be at risk if removed from Canada was prepared and submitted by a Post-Claim Determination Officer, Mr. Robert Barliszen, who found that Mr. Al-Joubeh would not be at risk. This opinion was made available to Mr. Al-Joubeh.
4) As a parallel application to the PDRCC assessment process, Mr. Al-Joubeh applied under s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
in December 1993. In July 1995, after an inquiry, a recommendation was made by Immigration Officer Ms. G. St. Hilaire not to process Mr. Al-Joubeh's application under s. 114(2) because insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds existed.
5) During her inquiry, Ms. Hilaire gathered evidence upon which to base her recommendation. As to evidence of the element of risk to Mr. Al-Joubeh, Ms. Hilaire followed directions contained in an internal Citizenship and Immigration Canada memorandum from the "Assistant Director of Inland Operations Directorate, Ontario Region" to "All Managers, Inland Ontario Region" dated October 18, 1994, which provides in part as follows:
a) If the application under s. 114(2) relates solely or primarily to risk, "the Immigration Officer is to seek an opinion on risk from the PCDO. The opinion of the PCDO is a factor the Immigration Officer could then rely on in making his own decision on the application".
b) On the parallel track, if the PDRCC review is completed and the s. 114(2) is still proceeding, then the risk determination under the PDRCC "must be considered in the decision making process. If there are no new elements of risk in the s. 114(2) submission, no further opinion needs to be obtained from the PCDO because her decision is on file and is final. If there are new elements of risk contained in the submission, then, advice can be sought from the PCDO and the Immigration Officer can make the appropriate decision. No favourable decision relating to risk should ever be made without consulting a PCDO. If the s. 114(2) submission is related to public policy reasons, the Immigration Officer can make the decision accordingly."
6) Ms. St. Hilaire confirmed that she was not prepared to consider all the relevant information on risk due to the fact that she was not trained to do risk assessments. She added that risk assessments were not her function, instead, they were the function of the Post Claims Review Section.
7) Ms. St. Hilaire followed the directions contained in the memorandum, and considered Mr. Barliszen's opinion prepared for the PDRCC assessment. However, since there were new elements of risk submitted by Mr. Al-Joubeh in the s. 114(2) applicaton, namely a warrant for arrest purportedly issued by the Hizbollah, a letter from Amnesty International and a psychological assessment of Mr. Al-Joubeh, Ms. St. Hilaire consulted further with Mr. Barliszen on the first two of these new elements, and received an updated opinion from him. She considered the psychological assessment herself.
8) In preparing his updated opinion given the new elements of risk supplied by Ms. St. Hilaire, Mr. Barliszen's considered the following new sources of information which were not considered in reaching the PDRCC opinion:
The Human Rights Watch Book "Playing the Communal Card"
; articles entitled, "
Dreaming of Christian Lebanon
" and "
Lebanon: The Succession of President Hrawi
"; and the oral opinions of the "local CSIS office's Middle East specialist".
[4]
The level of judicial scrutiny which can be maintained over a s. 114(2) recommendation has been the subject of careful comment. The following passages adapted from the respondent's Memorandum of Argument accurately set out uncontested principles to be followed in this case:
1) The content of the duty of fairness varies according to the circumstances. The decision in question is that of an immigration officer charged with making a recommendation to the Minister. The decision is wholly a matter of judgment and discretion. Only minimal procedural fairness principles are implied into a statutory scheme where the administrative function being carried out is "discretionary" and "policy-oriented" in nature and where the decision will not have any other effect than to give the applicant additional rights if it is favourable to the applicant. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(2d) 353; 106 D.L.R.(3d) 385; 13 C.R.(3d) 1 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)
2) In an application pursuant to s. 114(2), it is for the applicant to persuade the decision maker that he or she should be given exceptional treatment. In the absence of any evidence that the decision maker relied upon extrinsic evidence not brought forward by the applicant, the application to attack the decision maker's recommendation must fail. To succeed in the attack, the applicant must show that the decision maker erred in law, proceeded on some wrong or improper principle, or acted in bad faith. (
Shah
supra,
Vidal and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)
3) Guidelines for the exercise of discretion on humanitarian and compassionate considerations are permissible so long as these guidelines are intended to be statements of general policy or rough "rules of thumb" and not an exhaustive definition binding on Immigrations Officers. (
Vidal
, supra.)
[5]
Counsel for Mr. Al-Joubeh has argued that a duty of fairness was breached in reaching the decision in Mr. Al-Joubeh's case because the contents of the memorandum and Ms. St. Hilaire's views and actions support a finding that Ms. St. Hilaire was fettered in her ability to make an independent decision, and that this provides a ground to quash the order.
[6]
I find that the memorandum provides reasonable guidelines for processing s. 114(2) claims. It is clear on its face that the discretion for making a decision is the Immigration Officer's alone, but he or she is encouraged to seek an expert opinion on the issue of risk. It does state, however, that as was the case for Mr. Al-Joubeh, if the PDRCC assessment is completed, and no new evidence of risk exists, then the report already prepared on this element should be considered as final and that a further opinion should not be sought. This simply puts common sense into departmental policy.
[7]
I find that Ms. St. Hilaire was free to obtain an expert opinion on the issue of risk, and indeed it was good judgment for her to do so in view of her admitted lack of training in the subject. Accordingly, I can see nothing wrong in her admission that she was not prepared to consider all the relevant information on risk due to this fact. It is clear on what she said that instead of attempting to evaluate the information on risk, she chose instead to leave the risk analysis to the expert, Mr. Barliszen.
[8]
I find that Ms. St. Hilaire was free to decide as she did. There is no suggestion in the memorandum that an Immigration Officer is not free to decide on the available evidence. The memorandum only describes circumstances under which the resources of the PCDO should not be further used. It might very well be that the opinion of a PCDO on risk will be compelling to an Immigration Officer doing an inquiry and, accordingly, will be given great weight in deciding on the outcome. The allocation of weight is an important part of the decision making process, and I find that Ms. St. Hilaire properly considered and assigned weight to the risk opinion which was part of the duty of fairness she owed to Mr. Al-Joubeh.
[9]
There remains, however, a question about whether she should have done more.
[10]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  to a s. 114(2) recommendation and in which Hugessen, J.A., makes the following finding about procedure under this provision:
"The officer is not required to put before the applicant any tentative conclusions she may be drawing from the material before her, not even as to apparent contradictions that concern her. Of course, if she is going to rely on extrinsic evidence, not brought forward by the applicant, she must give him a chance to respond to such evidence."
[11]
Webster's Third New International Dictionary
defines "extrinsic" used in this context as "derived from an external source". Counsel for Mr Al-Joubeh has argued that the new sources of information considered by Mr. Barliszen in preparing his updated opinion are extrinsic evidence. I agree with this submission.
[12]
Shah
does not say that extrinsic evidence is not admissible. The case simply stands for the proposition that if such evidence is to be considered by an Immigration Officer in a s. 114(2) inquiry, the Officer must give the applicant a chance to respond to it. In this case, the PDRCC risk assessment was provided to the applicant and no objection has been raised about this. Objection is raised, however, to the updated assessment being considered by Ms. St. Hilaire without the applicant being given a chance to respond to the extrinsic evidence considered by Mr. Barliszen in its preparation. I am satisfied that, not having provided an opportunity to do so, Ms. St. Hilaire failed to observe a principle of procedural fairness that she was required by law to observe.
[13]
I have been told by counsel for the applicant that, if given an opportunity to do so, there is a great deal which can be said in response to the updated risk assessment which will add to the evidence that Ms. St. Hilaire must consider in reaching her recommendation. My concern is to see that this happens.
[14]
The applicant has argued that Ms. St. Hilaire's recommendation should be quashed and a new inquiry ordered before another Immigration Officer. I do not feel that this is the proper remedy. I see no reason why Ms. St. Hilaire cannot hear the response to the extrinsic evidence and then decide on the s. 114(2) application with the benefit of that response. Since the response will be on the issue of risk, Ms. St. Hilaire will be obliged to seek a further updated opinion from Mr. Barliszen, and to assign weight to it in reaching her decision.
[15]
Accordingly, pursuant to s. 18.1(3)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
, I set aside Ms. St. Hilaire's recommendation and refer this case back to her for the taking of further evidence as I have outlined, and for a new recommendation under s. 114(2).
[16]
I make no award as to costs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/sg
[End of document]