[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This is an application for an order by way of certiorari quashing the decision of the respondents refusing the applicant's request for permanent residence in Canada, and for a writ of mandamus directing that:
(a) The respondents consider and process the applicant's request for permanent residence in Canada in accordance with the Immigration Act and Immigration Regulations.
(b) The respondents determine in accordance with the law, whether it would be contrary to the said Immigration Act and Immigration Regulations to grant landing to the applicant.
[2]
This matter came on for hearing at Toronto, Ontario, on May 1, 1989. At that time, I dismissed the application from the Bench and indicated that these brief written reasons would follow.
[3]
The applicant has requested permanent residence in Canada as an independent candidate pursuant to s. 6(1) of the Immigration Act. Such applications involve a two-stage assessment process during which it is the visa officer's duty to apply criteria set forth in the legislation and award points based on the ability of the applicant to become successfully established in Canada. The criteria for successful establishment include age, education, occupational demand and experience, language and personal suitability. The first phase of the assessment is a paper screening process in which immigration officials evaluate documents submitted by applicants and decide if the application process should be continued. If the applicant passes this phase, he is invited to an interview with a visa officer. During the interview, the officer assesses the employment experience of the applicant and awards points for the other factors based on the information presented. Obviously, one of the most significant factors in any assessment is the applicant's possibility of employment in Canada. Points are therefore awarded both for occupational demand in the paper screening step, and for experience in the final assessment. The process also requires recourse to the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations (C.C.D.O), a seven volume manual which classifies and describes thousands of occupations. Assessment of any one intended occupation begins with a matching of the applicant's work routine with a specific occupation from the C.C.D.O.
[4]
The facts are not in dispute and are contained in the affidavits of the applicant, Anita Sulley, one of his solicitors, and Aphordite Zografos, Justice Liaison Officer. The applicant resides in the Philippines where he is employed as department head of the Bottle Yard Department of San Miguel Corporation. An application for permanent residence in Canada was submitted to the Canadian Consulate General in San Francisco, California dated February 17, 1987, accompanied by a letter from the applicant's solicitor. On the application form, the applicant's present occupation was cited as "Manager, Shipping and Container", but Box 19 which is for the intended occupation in Canada, was not completed. The solicitor's letter outlines the applicant's work experience as including extensive experience in physical distribution, warehousing, layouting, material handling, engineering and trucking. A further component of his present employment includes domestic and overseas operation of break bulk and containerized shipping including manning, husbanding, handling, port of authority arrangements and dispatching.
[5]
The applicant was convoked for an interview on July 28, 1987. In support of his application he submitted numerous documents describing his employment duties, work experience and course taken. During the interview, the applicant states he was questioned with regards to his present employment and asked to give a description of his duties. He replied that he was involved in yarding operations, warehousing, layouting, loading and unloading of container vents and logistic or physical distribution in general; seventy per cent of his time being spent in the field coordinating various activities and supervising day-to-day activities with the remaining thirty per cent occupied by paperwork, planning, budgeting and monitoring of operations and cost reports. The applicant maintains he was not required to give details about his experience over the seven years he had been employed by the San Miguel Corporation. A copy of the visa officer's notes taken during the interview was included as exhibit "P" in the respondent's material:
"After careful review of PI's duties as Manager, Bottleyard Operations for a brewery in Cebu it appears that his occupational category should be as is indicated in #16 above. Zero demand brings automatic refusal. Further, as PI has six dependent children, believe he would have great difficulty finding suitable employment to support his family."
[6]
In the following letter dated August 7, 1987, the applicant's request for permanent residence was refused:
"This refers to your application for permanent residence in Canada and your interview at this officer on 28 July 1987.
"One of the key factors in meeting Canadian immigration selection criteria in the independent category is that the applicant's job skills be classified as being in demand in Canada. It is our task to thoroughly review your employment background and qualifications, categorize them into the job classification system provided in the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations (C.C.D.O.) and then determine whether occupations in that category are currently listed as being in demand in Canada.
"We have therefore carefully reviewed the information you have provided in your application, the documents you supplied, and your answers to questions at your interview concerning employment skills. It is our conclusion from this analysis that, there being no C.C.D.O. classification under your current title -- Manager, Bottleyard Operations -- the closest approximation is C.C.D.O. category 1149-146-Manager, Warehouse.
"Unfortunately, occupations in the 1149 category are not currently in demand in Canada and, as a result, you therefore do not meet immigration selection criteria in the independent category. We must therefore refuse your application."
[7]
In response to this refusal, the applicant's solicitor forwarded a letter dated August 17, 1987, explaining that in the application form, the applicant's intended occupation had inadvertently been left out. Consideration of the applicant in the occupation of Manager, Transport Department was requested with Manager, Water Transport listed as an alternative. The visa officer replied that the applicant had in fact been paper screened on the basis of the intended occupation Manager, Transport Department, which allowed the application to proceed to the interview stage. Based on the detailed questioning as to the applicant's past and present employment and the material submitted by the applicant, the officer explained that a classification as Manager, Transport Department or any other demand category could not be substantiated.
[8]
The applicant's solicitor replied in correspondence dated August 4, 1988, that the visa officer had improperly assessed the applicant's work experience on the basis of his current title rather than assessing actual training and experience and requested a re-review of the application. The re-review was refused for the reason that the visa officer had assessed all components of the applicant's work experience through a lengthy interview and thorough examination of written evidence presented by the applicant. It was maintained that it had never been the policy of the San Francisco Immigration Office to base occupational assessments on position titles.
[9]
In appeal of the refusal for permanent residence, the applicant argues that it is inferential that a person carrying out the occupation of Manager, Warehouse for a water transport company has in hand the experience of Manager, Water Transport or Manager, Transport Department. It is also submitted that the visa officer wrongfully assessed the applicant's request for permanent residence on the basis of his current occupation and failed to evaluate his actual work experience in relation to the intended occupations.
[10]
On the other hand, the respondents maintain that the evidence demonstrates his visa officer carefully considered the applicant's work history, past and present, together with all the relevant C.C.D.O. classifications and did not fall into the error of considering the work experience or classification, or both, too narrowly.
[11]
The relevant legislative provisions in this matter are ss. 9, 12(1), 14(2) of the Immigration Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended (formerly S.C. 1976-77, c. 52), ss. 8(1)(a), 8(2), 9(1), 11(1), 11(2) of the Immigration Regulations and factors 3 and 4 of Schedule I:
Immigration Act
"9(1) Except in such cases as are prescribed, every immigrant and visitor shall make an application for and obtain a visa before that person appears at a port of entry.
"(2) Every person who makes an application for a visa shall be assessed by a visa officer for the purpose of determining whether the person appears to be a person who may be granted landing or entry, as the case may be.
"(3) Every person shall answer truthfully all questions put to that person by the visa officer and shall produce such documentation as may be required by the visa officer for the purpose of establishing that his admission would not be contrary to this Act or the regulations.
"(4) Where a visa officer is satisfied that it would not be contrary to this Act or the regulations to grant landing or entry, as the case may be, to a person who has made an application pursuant to subs. (1), the visa officer may issue a visa to that person, for the purpose of identifying the holder thereof as an immigrant or a visitor, as the case may be, who, in the opinion of the visa officer, meets the requirements of this Act and the regulations. 1976-77, c. 52, s. 9.
"12(1) Every person seeking to come into Canada shall appear before an immigration officer at a port of entry, or at such other place as may be designated by a senior immigration officer, for examination to determine whether that person is a person who shall be allowed to come into Canada or may be granted admission.
"14(2) Where an immigration officer is satisfied that it would not be contrary to this Act or the regulations to grant landing to an immigrant whom the officer has examined, the officer shall
(a) grant landing to that immigrant, in which case the officer may impose terms and conditions of a prescribed nature; or
(b) authorize that immigrant to come into Canada on condition that the immigrant be present for further examination by an immigration officer within such time and at such place as the immigration officer who examined the immigrant may direct."
Immigration Regulations
:
"8(1) For the purpose of determining whether an immigrant and his dependants, other than a member of the family class or a Convention refugee seeking resettlement, will be able to become successfully established in Canada, a visa officer shall assess that immigrant or, at the option of the immigrant, the spouse of that immigrant,
(a) in the case of an immigrant, other than an immigrant described in paragraph (b), (c) or (e), on the basis of each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I;
"(2) A visa officer shall award to an immigrant who is assessed on the basis of factors listed in column I of Schedule I the appropriate number of units of assessment for each factor in accordance with the criteria set out in column II thereof opposite that factor, but he shall not award for any factor more units of assessment than the maximum number set out in column III thereof opposite that factor.
"9(1) Where an immigrant, other than a member of the family class, an assisted relative, a Convention refugee seeking resettlement or an investor, makes an application for a visa, a visa officer may, subject to section 11, issue an immigrant visa to him and his accompanying dependants if
(a) he and his dependants, whether accompanying dependants or not, are not members of any inadmissible class and otherwise meet the requirements of the Act and these Regulations; and
(b) on the basis of his assessment in accordance with s. 8
(i) in the case of an immigrant other than a retired person or an entrepreneur, he is awarded at least 70 units of assessment, or
(ii) in the case of an entrepreneur, he is awarded at least 25 units of assessment.
"11(1) Subject to subss. (3) and (4), a visa officer shall not issue an immigrant visa pursuant to s. 9 or 10 to an immigrant who is assessed on the basis of factors listed in column I of Schedule I and is not awarded any units of assessment for the factor set out in item 3 thereof unless the immigrant
(a) has arranged employment in Canada and has a written statement from the proposed employer verifying that he is willing to employ an inexperienced person in the position in which the person is to be employed, and the visa officer is satisfied that the person can perform the work required without experience; or
(b) is qualified for and is prepared to engage in employment in a designated occupation.
"(2) Subject to subss. (3) and (4), a visa officer shall not issue an immigrant visa pursuant to s. 9 or 10 to an immigrant other than an entrepreneur, an investor, a retired person or a self-employed person unless
(a) the units of assessment awarded to that immigrant include at least one unit of assessment for the factor set out in item 4 of column I of Schedule I;
(b) the immigrant has arranged employment in Canada; or
(c) the immigrant is prepared to engage in employment in a designated occupation."
Schedule I
(ss. 3, 7, 8, and 11)
Column I
Column II
Column III
Factors
Criteria
Max. Units
3. Experience
Units of assessment shall be awarded for experience in the occupation in which the applicant is assessed under item 4 or, in the case of an entrepreneur, for experience in the occupation that the entrepreneur is qualified for and is prepared to follow in Canada, as follows:
8
(a) when the Specific vocational Preparation time needed is less than three months, two units for the first year of experience;
(b) when the Specific Vocational Preparation time needed is three months or more and less than twelve months, two units for each year of experience not exceeding two years;
(c) when the Specific Vocational Preparation time needed is one year or more and less than four years, two units for each year of experience not exceeding three years; and
(d) when the Specific Vocational Preparation time needed is four years or more, two units for each year experience.
4. Occupational Demand
Units of assessment shall be awarded on the basis of employment opportunites available in Canada in the occupation that the applicant is qualified for and is prepared to follow in Canada, such opportunities being determined by taking into account labour market demand on both an area and national basis.
10
[12]
As I held in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), these cases require that the actual experience and time spent in each of the various responsibilities in an applicant's occupation be broken down in order to award units of assessment for experience for experience in intended occupations, but in my opinion, that analysis was carried out by the visa officer in this case. The applicant argues that he was simply assessed with regards to his current position, without having his actual experience taken into account but correspondence from immigration officials filed with the applicant's affidavit indicates otherwise. The letter from the visa officer in response to counsel's letter of August 17, 1987, demonstrates that the applicant was initially assessed in his subsequently proclaimed intended occupation of Manager, Transport Department. Indeed, this assessment resulted in the applicant being called for an interview. In addition, the initial refusal letter, the visa officer's notes taken during the interview, as well as subsequent correspondence from immigration officials indicate that all components of the applicant's work experience were considered by the officer with regards to the intended occupations and any other applicable demand occupations. The visa officer examined the applicant's situation and found that in fact, he did not have the necessary experience for his intended occupations. Whether I would have reached the same result or not is irrelevant. Section 18 application are not an appellate review and in the absence of a denial of natural justice or an error of law, I cannot interfere with the visa officer's decision.
[13]
There was evidence to support the visa officer's assessment, and I am not satisfied that there was an error of law, of jurisdiction or a denial of natural justice. Accordingly, I dismissed the application with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slg
[End of document]