[1]
MacKay, J.
: In these interlocutory proceedings, heard in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on May 9, 1989, the defendants presented two applications to be considered as alternatives, for
1) an Order that the statement of claim filed by the plaintiff in this matter be struck out in its entirety without leave to amend, pursuant to rules 419 and 408 of the Federal Court Rules, and if that application not be granted,
2) an Order that the plaintiff produce for inspection and for the taking of copies certain documents being, relating to and identifying an agency agreement between the plaintiff and Vet's Moving and Storage Company, pursuant to rule 455(2).
[2]
The action between the parties commenced with the filing on August 7, 1987, of the plaintiff's statement of claim alleging damages through breach of contract or by negligence of the defendants in loading, storage, carriage, handling and discharge of goods said to be owned by the plaintiff, which were carred under a Bill of Lading issued by the defendant CN Marine Inc. from North Sydney, Nova Scotia to Port aux Basques, Newfoundland in August, 1986. The goods in question consisted of a tractor-trailer containing household effects and it is alleged extensive damage to the tractor-trailer and its contents was observed on discharge from the "Stena Grecia", a vessel operated by the defendants.
[3]
In the statement of claim the plaintiff alleges, inter alia, that:
"At all material times herein it was the owner of certain goods hereinafter described" (paragraph 1)
"Pursuant to a contract of carriage, a tractor-trailer containing household goods for five families was received on board the vessel "Stena Grecia" in good order and condition by the defendants which undertook to carry the said tractor-trailer and contents herein in the same good order and condition to the plaintiff at Port aux Basques, Newfoundland. Upon receipt of the goods the defendants issued a clean on board Bill of Lading No. 321397." (paragraph 4)
"Upon arrival of the vessel at Port aux Basques, ... extensive damage was observed to the tractor-trailer and the contents therein ... and as a result the plaintiff has sustained a loss in the amount of $10,334.42." (paragraph 6)
"... the defendants failed to make available for delivery the plaintiffs' goods at Port aux Basques ... and failed to safely carry, stow, discharge, care for and deliver the plaintiff's said goods and to make the same available for delivery." (paragraph 7)
"... at all material times herein it was the owner of the shipment, owner, holder and endorsee for value of the Bill of Lading and all rights thereto, and owner and consigee of the shipment and the person to whom the defendants are liable for the loss in the amount of $21,337.05." (paragraph 11)
[4]
In October 1987 the defendants filed a statement of defence and in November filed a notice to inspect, notice to admit and notice under the Canada Evidence Act and with that a defendants' list of documents in accord with rule 447. Thereafter, in the course of an examination for discovery of a representative of the plaintiff company, counsel for the defendants learned that the tractor trailer alleged to have been damaged by the defendants was not in fact owned by the plaintiff, that Vet's Moving and Storage Company acted as agent for the plaintiff in carrying the goods, and further that the contents of the trailer, household goods, were not owned by the plaintiff but by five families with which agents of the plaintiff had contracted to carry household effects to and for delivery in Newfoundland. It also became clear to counsel for the defendants that there is a written agency agreement between the plaintiff and Vet's Moving and Storage Company, but the plaintiff declined to produce this document or documents, though requested to do so by the defendants' counsel, on grounds of confidentiality and concern for the plaintiff's position via-à-vis competitors who might be interested in information of this sort.
[5]
Thereafter on January 27, 1989, the defendants' motions now under consideration were filed. In response to the motion to strike the plaintiff prepared an amended statement of claim, provided it to counsel for the defendants and sought consent for its filing. Consent was not given and the original statement of claim remains the basis of the action at this stage.
[6]
At the hearing counsel for the defendants appeared in support of the applications, and counsel for the plaintiff filed affidavits, supporting exhibits and written submissions pursuant to rule 325 in response (and in opposition) to the motions of the defendants. After consideration of argument advanced on behalf of the defendants and of the written submissions on behalf of the plaintiff, the following are my reasons and conclusions concerning these applications, which are dealt with in turn.
The Motion To Strike The Statement Of Claim
[7]
The defendants' motion to strike the plaintiff's statement of claim in its entirety without leave to amend pursuant to rules 419 and 408 is based on submissions that it
a) discloses no reasonable cause of action,
b) is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious,
c) may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action, or
d) is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court.
[8]
These submissions in turn reflect the grounds for this motion as set out in rule 419(1), clauses (a), (c), (d) and (f) respectively. In support of these submissions the affidavit of counsel for the defendants indicates that in discovery it became apparent that the plaintiff was not the owner of the tractor-trailer unit covered under the Bill of Lading issued for the voyage for transport between North Sydney and Port aux Basques, and that it was not the owner of the contents of the trailer unit.
[9]
The defendants say that since it is apparent from examination for discovery that the plaintiff did not own or have any possessory interest in the goods carried by ship the plaintiff has no material facts upon which to base its claim. This is the basis of the defendants' submission that the statement of claim discloses no reasonable cause of action. Further, the proposed amended statement of claim, not yet filed, contains allegations of ownership of the tractor-trailer which the evidence available from discovery does not support. The allegations of ownership, belied by evidence determined on discovery, are the basis of submissions that the statement of claim is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious, and implicitly, at least in part, that it may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action, or that it is otherwise an abuse of the process of the court.
[10]
Before turning to the merits of the motion by the defendants to strike the statement of claim procedural issues are raised by the plaintiff in opposition to the motion. Objection to the motion to strike at this stage in the proceedings is raised because the defendants have responded, in filing their defence, to the pleadings to which objection is now taken. The plaintiff relies on the general principle precluding a motion to strike after response to the pleading in issue on the basis of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 160 (F.C.T.D.) which concerns a submission under rule 419 (1)(a) that the statement of claim discloses no reasonable cause of action, and in relation to submissions on other grounds set out by the defendants reflecting those in rule 419(1)(c), (d) and (f), in reliance upon general principles enunciated in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 490 (F.C.T.D.) and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).
[11]
The defendants point to exceptions to the general principle as indicated in Caterpillar Tractor Co., supra, where Addy, J., did allow a motion to strike certain paragraphs in a defence, after reply, where on examination for discovery the defendant's representative had admitted there were no facts known to support the allegations in the paragraphs in question. The defendants here also point to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where Walsh, J., indicated that despite rule 419(2) in a motion to strike under rule 419(1)(a) the court could not ignore evidence in an affidavit supporting the motion to strike which clearly showed that an essential allegation is not true, or is at least erroneous or misleading. Further in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  claim, after defence was filed without objection to the form or content of the claim, where it was submitted inter alia that the statement of claim disclosed no reasonable cause of action and that in the circumstances the court lacked jurisdiction. In that case, the learned justice affirmed that the defendant may ask at any time, before and even during trial, for an action to be dismissed which is the essence of a motion to strike a statement of claim on the ground it does not disclose a reasonable cause of action, and that such a motion should be considered on its merits.
[12]
The defendants' authorities also included  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), where Urie, J.A., speaking for the Court of Appeal, declined to disturb the discretionary Order of the trial judge who had not allowed a motion to strike after particulars had been sought and provided and the defence had been filed in relation to matters subsequently objected to, and where the submission in support of the motion simply indicated that the paragraph there objected to did not raise any cause of action within the jurisdiction of the court.
[13]
I acknowledge the general principle upon which plaintiff relies in opposition to the motion to strike, that is that a party who responds to matters pleaded cannot in normal circumstances subsequently object to the pleadings. I do not accept that the general principle precludes consideration of the merits of a motion to strike on the ground that the claim, or defence, does not disclose any reasonable cause of action, or defence, nor should it apply to circumstances where material facts alleged in the statement of claim are denied in examination for discovery of the plaintiff and the denial subsequently becomes the defendant's basis for submission of a motion to strike. In the circumstances of this case it is my conclusion that the merits of the motions advanced on behalf of the defendants warrant consideration.
[14]
When we turn to the merits of the defendants' motion to strike the statement of claim we start from the principle, clearly established by precedent, that the court is reluctant to strike out pleadings except where it is satisfied that the case for striking is beyond doubt (per Estey, J., in Inuit Tapirisat of Canada and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 740), or "unless it is obvious that the plaintiff's action is so clearly futile that it has not the slightest chance of succeeding" (per Pratte, J., in David Creaghan, Executor of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 735 (T.D.), quoted by Teitelbaum, J., in Blackfoot Indian Band No. 146 v. Canada et al. (1986), 7 F.T.R. 133, at 139 (T.D.)).
[15]
Here defendants submit that evidence obtained from discovery of the plaintiff's representative clearly establishes, contrary to allegations in the statement of claim, that plaintiff does not own and has no possessory interest in the goods transported and allegedly damaged, either in the tractor-trailer or in its contents. Defendants rely upon Tetley, Marine Cargo Claims (3rd Ed., Blais, Montréal, 1988) at 177 to 189 and 208 to 213 for the general principle that to claim for damage to cargo carried by sea, either in contract or in tort, the claimant must have title to the goods in order to recover substantial damages for breach of contract or to claim at all in tort. In The "Sanix Ace", [1987] 1 L1. L.R. 465 (Q.B.D.) Hobhouse, J., on appeal from an arbitrator, upheld an award of substantial damages to claimants who were charterers and also owners of a bulk cargo damaged in transit. He affirmed a longstanding principle of English law that ownership of the goods carried or possessory title to the goods is essential for a claim for damage to cargo. In Leigh and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C.), the House of Lords dismissed an appeal by one who had claimed for damages to cargo in both contract and tort but who had no property in the goods when the damage was done.
[16]
The defendants submit that the plaintiff, not having claimed an assignment of the claims of owners of the goods transported under the Bill of Lading and not having joined the owners as parties to the action, has, at most, a claim for financial losses arising under contracts it made with the owner of the goods, a claim which defendants say is not recoverable in an action based on damage to cargo carried by sea. They rely upon The "Esso Bernica", [1989] 1 L1. L.R. 8. In that case in an action for negligence causing damage to a ship and loss of some of its oil cargo the House of Lords struck out claims to recover sums paid out in relation to claims in respect of oil pollution arising under the terms of a voluntary agreement among tanker owners. The basis of that conclusion was a general rule of English and Scots Law that where a party has indemnified another and is subrogated to the rights of the person indemnified he can only pursue those rights in the name of that person.
[17]
The "Esso Bernica" The "Sanix Ace" and Leigh and Sillavan Ltd., supra, may be important authorities in relation to claims the plaintiff here advances. The plaintiff argues that it did incur direct costs itself, aside from settlements paid to others whose household effects were damaged, as a result of the alleged failure by defendants to carry and deliver the tractor-trailer and its contents in good order. It is, or course, the party to whom one of the corporate defendants issued the Bill of Lading relating to carriage of the tractor-trailer. It may thus have a claim against the defendants which at trial of this matter would have to be considered.
[18]
In these circumstances, it cannot be said at this stage that the plaintiff's claim is futile or that the original statement of claim cannot be amended to properly disclose a reasonable cause of action, as the test for considering a motion to strike a statement of claim was expressed by Thurlow, A.C.J., as he was then, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 259 (F.C.T.D.).
[19]
Further, the defendants' submission that the absence of ownership or possessory title, and the failure to have assignments from owners or to join them as parties, leaves the plaintiff without standing in this matter cannot, in light of the plaintiff's possible claim in relation to other costs directly incurred by it, be resolved at this stage.
[20]
As background to any confusion in relation to the right to claim damages, the pleadings filed in this matter, ie., the statement of claim and the defence, join issue, inter alia, on whether the tractor-trailer carried under the Bill of Lading was damaged, what the cause of the loss, if any, may have been and what the appropriate basis may be for compensation for loss. These issues can only be resolved at trial, if the claims of the plaintiff are not withdrawn or settled.
[21]
Other grounds are submitted by the defendants for striking the statement of claim. It is said that it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious in that the plaintiff has no material facts upon which to base its action since it had no ownership or possessory rights in the goods allegedly damaged, and further, it is implied, that misrepresentations as to ownership made in the statement of claim which evidence on discovery does not support violate principles of fair pleading and thus, are scandalous or vexatious. As noted, the plaintiff claims for costs incurred by it aside from any settlements made with owners of goods, a matter that became clear in the process of discovery. Of course, misrepresentation of facts alleged in a statement of claim cannot be condoned and to the extent those are clear the plaintiff should seek to amend its claim if it is to have any hope of succeeding even in part in an action. But where those are now known to defendants, if only through discovery, the defendant is not further prejudiced if this matter proceeds. Thus, because there appears an issue to be tried, unless this matter is settled, while the plaintiff may have violated principles of fair pleading in the statement of claim filed, I am not prepared to strike the statement of claim at this stage.
[22]
It is implied by the defendants that failure to provide a consistent statement of claim for special damages, which have varied each time they have been expressed in the plaintiff's original and draft amended statement of claim and in subsequent correspondence, is vexatious. It is surprising that the plaintiff has been so casual in treating this matter, but those damages are now said to have been provided with particulars and in any event would have to be established at trial.
[23]
The defendants submit that proceeding under the statement of claim would be prejudicial and an abuse of the process of the court, where the owners of the goods alleged to have been damaged have not been joined as parties, and they are now subject to suit by those claiming as owners. Indeed one or more of the defendants have received a statement of claim initiating action from a third party claiming as owner of household goods carried in the tractor-trailer aboard the "Stena Grecia". The plaintiff submits that there is no inherent prejudice to the defendants as a result of its claim for amounts paid out under contracts between the plaintiff and the owners. Whether the plaintiff's failure to join the owners as parties (which defendants submit is required for the plaintiff's claim to succeed) ultimately provides a defence to some or all of plaintiff's claim can only be resolved at trial. At this stage that failure, and the possibility of separate claims by third party owners against defendants do not, in my view, render the statement of claim filed herein so prejudicial to the defendants or such an abuse of the process of the court as to warrant striking out the statement of claim.
[24]
While amendments to pleadings may be required and while the statement of claim as originally filed may be erroneous or at least misleading in allegations of certain material facts, it is my conclusion that the statement of claim ought not to be struck out at this stage.
[25]
Even taking into account the lack of ownership or possessory title of the plaintiff in the goods alleged to have been damaged, assuming other facts alleged in the statement to be true, the plaintiff has an arguable case in relation to some aspects of its claim. That meets the standard required in relation to a motion to strike under rule 419(1)(a) as set out by Mr. Justice Pratte as he then was in the Federal Court, Trial Division, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In relation to the submissions on other grounds, reflecting rule 419(1)(c), (d) and (f), the standard from Creaghan requires that I be persuaded, which I am not, that the plaintiff's action in all of its aspects is so clearly futile that it has not the slightest chance of succeeding. Nor is the statement of claim "clearly and obviously so irrelevant, impertient or vexatious as to violate any reasonable concept of fair pleading or manifestly an abuse of the process of the court", in the words of McNair, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  dismiss the defendants' motion to strike the statement of claim.
The Motion For Production Of Documents
[26]
The defendants' second application pursuant to rule 455(2) of the Federal Court Rules, seeks an order directing the plaintiff to produce for inspection and for the taking of copies certain documents being, related to and identifying an agency agreement between the plaintiff and Vet's Moving and Storage Company.
[27]
The defendants claim that during the course of examination for discovery of the plaintiff that a third party, referred to in the affidavit of defendants' counsel in support of the motion as Vet's Moving & Transportation Ltd., acted as an agent for the plaintiff, carrying the household effects in a tractor-trailer unit carried on board the defendants' vessel. Further, in the course of discovery the plaintiff acknowledged that there exists an agreement between it and the agent, Vet's Moving & Transportation Ltd., but that it would not produce the agreement unless ordered to do so by a court. The defendants claim that the documents(s) is (are) relevant to its ability to make full answer in defence to the claims of the plaintiff.
[28]
The plaintiff submits that the agreement between it and its agent is not relevant to any of the issues in this action. It is submitted that as the defendants' contract of carriage was entered into with the plaintiff any agency agreement that the plaintiff may have entered into in whatever capacity respecting the shipment carried by the defendants is irrelevant and that only the plaintiff can take action against the defendants under the contract of carriage. This argument does not address the plaintiff's claim in tort for negligence and if the defendants believe that the agency agreement is relevant to issues and to their defence it is my conclusion that they are entitled to inspect and to have copies of the documents in possession of the plaintiffs which constitute the agency agreement with Vet's Moving and Storage Company also described as Vet's Moving & Transportation Ltd.
[29]
While in the course of discovery the plaintiff indicated that it was prepared to undertake to answer any questions pertaining to the agency agreement in question that does not satisfy the defendants' interest in inspecting the documents and having copies of them. During the course of discovery and in the affidavit of the plaintiff's solicitor in relation to this motion, the plaintiff's concern with production of the agency agreement in question appears to be the confidentiality of certain terms which presumably would be of interest to competitors. The defendants are prepared to give undertakings to maintain the documents constituting the agency agreement on a confidential basis and for purposes only of defence in this action. An undertaking of this kind would be an appropriate condition of an order to produce under rule 455(2). If, at a future stage, one or others of the parties seeks to file the agreement with records in this action the court may issue an appropriate order to seal the documents in questions as confidential if such an order is sought.
[30]
The rules of this court about production of documents generally are designed to ensure access by one party to documents available to the other which may be relevant to issues raised in an action between them. In the circumstances of this case I conclude that those general purposes are best served by allowing the defendants' application that the plaintiff produce for inspection and for the taking of copies certain documents being, relating to and identifying an agency agreement between the plaintiff and Vet's Moving and Storage Company (or Vet's Moving & Transportation Ltd.) and the Order to produce will thus issue.
Costs
[31]
In their notices of motion the defendants did not specify that they would seek costs in relation to these applications. At the time of the hearing it was submitted by their counsel that costs should be awarded to the defendants. It was submitted that in connection with the first motion, to strike the statement of claim, the inclusion of certain erroneous allegations of material facts, later clarified as erroneous in the course of examination for discovery but not yet addressed by amendments to the statement of claim or fully addressed in the proposed amended statement which the plaintiff had submitted to counsel for the defendants - that all this warranted costs to the defendants, implicitly regardless of the outcome of the application.
[32]
Of course, in the usual run of events costs follow the success in the outcome of proceedings and on interlocutory matters, it is the general practice that costs simply become costs in the cause and are then settled as costs may be awarded in the final outcome. While I have considerable sympathy for the submission of the defendants in relation to the first motion, I note that costs were not put in issue by its notices of motion and were not addressed by the plaintiff in its written submissions. I note also that success in relation to these two applications of the defendants is divided between the parties. In these circumstances, it seems to me appropriate that costs be costs in the cause.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slg
[End of document]