[1]
Gibson, J.
: These reasons relate to two separate applications for judicial review, the first of two decisions, the second of a single decision, all essentially identical and arising out of a series of transactions in the last months of 1991 and the first months of 1992, in which the National Tripartite Stabilization Committee for Beef (the "Committee") denied the three applicants' appeals of decisions made by the Alberta Administration Office of the National Tripartite Stabilization Program for Beef (the "Program") which declared ineligible for stabilization payments substantial transactions in slaughter-weight cattle in respect of which stabilization payments had already been made.
[2]
In the result, the three applicants (the "applicants") in the two separate applications were found to be liable for substantial repayments.
[3]
At the opening of the hearing before me, counsel were in agreement that the fact situations underlying the two separate applications for judicial review by the three applicants were essentially identical and therefore the two applications were heard together. On the same basis, these reasons are applicable to the two separate applications filed.
[4]
The factual background may be briefly summarized as follows. As indicated earlier, the applicants engaged in substantial transactions involving slaughter-weight cattle in the last months of 1991 and the first months of 1992. For example, in that period, Haney Farms sold, in two separate transactions, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-four slaughter-weight cattle and thereafter purchased one thousand seven hundred and fifty-four cattle to replace the animals sold. Similar transactions were made by the other applicants. Some months later, stabilization payment levels for the period in question were established and the applicants received stabilization payments. On further review, those stabilization payments were disallowed by the Alberta Office of the Program and were sought to be recovered. The applicants unsuccessfully appealed the disallowances to the Committee.
[5]
In its decision letters, the Committee stated:
"On May 30, 1994, the National Beef Committee reviewed your appeal of the decision made under the National Tripartite Stabilization Program (NTSP) for Beef to disallow sales of slaughter cattle and to demand repayment of stabilization payments previously made on those sales.
"After due consideration, the Committee confirmed the above-noted decision based on the determination that stabilization payments on the sales in dispute would be contrary to the stated purpose of the NTSP, which is to reduce income loss to producers due to market risks. The sale and purchase of animals of similar weight and value did not involve the producers in any material market risk."
The Statutory And
Administrative Scheme
[6]
The National Tripartite Stabilization Program for Beef was first established under the
Agricultural Stabilization Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. A-8. The preamble to that
Act
read as follows:
"Whereas it is expedient to enact a measure for the purpose of stabilizing the prices of agricultural commodities in order to assist the industry of agriculture to realize fair returns for its labour and investment, and to maintain a fair relationship between prices received by farmers and the costs of the goods and services that they buy, thus to provide farmers with a fair share of the national income;"
By amendments to the
Agricultural Stabilization Act
assented to on the 28th day of June, 1985, R.S.C. 1985 (1st Supp.), c. 40 which were, with an exception not relevant to this matter, effective that day, Parliament provided for price stabilization schemes based on price stabilization agreements. A new s. 13(2) was added reading as follows:
"(2) Where provinces or producers, or provinces and producers, desire to participate in a price stabilization scheme for an agricultural commodity, the Governor-in-Council may, subject to this section, authorize the Minister to enter into agreements with those provinces or producers, or provinces and producers, as the case may be, to provide such a scheme."
Subsection (4) of the same section provided that an agreement must specify certain matters and must provide for the establishment of a stabilization committee, consisting of representatives of Canada and of the province or producers or of the province and producers, as the case may be, and must specify the powers and duties of the stabilization committee.
[7]
A tripartite agreement for feeder calves, feeder cattle and slaughter cattle was entered into by Canada, Alberta, and the other nine provinces in February of 1989. The program was to be cost-shared among Canada, the provinces and producers. It was to be voluntary in respect of producer participation. It was recited to be an agreement "... to reduce loss of income to cattle producers due to market risks by stabilizing the price for Feeder calves, Feeder cattle and Slaughter cattle ...".
[8]
The applicants were voluntary participants in the scheme.
[9]
A producer handbook published at about the same time recited the same objective. It stated that the National Tripartite Stabilization Plans were established by federal provincial agreements and were designed to reduce income loss by producers as a result of market risks.
[10]
Effective April 1, 1991, the
Agricultural Stabilization Act
was repealed and replaced by the
Farm Income Protection Act
, S.C. 1991, c. 22. The long title of that
Act
was as follows:
"An Act authorizing agreements between the Government of Canada and the provinces to provide for protection for the income of producers of agricultural products and to enable the Government of Canada to take additional measures for that purpose"
Thus, the objective of the former
Act
and of the plans in existence, which were continued, remained essentially constant.
Preliminary Issues
1. Jurisdiction
[11]
Counsel for the respondent took the position before me that the Committee is not a federal board commission or other tribunal within the meaning of s. 2 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, and therefore the decisions here at issue are not subject to judicial review by this court. The definition "federal board commission or other tribunal" in s. 2 of the
Federal Court Act
reads as follows:
"'federal board, commission or other tribunal' means any body or any person or persons having, exercising or purporting to exercise jurisdiction or powers conferred by or under an Act of Parliament or by or under an order made pursuant to a prerogative of the Crown, other than any such body constituted or established by or under a law of a province or any such person or persons appointed under or in accordance with a law of a province or under s. 96 of the Constitution Act, 1867;"
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Décary, J.A., described the phrase "powers conferred by or under an Act of Parliament" as "particularly broad". On the facts before him, which were quite different from those in this matter, he stated:
"... strictly speaking I am only required to consider whether there is a '[power] conferred by or under an Act of Parliament' within the meaning of the definition of 'federal board, commission or other tribunal', ..."
and he concluded there was. He continued:
"It should be borne in mind that what is at issue here is determining whether a litigant has access to this court's power of review in connection with a legislative provision - s. 18(1)(a) of the
Federal Court Act
- by which Parliament sought to make the federal government subject to the court's superintending and reforming power. As I see it, there is no reason to try and distort the usual meaning of the words or strive to divest them of all practical meaning by resort to fine distinctions suited to constitutional analysis, which would have a sterilizing effect contrary to the intent of Parliament."
Later in his reasons, Décary, J.A., continued:
"In recent years Parliament has made a considerable effort to adapt the jurisdiction of this court to present-day conditions and to eliminate jurisdictional problems which had significantly tarnished the court's image. As between an interpretation tending to make judicial review more readily available and providing a firm and uniform basis for the court's jurisdiction and an interpretation which limits access to judicial review, carves up the court's jurisdiction by uncertain and unworkable criteria and inevitably would lead to an avalanche of preliminary litigation, the choice is clear. I cannot assume that Parliament intended to make life difficult for litigants."
In light of these clear and unequivocal pronouncements, despite the able argument of counsel for the respondent to the contrary and the decisions he cited before me, [see footnote 1]. I conclude that the Committee is a federal board commission or other tribunal within the meaning of the
Federal Court Act
and that the decisions now before me are therefore subject to judicial review by this court.
2. Lack of Affidavit in Support - Rule 1603(1)
[12]
Counsel for the respondent argued that the application of Garvan Kostal should fail because it was unsupported by an affidavit by or on behalf of Garvan Kostal at the time of filing of the notice of motion. Rule 1603(1) of the
Federal Court Rules
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 663 reads as follows:
"1603(1) At the time of filing the notice of motion, the applicant shall also file one or more affidavits verifying the facts relied on by the applicant."
Garvan Kostal is a co-applicant with Haney Ranching Ltd. Their application was supported by an affidavit of Howard Haney, filed the same day as the application for judicial review, who described himself in his affidavit as president and major shareholder of the applicant Haney Ranching Ltd. As previously indicated in these reasons, the facts surrounding the applications for judicial review, one on behalf of Haney Ranching Ltd. and Garvan Kostal and the other on behalf of Haney Farms (1985) Ltd., are substantially similar. I find nothing in rule 1603(1) which would require the filing of essentially duplicate affidavits (undoubtedly with numbers and dates changed) on behalf of co-applicants in a single application for judicial review. To so require would, I am satisfied, offend against the rule of interpretation provided by rule 2(2) [See footnote 2]. I find no impediment to allowing the application for judicial review on behalf of Garvan Kostal to proceed.
3. The affidavit of Herbert A. Lock filed July 20, 1994
[13]
Counsel for the respondent objected to the admission of the affidavit of Herbert A. Lock, the substance of which was essentially to evidence information conveyed to him in a telephone conversation with a member of the Committee. I am satisfied that the objection of counsel for the respondent to this affidavit is well-founded. The totality of its substance is hearsay evidence. The respondent is potentially prejudiced by the reality that cross-examination on the substance of the affidavit would be fruitless. In any event, much of the substance of the affidavit is reflected in direct evidence that is before the court. Accordingly, Mr. Lock's affidavit will be struck from the record and I will give no consideration to its contents in reaching my decision.
Issues And Analysis
1. Fairness
[14]
Counsel for the applicant argued that the Committee breached its duty to act fairly in respect of the applicants in three respects: first, it failed to provide them with an opportunity to make oral representations; secondly, in reaching its decision, it relied on material and representations to which the applicants were given no opportunity to reply, either orally or in writing; and thirdly, it failed to provide any or sufficient reasons for its decision.
[15]
In
Cardinal and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.(3d) 35; [1986] 1 W.W.R. 577; 23 C.C.C.(3d) 118; 24 D.L.R.(4th) 44, Mr. Justice Le Dain, speaking for the Supreme Court of Canada, stated at p. 653 (S.C.R.):
"This court has affirmed that there is, as a general common law principle, a duty of procedural fairness lying on every public authority making an administrative decision which is not of a legislative nature and which affects the rights, privileges or interests of an individual: ..." (citations omitted).
The principle was restated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 81; 69 D.L.R.(4th) 489; [1990] 3 W.W.R. 289, where Madam Justice L'Heureux-Dubé stated at p. 669 (S.C.R.):
"The existence of a general duty to act fairly will depend on the consideration of three factors: (i) the nature of the decision to be made by the administrative body; (ii) the relationship existing between that body and the individual; and (iii) the effect of that decision on the individual's rights. This court has stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  general duty to act fairly on a public decision-making body ..." (citation omitted)
I am satisfied that the Committee here was under a duty to act fairly in reaching its decision with respect to the appeals of the applicants. The extent of the duty will vary depending upon the nature of the decision. [See footnote 3]
[16]
No hearing was provided to the applicants. Indeed, none was requested. Counsel for the respondent argued that none was required. All of the material on which the Committee's decisions were based, it was argued, was provided to the applicants and the applicants were given a reasonable opportunity to reply in writing.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), in very short reasons, Mahoney, J.A., stated:
"An administrative tribunal is not required by considerations of fairness to order an oral hearing merely because there is an issue of credibility as to some matter before it when there is otherwise an adequate basis in the record for its decision."
Here, it is possible to infer from a draft record of the Committee's discussion regarding these appeals that there was some doubt about the bona fides of the applicants with regard to the conduct of the transactions in question. Therefore, there may have been an issue of credibility as to some matters before the Committee. Nonetheless, if the Committee relied solely on the written record before it, including the submissions of the applicants, then there was an adequate basis in the record for its decision, and there was, I conclude, no requirement for an oral hearing.
[17]
Counsel for the applicants argued that the draft record of the Committee's discussion of the applicant's appeals disclosed that the Committee did not simply rely on the written record for its decision. The draft record [See footnote 4] discloses that at least one participant in the meeting described the appeals as involving transactions between related companies. No allegation of related companies or other relationship was contained in the record and, indeed, those who made the decisions under appeal to the Committee apparently acknowledged that the applicants were dealing at arms length from each other. Concerns regarding the bona fides of the applicants in entering into the transactions were clearly aired at the Committee meeting, according to the draft record. Further, the draft record indicates that one member of the Committee who apparently had been involved in the administrative work leading to the decisions appealed from was present for a portion of the discussion regarding the appeals and took some part in that discussion. The draft record indicates that he left before the discussion was completed and was not present when the decisions were taken.
[18]
Finally, on the issue of fairness, counsel for the applicants argued that the Committee was under a duty to provide reasons and that the paragraphs quoted above from their letters to the applicants did not constitute reasons or at the very least, adequate reasons. Counsel for the applicants relied on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 13 N.R. 299; 2 A.R. 451 where, in circumstances where reasons for a decision were mandated by statute, Sinclair, J.A., stated:
"... it must be kept in mind that the section is intended to enable persons whose rights are adversely affected by an administrative decision to know what the reasons for that decision were. The reasons must be proper, adequate and intelligible. They must also enable the person concerned to assess whether he has grounds of appeal."
On the facts before me, I am satisfied that the paragraphs quoted from the notices of decision sent to the applicants constituted reasons and that those reasons were adequate to meet the duty of fairness.
[19]
I conclude with respect to the issues related to fairness, taken together, that the Committee breached the duty of fairness which it owed to these applicants. I reiterate that I consider the reasons provided to be adequate. If the Committee had relied solely on the written record disclosed to the applicants and on the material provided in response by the applicants, no breach of the duty of fairness would have arisen out of the failure to provide a hearing. However, I am satisfied that the draft record of the discussion in the Committee concerning the applicants' appeals discloses consideration of matters not disclosed to the applicants and to which the applicants were given no opportunity to respond. The draft record also discloses the participation of an individual who was in a position to argue the case in favour of the decisions under appeal without providing the applicants with a reasonable opportunity, indeed without providing them any opportunity, to respond. In essence, the respondent to the appeals was given an oral hearing while the applicants/appellants were not.
2. Reasonable Apprehension of Bias
[20]
Counsel for the applicants argued that the presence of, and participation by, a member of the Committee who had been involved in the preparation of the decisions appealed from, at a portion of the meeting of the Committee at which the applicants' appeals were disposed of, gives rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias. Although I have to some extent dealt with this concern in my consideration of the Committee's duty to act fairly to the applicants, the potential for bias raised by the presence and participation of the particular member of the Committee deserves to be considered separately.
[21]
Briefly stated, against the test for a reasonable apprehension of bias adopted by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 271; 301 A.P.R. 271, I am not satisfied that there are grounds to conclude on the facts of this matter that there is a basis for a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the Committee.
3. Error Of Law
[22]
Counsel for the applicants argued that the decision letters provided to the applicants by the Committee, together with the draft record of the Committee meeting, disclose that the Committee relied upon purposes, criteria or objectives of the Program that became effective only after the date of the transactions in question rather than upon the clearly enunciated purposes of the Program as set out in the statute, the plan and the producers handbook, as referred to above, all of which were in effect at the time of the transactions in question. In so doing, it was argued, the Committee erred in law. If I were satisfied on the material before me that counsel's allegations were correct, then I would have no difficulty concluding that there had been an error of law in relying upon purposes, criteria or objectives that simply did not govern the assessment of the applicants' entitlement to stabilization payments in respect of the transactions in question. But I am not so satisfied. While the draft record of the Committee meeting in question discloses that Committee members had serious concerns that the applicants were abusing the Program, I am not satisfied that those doubts or concerns related other than to a reasonable interpretation of the purposes, criteria or objectives of the Program at the time the transactions in question occurred. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there was any error of law committed by the Committee that would justify interference by this court in its decisions.
4. Curial Deference
[23]
Counsel for the respondent argued that curial deference is owed by this court to decisions of the Committee. The Committee, it was argued, was clearly, in the light of its mandate and membership, an expert body. In light of the fact that I conclude that these applications must be allowed on the basis of failure by the Committee to respect its duty to act fairly to the applicants, the issue of curial deference does not arise.
Conclusion
[24]
Based upon the foregoing analysis, I conclude that, by reason only of the Committee's failure to respect the duty on it to act fairly towards the applicants in these matters, the applicants must succeed. In the circumstances before me, counsel for the applicant urged that I substitute a decision in favour of the applicants for that of the Committee. I decline counsel's invitation, even if I were to conclude that I have the authority to do so. The applicants' applications will be allowed. The decisions on their appeals from decisions declaring them ineligible for stabilization payments under the National Tripartite Stabilization Program for Beef with respect to certain transactions in slaughter-weight cattle that took place in the closing months of 1991 and the early months of 1992 will be set aside and their appeals will be referred back to the respondent for redetermination taking into account these reasons.
Applications allowed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/ldl
Footnotes:
1.	See for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)
2.	Federal Court Rule 2(2) reads as follows:
"(2) These Rules are intended to render effective the substantive law and to ensure that it is carried out; and they are to be so interpreted and applied as to facilitate rather than to delay or to end prematurely the normal advancement of cases."
3.	See, for example,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
4.	Tab 5, Supplemental Application Record of the applicant Haney Farms (1985) Ltd.
[End of document]