[1]
Lutfy, J.
: Some two years after launching this patent infringement action, the plaintiff Glaxo Group Limited ("the plaintiff") filed its Affidavit of Documents which discloses 833 documents or bundles of documents, of which 20 have been "redacted", in the words of the affidavit. The parties acknowledge that "expurgated" or "edited" are the more common Canadian terms for "redacted" [see footnote 1].
[2]
The parties also acknowledge that document No. G685, chosen at random by the court, is representative of the 20 redacted documents. This document has 31 pages, of which 26 have been totally expurgated. Three pages which disclose no substantive information have not been edited. Two pages which disclose substantive information have been partially redacted.
[3]
The defendant moved to require the plaintiff to produce unredacted copies of the 20 redacted documents. In his order of September 24, 1996, Associate Senior Prothonotary Peter A.K. Giles ordered that:
"The motion for production of unredacted copies of those produced with portions redacted is dismissed, but it is ordered that counsel will attempt to reach agreement for Ms. Hitchman as counsel for the defendant to inspect the documents on a counsel's eyes only basis.
"If she does not agree that the redacted portions of any documents are irrelevant, or if no agreement has been reached as to inspection by October 15th, 1996, then by November 4th, the plaintiff shall produce and serve an affidavit indicating the general nature of the redacted portion of each document still in issue and the reason that the portion is said to be irrelevant. If the defendant does not agree that any portion is irrelevant, it shall seek a special date for hearing in the week of November 25th, 1996, to determine relevancy. If the defendant wishes to question the accuracy of the characterization of any redacted portion mentioned in the affidavit, she may request the redacted portion be read by the court at such hearing."
[4]
The plaintiff has appealed this order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary.
[5]
The plaintiff has also appealed that portion of the order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary concerning the venue of motions in this action. This portion of the appeal will be dealt with under the second heading of these reasons.
The Issue Of The Production
Of Redacted Documents
[6]
The plaintiff's Affidavit of Documents is filed pursuant to rule 448, which requires a listing and description of "all documents relevant to any matter in issue". The rule provides for four schedules or categories of documents. Schedule 1 documents are those in the possession, power and control of the party and for which no privilege is claimed.
[7]
In defining "document", rule 447 identifies a number of devices which record or store information, but nothing in the definition otherwise changes the usual meaning given to the word.
[8]
All of the plaintiff's documents have been listed under Schedule 1 and have been produced pursuant to confidentiality protective orders issued in this action. All of the redacted documents are either confidential or for counsels' eyes only.
[9]
Counsel for the plaintiff acknowledges that no privilege is claimed for any of the redacted documents. The sole purpose in redacting a document was to exclude information which, in the view of the plaintiff, was not relevant to any matter in issue and to provide disclosure only of that portion of the document which the plaintiff considered relevant.
[10]
In refusing to produce unredacted documents, the sole authority relied on by the plaintiff is the decision of Strayer, J., then of the Trial Division, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 478. In that case, the plaintiff produced its Affidavit of Documents without specifying any exceptions or deletions of material pertaining to irrelevant matters. In response to the defendant's request for the production of the Schedule 1 documents, the plaintiff delivered what were in some cases expurgated versions of the documents. The plaintiff refused to provide the unexpurgated version of the documents on the grounds that the deleted material was not relevant to the litigation and was commercially sensitive. The confidentiality order that had been agreed to by the parties allowed for the disclosure of confidential documents to the defendant's officers and apparently did not have a category of confidential documents for counsel's eyes only. This fact alone distinguishes this decision from the present case.
[11]
Strayer, J., resolved the dispute by imposing a procedure similar to the one ordered by the Associate Senior Prothonotary in this case. In reaching his decision, Strayer, J., stated at page 480 (C.P.R.):
"I have no doubt that the obligation under rule 448 is to disclose in the affidavit of documents only such documents as are 'relevant to any matter in issue', to use the words of para. 448(2)(a) of the rules. It may well be that the plaintiffs were not obliged to list all of these documents in their entirety, as they did, without specifying any exceptions or deletions of material pertaining to irrelevant matters. But the fact remains that the plaintiffs did list these documents without qualification in their affidavits of documents. The question then arises: if a party in his affidavit of documents once describes the whole of a document without exception as being relevant, is he automatically bound to produce the whole of that document to an opposing party on request pursuant to rule 452(3)? In my view, he is unless he can persuade the court, when an application for enforcement is made by the opposite party, to exercise its discretion in his favour in the interest of justice.
"Rule 453(2) provides as follows:
'Where a party fails to comply with rules 448 to 452, the court make such order as it considers just, including an order in the nature of the order described in rule 461.'
"While that rule clearly would permit me to order literal compliance with the requirements of rule 452(3), I am also empowered to make such order as I consider 'just'. In the present case, I think I should make an order which best carries out the spirit of the rules pertaining to discovery of documents, namely, to ensure that only relevant documents need be produced."
[12]
Of the six decisions considered by Strayer, J., three dealt with the expurgation, under court review, of documents referred to in the pleadings and whose production was required by rule 407(2). Three others dealt with partial disclosure, again under court review, of information in income tax returns or otherwise commercially sensitive information, where there was no confidentiality order. Each of these cases can be distinguished from this one. In short, I know of no rule, doctrine or jurisprudence which would free a party, as a general rule, from its obligation to list and provide Schedule 1 documents in their entirety.
[13]
Rule 448 requires the listing of
all documents
relevant to any matter in issue. The rule does not limit documentary discovery to
only those extracts of a document
which may be relevant to any matter in issue. If that had been the intention, the rule would be so worded.
[14]
The spirit of the rules on discovery was well summarized by McNair, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 229:
"The purpose of discovery, whether oral or by production of documents, is to obtain admissions to facilitate proof of the matters in issue between the parties. The prevailing trend today favours broadening the avenues of fair and full disclosure to enable the party to advance his own case or to damage the case of his adversary. Discovery can serve to bring the issues more clearly into focus, thus avoiding unnecessary proof and additional costs at trial. Discovery can also provide a very useful tool for purposes of cross-examination.
. . . . .
"The case authorities afford some useful guidelines bearing on the issue of relevance vis-à-vis the determination of whether the learned prothonotary was clearly wrong in compelling answers to the questions enumerated in the defendant's notice of motion. I will endeavour to review briefly the ones I consider to be most applicable.
1. The test as to what documents are required to be produced is simply relevance. The test of relevance is not a matter for the exercise of the discretion. What documents parties are entitled to is a matter of law, not a matter of discretion. The principle for determining what document properly relates to the matters in issue is that it must be one which might reasonably be supposed to contain information which may directly or indirectly enable the party requiring production to advance his own case or to damage the case of his adversary, or which might fairly lead him to a train of inquiry that could have either of these consequences [citations omitted]."
[15]
The purpose of documentary discovery is to obtain disclosure of all relevant documents. Many portions of those documents may not be relevant to the issues. Indeed, rule 448(5) assures the parties that the disclosure of the document in an affidavit of documents and its production is not to be taken as an admission of its admissibility in the action.
[16]
If a party were permitted to disclose and produce only the unilaterally redacted version of a Schedule 1 document, our motions court would be inundated with requests for more complete disclosure. What information is the party hiding in the expurgated portion of a document? The costs and time involved in such a process are contrary to everyone's interest in the good administration of justice. This cannot be the process which was contemplated in rule 448. Counsel for the plaintiff candidly acknowledges that he knows of no instance, except his own efforts in this action and in three immediately related actions, where a party served an affidavit of documents with redacted Schedule 1 documents.
[17]
If a portion of a document is relevant, the document must be disclosed and its unexpurgated version must be made available for inspection, unless the parties agree otherwise. Very rarely, if at all, will all the documents disclosed in an affidavit of documents be produced at trial. With complete disclosure of all relevant documents, counsel can then decide which will be necessary for the resolution of the issues in the litigation. While there may exist exceptional situations which would warrant the court's intervention in allowing the party to deviate from the general rule of unedited documentary disclosure under Schedule 1, this is not one.
[18]
The issues before me on this appeal are narrower than the principles I have enunciated in these reasons. The order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary provides for a procedure which is similar to the one envisaged by Strayer, J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (John) Ltd.
, and is consistent with rule 453, where the court is satisfied, as I am in this case, that the affidavit of documents is deficient. Its deficiency is the notation of "redacted" for 20 of the documents. While I would have granted relief to the defendant further than that which was ordered by the Associate Senior Prothonotary, I have only the plaintiffs' appeal before me.
[19]
In the circumstances, I am satisfied that there is no error in the Order as issued which would justify my intervention.
The Issue Of The Venue
Of Motions
[20]
In its same motion, the defendant also sought an order requiring the plaintiffs to bring their motions in Toronto unless there be urgency. The decision of the Associate Senior Prothonotary was as follows:
"The motion for hearings in Toronto is not granted. Motions are to be heard in the most convenient place for counsel and witnesses determined by nose count. For good reason a motion may be set down elsewhere, for example, where a hearing can only be arranged in a different city in order to bring the matter on before a required date."
[21]
Counsel in this action practice in Toronto. Two of the parties are located in the greater Toronto area and Glaxo Group Limited is located in the United Kingdom.
[22]
Counsel for the plaintiffs have regularly, if not always, made their several motions in this litigation returnable in Ottawa. The reason for this is not apparent in the court record. During the past six weeks alone, on at least two occasions where counsel for the plaintiffs have made their motions returnable in Ottawa, this court has ordered that both motions be heard in Toronto. It was to avoid this repeated situation that counsel for the defendant sought to have all motions in this action heard in Toronto.
[23]
The
Federal Court Rules
are silent on the venue of motions. The plaintiffs assert that this allows a party to choose its venue from among the cities where the court hears motions. If this were literally true, and counsel for the plaintiff did not suggest this, a party in Toronto could make a motion presentable in Quebec City or Halifax for no apparent positive reason related to the litigation. Counsel for the defendant relied on the "gap rule" (rule 5 of the
Federal Court Rules
) and suggested that motions are made returnable in the place of the solicitor's office of the respondent party, pursuant to rule 37.03 of the Ontario
Rules of Civil Procedure
.
[24]
In four earlier decisions, the Associate Senior Prothonotary held that motions should be made returnable at the most convenient place [see footnote 2]. He did so without reference to provincial rules but by analogy with rule 483 of this court concerning the venue of trials. In
Society of Composers, Authors and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 60 F.T.R. 161 (T.D.), Noël, J., resolved a similar issue:
"[ ... ] the ability of a litigant before this court to file a motion in the Registry of his choice must not be abused. Counsel are expected to strike a fair balance as between themselves with respect to venue. There is in this court no rule permitting a party to bring its motions in the city of its choice without regard to the convenience of the other party. In matters which involve protracted pretrial motions, the parties must share the inconveniences irrespective of who initiates the motion and counsel are expected to ensure that result."
[25]
The order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary seems to protect the interests of all parties. It respects the court's national jurisdiction and yet resolves the practical problem created by motions being regularly made returnable in a city where none of the counsel resides. In the normal course of events, motions in this action will be heard in the most convenient place for counsel, ordinarily Toronto, and a hearing can be arranged in a different city "in order to bring the matter on before a required date". It appears to me that this is a reasonable solution for the parties and the good administration of justice, and also one which is consistent with the orders of at least two judges of this court issued since September 17, 1996, in this same action. I can identify no error in the Order and no grounds which would warrant my intervention.
[26]
Accordingly, the plaintiffs' motion of October 10, 1996, for the setting aside of the relevant paragraphs of the order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary, is dismissed. His order will be varied only as regards the time limits within which the parties are to comply with his procedure. Costs will be payable to the defendant in any event of the cause.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/gs
Footnotes
1.	 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 84 A.R. 149 (Q.B.), McDonald, J., then of the Alberta Court of Queen's Bench, noted:
"[...] the procedure by which an affidavit filed in support of an application for a search warrant is edited for purposes of disclosure in the United States is called 'redaction', which according to the dictionary, is a term known to the publishing industry, and simply means editing."
2.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 89 F.T.R. 200 (T.D.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 58 F.T.R. 261 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  document]