[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an appeal by way of notice of appeal from the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks (through the Senior Hearing Officer) dated February 28, 1990, maintaining the registration of trademark No. TMDA 46349, "Jamesway".
Background
[2]
At the request of the appellant, Meredith & Finlayson, the Registrar of Trademarks (the Registrar) issued a s. 45 (formerly s. 44) notice under the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13 (the
Act
), dated January 25, 1988, to Berg Equipment Co. (Canada) Limited (Berg), the registered owner of the trademark "Jamesway", requesting it to provide within three (3) months an affidavit or statutory declaration showing, with respect to each of the wares specified in the registration, whether the trademark is in use in Canada, and if not, the date when it was last used and the reason for the absence of use since that date.
[3]
The trademark "Jamesway" was registered on May 16, 1929 for use in association with the following wares:
"Wares: (1) Incubator hatcher systems, automatic poultry chain feeders, automatic cage feeding systems, laying cages, pullet cages, hanging poultry feeders, poultry waterers and gas brooders; silo unloaders, cow stanchions, cow stalls, stabling equipment, namely barn cleaners, barn floor scrapers, manure pumps, manure stackers, feed elevators, shuttle feeders, hog feeders, hog farrowing crates, gutter grating; ventilating systems, water bowls, cable feeders, feed carts, bunk feeders, hog pens and hog farrowing stalls, hog water bowls, hen house, cattle barns and hog barns."
[4]
According to the register, Jamesway Co. was recorded as the registered user on July 21, 1977 (RU32297). This registered user registration was amended on March 16, 1977 to change the name of the registered user company to that of Marmon Group of Canada Inc. This change of name was recorded on October 20, 1977.
[5]
In response to the s. 45 notice, on June 27, 1988, Berg filed two affidavits one from Vernon R. Berg, Jr., sworn on June 22, 1988 (the Berg affidavit) and one from Don S. Hamilton, sworn on June 23, 1988 (the Hamilton affidavit).
[6]
On December 20, 1988, the appellant filed written submissions and requested an oral hearing before the Registrar of Trademarks. A hearing was held on February 13, 1990, at which both parties were represented by counsel.
Decision Of The Registrar
Of Trademarks:
[7]
On February 28, 1990 the Registrar, through a Senior Hearing Officer, maintained the registration of TMDA 46349, trademark "Jamesway". The Registrar concluded, based on the evidence filed, as follows:
"the subject trademark is in use in Canada in association with dairy farm equipment and while it is technically not so in use in association with poultry farm equipment, special circumstances exist which excuse that apparent period of nonuse. Consequently, this registration ought to be maintained as it presently appears on the register."
[8]
For the purposes of the proceeding and in making his decision the Registrar divided the wares into two categories: dairy farm equipment and poultry farm equipment. On the issue of use in association with dairy farm equipment, he noted that although the showing of use was not overwhelming he could not accept that the Berg affidavit consisted of a bare allegation of use. After considering the jurisprudence, the Registrar was satisfied that sufficient commercial activities in Canada have been shown to maintain the mark for use in association with the dairy farm equipment category and that special circumstances exist to excuse some nonuse. With respect to the question of title to the mark, the Registrar noted that this information was ascertainable from the register and found that title in the mark changed to Berg on December 31, 1984, further to an amalgamation recorded on the register on July 24, 1987, approximately six months prior to the notice date. Also, according to the Berg affidavit, Jamesway Farm Equipment Ltd., the predecessor in title, amalgamated with Berg and other corporations to become Berg Equipment Co. (Canada) Limited. (According to the Letters of Amalgamation the following companies amalgamated: Berg Equipment Co. (Canada); Berg Equipment Ltd.; Jamesway Farm Equipment Ltd.) As amalgamation companies do not cease to exist upon amalgamation it was the Registrar's opinion that it was conceivable that the amalgamated company might have wished to continue the use of illustrated material of one of its amalgamated companies.
[9]
The question of the use of the mark in association with poultry farm equipment was more complicated in that the Hamilton affidavit was not clear as to which company the affiant was referring to. The Registrar noted that the Hamilton affidavit indicated that he (Hamilton) was Vice-President and General Manager of Jamesway Co., as a Division of the Marmon Holdings of Canada Inc. but then stated that Jamesway Co., as a Division of the Marmon Group of Canada Inc., became the approved registered user of the "Jamesway" trademark, in respect of poultry equipment, but failed to specify a date of recordal. The Registrar then referred to the register and noted that Jamesway Co. was recorded as the registered user of the mark on July 21, 1977, and that this register user registration was amended on March 17, 1977, to show that the registered user company was Marmon Group of Canada Inc. The Registrar then concluded the evidence (i.e. the affidavit) showed use of the mark in respect of poultry farm equipment by the Holding company, which was not the registered owner or user. However, the Registrar's assignment file 104,779 showed an application by Berg to register James Co., a Division of Marmon Holdings of Canada Inc., as a registered user. The application was dated August 30, 1988, and was recorded on January 20, 1989, with effective date August 30, 1988, some six months subsequent to the notice date of the s. 45 proceedings. The Registrar was of the view that this recordal strongly suggested that the use of the mark shown by the Hamilton affidavit was used by Marmon Holdings of Canada Inc. He then concluded there was evidence before him to at least infer that the registrant company recently went through an amalgamation with several other companies, and that
"... it is part of a group of companies presently going through a process of reorganization and that at least one company, presumably part of the group, has been elected to use the trademark in association with the general category of poultry equipment, and has in fact used the mark substantially in that respect."
Appellant's Position
[10]
The appellant argues that the Registrar made errors in his findings and specifically appeals the Registrar's decision on the following basis:
"(1) the Registrar was wrong in finding that there was evidence of use in Canada of the mark 'Jamesway' in association with each of the wares defined as dairy farm equipment in the normal course of business at the relevant time by the registrant Berg;
"(2) after finding that there was no evidence filed to show or a plea by the registrant raising the issue of absence of use of the mark, the Registrar was wrong in finding that Marmon Holdings of Canada Inc. is a part of 'the Group' of companies associated with the registrant and that special circumstances existed to excuse 'some nonuse';
"(3) the Registrar was wrong in finding that the contents of the Berg affidavit were more than a bare allegation of use of the mark in association with the dairy farm equipment category and in finding that in this affidavit sufficient commercial activities in Canada had been shown to maintain the mark for use in the association with the dairy farm equipment category of wares;
"(4) the Registrar was wrong in finding in the Berg affidavit evidence of 'sufficient commercial activities in Canada' with respect to some of the wares; and
"(5) the Registrar was wrong in finding that in the Hamilton affidavit there was shown use of the mark in association with any or all of the wares related to poultry farm equipment."
[11]
The appellant notes that a pamphlet of Jamesway Farm Equipment was attached to the Berg affidavit, that the merger of Jamesway into Berg was completed on December 31, 1984, four years prior to the date of the Berg affidavit and that the Berg's invoices (Exhibit 2) do not show the use of the mark "Jamesway" in association with any wares set out in the registration. The appellant maintains that the exhibits to the Hamilton affidavit show, at best, sales on or about December 1987 by Jamesway, a division of Marmon Holdings Canada Inc., of incubator and hatchery systems but does not show sales of other wares outlined in the registration. Further, neither affidavit specifies when the publicity documents attached to the affidavits were first used, distributed or whether they were still available for and distributed at the relevant date.
[12]
The appellant submits that as of the material date, Marmon Holdings was not an approved registered user of the wares. The registrant did not plead or submit any evidence which showed or tended to show that they were excusing circumstances for the nonuse of the registration in association with one or more of the wares in association with which the mark is registered.
[13]
The appellant argues that in any event there were no facts in which the Registrar could have decided, even if he had the discretion, that there were special circumstances that excused the absence of use of the mark in association with one or more of the wares set out in the registration. The appellant further submits that the registrant has not shown any use at the relevant date of the trademark as registered in its design form.
Respondent Berg's Position
[14]
The respondent Berg maintains that the Registrar did not base his decision on any erroneous principle of law and had evidence before him justifying his conclusions.
[15]
The respondent submits that in respect of the dairy farm equipment category, the Registrar properly instructed himself on the law and properly considered the evidence sufficient to make it appear to him that use existed. With respect to poultry farm equipment the respondent submits that the Registrar found that the Hamilton affidavit showed substantial use of the trademark but that since use was not by the registered owner or the party that appeared as the registered user at the time of the notice, that there were, however, special circumstances that excused the nonuse. In this regard, the respondent maintains that the Registrar properly instructed himself on the law and properly considered the evidence sufficient to make it appear that special circumstances existed to excuse the period of nonuse. The respondent argues that the wording of s. 45 confers upon the Registrar a broad discretion in respect of his determination of user, nonuser or the existence of special circumstances.
Appeals To The Federal Court Of
Appeal Re Affidavit Material
[16]
Prior to this matter coming to trial, there was an appeal from two orders of Dubé, J., refusing to strike out three affidavits proffered by the respondent (the appellant before me) in support of its appeal against a decision of the Registrar and granting leave to the respondent to cross-examine the affiants of two affidavits, which the registered owner of the mark produced in the s. 45 proceedings. Reasons for judgment are contained in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The Court of Appeal, after quoting from
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 62, at p. 69 C.P.R., held that the proffered affidavits should have been struck out as being irrelevant to the issues on the appeal from the Registrar to the Trial Division and the appeal was allowed. With respect to the second order, the Court of Appeal was of the view that the affidavits were not filed in the Trial Division, they were simply part of the Registrar's record and as such became part of the Trial Division's record by virtue of s. 60, and that there is no provision that would allow the court to order cross-examination on affidavits filed in proceedings before another tribunal. This appeal was also allowed.
Issue
[17]
Essentially, the issue to be resolved is whether the Registrar erred in coming to the findings which supported his conclusion to maintain the registration of the trademark "Jamesway".
Discussion
[18]
Section 45 of the
Act
provides in part:
"45(1) The Registrar may at any time and, at the written request made after three years from the date of the registration of a trademark by any person who pays the prescribed fee shall, unless he sees good reason to the contrary, give notice to the registered owner of the trademark requiring him to furnish within three months an affidavit or a statutory declaration showing, with respect to each of the wares or services specified in the registration, whether the trademark is in use and the reason for the absence of such use since that date.
"45(2) The Registrar shall not receive any evidence other than the affidavit or statutory declaration, but may hear representations made by or on behalf of the registered owner of the trademark or by or on behalf of the person at whose request the notice was given.
"45(3) Where, by reason of the evidence furnished to him or the failure to furnish any evidence, it appears to the Registrar that a trademark, either with respect to all of the wares or services specified in the registration or with respect to any of those wares or services, is not in use in Canada and that the absence of use has not been due to special circumstances that excuse the absence of use, the registration of the trademark is liable to be expunged or amended accordingly."
Use is defined in s. 2 of the
Act
as:
"'use', in relation to a trademark, means any use that by s. 4 is defined to be a use in association with wares or services."
Section 4 of the
Act
reads:
"4(1) A trademark is deemed to have been used in association with wares if, at the time of the transfer of the property in or possession of the wares, in the normal course of trade, it is marked on the wares themselves or on the packages in which they are distributed or it is in any other manner so associated with the wares that notice of the association is then given to the person to whom the property or possession is transferred."
[19]
As noted by the Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  expeditious method of removing from the register marks which have fallen into disuse. The case law is clear on the purpose of s. 45 of the
Act
, which is to "rid the register of deadwood". It is not intended to provide an alternative to the usual inter partes attack on trademark envisaged by s. 57. The fact that an applicant under s. 45 is not even required to have an interest in the matter speaks to the public nature of the concerns the section is designed to protect. Further, in accordance with s. 45(2) the Registrar may only receive evidence tendered by or on behalf of the registered owner. It is not intended that there should be any trial of a contested issue of fact, but just an opportunity for the registered owner to show, if he can, that his mark is in use or if not, why not.
[20]
As this is an appeal under s. 56 of the
Act
, the onus is on the appellant to establish that the Registrar was wrong. Also, as indicated by the Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  does not have the effect of enlarging the scope of the inquiry or, consequently, of the evidence relevant thereto. We cannot improve on the words of Thurlow, C.J., speaking for this court, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the s. 44(1) [now 45(1)] notice was sent is not receivable on the appeal from the Registrar any more than it would have been receivable before the Registrar. On this point, I would adopt the view expressed by Jackett, P., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the court can be 'satisfied that the trademark is in use'. In their context, I am satisfied that these words refer only to the court being satisfied in the same way as the Registrar might have been satisfied at the earlier stage - that is, by the evidence adduced by the registered owner. The learned President did not have to deal there with the question whether third parties could come in with evidence and there is nothing in what he said to suggest that he addressed his mind to this possibility.
"The applicant also relies on s. 55(5) [now 56(5)] which provides that 'On the appeal evidence in addition to that adduced before the Registrar may be adduced.' This cannot, however, extend to authorizing evidence on issues that are not before the court on appeal. When, therefore, the sole question is whether the registered owner's evidence makes it 'appear' to the court that there is user, any other evidence on the question of user is obviously not relevant to the issue."'"
[21]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 74, Madame Justice Reed provides a very useful overview of the issues involved in an appeal from the Registrar's decision made pursuant to s. 45. She described the nature of the proceeding before her (and the one before me) as similar to a trial de novo in that the appellant (in this case the respondent) has the right to adduce evidence which was not presented to the Registrar. However, as noted in
Berg
the additional evidence admissible before the court will be the evidence furnished by the registered owner; evidence of the requesting party or respondent (in this case the appellant) is not admissible. Madame Justice Reed then stated at page 77 C.P.R.:
"It is trite law that the duty of the court is not restricted to deciding whether the Registrar was right or wrong: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 51-52; 25 F.T.R. 65; 22 C.I.P.R. 146 (T.D.).
"It has also been said, however, that the court should be circumspect about interfering with a Registrar's decision: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 10 C.I.P.R. 224 (F.C.T.D.). Mr. Justice Strayer in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 135; 9 F.T.R. 136; 11 C.I.P.R. 1 (T.D.), noted:
'... the appellant urged me to treat the matter completely de novo without regard to the chairman's decisions. While I accept that these appeals involve determinations of fact which I am as entitled as a registrar to make, in my view the court should be reluctant to reverse the findings of the registrar or chairman unless it is clearly satisfied that he came to the wrong conclusion on the facts or unless there is significant new evidence placed before the court that was not before the registrar.'"
Use By Owner:
[22]
The jurisprudence supports the view that for the purposes of s. 45 of the
Act
, the use in Canada means use in Canada by the registered owner or registered user,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 46 (F.C.A.). Therefore, the Registrar was correct when he found that in the technical sense use of the trademark "Jamesway" in respect of poultry farm equipment was by Marmon Holdings of Canada, a legal entity which was neither the registered owner or registered user.
[23]
However, the fact that a transfer of ownership is not registered has been held not to invalidate the mark.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), the owner named on the register was different from that of the true owner at the time the s. 44 (currently s. 45) notice was sent. It was held that evidence of use submitted by the true owner could satisfy s. 44. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Walsh, J., found that "use by the successor corporation [was] equivalent to use by the registered owner" (at page 41). He also noted that it was tantamount to the consequences of a change of corporate name, entailing a correction of the register, not registration of an assignment. I should add that the Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (at pages 52 and 53) indicated that the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case was peculiar to its facts and that the decision is not authority for the proposition that evidence of use by the owner in fact is sufficient. On the other hand, Madame Justice Reed noted in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that in light of the evidence the Helena Rubenstein Inc. and Coscelebre were one and the same (the change of name occurred in July of 1984) she was not prepared to find that use had not been proven for the purposes of s. 44 merely because the evidence of use in 1985 was use by Coscelebre.
Nature Of Use:
[24]
The declaration or affidavit must provide some evidence of use - a bare declaration is not deemed to be sufficient. The cases cited by the Registrar clearly support this statement as a correct statement of the law.
[25]
I have also noted the often quoted comments of Thurlow, C.J., in
Plough
at page 66:
"What s. 44(1) [curently s. 45(1)] requires is an affidavit or statutory declaration not merely stating but 'showing', that is to say, describing the use being made of the trademark within the meaning of s. 2 and of use in s. 4 of the
Act
. The subsection makes this plain by requiring the declaration to show with respect to each of the wares and services specified in the registration whether the trademark is in use in Canada and if not the date when it was last used and the reason for the absence of use since that date. The purpose is not merely to tell the Registrar that the registered owner does not want to give up the registration but to inform the Registrar in detail of the situation prevailing with respect to the use of the trademark so that he, and the court on appeal, can form an opinion and apply the substantive rule set out in s. 44(3) [currently s. 45(3)]."
The above comments have been somewhat tempered by statements that there is no need for "evidentiary overkill".  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at page 293 C.P.R., McNair, J., indicated that:
"Evidence in response to a s. 44 notice should be forthcoming in quality, not quantity, and there is no need nor justification for evidentiary overkill ..."
Also, the type of evidence submitted will vary from case to case and will depend on for example, the nature of business (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.)).
[26]
In addition, the use has to be of a normal commercial nature, one of which can be said to have taken place "in the normal course of business". Further, it has been held that a single sale may satisfy that requirement. I agree with Madame Justice Reed's view in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that s. 45 does not impose on a registrant the obligation to prove continuous use in Canada. She stated at page 82 C.P.R. of that case that:
"The showing of 'use in Canada' required by s. 44 (now s. 45) can be satisfied by usage which falls short of 'marketing in a serious commercial manner', providing the use is by way of a normal commercial transaction or in the normal course of trade."
and continued
"I do not read the jurisprudence as requiring the court or the Registrar to find a certain level of commercial activity, in order to prove use. The single sale, in this case, was not put forward as an example of one of many sales, as appears to be the case in
Philip Morris
case. On the other hand, it is not a sale divorced from all context as was true in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 9 C.I.P.R. 105; 1 A.C. W.S.(3D) 226."
In that case, the business of the appellant was clearly described and the evidence in the affidavit asserted that the sale was one made "in the normal course of business" and that the assertion accorded with the evidence in the file of the context in which the sale was made.
[27]
In terms of the appellant's arguments relating to the Registrar's decision with respect to dairy farm equipment, the appellant contends that the Berg affidavit contains a number of defects and as such the affidavit fails to provide relevant facts from which a conclusion could be reached that the trademark was in use in Canada by the registered owner and that the use was in the normal course of trade. The appellant submits that:
"(1) paragraph 2 of the Berg affidavit does not state or show that there was any transfer of possession or ownership of the wares in Canada, i.e., there is no information relating to the sale or manufacture of the wares;
"(2) paragraph 3 which contains a reference to advertising brochures, appended as Ex. A, does not state that any of the equipment illustrated in the material was ever sold in Canada;
"(3) that at best, the Ex. A materials show advertising of the trademark, although the affidavit does not state that these materials were distributed in Canada;
"(4) paragraph 4 refers to a number of invoices, appended as Ex. B, but contains no analysis of these invoices; and
"(5) there is no apparent correlation between the products referred to in the invoices and the wares for which the trademark was registered."
[28]
The Berg affidavit dealt with use of the mark in respect of wares falling into the category of dairy farm equipment. The Berg affidavit provides in part:
"1. I am the President of Berg Equipment Co. (Canada) Limited, owner of the trademark 'Jamesway' in Canada, registered in number TMDA 046,394, as such I have knowledge of the facts hereinafter set forth. Berg Equipment Co. (Canada) Limited is the successor-in-interest to Jamesway Farm Equipment Ltd. of St. Isadore de Prescott, Ontario, which merged with other corporations to become Berg Equipment Co. (Canada) Limited. Evidence of this change was recorded against registration TMDA 046,349 on July 24, 1987 as stated in the registration.
"2. Berg Equipment Co. (Canada) Limited manufactures and sell a wide range of farm equipment, and in particular, manufactures and sell the following equipment in association with the trademark 'Jamesway': silo unloaders, cow stanchions, cow stalls, stabling equipment, namely barn cleaners, barn floor scrapers, manure pumps, manure stackers, feed elevators, shuttle feeders, hog feeders, hog farrowing crates, gutter grating, ventilating systems, water bowls, cable feeders, feed carts, bunk feeders, hog pens and hog farrowing stalls, hog water bowls, cattle barns and hog barns."
Exhibit "A" attached to this affidavit contains a selection of illustrated materials exemplifying the wares and showing the way the trademark is placed on the wares. Exhibit "B" contains a selection of invoices showing sales of the trademark in respect to the above-noted wares. The invoices are dated prior to the s. 45 notice.
[29]
Further, as pointed out by counsel for the respondent, the invoices which appear in Ex. B themselves depict the trademark in conjunction with wares that would be consistent with replacement parts for certain wares listed in the registration. For example, the "Jamesway" impeller blade (P107) is consistent with the registered ware "manure pump" and the "Jamesway" motors (P108) are consistent with many of the powered wares such as "cable feeders". Certain invoices themselves bear the "Jamesway" trademark in respect of the sale of registered wares and more particularly the "Jamesway" hog troughs (P97) are consistent with the registered wares "hog feeders" and the 23 "Jamesway" partitions (P113) are consistent with the wares "cow stalls", "stabling equipment" or "hog farrowing stalls". Also, as the respondent submitted, all the invoices depicting the "Jamesway" mark are noted as having been paid by cash or cheque, showing that the purchaser was present and received the invoice concurrently with the goods. Which, as argued by the respondent, would bring the trademark into association with the wares at the time property and possession in them was transferred as contemplated by s. 4(1) of the
Act
.
[30]
After reviewing the material I agree with the Registrar that the use is not overwhelming, but it is more than a bare allegation of use. In light of the case law, noted by the Registrar and outlined in these reasons, I believe that the Registrar was correct when he indicated that the affidavit was more than a bare allegation of use and that he was satisfied that sufficient commercial activity in Canada has been shown to maintain the mark in association with the dairy farm equipment category. In this regard I cite the case of
Institut National des Appellations d'Origine des  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pages 4-5 (F.C.T.D.), where it was held that once the Registrar has determined that a sale is in the normal course of trade the court is not in a position, in the absence of suitable evidence to the contrary, to overrule such a finding. Further I believe, given the summary nature of the proceedings under s. 45, it is not up to me as the judge to establish criteria as to what constitutes the normal course of trade in a particular product. Once there is evidence which reveals more than a bare statement that the trademark was in use, then it can reasonably be inferred that the use was in the normal course of trade.
[31]
The Hamilton affidavit deals with wares falling into the poultry category and reads in part:
"1. I am the Vice-President and General Manager of Jamesway Co., a Division of Marmon Holdings of Canada Inc., and as such, I have knowledge of the facts hereinafter set forth.
"2. Jamesway Co., as a Division of The Marmon Group of Canada Inc. became the approved registered user of the trademark 'Jamesway', registered in TMDA 046,349, in respect to 'poultry equipment namely incubator hatcher systems, automatic poultry chain feeders, automatic cage feeding systems, laying cages pullet cages, hanging poultry feeders, poultry waterers and gas brooder.
"3. My company uses the trademark 'Jamesway' in respect of the above noted wares, in that my company manufactures and sell the said equipment intended to be used for poultry, on which it places the 'Jamesway' mark. Attached hereto and marked as Exhibit 'A' to this my affidavit is a selection of illustrated material exemplifying the wares, and the manner in which the trademark is placed on the wares.
"4. My company sells wares both within, and by export from, Canada, and attached hereto and marked as Exhibit 'B' to this my affidavit is a selection of recent invoices exemplifying such sales as 'Jamesway' branch equipment."
The affiant added that the dollar value of sales by his company in association with the mark "Jamesway" in respect of the wares noted was in excess of $22,000,000 for the 12 month period prior to December 31, 1987.
[32]
The Registrar made an interesting comment regarding the interpretation of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 228 (F.C.A.), wherein he stated that he did not agree that the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case stood for the proposition that use has to be shown with each item covered by the registration. In that case, the affidavit of use made it clear that the trademark was in use with the ware beer only so to maintain the purity of the register, it became incumbent on the Registrar to remove other registered wares, even if they belonged to the same category. I believe this interpretation stems from the following comments by Stone, J., at pages 236 and 237 C.P.R.:
"Clearly, s. 44(1) of the
Act
contemplates that a registered owner may not be making use of a trademark with respect to all of the wares specified in the registration. It calls upon the registered owner to show what use he is making of the mark in Canada. If he shows that the mark is in use in Canada with respect to all of the wares specified then, clearly, the registration is not to be touched. If, on the other hand, he shows that the mark is in use in Canada with respect to some but not all of the wares, the registration is liable to be amended. In this case, the respondent has not shown that the trademark 'Rainier' is in use in Canada with respect to all of the wares specified. It has shown only that the mark is in use with respect to 'beer'. The fact that the other wares specified fall within a group of wares that are in some way related to beer is not sufficient, in my view, to preserve the registration intact. That could only be done if the respondent had also shown that the trademark is in use in Canada with respect to each of these other wares. Such use is required in order to sustain all of the rights in the trademark ..."
In light of Stone, J.'s, closing comments I find it difficult to accept the Registrar's interpretation of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case.
[33]
Further, although evidence of use should be directed to the period prior to the notice, I note that in the Court of Appeal's decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the emphasis was on the requirement of bona fide use in the normal course and refers to Stone, J.'s, comments at page 223 C.P.R.:
"In my opinion, s. 44(1) does not, in terms, require that evidence of use be limited to use on or immediately prior to the notice date. It only requires that, within the specified time limit, the registered owner furnish affidavit evidence or statutory declaration 'showing with respect to each of the wares or services specified in the registration, whether the trademark is in use in Canada' ... The evidence satisfies me that the respondent's business activities in Canada in 1980, culminating in shipment of beer into British Columbia in July and August of that year, constituted evidence upon which the learned judge was entitled to conclude that the trademark 'Rainier' 'is in use in Canada' and accordingly, that it was not liable to be expunged ..."
Special Circumstances
Excusing Nonuse
[34]
Where the trademark has not been used or there has been interrupted use, s. 45(3) of the
Act
provides that the registration may be maintained if special circumstances for nonuse exist. The burden rests on the registered owner to satisfy the Registrar that special circumstances exist to excuse the nonuse.
[35]
As part of its submissions, the appellant argued that it was not open to the Registrar to make a finding of special circumstances justifying the absence of use when no such evidence was filed by the respondent or when such a plea was not advanced by the respondent.
[36]
Although it is difficult to define what constitutes "special circumstances", there have been attempts to identify tests relating to special circumstances (see
88766  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 260, at page 269 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 488 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), at pp. 123-125). "Special circumstances" have been interpreted as circumstances that are unusual, uncommon or exceptional, peculiar or abnormal arising from forces external to the voluntary acts of the owner. As indicated by Pratte, J., in
Harris Knitting
at page 493:
"... it is impossible to state precisely what the circumstances referred to in s. 44(3) must be to excuse the absence of use of a mark. The duration of the absence of use and the likelihood it will last a long time are important factors in this regard; however, circumstances may excuse an absence of use for brief period of time without excusing a prolonged absence of use. It is essential, as well, to know what extent the absence of use is due solely to a deliberate decision on the part of the owner of the mark rather than to obstacles beyond his control. It is difficult to see why an absence of use due solely to a deliberate decision by the owner of the mark would be excused."
In dealing with the question of special circumstances I must keep in mind that it is not the function of the court in hearing an appeal from a decision of the Registrar, to set aside the decision because I may have come to a different conclusion. I must be satisfied that the Registrar failed to consider the facts before him or failed to properly interpret the facts before I can interfere with his decision. Once again, it should be kept in mind that the burden is on the appellant to convince me that the Registrar erred in coming to his decision to maintain the registration.
[37]
In his decision the Registrar made reference to two cases, namely
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  special circumstances existed to excuse the nonuse. He noted these cases because he considered that the facts, although not exactly on point, would be able to assist him in his determination.
[38]
In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case a s. 45 notice was issued after a filing of an application to register Interbake Foods Limited, a subsidiary of George Weston Limited, as a registered user but was not recorded until after the Registrar had made his decision with respect to the s. 45 notice. What had occurred was that two subsidiaries had been registered users of the trademark in question. Weston Ltd. then made application for Interbake to become a registered user. As this application reflected intercorporate operating changes  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's subsidiary companies, the registered user status of the other two subsidiary companies was cancelled. In response to the s. 45 notice an affidavit of use by the prior registered users from 1978 to 1981 was filed by an officer of Interbake. The Registrar ruled that as the registered user application had not been processed the use shown by this affidavit was not by the registered owner or by the registered user and therefore the registration was expunged. On appeal Joyal, J., concluded that in the technical sense there was failure to furnish evidence and the trademark was not in use in Canada, in the technical sense. However, he found that such absence of use may be excused due to special circumstances. He made the following comment at page 531:
"Where by reason of intercorporate reorganizations, it is required that a change be made in registered users, formal requirements and the dynamics of the trade create a flux which at times cannot be avoided. On the one side, user cancellations are registered forthwith. On the other side, user applications are held pending for months. Should there be current inventories of packaged goods under the name of former users, these are not to be thrown away. ...
"In those circumstances the strict and formalistic application of the law might create a situation where a trademark, as statutorily defined, is in limbo. The appellant is not using it. The former registered users are not using it because their registrations have been voluntarily cancelled. The new designated user cannot be held to be using it because its user registration is still pending. As a consequence, there may come a relevant time when an owner is requested to file affidavit evidence of use when there is neither owner nor user competent to do so. A fine state of affairs, specially when in this case, the trademark has and had been notoriously in use."
[39]
Thus, use of a mark by a licensee whose application for status as a registered user has been filed but not yet registered constituted special circumstances for maintaining the registration of the trademark.
[40]
The <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case also involved a s. 44 (now s. 45) notice in respect of the trademark "Menu" for dog and cat food. The owner of the trademark filed an assignment purporting to be a nunc pro tunc assignment and evidence of use by the assignee. The Registrar maintained the registration with respect to dog food and expunged it as to cat food. At the Trial Division the following issues were noted:
"(1) was the nunc pro tunc assignment a valid confirmation of an earlier assignment that had occurred but not been recorded; and
"(2) must the person who is the registered owner of the mark on the date of the s. 44 notice be the party making use of the mark in Canada, or can it be an assignee, though not recorded."
The Trial Division judge upheld the Registrar's decision and maintained the registration.
[41]
On further appeal, the Court of Appeal, based on the evidence that there was nonuse, returned the matter to the Registrar to make a determination of whether if the absence of use was not due to special circumstances that would excuse such nonuse. The Court of Appeal on review of the assignment documents was not convinced that the documentation was a nunc pro tunc assignment and that it did not have retroactive effect and therefore use shown by the evidence was not that of the registered user or owner. Mahoney, J., made the following comment at page 50:
"Transactions postdating the issue of a s. 44 notice may properly be viewed with some scepticism and, when the true circumstances are peculiarly within the knowledge on one party, he should bring that evidence forward. It is unreal and unfair to lay the onus on another who, in the scheme of things has no power to compel production of evidence."
With respect to the question of use by other than the registered owner, the primary question was identified as being whether evidence of use by Menu Foods was acceptable. As I noted earlier, Mahoney, J., accepted and adopted Dubé, J.'s, comments in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , with one clarification that in his opinion an assignee of the registered owner is entitled to be registered as owner, not as a registered user. In summary, he agreed that for the purposes of s. 44 (now s. 45) of the
Act
, "use in Canada" means use in Canada by the registered owner or a registered user.
[42]
In
88766 Canada Inc.
(supra) Teitelbaum, J., was also faced with the submission that no proof of usage was made and that no special circumstances were advanced by the respondent to show why there had not been use of the trademark. However, Teitelbaum, J., had no difficulty finding that although no use of the trademark was shown, the Registrar had sufficient facts before him to conclude that special circumstances existed for the nonuse of the trademark by Weston.
[43]
In light of the above-noted comments and especially as the matter in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was specifically referred back to the Registrar to consider the question of special circumstances, I believe that the Registrar was correct to consider whether special circumstances existed in the case before him to excuse the nonuse. He noted that the evidence showed no use by the registered owner or by the registered user and that although the question of excusing circumstances was not documented or pleaded there was evidence before him to at least infer that the registrant company had recently gone through an amalgamation procedure with several other companies, that it is part of a group of companies presently going through a reorganization process and that at least one company, presumably part of the group, had elected to use the trademark in association with the general category of poultry equipment and that it used the mark substantially in that respect.
[44]
Also, even if I did not find that the evidence presented supported use of the trademark in respect of all of the wares, it could be argued that special circumstances exist to justify the nonuse.
[45]
Therefore, keeping in mind the purpose of a s. 45 application as well as the function of this court on an appeal from a decision of the Registrar, I am not completely convinced that the Registrar made a clear error when he made the decision to maintain the registration of the trademark "Jamesway".
[46]
For the reasons stated above, the decision of the Registrar is maintained and this appeal is dismissed. Counsel for the respondents requested that no order as to costs be made until an opportunity is provided to the parties to present their views either in writing or orally.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]