[1]
Denault, J.
[Translation]: This application for judicial review relates to a very narrow issue: the right of the Refugee Division to ask the Documentation Centre for additional information concerning the status of the law in Poland when the hearing has concluded and decision reserved. A secondary issue is whether the tribunal's analysis of the additional information that was gathered was reasonable.
[2]
This citizen of Poland claimed refugee status stating that he had a well-founded fear of persecution by reason of his religion, his political opinion and his membership in a particular social group. The applicant, who is a Jehovah's Witness, did not agree to use arms against anyone and therefore refused to do his military service or even to do alternative service in the police force, for the same reasons. The tribunal found that the applicant's testimony was credible overall, but the nub of the case does not relate to that issue. The applicant also claims to have been sentenced to 18 months in prison after being convicted of violating s. 271(1) of the
Polish Penal Code
for distributing and posting pamphlets hostile to the State between January and May 1991. He was at that time an active member of the movement "Solidarity In Struggle" which was opposed to Lech Walesa's Solidarity movement. The verdict and sentence were given in absentia on October 11, 1991. The applicant fears that he would be imprisoned if he were to return to his country.
[3]
When the hearing of his refugee claim had concluded and the tribunal reserved decision, the members found, based on an Amnesty International report covering 1990 which was accepted in evidence (Exhibit A-6), that after Solidarity came to power a revision of the penal
Code
had been carried on throughout 1990, and that it was necessary to verify the status of the
Polish Penal Code
at the time the applicant was sentenced. The tribunal asked its documentation centre for additional information concerning the revision of the
Polish Penal Code
, and in particular the status of s. 271(1). In reply, the documentation centre sent it three documents. The first came from the Embassy of Poland in Ottawa and stated that s. 271 of the penal
Code
"regarding the dissemination of false information, no longer exists and there is no censorship in Poland (January 15, 1992)". The second referred to the fact that shortly after the Mazowiecki government took power in September 1989 the most shocking sections of the penal Code and code of penal procedure had been repealed, before the examination of the codes was undertaken in 1990 for the purpose of an overall revision. The third document referred to the fact that on September 28, 1989 the government had announced that it wanted to lift censorship in Poland gradually but that this would not be possible until certain sections of the
Penal Code
, particularly those relating to the dissemination of false information, were amended, and that this would be done during the following year.
[4]
After obtaining those documents, the tribunal gave notice to the applicant and his counsel and a new hearing was held. Counsel made several objections to the introduction of these documents, including the argument that the tribunal had exceeded its jurisdiction in its search for information. He also argued that when it had contradictory evidence on a specific point, the tribunal had to give the claimant the benefit of the doubt and give preference to the facts established in his statement. The tribunal rejected these objections in an extremely detailed judgment and concluded that s. 271 of the
Polish Penal Code
was no longer in force when the claimant committed the acts with which he was charged from January to May 1991. The tribunal accordingly held that although it considered that conviction to be still in effect, the applicant's claim had to be rejected because he could have exercised his rights to apply for it to be quashed and to enjoy the protection offered by his country.
[5]
Counsel reiterated the same objections that he had made to the tribunal. First, he contends that it is the responsibility of the refugee hearing officer to provide the members with the necessary information, and it is not for them to set about looking for additional information on their own. It is not up to the tribunal to go and search through books and documents in an attempt to contradict the evidence produced by the applicant; in this case, research was improperly undertaken into the question of the validity of a judgment which the evidence clearly established resulted in the conviction of the applicant. Referring to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)), he contends that this research was not necessary "for the purposes of the hearing" in that, in our judicial system, the tribunal must remain neutral.
[6]
I believe that the tribunal acted within the limits of the hearing in that, while decision was reserved, relying on a piece of evidence (A-6) which led it to doubt the relevance of the document, it had the authority to "do anything necessary to provide a full and proper hearing" under s. 67(2) of the
Act
. Since it had not yet ruled on the claim, the Refugee Division was not "functus officio" and had the authority to exercise the powers given to it by the
Act
"provided it did so properly by giving the respondent, (here, the applicant), an opportunity to be heard at the reconvened hearing" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 253  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the s. 28 application was allowed because after the tribunal had itself gathered evidence it did not order that the hearing be reopened. This is not the case here. After obtaining the additional evidence, the tribunal held a new hearing, but it did not accept the applicant's objections and rejected his claim.
[7]
The second argument raised by counsel for the applicant is that the evidence gathered by the tribunal does not support its conclusion that s. 271 of the
Polish Penal Code
had been repealed before the acts of which the applicant was accused were committed. On this point, the evidence gathered at least raises some doubt and it is wrong to argue that the applicant should be given the benefit of that doubt. That evidence could reasonably have led the tribunal to conclude, as it did, that the applicant had not discharged his burden of proving a well-founded fear of persecution by reason of his political opinion.
[8]
For these reasons, the application for judicial review must be dismissed. In light of the recent decisions in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and
Yussuf
(A-823-90), I believe that there is no serious question of general importance in this case that would open the way to an appeal under the provisions of s. 83 of the
Act
.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/blk