[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The applicants have brought a written motion pursuant to subsection 18.1(1) of the
Federal Court Act
for an order to quash a visa officer's decision dated December 10, 1993, rendered at the Canadian High Commission in New Delhi, India, in which the applications of the applicants, Kaur, for permanent residence in Canada, were refused.
[2]
The grounds stated for such relief are:
1. The respondent [really, the respondent's visa officer] erred in law in its [sic] refusal of the application for immigration; and
2. The respondent failed to comply with the duty of fairness.
[3]
The first applicant, Gurdeep S. Khalon, is a man and the two other applicants, Bhupinder Kaur and Rajinder Kaur are women, 19 and 17 years of age respectively. Inelegant as it may be, he will be referred to sometimes hereinafter as: the male applicant; and they as: the female applicants. They are his nieces, the daughters of his sister.
[4]
The visa officer interviewed the female applicants and rejected their applications, even on a humanitarian and compassionate (hereinafter sometimes: H & C) basis. They are not "family class" applicants.
[5]
The female applicants' mother, the male applicant's sister, had been divorced from their father who had abandoned them. Ultimately the girls' mother, the male applicant's sister, had remarried, but her new husband wanted nothing to do with her two daughters, the female applicants. It is alleged that they went to live with their grandparents, the parents of their mother and of the male applicant. The male applicant had successfully sponsored his parents' application to come to Canada, but the female applicants' application was refused on the basis of insufficient points. The applicants do not challenge that refusal. They do, here and now, challenge their refusal on humanitarian grounds.
[6]
In support of each of the female applicants' applications their grandfather Shiv Dev Singh Khalon produced his affidavit, copies of which appear at pp. 19 and 29 of the record. The applicants' counsel specifically referred to this passage of that affidavit:
"Till then [ie. from 6/6/83] both of the said daughters are being brought up by me."
The applicants' counsel argues that this passage of the affidavit was wrongly dealt with in law, because the visa officer did not accept it at face value and wanted more background information in the result. The applicants had volunteered no more than what is above cited, on that particular point. They were not more forthcoming.
[7]
By not accepting that scant information on face value, counsel avers, the visa officer ran afoul of the jurisprudence expressed in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A).
[8]
The applicants' counsel states that in "doubting" the cited passage in the affidavit, or, in saying that there was insufficient information given for the visa officer's purpose, the visa officer acted illegally. The passage from the officer's reasons runs:
"No evidence was presented that backdated the application that would indicate that these two children were living with he [sic] and his wife."
Counsel says that the foregoing passage refers to information arising prior to the application. The visa officer (hereinafter, sometimes: v.o.) went on to state:
"If the guardianship had been finalized through the Court system prior to the sponsorship [by the male applicant] I would have been more satisfied that the claimed relationship existed."
It possibly signifies little that the grandfather, in presenting his self-serving affidavit, is not even the applicant, as mentioned by Mr. Justice Heald in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , when the presumption of truth is mentioned, in regard to a hearing before a board.
[9]
It is not necessary to reject, or even doubt grandfather Khalon's affidavit, or it would not be, if he had been more forthcoming. For example, the v.o. had school certificates which listed Manjit Singh as the female applicants' father, who, without more, would be presumed to be their guardian, and no guardian would have to be specified other than their father. However, those certificates did not show grandfather Khalon as a guardian after his guardianship procedures had commenced, but the applications for permanent residence show the parents as the grandparents, and not Manjit Singh. Clearly the v.o. was interested to know which of these documents produced on the female applicants' behalf was correct. The v.o. was entitled legally to view these papers, including grandfather Khalon's affidavit with caution, and indeed, outright suspicion. In such circumstances he rejected the applications, and he was entitled to do so.
[10]
In the present proceedings, (an entirely different matter from a board adjudication), there was filed the v.o.'s affidavit, sworn in Hull, Québec on August 18th, 1994. The v.o. had perused the grandfather's affidavit in which paragraph 5 asserts "all the expenses of Board, lodging, education are being borne by me ...". That is one aspect of the female applicants' request for H & C consideration. They presented another story to the visa officer during his interview of Ms. Bhupinder, as he deposed:
"16. On December 6, 1993, I conducted a personal interview with Ms. Bhupinder. [She] was 17 hears old at the [time]. ... Ms. Bhupinder told me that she received money from Canada from Mr. Khalon through her grandparents, [Dev Singh Khalon and Chahan Kaur] and that there was no direct contact between Ms. Rajinder and Mr. Khalon, that all the contact was through letters written by Mr. Khalon to the grandparents and from the grandparents to the relatives in Canada. ..."
So the applicants presented the v.o. with an inconsistent story, and an unforthcoming, incomplete story in order to move him to accord them the privilege - not the right, be it noted - of H & C relief.
[11]
The v.o.'s decisions were made, both, on December 10, 1993, as illustrated by exhibit K to his affidavit. Counsel for the applicants wrote to the High Commission in New Delhi on February 7, 1994, requesting special consideration. The v.o., in turn, wrote back to counsel, as a courtesy on March 24, 1994, informing that (in his opinion) there was no reason to reopen the applications and that the December 10, 1993 refusals were final. The v.o. also informed that applicants' counsel that if there were any new information, new applications could be initiated.
[12]
The principle upon which this court proceeds is not only are there different H & C considerations in overseas reviews as distinct from inland reviews but, as stated by Hugessen, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A), the v.o. is not required to put before the applicant any tentative conclusions which the v.o. may be drawing from the material presented to him or her (as the v.o. there was), not even apparent contradictions which concern the visa officer. Nevertheless the applicant, in order to succeed, must show that the v.o. erred in law, proceeded on some wrong or improper principle or acted in bad faith. That is a heavy burden.
[13]
The manner of dealing with affidavits in support of H & C applications in legations overseas is perforce different from such manner in regard to adjudications in Canada. It will be remembered that the visa officer abroad has not the benefit of any cross-examinations of the deponent on his or her affidavit, and most significantly, has not inestimable benefit of a refugee hearing officer's (RHO's) valuable services and help.
[14]
Those who say that an affidavit with insufficient information in support of an H & C review is to be accepted on face value, say something ineffably naive, and not required in law. Canadian visa officers, in evincing typically Canadian soft-heartedness, are not required simultaneously to evince "soft-headedness". They are not required, by so doing, to open the doors to any old untested sworn statements which can be crafted to be evasive, self-serving or positively misleading, or even just erroneous.
[15]
The law of Canada does not need, and is not, to be so interpreted as to pander to the wily and the crooked, not to stress the careless or, the forgetful. No one is saying that grandfather Khalon is such a person, but on the other hand his affidavit is not to be exempted from the standards astutely to be applied equally to all other such affidavits which could in future, or do, carry insufficient data for success on an H & C review, conducted overseas.
[16]
The applicants produced an interpretation manual which this court simply ignores for two reasons. First: no such manual either here or in the far removed field of income tax can ever necessarily override the statutory or regulatory interpretations imparted by a superior court. Second: the applicants have presented a section, 9.07(3)(a) and (b), of the manual which deals with the inland applications and not with overseas applications. So, it is irrelevant. There is no merit in the applicants' point about facilitating the reunion in Canada of Canadian citizens with overseas relatives, on a de facto basis, despite the words in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 123 (T.D.), favour the applicants' posture here, although Mr. Justice Strayer appears to be quite correct in positing that, in view of the openness of section 114, some guidelines are helpful so long as they do not fetter discretion, or attempt to override the court's jurisdiction.
[17]
Applicants' counsel keep attempting to expand and over-judicialize the application of the H & C review. It is well to remember what was stated by Strayer, J. (as he was), in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in principle, even although that case involved inland applications, where humanitarian and compassionate grounds could well encompass now, if not then, how well established a family had become, if not earlier excluded promptly after arrival. Mr. Justice Strayer commented on the nature of subsection 114(2) of the
Act
. Three of the six propositions stated by him are:
"(1) In subs. 114(2) Parliament has authorized the Governor-in-Council to make exceptions to the rules found in the
Act
and in the
Regulations
. There is therefore nothing inconsistent with the
Act
in the Governor-in-Council creating such exceptions by regulation.
"(2) The exceptions so made are for the benefit of those in whose favour they are made and do not detract from the normal application of the general rules to all others.
Those who complain that they have not been made the beneficiary of a regulation adopted under subs. 114(2) are in effect complaining that they have not received a special benefit
.
. . . . .
"(6) The Court should not interfere with the exercise of discretion by an officer or body authorized by statute to exercise that discretion
unless
it is
clear that the discretion has been exercised in bad faith
or
on grounds unrelated
to the purposes for which the discretion is granted." (emphasis not in original text)
[18]
Strayer, J., further observed:
"that it must follow as a corollary of the reasoning of Jerome, A.C.J., in
Yhap
that an applicant cannot complain if an immigration officer fails or refuses to follow the Minister's guidelines. Nor can he complain if an immigration officer applies any factor in lieu of those in the guidelines as long as this is done in good faith and the factor is not wholly irrelevant to any conceivable view of humanitarian and compassionate considerations. Further, it is for the officer to decide if he is convinced of the truth of an applicant's assertions, unless perhaps he makes findings of fact which are clearly without regard to any material before him.
It is not for the court to sit in appeal on his findings of fact or his weighing of the various factors
." (emphasis not in original text) (p. 130, para 11)
So, too, it must be in the present case.
[19]
Fairness was not breached in this case. When seeking a special privilege, as distinct from a cast-iron legal right, the applicants must bring before the v.o. all the data which the applicants think will move the v.o. to recommend H & C relief. If their information be spotty, inconsistent, incomplete or unforthcoming, they cannot be heard to complain that they were not accorded a special privilege not generally accorded. The H & C review is a sort of last resort after having failed the legal criteria: it is a privilege. One wonders if some newly devised last, last discretionary resort were to be invented, if the bar would attempt to judicialize it, too.
[20]
This court follows and adopts the words of Mr. Justice Collier in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), where he is reported at p. 319, paragraph 12:
"The onus is on the applicant to satisfy the Court there was a reversible error, warranting judicial interference by way of relief in the nature of certiorari. This is not an appeal, or a retrial of the matter. Nor can the Court, in the absence of error in the legal sense, substitute its opinion for the discretion exercised by the immigration officer in coming to the decision he did."
[21]
During the hearing of this application in Winnipeg, the court mentioned certain jurisprudence generated by the court's own preliminary research, and accorded counsel on each side further time in which to make written argumentation on that jurisprudence. The jurisprudence mentioned was and is:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), wherein the following passage concerning H & C review where an interview is offered, was noted. There Mr. Justice Rouleau went on to adopt the principle proclaimed by the Supreme Court of Canada about "procedural fairness" in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  subsection 114(2):
"The jurisprudence from this Court on this point indicates that unless the discretion has been exercised in bad faith, the Court should not interfere with the decision of an Immigration Officer." (p. 3)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Mr. Justice Hugessen, stated:
"It is commonplace that the content of the duty of fairness varies according to the circumstances. In the present case we are all of the view that such content was minimal. The decision was that of an immigration officer ... on humanitarian and compassionate grounds. The power to grant such exemption resides in subsection 114(2) of the
Act
.
The decision itself is wholly a matter of judgment and discretion
and the law gives the applicant no right to any particular outcome." (emphasis not in original text)
. . . . .
"In such a case as this one, the applicant does not have a 'case to meet' of which he must be given notice; rather it is for him to persuade the decision-maker that he should be given exceptional treatment and exempted from the general requirements of the law. No hearing need be held and no reasons need be given.
The officer is not required to put before the applicant any tentative conclusions she may be drawing from the material before her, not even as to apparent contradictions that concern her
." (emphasis not in original text)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the court confirmed the line of jurisprudence that the H & C review "is of a purely administrative nature" and that the principal issue is "whether the applicant was given his opportunity to be heard, and whether the immigration officer fully considered the applicant's evidence".
[22]
After perusing the said written argumentation of the respective parties' counsel, the court concludes that the respondent's counsel interpreted the above mentioned jurisprudence correctly in concluding that it favours the respondent's resistance to this application.
[23]
Here, the court can find utterly no bad faith, nor any other reversible defect in the visa officer's performance of his duty in this matter. Accordingly, the application for an order to quash his decision is dismissed.
[24]
The applicants formulated certain questions which their counsel alleged to be both serious and of general importance. The respondent does not agree. Nor, with respect, does the court. None is a serious question of general importance for all have been resolved in prior jurisprudence or statutory provisions. Therefore none of those questions is to be certified.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/slm
[End of document]