[1]
Cullen, J.
: Initially, the defendants filed a motion for an order striking out the Statement of Claim and dismissing this action. The plaintiff made a cross-motion seeking, inter alia, an order permitting him to amend the Statement of Claim. However, in the interim, the plaintiff filed an Amended Statement of Claim which he was permitted to do under the
Rules
in that no Statement of Defence had been filed by the defendants. Accordingly, he withdrew his cross-motion and the parties agreed that the defendants Notice of Motion would proceed, dealing with the Amended Statement of Claim.
[2]
The motion here is to strike out the Statement of Claim on the authority of rule 419 of the
Federal Court Rules
.
[3]
Basically, the plaintiff here claims damages for breach of contract on the basis of alleged wrongful or constructive dismissal, as well as infringement of his
Charter
rights under ss. 7 and 12 of the
Charter
.
[4]
The reasons here, particularly on a Notice of Motion, do not require extensive comment from the court.
[5]
As alleged by counsel for the defendants at p. 11 of the transcript:
"It is submitted, my lord, that it is now settled law that service in the Canadian Armed Forces does not create any contractual relationship, nor does termination of service give rise to the cause of action in civil courts for alleged wrongful dismissal or a breach of contract."
[6]
Several authorities can be quoted for this premise and the headnote in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), states it succinctly:
"The engagement of an individual as a member of the Armed Forces does not create any contractual obligations on the part of the Crown. Accordingly, a member of the Armed Forces who alleges that he has been wrongfully dismissed is limited to the internal appeals and remedies provided by statute and
Regulations
, and has no cause of action which can be asserted in the Trial Division of the Federal Court.
"[
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , [1943] Ex. C.R. 77, refd to]"
[7]
Mr. Justice Mahoney made the point in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  be an exercise of leisure for me to review in detail the numerous authorities supporting the defendant's proposition that 'contracts of service between the Crown and members of the armed forces are controlled by the royal prerogative [and that] no member of the armed forces has any legal remedy for wrongful dismissal'
4
4
Halsbury's Laws of England
, Third Edition, Volume 33, para. 1387."
[8]
Following on Mr. Justice Mahoney's decision the plaintiff amended his Statement of Claim and Mr. Justice Cattenach, in a comprehensive fashion, dealt with this matter (Court File no. T-3997-78) at p. 3 of his Reasons for Judgment dated February 21, 1979:
"An amended statement of claim was filed on November 7, 1978 in which the sole relief sought is a declaration that the plaintiff was wrongfully and unlawfully dismissed from the Canadian Armed Forces.
"If such declaration were to be forthcoming, in my view, it would be contrary to the wealth of authority relied on by my brothers Mahoney and Marceau to which I have referred and contrary to the decision of Cameron, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  make a declaration which, though devoid of any legal effect, would, from a practical point of view, serve some useful purpose.'
"From the circumstances of the present matter I cannot envision any useful purpose to be served from a practical point of view by a declaration in the terms sought.
3
[1973] F.C. 1223"
[9]
Thus the Statement of Claim in its entirety can be struck on this ground. It is also vulnerable to being struck due the provisions of the
National Defence Act
which provides a specific redress process, as counsel for the defendants points out at p. 24 of the transcript:
"... it's the broadest possible wording [of s. 29 of the
Act
] that accommodates any and every wording, phrasing, expression of injustice, unfairness, discrimination, whatnot. It covers everything. It leaves nothing out. It's exhaustively comprehensive."
We are not dealing with a situation under the
Public Service Employment Act
.
[10]
Parliament has passed the various sections of the
National Defence Act
and here s. 29 clearly is applicable. Counsel for the defendants, at p. 30 of the transcript, stated:
"That s. 29, there is no equivalent provision in any other statute of Canada in terms of the scope of the wrongs, real, alleged, imagined wrongs that a person can get redress for for anything. That is the difference between the civilian and the military person."
[11]
Accordingly, the defendants' motion to strike is allowed with costs, without prejudice to the plaintiff to launch a new action or pursue the remedies available under the
National Defence Act
, if permitted by the
Act
at this time.
Application allowed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/slm
[End of document]