[1]
Simpson, J.
: The following three applications were heard together:
Merck & Co., Inc. and Merck Frosst Canada Inc. (collectively "Merck") have moved pursuant to Federal Court rules 1716(2)(b) and 1611 for leave to be added as respondents or, in the alternative, as intervenors in a case brought by way of an application for judicial review (the "Main Application") in which Apotex Inc. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) is the applicant and the Attorney General of Canada and the Minister of National Health and Welfare are the respondents (collectively, the "respondents").
Eli Lilly Canada Inc. ("Lilly") has moved pursuant to Federal Court rules 1602(3) and 1611 for leave to be added as a party respondent or, in the alternative, as an intervenor in the Main Application. In addition, Lilly has asked for an order pursuant to rule 1602(3) requiring Apotex to join as a respondent to the Main Application the person who filed the patent list in connection with the first Notice of Compliance to issue for the drug product in question.
The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association of Canada ("PMAC") has moved for leave, pursuant to Federal Court rule 1611, to be added as an intervenor in the Main Application. PMAC is a pharmaceutical industry organization with fifty-three full members who exercise patent rights in respect of a significant number of their products either as patent owners or as voluntary licensees.
The Status Of The
Main Application
[2]
The Main Application was commenced by an Originating Notice of Motion dated October 14, 1993, in which Apotex sought an order:
"(a) Directing the respondent Minister of National Health and Welfare to issue to Apotex a Notice of Compliance in respect of the drug product referred to in the affidavit of Bernard Sherman affirmed October 13, 1993;
"(b) Declaring that the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
are ultra vires subsection 55.2(4) of the
Patent Act
and that the respondent Minister is accordingly not impeded by same in any way in the grant of the Notice of Compliance sought under paragraph (a)."
[3]
The affidavit of Bernard Sherman, who is the President and Chief Directing Officer of Apotex, was filed in support of the Main Application (the "Sherman Affidavit"). Although a hearing date of September 13, 1994, has been set for the Main Application and even though all relevant time limits for defending the Main Application have expired, the respondents have taken no action to resist the Main Application. Counsel for the respondents advised that his clients had decided not to defend the Main Application until the within applications for party and intervenor status had been decided.
The Legislation And
The Regulations
[4]
On February 4, 1993, the
Patent Act Amendment Act, 1992
, S.C. 1993, c. 2 (the "
Act
"), received Royal Assent and most of its statutory provisions were proclaimed in force on February 15, 1993. However, s. 55.2 of the
Act
became effective on March 12, 1993. The
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, SOR/93-133 (the "
Regulations
"), which were made under the authority of s. 55.2 of the
Act
and which concern the issuance of notices of compliance ("NOC") for patented medicines also came into force on that date. An NOC is a document which gives its holder the right to market a product. Without an NOC a drug cannot be sold. The
Regulations
have radically altered the procedures for obtaining an NOC, and they essentially prohibit the Minister of National Health and Welfare from granting an NOC to a generic manufacturer such as Apotex until the expiry of all relevant product and use patents.
[5]
The
Regulations
also provide a scheme which governs the issuance of NOCs. Section 4 of the
Regulations
provides that a company which develops a drug or holds a voluntary licence (an "Originator") files a patent list (the "List") which indicates the drugs over which it claims a proprietary patent interest.
[6]
Under s. 5 of the
Regulations
, it is open to a generic manufacturer to challenge a List on one of several enumerated grounds. This challenge takes the form of a Notice of Allegation (the "Allegation"). When an Allegation is filed, s. 6 gives the patent holder a statutory cause of action. It is entitled to bring an application to this court (the "Prohibition Proceeding") for an order prohibiting the issuance of an NOC.
Prohibition Proceedings
[7]
At this time, Merck and Apotex are parties to three Prohibition Proceedings and two are underway which involve Apotex and Lilly. In all, there are seventeen Prohibition Proceedings in progress to which Apotex is a party. They involve nine patent holders as applicants, eight of whom are PMAC members. In addition, as of December 1993, there were forty-seven Prohibition Proceedings which involved patent holders and all generic manufacturers including Apotex. If Apotex succeeds in the Main Application and obtains a declaration that the
Regulations
are invalid, all the outstanding Prohibition Proceedings and the validity of several prohibition orders that already have been granted will be called into question.
Jurisdiction
[8]
No issue was taken with this court's jurisdiction to add a party as a respondent in proceedings commenced by an originating motion. It was agreed that rule 5 (the gap rule) allows the court to join parties by analogy to the provisions of the other rules. In this case the applicable rule is 1716. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 286 (T.D.).)
Analysis
[9]
I have concluded that the following factors are relevant to the exercise of my discretion:
1. The status of the case. What is the procedural and substantive development of the matter to date? How well have the issues been defined?
2. The impact of the decision. Who will be affected? Are the issues of interest to the parties, to a broader group such as an industry or to the public at large?
3. The nature of the rights which the moving parties assert. Are they direct or remote? Are they substantive, procedural, economic?
4. The nature of the evidence the proposed parties or intervenors are in a position to adduce and whether it will assist the court in reaching its decision.
5. The ability of the existing parties to adduce all the relevant evidence and their apparent enthusiasm for the task.
[10]
Apotex argues that the respondents can adequately defend this matter and, indeed, have the only evidence which could be relevant, because the validity of the
Regulations
depends exclusively on what information the Governor-in-Council had in its possession when the
Regulations
were passed. This information, he argues, is necessarily outside the knowledge of Merck, Lilly and PMAC. However, this case is in its infancy. Since the respondents have not filed any material, the issues have yet to be joined. In these circumstances, I am not prepared to accept the narrow characterization of the issues proposed by Apotex particularly as the Sherman Affidavit, which speaks of frivolous proceedings and discrimination, suggests that the issues may be broader than counsel presently submits.
[11]
The Main Application addresses the validity of the
Regulations
. For that reason, this is not a narrow lis. The decision will affect both the pharmaceutical industry and the consumers of its products. If Apotex is successful in the Main Application, the statutory cause of action and procedural rights which underpin the Prohibition Proceedings will be destroyed. Counsel for the moving parties characterize the Main Application as a preemptive strike designed to wipe out the Prohibition Proceedings in the absence of the Originators (including Merck and Lilly) which are the parties to those proceedings and which have proprietary interests in the patents in issue therein.
[12]
Because Apotex has refused to identify the product for which it seeks an NOC in this case, none of the applicants have been able to establish a direct proprietary interest in the drug product in issue in the Main Application. However, I am satisfied that their participation in the Main Application on the issue of the validity of the
Regulations
is justified because their legal rights to protect their patent interests using the Prohibition Proceedings under the
Regulations
will be fundamentally affected if the
Regulations
are declared invalid.
[13]
This situation is to be distinguished from those in which parties have unsuccessfully applied to intervene based on the precedent value of the case in which intervenor status was sought (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)). In this case, a finding that the
Regulations
are invalid will not merely create a precedent for another case, it will erase the cause of action which supports the Prohibition Proceedings.
[14]
Merck also took the position that it is entitled to participate, as a matter of fairness, to respond to passages in the Sherman Affidavit which suggest bad faith on Merck's part and also suggest that Merck was involved in misleading this court. These suggestions are created by innuendo arising from allegations that Merck stood to gain financially from the passage of the
Regulations
and that their passage was engineered to protect Merck's drug. I have concluded that the allegations are serious and that Merck's participation is necessary in order that they may be dealt with fairly and completely.
[15]
The Sherman Affidavit also states in paragraph 62 that "in most if not all cases" the position of the Originators in the Prohibition Proceedings is "plainly frivolous and abusive". Merck and Lilly say this statement applies to them and PMAC says that it applies to the majority of its members who have been or are presently parties to Prohibition Proceedings. Because the matter is raised in the Sherman Affidavit, it should be addressed and I accept that Merck, Lilly and PMAC have the ability to add information on this issue which is not necessarily available to the respondents. In addition, PMAC, through its members, is prepared to bring forward evidence about other matters raised in the Sherman Affidavit such as the necessity for the
Regulations
and their alleged discriminatory application. PMAC is uniquely qualified to adduce such evidence and to comment on the impact that a declaration of invalidity would have on patent holders.
[16]
I have also determined that the respondents' interests and those of the moving parties will not be aligned on all issues. Counsel for the respondents admitted as much when he said in argument:
"It's because the attorney general is not anyone's ally that these applicants get their direct interest in participating in these proceedings, because certainly the attorney general will not be trying to defend the good name of Merck or others against whom specific allegations are made and whose private interests might be affected if the regulations were to be struck down."
[17]
For all these reasons, I have concluded in the exercise of my discretion that the interests of the applicants and the interests of justice in an effective and complete determination of all the issues favour the participation of the applicants in the Main Application. The nature of their participation is set out in my accompanying order. It grants Merck status as a respondent because it sought to address all the issues and because it was the object of the allegations of bad faith in the Sherman Affidavit. Limited intervenor status has been granted to Lilly and PMAC as they did not wish to participate on all issues.
The Unidentified Patent Holder
[18]
Lilly has asked this court to add the holder of the patent for which Apotex seeks an NOC as a party to the Main Application. Counsel argues that, in her decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 54, McGillis, J., of this court held that the patent holder is a necessary party. This, in my view, was not her conclusion. Her decision is restricted to its facts and stands for the proposition that, in cases where the proceedings concern its drug, a patent holder has an interest which, on its application, may lead to the granting of party status. In this case, the patent holder has not asked to be joined and is not before the court in any capacity. I am not prepared to join a company as a party when it may be ignorant of or disinterested in the Main Application.
[19]
However, the identity of the patent holder with the proprietary interest should be made public so that, if so advised, it may take steps to participate as a party or perhaps be involved as a witness in the Main Application. Unless the patent holder is identified, I have no confidence that all the facts and issues relating to Apotex' request for an NOC will be before the court. Accordingly, my order of this date directs Mr. Sherman to disclose the name of the patent holder.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/nmg
[End of document]