[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application, heard in Toronto March 16, 1992, for an order staying an inquiry concerning the applicant scheduled to proceed before an immigration adjudicator, R. Stonehouse, on March 18, 1992, until the applicant's application for leave to commence judicial review proceedings is determined, and if leave be granted until those proceedings are finally disposed of, by the court.
[2]
This application, filed March 11, 1992, was accompanied by an application for leave pursuant to s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 as amended, to apply pursuant to s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 as amended, for orders in the nature of certiorari and mandamus. Those orders are sought in relation to a decision of a credible basis tribunal composed of R. Stonehouse, Adjudicator, and R. Rushowy, a member of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board, made March 10, 1992, wherein the tribunal is said to have determined that it would not hear evidence and argument on behalf of the applicant in relation to s. 7 of the
Charter
. The tribunal thereafter is said to have proceeded to find that the applicant did not have a credible basis for his claim to be a Convention refugee; then it adjourned and scheduled resumption of its hearing for the evening of March 18, 1992. The application, for leave to seek judicial review, was not considered when this application for a stay of the tribunal's proceedings was heard.
[3]
The basis of this application appears from the affidavit of Marie Chen, barrister and solicitor, who served as the applicant's counsel at his inquiry, which includes the following paragraphs.
"2. The applicant is a citizen of Trinidad and was born on April 25, 1955. He arrived in Canada on December 22, 1986 and indicated his intention to claim protection as a Convention refugee in Canada in January 1987. He lives with his wife and two children, one of whom is a Canadian citizen, in Mississauga, Ontario. He is the subject of an immigration inquiry being held at the Toronto Refugee Backlog Clearance Canada Immigration Centre before an adjudicator R. Stonehouse.
"3. The applicant first attended at his inquiry on October 7, 1991, a date which was set without counsel's consent. The inquiry was adjourned to November 25, 1991 as I was not able to attend that day.
"4. I attended with the applicant at his inquiry on November 25, 1992. The inquiry was set to proceed at 8:30 a.m. We were called into the boardroom at 9:30 a.m. and advised by an adjudicator R. Stonehouse that the case would be adjourned because a member of the Convention Refugee Determination Division (CRDD) was not available. I advised the adjudicator that it was in the applicant's interest to proceed with the inquiry and that we wished to proceed that day. At 10:55 a.m., the inquiry began before an adjudicator, R. Stonehouse, and a CRDD member, R. Rushowy.
"5. At the outset I informed the tribunal that the applicant was raising constitutional arguments that the applicant's rights under s. 7 of the
Charter
had been infringed by the delay in dealing with his refugee claim. I argued that the Federal Court of Canada had ruled that tribunals could proceed with hearing the evidence on credible basis first before hearing the evidence on the constitutional issues and that most adjudicators had proceeded with the credible basis first. I argued that the constitutional issues were preliminary in nature but that because changes were about to take place in Trinidad that would affect the applicant's refugee claim we were prepared to proceed with the credible basis portion of the inquiry first. I informed them that I would be providing six books of evidence in relation to the constitutional arguments.
"6. The adjudicator decided to proceed with the credible basis. He dealt with the immigration allegations and found that the applicant was as described under s. 27(2)(e) of the
Immigration Act
.
"7. The applicant's Personal Information Form was submitted to the tribunal but was returned to the applicant as changes had to be made. Because of the time of day, the inquiry was adjourned to March 10, 1992 for an all day sitting. I indicated that I had earlier dates available, as early as December 1991, but the tribunal and the case presenting officer had no earlier dates on which they were all available.
"8. I attended with the applicant at the resumption of his inquiry on March 10, 1992. At the outset, I informed the tribunal that it was still my position that the constitutional argument was a preliminary one, that I did not waive this argument at the last sitting but that because events were occurring in Trinidad at that time that would affect the applicant's refugee claim, it was in the interest of the applicant to proceed with the credible basis first at the time of the last sitting. The tribunal made no response to this.
"9. The tribunal then proceeded to hear evidence on the credible basis. During the proceedings in the afternoon, the evidence on the credible basis was completed and I made submissions that the applicant should be found to have a credible basis to his refugee claim. One of the arguments I raised during my submissions was that the applicant's rights had been infringed under s. 7 of the
Charter
because circumstances had changed in Trinidad during the delay in dealing with the applicant's claim and that this caused the applicant prejudice. I stated that I would be dealing with this argument in more detail in my submissions on the constitutional issues. The tribunal made no response to this.
"10. After hearing submissions from the case presenting officer and myself, the adjudicator indicated that they would be recessing and switched off the recording equipment. It was about 3:30 p.m. As the panel members were leaving the hearing room, I enquired as to the reason for the recess. The adjudicator told me that they were recessing for a decision on the credible basis.
"11. When the panel returned about 15 minutes later, the adjudicator informed me that they were giving their decision on the credible basis. I objected at this point and stated that they could not make a decision on the credible basis before hearing the evidence on the constitutional issues and that they had to hear the constitutional evidence first. I submitted that they had to determine whether there has been a violation of the applicant's rights under s. 7 of the
Charter
and whether or not s. 52 of the
Constitution Act
was applicable to the applicant before making the credible basis decision.
"12. The adjudicator then informed me that he had not received notification that the Attorney General of Canada had been served with notice that the applicant was raising a constitutional issue before them and that under the new
Federal Court Act
the Attorney General of Canada had to be given such notice. They were a tribunal under the
Act
. This was the first time the tribunal raised this issue with me despite my references earlier on in [the] day to the constitutional arguments. The adjudicator continued and said that since I had not provided the panel with the books of evidence relating to the constitutional arguments and that I had not provided notice, he thought that I was not proceeding with the arguments.
"13. I submitted that the notice requirement did not apply in the applicant's case and that the books of evidence were not the only evidence that the applicant would be relying on in relation to the constitutional issues and that the applicant would be testifying on the issue of prejudice. I asked the adjudicator whether he was making a decision that he had no jurisdiction to entertain the constitutional arguments.
"14. The adjudicator replied that he was not making such a jurisdictional decision; that I had avenues of redress and remedy; and that because a preliminary procedural requirement had not been met he was not permitted to proceed on the constitutional issues. The CRDD member then proceeded to render a decision on the credible basis, finding that the applicant had no credible basis. The adjudicator concurred.
"15. The adjudicator then proceeded to decide whether or not the applicant should be deported. It was about 4:15 p.m. at this time. I objected to proceeding. I stated that I wanted an opportunity to explain to the applicant the consequences of the decision that they had made. I submitted that because the proceedings at this stage necessarily involve the giving of evidence by the applicant, that I needed an opportunity to prepare the applicant. The adjudicator replied that the applicant was present to give evidence. However after discussion with the CRDD member, the adjudicator agreed to proceed [with] another date. He suggested the evening of the next day, March 11, 1992. I stated that I was not available because of previous appointments. The adjudicator then adjourned the proceedings to the evening of March 18, 1992."
In a supplementary affidavit sworn and filed on March 12, 1992, the day following her original affidavit, Ms. Chen avers that in relation to paragraph 15 of the original she had neglected to attest that from inquiries directed to the case presenting officer involved in the hearing on March 10 and to fellow barristers involved in immigration hearings it appears that adjournments of hearings in March 1992, at the Toronto Refugee Backlog Clearance Office are generally set to resume in May or June of 1992.
[4]
At the hearing of this matter there were differences between counsel for the applicant and counsel for the respondent about underlying facts based on their interpretation of the affidavit of Ms. Chen, and about the significance of the evidence. For the respondent it was urged that a decision on the issue of a credible basis of the applicant's claimed refugee status had not yet been made essentially because the hearing had not been concluded. Further, it was urged that in paragraph 9 of her affidavit Ms. Chen makes reference to arguments raised during submissions including infringement of rights under s. 7 of the
Charter
, indicating that the tribunal had not declined to accept constitutional arguments. Finally, for the respondent it was urged that there was no evidence before the court of irreparable harm. For the applicant it was urged that the hearing by the tribunal was a hearing in which several findings would be made, including a decision whether there was credible basis for the applicant's claim, that the tribunal had determined there was no credible basis, as paragraph 14 of Ms. Chen's affidavit made clear, and the only matter left to be determined was whether a removal order should issue. As the only evidence before the court I accept that as fact in relation to the hearing on March 10 but I also accept that the tribunal has not yet completed its findings, which will ultimately be reduced to written form, and until it does so its proceedings are matters within its jurisdiction to determine. I also accept as fact that the tribunal did not, on March 10, provide opportunity for full constitutional arguments to be presented then, not only because counsel had not then presented them in detail but also because of procedural requirements for raising constitutional issues as provided in amendments to the
Federal Court Act
effective February 1, 1992.
Issues
[5]
This application raises two issues. The first concerns the jurisdiction of the court to issue an order, in the nature of an interim or interlocutory order here sought, to stay proceedings of the tribunal. The second, assuming the court has jurisdiction, is whether the order sought should issue.
[6]
For the respondent it is submitted that the court's jurisdiction under s. 18.2 of the
Federal Court Act
, as amended effective February 1992, is limited, in a case like this where leave to commence proceedings for judicial review is required pursuant to s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
, to circumstances where leave to proceed has been granted, a determination not yet made in relation to the application for leave. Section 18.2 provides:
"18.2 On an application for judicial review, the Trial Division may make such interim orders as it considers appropriate pending the final disposition of the application."
For the applicant it is urged that s. 18.2 is not limited as the respondent suggests, and in any event it is within the court's inherent jurisdiction to grant a stay where failure to do so would render nugatory the court's jurisdiction to review the proceedings of the tribunal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 69 (T.D.)). In my view the court's jurisdiction to order a stay of proceedings is not limited by s. 18.2 of the
Federal Court Act
by the necessity to apply for leave to seek judicial review, and in an appropriate case, particularly one where the issue raised in an application for leave is arguable, but would be moot or the jurisdiction of the court would be rendered nugatory by failure to grant a stay, a stay may be ordered within the discretion of the court.
[7]
In this case I am not persuaded that if proceedings of the tribunal are not now stayed, the opportunity for the court to review the proceedings of the tribunal will be lost or that jurisdiction in relation to judicial review will be rendered nugatory. Further steps in the process of consideration of the applicant's situation under the
Immigration Act
are required before he could be excluded from Canada and the opportunity for judicial review, now sought by the application for leave filed, can proceed in the ordinary course. If that process is not completed before steps are taken to remove the applicant from Canada, he may at that time apply for leave, if necessary, to stay implementation of those procedures pending disposition of the application for leave, and any judicial review proceedings arising from that application if granted.
[8]
I turn briefly to the second issue, whether the merits of this case otherwise warrant intervention of the court to stay proceedings of the tribunal. The test, accepted by both counsel, is that set out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, based upon
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241; 38 D.L.R.(4th) 321; 18 C.P.C.(2d) 273; 25 Admin. L.R. 20, per Beetz, J., at p. 127; and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, per Heald, J.A., at pp. 305-307.
[9]
The serious issue raised in the application for leave to commence judicial review proceedings is said to be denial, by decision [of] the tribunal, of the applicant's opportunity to raise constitutional arguments, based on the
Charter
, that are said to be preliminary to the determination of the question of a credible basis for the applicant's claim to refugee status. There is no doubt that such issues, if raised, are within the jurisdiction of the tribunal in determining the law applicable to this case (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), per  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), per Jerome, A.C.J. (F.C.T.D.)). The denial of opportunity to consider submissions on the issue is likely to be perceived as raising an arguable issue, indeed, without attempting to prejudge the ultimate determination on the application for leave since affidavit evidence and argument are not yet filed, it is in my view that is likely to be perceived as a serious issue.
[10]
The basis for refusal thus far to consider constitutional submissions is said to be s. 57 of the
Federal Court Act
, as amended effective February 1, 1992, which provides in part:
"57(1) Where the constitutional validity, applicability or operability of an Act of Parliament or of the legislature of any province, or of regulations thereunder, is in question before the court or a federal board, commission or other tribunal, other than a service tribunal within the meaning of the National Defence Act, the Act or regulation shall not be adjudged to be invalid, inapplicable or inoperable unless notice has been served on the Attorney General of Canada and the attorney general of each province in accordance with subsection (2).
"(2) Except where otherwise ordered by the court or the federal board, commission or other tribunal, the notice referred to in subsection (1) shall be served at least ten days before the day on which the constitutional question described in that subsection is to be argued."
[11]
Whether that section of the
Act
permits a tribunal dealing with a matter the hearing of which commenced in November 1991, before the provision was effective, to preclude evidence and argument at a continuation of the hearing following coming into force of the amendment, is a question that may be resolved if the application for leave for judicial review is pursued. Again without prejudging the issue, procedural requirements not specifically made retroactive are unlikely to be perceived as an effective bar to arguments concerning substantive, or even procedural, rights guaranteed by the
Charter
. In short it seems to me the applicant here sets out a serious issue.
[12]
Will irreparable harm occur if a stay is not granted? In my view, at this stage I am not persuaded that it will. In the first place the tribunal's hearing is not concluded. Until it is and a written record of its findings produced, it is still in control of its own procedures and it may still provide for evidence and argument on constitutional issues to be presented. That may still be done with appropriate notice to Attorneys General in accord with s. 57 of the
Federal Court Act
. Even if it does not do so, its decision not to do so, already raised in the application for leave to seek judicial review, may be subject to review by this court.
[13]
Counsel for the applicant urges that unless the stay applied for is granted the court's jurisdiction will be rendered nugatory because the opportunity for submission of constitutional evidence and argument relating to the credible basis of the applicant's claim to refugee status will be lost, and that constitutes irreparable harm to the applicant. I am not persuaded that this is so. Should the tribunal not consider such evidence and argument, the application for leave now filed seeks review of that decision now made by the tribunal and the opportunity for judicial review awaits only the determination of the application for leave.
[14]
My conclusion is that in the circumstances of this case it would be inappropriate at this stage to stay proceedings of the tribunal considering the status of the applicant under the
Immigration Act
.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]