[1]
Wetston, J.
: This is an application, pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, for an order setting aside the decision Public Service Staff Relations Board (the "PSSRB") appointed adjudicator J. Barry Turner, dated November 1, 1993, wherein the applicant's grievance was denied. The applicant's grievance alleged that the respondent failed to maintain a work environment free from sexual discrimination and harassment.
Background
[2]
Normie Ribeca ("the applicant"), an employee of Transport Canada, first went to work with the Airport Maintenance Group at Pearson International Airport in 1989. One of her colleagues, at the time, was Joe Silva. The applicant and Mr. Silva, while colleagues, were friends. According to Mr. Silva, he and the applicant talked about everything: work, politics, family, kids, sex. However, according to the applicant, she and Mr. Silva did not socialize outside work.
[3]
In March 1989, Mr. Silva was appointed, on an acting basis, as the applicant's immediate supervisor, a position that became permanent in 1991. According to the applicant, her friendly working relationship with Mr. Silva dramatically changed. The applicant began experiencing what she perceived to be harassing treatment from Mr. Silva in March 1990. Apparently, Mr. Silva began to criticize the applicant's work habits and performance; he made embarrassing comments about her to other co-workers; he intimidated her; and he treated her, in her opinion, contemptuously. The applicant also contends that Mr. Silva regularly made sexually explicit comments to her. In total, the applicant outlined twenty-nine (29) allegations of harassment against Mr. Silva.
[4]
In January 1991, the applicant went to Mr. Silva's supervisor, John Kaldeway, Director, Airport Operations, regarding her concerns about Mr. Silva's management style. Mr. Kaldeway suggested that the applicant contact Transport Canada's regional counsellor, Doreen Kostyshyn, which she did on January 23, 1991. Also in January 1991, the applicant contacted Duncan McLeod, Airside Technical Inspector and the local union president, about her concerns regarding Mr. Silva's behaviour. Like Mr. Kaldeway, Mr. McLeod suggested the applicant see the regional counsellor.
[5]
The applicant met with Ms. Kostyshyn several times prior to filing her grievance regarding Mr. Silva's behaviour. Initially, the applicant wanted simply to improve her working relationship with her supervisor. However, by March 1991, the applicant began discussing incidents which she felt amounted to sexual harassment. By early June 1991, after having met with both the applicant and Mr. Silva, Ms. Kostyshyn suggested that they attempt to resolve their differences by mediation. However, reluctant to participate in mediation, the applicant filed her grievance on July 24, 1991.
[6]
Patricia Short-Gallé, Manager, Administration and Executive Services, Transport Canada, a former investigation assistant with the Public Service Commission, was appointed to investigate the applicant's grievance. In conducting her investigation, Ms. Short-Gallé met with both the applicant and Mr. Silva. Apparently, Mr. Silva was surprised that the harassment allegations were sexual in nature. Mr. Silva denied all of the applicant's allegations and outlined his own allegations of misconduct on the applicant's part.
[7]
Ms. Short-Gallé was unsuccessful in her attempts to substantiate any of the applicant's allegations. During her investigation, none of Mr. Silva's allegations were made known to the applicant, although one of his allegations was that he and the applicant had had an affair. Despite the many allegations, the only incident which Ms. Short-Gallé concluded probably occurred was with respect to the applicant having been shown or having found a photograph of the lower half of a nude male body, penis erect, which as it turned out was a photograph of Mr. Silva himself. Further allegations were made in December 1991, however, none of the subsequent allegations could be substantiated. Unable to confirm any of the applicant's allegations, Ms. Short-Gallé concluded that neither she nor any third party could substantiate this as being sexual harassment. No further investigation was undertaken.
[8]
The applicant's grievance was referred to adjudication pursuant to s. 92 of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. P-35 (the "PSSRA"). The hearing before the adjudicator lasted two and a half days. Fourteen witnesses appeared and twenty-one exhibits were introduced into evidence. An exclusion request was granted, however, considering the serious nature of the sexual harassment allegations, Mr. Silva was permitted to remain throughout the hearing.
Decision Of The Adjudicator
[9]
In a lengthy set of reasons, dated November 1, 1993, the adjudicator denied the applicant's grievance. The bulk of the reasons set out in detail the testimony of the various witnesses heard during the hearing. The actual decision is very short. In denying the grievance, the adjudicator characterized the evidence presented as contradictory. On balance, the adjudicator concluded that in his opinion, while neither party was innocent of wrongdoing, the applicant's evidence did not warrant a declaration that the respondent failed to maintain a work environment free from discrimination and harassment. In support of his conclusion, the adjudicator made only the following findings:
"The alleged gathering in Mr. Silva's room at the TCTI was never corroborated. Witness Miljkovic testified that he thought the alleged event happened in the grievor's room; the grievor said it was in Mr. Silva's room, and witness Todkill said he could not recall ever attending a gathering in Mr. Silva's room. Even if this incident did take place, I find it unbelievable that the grievor would have continued to sit beside Mr. Silva for the rest of the TCTI course in Cornwall if she was so embarrassed, or that she would have gone for a stroll with him to Zellers. Mr. Todkill in fact said that the grievor followed Mr. Silva around all week at the TCTI and that Mr. Silva was razzed for this. I believe Mr. Todkill.
"The grievor testified that she told counsellor Kostyshyn 'everything' at their first meeting in January 1991. This was denied by counsellor Kostyshyn even after she consulted her diary during the hearing. As late as May 1991, Mr. Kaldeway testified that neither Mr. MacLeod nor the grievor raised any sexual allegations with him. The first time he heard about them was on October 8, 1991 from investigator Short-Gallé. I believe him.
"Regarding the nude photos, Mr. Silva admitted that he took them and remembered showing them to the grievor, but if she was so shocked and offended by them why did she admit that she asked him what camera he used to take them with? Mr. Silva admitted that he showed the grievor the photos and that this was wrong.
"I believe the grievor failed a credibility test when she said she did not ask Elissa Pinkney to load the fellatio program on her computer whereas Mrs. Pinkney testified that she did ask her to load it and that they filed it under 'pig'. I believe Mrs. Pinkney. As reprehensible as this entire episode is in the public service workplace, there seems to be a high degree of consent and sharing of this maxi program, since it was viewed by others and no one asked the grievor to remove it.
"Witnesses Robert Pinkney and Christopher Cole both described a flirtatious manner of the grievor that sometimes gave the wrong impression of her, particularly for someone who liked to show her tan lines. Whether this was intentional or not, the grievor may not have realized what impression her actions were having on some staff members, but imaginations sometimes run wild."
Issues
[10]
1. Did the adjudicator err in law and exceed his jurisdiction in interpreting Article M-16.01 of the collective agreement?
2. Did the adjudicator base his decision upon an erroneous finding of fact made in a perverse and capricious manner or without regard for the material before him?
Analysis
[11]
The applicant takes issue with several aspects of the adjudicator's decision, however, the focus of counsel for the applicant's submissions was whether sexual harassment occurred in this instance. According to the applicant, in failing to put his mind to whether sexual harassment occurred in the present case, not only did the adjudicator fail to ask himself the right question, but he also failed to properly interpret article M-16.01 of the applicable collective agreement. The applicant also contends that, contrary to Supreme Court of Canada jurisprudence [see footnote 1], the definition of harassment in the collective agreement [see footnote 2], and the definitions of harassment in
Transport Canada's Personnel Manual
[see footnote 3], the adjudicator took into account irrelevant considerations. In the applicant's submission, the evidence presented to the adjudicator, as a whole, clearly and unequivocally established sexual harassment. For the adjudicator to have found otherwise was an error in law.
[12]
The applicant also takes issue with the adjudicator's findings regarding her reaction to being shown the nude photograph of Mr. Silva, as well as on an incident at the office involving a number of employees showing their tan lines, in which she was involved. The applicant also disagrees with the credibility finding regarding a fellatio program installed on her office computer.
[13]
Counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, focused his submissions on the onus of proof and the method by which the adjudicator found no harassment or discrimination. According to the respondent's submissions, a finding of sexual harassment or discrimination is a two step process. First, the applicant must prove the facts alleged, then the adjudicator is to determine whether the proven facts establish sexual harassment. The respondent submits that the applicant failed to prove the facts alleged. Having determined that the evidence was contradictory and that the applicant's behaviour was inconsistent with one alleging sexual harassment, the adjudicator did not, nor was he required to, determine whether sexual harassment or discrimination occurred in this instance. According to the respondent, the reasons for decision were sufficient in the circumstances of this case.
[14]
Was the applicant discriminated against and harassed contrary to article M-16.01? Article M-16.01 reads:
"M-16.01 There shall be no discrimination, interference, restriction, coercion, harassment, intimidation, or any disciplinary action exercised or practiced with respect to an employee by reason of age, race, creed, colour, national origin, religious affiliation, sex, sexual orientation, family status, mental or physical disability or membership or activity in the union."
As suggested by the respondent, in order to succeed, the applicant must establish the factual foundation underpinning harassment. The adjudicator must then determine whether the facts, as found, establish harassment in violation of M-16.01.
[15]
A considerable portion of the adjudicator's decision, and a significant portion of the written material before the court, was devoted to the testimony of thirteen (13) witnesses, including the applicant and Mr. Silva, relating to incidents the applicant alleges to have occurred between May 1990 and the end of 1991. The witnesses appear to have been from various departments at Pearson International airport. The adjudicator found their evidence, at best, to be contradictory.
[16]
However, four incidents, in particular, appear from the record to warrant comment by the court.
[17]
(1.) The applicant was shown a photograph of the naked lower portion of a male's body, penis erect. The applicant testified she found the photograph in her desk in September 1990. Mr. Silva admitted that the applicant did in fact see such a photograph he'd taken of himself, although according to his testimony, the applicant asked to see the photograph.
[18]
(2.) The applicant was shown a document described as an "Indian Application form" containing racist, stereotypical descriptions of members of Canada's First Nations, as well as several sexual slang references. Mr. Silva admitted completing and showing the applicant the form. Mr. Silva also testified that the form could be interpreted as "a sexual come-on".
[19]
(3.) Following an office party in the summer of 1991, the applicant and a co-worker, Cynthia Murdock, testified to having driven Mr. Silva home. Ms. Murdock testified that sexual invitations were made at the door to his home. In Ms. Murdock's opinion, the incident was threatening. While Mr. Silva does not dispute he was driven home, he testified that he did not recall making any sexual invitations.
[20]
(4.) Christopher Cole, an air traffic controller, testified that during the Christmas season in 1991, he saw Mr. Silva heading down a corridor which led only to the women's washroom. Mr. Cole apparently advised Mr. Silva that he must be going the wrong way. According to Mr. Cole, Mr. Silva turned and walked away mumbling. Later that day, Mr. Cole was approached by the applicant, who thanked him for turning Mr. Silva in the opposite direction to the women's washroom. Apparently, the applicant told Mr. Cole that Mr. Silva had been chasing her and that she had gone into the women's washroom to seek refuge. Mr. Silva testified that he did not recall any such incident.
[21]
Despite devoting a considerable portion of his reasons to the evidence as presented, the adjudicator made no specific findings regarding the above four incidents and whether they amounted to sexual harassment or discrimination. Moreover, these four incidents do not appear to have been contradicted. It appears the adjudicator made no specific evidentiary findings with respect to these four incidents in support of his dismissal of the applicant's grievance.
[22]
In order to determine whether sexual harassment or discrimination has occurred in this particular instance, the adjudicator must examine, consider and assess the totality of the evidence adduced. In this regard, he need not comment on all of the evidence but, the adjudicator must assess the relevant evidence, decide on its appropriate weight and make his evidentiary findings in the context of the particular allegations of sexual harassment. It is obvious from the adjudicator's decision that certain evidence was considered. However, certain uncontradicted facts were not considered and were clearly relevant to a determination of whether sexual harassment or discrimination was present. While the adjudicator seems to have considered and made certain findings regarding the applicant's role in some of the incidents which she alleges were sexual harassment or discrimination, I am of the opinion that the adjudicator failed, for the above reasons, to consider certain relevant evidence regarding sexual harassment or discrimination.
[23]
The court's role in this case is not to make findings of fact or to make a finding of harassment, rather, it is to determine whether an error was committed. In the court's opinion, the adjudicator erred in the manner in which he rendered his decision.
[24]
Accordingly, this application is allowed. The adjudicator's decision, dated November 1, 1993, is set aside and the matter is referred back for reconsideration by a different adjudicator.
Application allowed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/gms
Footnotes
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 81; 66 C.C.C.(3d) 321; 7 C.R.(4th) 117 (S.C.C.).
2.	article M-16.01
3.	"12.
Harassment
means any improper behaviour by a person employed in the Public Service that is directed at and offensive to any staff member of the Public Service and which a person knew or ought reasonably to have known would be unwelcome. It comprises objectionable conduct, comment or display made on either a one-time or continuous basis that demean, belittle, cause personal humiliation or embarrassment to a staff member.
. . . . .
"14. For the purposes of this policy, sexual harassment means any conduct, comment, gesture or contact of a sexual nature, whether on a one-time basis or in a continuous series of incidents,
a) that might reasonably be expected to cause offence or humiliation to any staff member; or
b) that might reasonably be perceived by the staff member as placing a condition of a sexual nature on employment or on any opportunity for training or promotion."
[End of document]