[1]
Teitelbaum, J
: On the 26th day of April, 1995, the plaintiffs, Procter & Gamble Inc. and The Procter & Gamble Company filed into the Federal Court Registry at Toronto, Ontario, a Statement of Claim naming Colgate-Palmolive Canada Inc. as defendant. In the conclusions found in the Statement of Claim, plaintiffs claim the following:
"(a) a declaration that Canadian Letters Patent 1,033,916 and claims 1, 5, 6 and 8 have been infringed by the defendant;
"(b) a declaration that with respect to Canadian Patent No. 1,033,916, the plaintiff Procter & Gamble Inc. is a person claiming under the patentee The Procter & Gamble Company pursuant to s. 55(1) of the
Patent Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4, as amended.
"(c) an interim, interlocutory and a permanent injunction restraining the defendant by its officers, directors, servants, agents and all those over whom it exercises control from:
(i) infringing Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,033,916, or any of claims 1, 5, 6 or 8 thereof.
(ii) inducing customers of the defendant, or consumers of fabric conditioning articles, to infringe Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,033,916;
(iii) selling, offering for sale, manufacturing or distributing fabric conditioning articles of the type offered for sale and distribution by the defendant under the trademark Ultra Fleecy.
"(d) that the defendant be required to deliver up to the plaintiffs all articles in the possession, custody or control of the defendant as may offend the injunctions sought in (c) above;
"(e) damages, or in the alternative, an accounting of profits, as the plaintiffs may after due inquiry elect;
"(f) pre and post judgment interest;
"(g) costs; and
"(h) such further and other relief as to the court may seem just."
[2]
On the same day, the plaintiffs filed a Notice of Motion for:
"2. An Order for an interim or interlocutory injunction restraining the defendant, its officers, directors, employees, agents and those over whom they may have control, until the disposition of this action at trial, or until expiry of the patent as set out below, whichever shall occur first, from:
a. selling, offering for sale, manufacturing or distributing fabric conditioning articles of the type offered for sale by the defendant under the trademark Ultra Fleecy;
b. otherwise further infringing Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,033,916 by selling, offering for sale, promoting, manufacturing or distributing fabric conditioning articles claimed in Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,033,916, in addition to those already offered for sale by the defendant under the name Ultra Fleecy; and
c. inducing customers of the defendant, or consumers of fabric conditioning articles, to infringe Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,033,916;
"3. Costs of this motion on a solicitor and client basis, payable forthwith.
"4. Such further or other order as to this Honourable Court may seem just."
[3]
The grounds for the said motion, as stated in the Notice of Motion, are:
"1. This motion for an interim or interlocutory injunction is brought pursuant to Federal Court Rule 469.
"2. There is a serious question to be tried, the defendant is violating the patent rights of the plaintiffs and the acts of the defendant have been done without the consent or authority of the plaintiffs.
"3. The balance of convenience favours the plaintiffs.
"4. Irreparable harm will be done to the plaintiffs unless an interlocutory injunction is granted."
[4]
In support of plaintiffs' application for an interim or interlocutory injunction, the plaintiffs have filed the affidavit of Rodolfo Delgado (Delgado), together with Exhibits "A" to "S", the affidavit of James Miller (Miller) with one exhibit, Exhibit "A" and the affidavit of Michelle Wassenaar together with Exhibits "A", "B" and "C".
[5]
The defendant did not file any affidavit evidence but did file, as its evidence, the cross-examinations of both Delgado and Miller.
[6]
Let me immediately state that as a result of the defendant not filing any evidence to contradict what was sworn to by Delgado and Miller, except for possible contradictions found in their cross-examinations, I must accept the evidence as given by Delgado and Miller.
[7]
I must also state that I was not presented with any evidence to contradict the fact that both Delgado and Miller are experts in their respective fields.
[8]
Delgado is a chemical engineer who has been employed by The Procter & Gamble Company (the American company) since June 1977. He is now Section Head, Research and Development, with responsibility for the North American dryer-added fabric softener business.
[9]
In paragraph 2 of his affidavit, Delgado states:
"Throughout my employment with Procter & Gamble, I have worked as a Product Development Manager. From March 1978 to January 1980, from July 1983 to January 1989, and from August 1993 to today, I have worked in Product Development on Procter & Gamble's Bounce brand of dryer added fabric softener ('the Bounce product'). My experience on the Bounce product includes formulating, processing, technical and consumer testing of the product and various modifications thereof, as well as evaluating products of other companies which are in competition with Procter & Gamble's Bounce product. I have become familiar with the project to develop and manufacture the Bounce product, since the project's inception in the late 1960's."
[10]
It is important to note that Delgado states, and there is no evidence to contradict this statement, that his expertise includes "evaluating products of other companies which are in competition with Procter & Gamble's Bounce product". Paragraphs 3 to 7 give further background to Delgado's expertise.
[11]
As I have stated, I am satisfied that Delgado is an expert in the field of fabric softeners and particularly with the Bounce product and other products that attempt to compete with the Bounce product manufactured by the plaintiffs.
[12]
Miller is a marketing consultant employed by The Bases Group. In paragraph 1 of his affidavit, Miller explains what it is that The Bases Group does.
"I am employed by The Bases Group. The Bases Group is a marketing research organization that is the world-wide leader in estimating sales volume for new products, line extensions and restaged brands. The Bases system for estimating sales volume was developed in 1977 and uses sophisticated market simulation models and analytical tools to help marketers assess the viability of new product initiatives before going to market. The Bases system has been used to evaluate over 8,000 new products for hundreds of clients in over 40 countries."
[13]
Miller is a Vice-President/Region Manager with The Bases Group, in charge of the company's Cincinnati, Ohio office. He has been with the company for 12 years. Miller has a Bachelor of Science and a Master of Science degree in marketing with a "concentration in Quantitative Analysis".
[14]
In paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of his affidavit, Miller states:
"5. In the course of my employment, I have become thoroughly familiar with marketing models and the analysis of consumer and market place variables that impact the performance of new and existing products. My experience has spanned a large number of consumer product categories, including laundry detergents and fabric softeners. I have provided consulting services to clients on many marketing issues including the order of entry effects associated with competitive product introductions.
"6. Beyond my formal education and work experience, I have taken a number of specialized seminars focusing on marketing, marketing models, sales forecasting and market research.
"7. I am a member of the American Marketing Association and I have lectured on marketing models and sales forecasting at several universities."
[15]
From the above, I am satisfied that Miller can be considered a marketing expert including the order of entry effects associated with competitive product introductions.
[16]
Michelle Wassenaar is a barrister-solicitor employed by plaintiffs' counsel. She lists and files some of the correspondence between the parties.
[17]
Both Delgado and Miller were cross-examined on their affidavits. The cross-examinations were filed into the record by counsel for the defendant.
[18]
In his cross-examination, Delgado was asked questions concerning his employment with The Procter & Gamble Company, the U.S. company. Delgado states that his responsibilities as Section Head, Research and Development for the North American dryer-added fabric softener business are:
"I oversee all of the research and development work that goes on for the United States and Canada for the dryer-added fabric softener business. I have a number of people, engineers and technicians, who report to me in their specific roles and I also interface quite a bit with the people in the marketing side and the financial side as well."
[19]
Delgado has no responsibility for marketing. He states that when Procter & Gamble develops a new product, it takes steps to keep the particulars of the product confidential and to his knowledge, it never gave samples of such new product to its competitors in advance of the product launch for their comments or review. He did state:
"Well, you don't share the samples with your competitors.
You do share with the trade before they actually are distributed to the trade.
" (emphasis added)
[20]
Clearly, Delgado is an expert in his field. There is nothing in his cross-examination to indicate otherwise.
[21]
In his cross-examination, Miller states that he did not use the Bases system that he referred to in paragraph 1 of his affidavit for the purposes of his affidavit. He also states, in his cross-examination, that his opinions relating to the Canadian market came from having read the affidavit of Delgado and, in addition, he spoke to a Catherine Pearce who is employed by the Canadian plaintiff and is responsible for the marketing of the Bounce product in Canada.
[22]
After reading the affidavit evidence of Miller and after reading his cross-examination, I am satisfied, as I will explain later, that Miller could have better informed himself but nevertheless, I accept his evidence as it relates to the issue of marketing and possible market loss if the defendant were to be permitted to enter the market before the expiry of the McQueary Patent.
[23]
As I have stated, the plaintiffs' application is an application for an interlocutory injunction seeking "quia timet" relief. Plaintiffs' action is based on a claim of patent infringement.
[24]
In the circumstances of this case, the product that plaintiffs allege infringe their products, Bounce and Downy dryer sheets, are dryer sheets to be sold under the name of Ultra Fleecy. These dryer sheets have never been seen by the plaintiffs.
[25]
The plaintiffs have rights under Canadian Patent No. 1,033,916 (the McQueary Patent), which will expire on July 4, 1995, in approximately eight weeks.
[26]
The defendant is planning to deliver shipments of dryer sheets under the name Ultra Fleecy commencing on Monday or Tuesday, May 15 or 16, 1995. Plaintiffs consider that the sale of the Ultra Fleecy sheets infringes the McQueary Patent and, as a result, plaintiffs will suffer irreparable harm.
[27]
As I have stated, plaintiffs claim that the Ultra Fleecy product will infringe the McQueary Patent without having seen or tested the Ultra Fleecy product. Plaintiffs have never seen a sample of the Ultra Fleecy product.
[28]
The defendant has refused to supply the plaintiffs with a sample of their Ultra Fleecy product. The defendant has also failed to file any evidence to deny that the Ultra Fleecy product infringes the McQueary Patent.
Test For Interlocutory Injunctions
[29]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 241, at p. 334, Sopinka and Cory, JJ., state:
"
Metropolitan Stores
adopted a three-stage test for courts to apply when considering an application for either a stay or an interlocutory injunction. First, a preliminary assessment must be made of the merits of the case to ensure that there is a serious question to be tried. Secondly, it must be determined whether the applicant would suffer irreparable harm if the application were refused. Finally, an assessment must be made as to which of the parties would suffer greater harm from the granting or refusal of the remedy pending a decision on the merits."
[30]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1, the Federal Court of Appeal established the following criteria which must be present before an interlocutory injunction should issue:
(a) Where the plaintiff's recoverable damages resulting in the continuance of the defendant's activities pending trial would be an adequate remedy that the defendant would be financially able to pay, an interlocutory injunction should not normally be granted;
(b) where such damages would not provide the plaintiff an adequate remedy but damages (recoverable under the plaintiff's undertaking) would provide the defendant with such a remedy for the restriction on his activities, there would be no ground for refusing an interlocutory injunction;
(c) where doubt exists as to the adequacy of these remedies in damages available to either party, regard should be had to where the balance of convenience lies;
(d) where other factors appear to be evenly balanced, it is prudent to take such measures as will preserve the status quo;
(e) where the evidence on the application is such as to show one party's case to be disproportionately stronger than the other's, this factor may be permitted to tip the balance of convenience in that party's favour provided the uncompensable disadvantage to each party would not differ widely;
(g) other unspecified special factors may possibly be considered in the particular circumstances of individual cases."
[31]
In the case of
Canadian Parks and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 245, Strayer, J. (as he then was), states:
"In deciding whether the applicant is entitled to interim relief, it is common ground that the principles applicable to interlocutory injunctions should be applied. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241; 38 D.L.R.(4th) 321; 18 C.P.C.(2d) 273; 25 Admin. L.R. 20). The proper approach to determining whether an interlocutory injunction should be issued has been clarified authoritatively in this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1 (F.C.A.). As was emphasized there, one should not apply the various criteria mechanically but may instead have regard to a combination of factors. Essentially the factors identified are: is a serious issue raised; if so, would damages provide an adequate remedy to the plaintiff in lieu of an injunction, or if not would the grant of an injunction nevertheless cause irreparable harm to the defendant which could not be compensated by damages; and if this does not provide a clear answer as to whether an injunction should be granted, then regard should be had to the balance of convenience including the general presumption in favour of maintaining the status quo. I shall proceed to apply these factors in the present case."
[32]
It is apparent from a reading of the above cases that the onus is on the party requesting the issuance of an interlocutory injunction to show a serious issue or an arguable case, irreparable harm and that the balance of convenience, including the general presumption of maintaining the status quo, is in the applicant's favour.
[33]
Although I am mindful of the jurisprudence that in patent matters,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), at pp. 363 and 364, Jerome, A.C.J., states that plaintiff must establish a strong or prima facie case.
"Every aspect of the grievance is to be fought at trial. Validity is acknowledged for the purposes of the motion but the defendant intends to vigorously contest it at trial. Although I am prepared to accept there are serious issues to be tried in this case, I am not satisfied the plaintiffs have established a strong, or prima facie case of infringement.
"The defendant also states the harm in this situation is entirely quantifiable. I agree.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), former Chief Justice Thurlow explained why injunctive relief in patent cases is the exception rather than the rule [at pp. 55-65]:
'In this court, the grant of an interlocutory injunction in a patent infringement action is not a common occurrence in most instances, the result of an application for an interlocutory injunction, where infringement and validity are in issue, is that the defendant gives a satisfactory undertaking to keep an account and upon that being done the application is dismissed with costs in the cause ... The principal reason for this practice is, in my opinion, the fact that in most instances the nature of the patent rights involved is such that damage (providing there is some reasonably accurate way of measuring them) will be an adequate remedy for such infringement of the rights as may occur pending the trial and because when the matter turns on the balance of convenience if the defendant undertakes to keep an account and there is no reason to believe that he will be unable to pay such damages as may be awarded, the balance will generally be in favour of refusing the injunction.'"
I am also mindful of what the jurisprudence states as found in the cases of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 291 (T.D.).
[34]
In the
Procter & Gamble
case, supra, Mr. Justice Collier at p. 225, in speaking of an action for alleged infringement of a patent, states:
"This is an action for alleged infringement of a patent.
. . . . .
"All that said, there is no difference, as to general principles governing interlocutory injunctions, between a patent suit and other suits. There may be one small qualification to that statement which I shall later mention."
and in the
Samsonite
case, supra, Madame Justice Reed states, at p. 309:
"I simply do not accept that there is a presumption that interlocutory injunctions should not be granted in patent cases."
[35]
I am satisfied that each case of patent infringement, where a party claims patent infringement and is asking for an interlocutory injunction, must be decided on the facts as presented. It is too simple a statement to say that where patent infringement is involved and a claim for an interlocutory injunction is requested, one need only show that the claim is not frivolous or vexatious or that one need only show an arguable case or one needs to show a prima facie claim or a strong prima facie claim.
[36]
The court must look at all the facts showing infringement and decide if the applicant requesting the interlocutory injunction has a reasonable chance of success at trial. Whether one calls this an arguable case, a prima facie case or a strong prima facie case is not of utmost importance.
[37]
In the case at bar, counsel for defendant informed me that defendant intends to contest the validity of plaintiffs' patent but has failed, to the present time, to file a Statement of Defence indicating why the plaintiffs' patent is invalid. In addition, defendant failed to file affidavit evidence stating that it intends to contest the validity of plaintiffs' patent and why it would do so.
[38]
A registered patent is presumed valid until a court declares the patent to be invalid. At this stage of the proceedings, plaintiffs' patent is valid.
The Issue Of
An Arguable Case Or
A Prima Facie Case
Or A Strong
Prima Facie Case
[39]
Plaintiffs, in their Statement of Fact and Law make the following submission, quoting from the affidavit of Rodolfo Delgado:
"1. The McQueary Patent issued to the plaintiff, the Procter & Gamble Company, on July 4, 1978, in respect of an invention entitled 'Article for Conditioning Fabrics in a Clothes Dryer' and naming Agnes R. McQueary as inventor.
"2. The McQueary Patent describes and claims an improvement to the working of the invention of Canadian Patent No. 1,005,204, the 'Gaiser Patent' which expired in Canada on February 15, 1994.
"3. The McQueary Patent has both article and method claims. The article described and claimed in the McQueary Patent has a substrate which contains perforations sufficient in size and number as to permit at least about 75% of the normal volume of air flow through said dryer when the product is used therein; said perforations comprising from about 0.5% to about 75% of the area of said substrate.
"4. The method of the invention of the McQueary Patent provides, in the conditioning of fabrics by addition of conditioning agents thereto, the step of commingling the fabrics to be conditioned with a substrate carrying a conditioning agent removable to the fabrics and having perforations as described above, thereby to reduce the hindering or restrictive effect of the article upon the exhaust of air from the dryer.
"5. The plaintiff Procter & Gamble Inc. is the exclusive Canadian licensee under the McQueary Patent. The plaintiff, The Procter & Gamble Company, and its legal representatives have, until July 4, 1995, the exclusive right, privilege and liberty of making, constructing, using and vending to others to be used the invention of the McQueary Patent.
"6. Proctor & Gamble's Bounce and Downy sheets, as marketed and used in Canada, both come within the scope of the McQueary Patent.
"7. The McQueary Patent has been asserted a number of times by Procter & Gamble in the Federal Court of Canada in the past two years. Each time that Procter & Gamble has asserted the McQueary Patent, an injunction (either permanent or interlocutory) has been obtained to prevent sales of infringing dryer sheets during the life of the McQueary Patent.
"8. Since 1981, when Cling Free sheets were ordered off the market by Order of this Honourable Court, the only dryer added fabric softening sheets sold on a continuing basis in Canada have been the two Procter & Gamble brands Bounce and Downy.
"9. Procter & Gamble has taken steps to ensure that the McQueary Patent is respected by its competitors. The Procter & Gamble Company has licensed only one party, Procter & Gamble Inc., to make or distribute products covered by the McQueary Patent in Canada.
"10. At the time of this hearing, there are no dryer added fabric softener sheets being sold to consumers by Colgate or its distributors in Canada. Neither Colgate, nor any company related to Colgate, is now selling dryer added fabric softener sheets in the United States, either.
"11. Colgate has, however, begun to offer for sale Ultra Fleecy to Canadian retailers. Approximately two weeks before this injunction application was filed, Colgate representatives began to show sample packaging to Canadian retailers. They began to take orders for shipment in early May. At the time that the motion was filed (April 26, 1995), Colgate had told its retailers that it would begin shipping the Ultra Fleecy sheets to retailers in Canada on May 1, 1995. It is now May 15, 1995.
"12. The Ultra Fleecy packaging indicates that the Ultra Fleecy sheets are made in the United States, and it is believed that Colgate has an inventory of Ultra Fleecy sheets in Canada which it is preparing to ship to retailers on May 8, 1995.
"13. Colgate has no manufacturing facilities in Canada capable of producing a dryer sheet. The Ultra Fleecy packaging which has been shown by Colgate to prospective retailers in Canada bears the statement 'Product Made in U.S.'. Colgate will import sheets from the U.S., purchased from a third party, to supply the Canadian market.
"14. A sample box of the Ultra Fleecy product (Exhibit 'L' to the Delgado Affidavit) has been shown to retailers in Canada by representatives of Colgate. The box is described by Colgate representatives as being an example of the packaging for dryer sheets which are being sold by Colgate in Canada with a planned shipment date of May 8, 1995.
"15. Colgate is not showing actual dryer sheets to its customers while it is showing the sample box. For this reason, Procter & Gamble has been unable to obtain a sample of the Ultra Fleecy sheet. It is usual for dryer sheet manufacturers to show samples of new products to retailers before the product is actually shipped to the retailers.
"16. Despite the unavailability of a sample of the Ultra Fleecy sheet, it is beyond doubt that the Ultra Fleecy sheet is an infringement of the McQueary Patent."
[40]
The defendant states that the decisions of the Federal Court involving the McQueary Patent were not cases only involving the McQueary Patent but also involved Patent No. 3,442,692, the inventor being listed as Conrad J. Gaiser, registered May 6, 1969, United States Patent Office and that the judgments were either on consent or were unopposed. Counsel for defendant submits that no weight should be given to the statement made by Delgado in paragraph 39 of his affidavit wherein Procter & Gamble obtained court orders or agreements from approximately 30 companies that they will not sell dryer sheets that infringe to show that the McQueary Patent is a valid patent.
[41]
Counsel for defendant submits that "in recent times" there exists or existed a number of products that have been on the market as can be seen from Exhibit "P" to the Delgado affidavit.
[42]
Exhibit "P" is a list of 47 vendors who sold, it appears to me, dryer added sheets to the public listed under such names as Sun Bright, Ultra Mini Maxx, etc. In almost all cases found in Exhibit "P", the distributor/retailer stopped selling the product.
[43]
Defendant submits that there is no evidence before me which could establish a serious issue, in that there is no evidence that the defendant's product, which is not yet released, could infringe the McQueary Patent.
[44]
Defendant submits that Delgado's evidence, which states that if the defendant's product is a dryer sheet it must of necessity infringe, should not and cannot be accepted as the McQueary Patent is only an improvement on the Gaiser Patent.
[45]
Counsel for defendant further submits that Delgado's statements in his affidavit as to infringement is only speculation at best. The fact, according to defendant, that it does not have a dryer sheet on the market in the U.S. is not a reason to conclude that what the defendant wishes to market in Canada would infringe the plaintiffs' product.
[46]
There is no doubt that plaintiffs have failed to put before me direct evidence of infringement. It would be impossible for the plaintiffs to have this evidence since they were not given a sample of the dryer sheet that defendant intended to market in Canada. I agree with the submission of the defendant that it would be most extraordinary for the defendant to give a sample of its product to a competitor before the product is on the market. But the evidence clearly indicates that it is
out of the ordinary
for the defendant
not to give
a sample of its product to the retailer who will be selling the product. Delgado, in his cross-examination, made this statement. There is no evidence to contradict this statement and I accept it as a fact.
[47]
I am unable to infer from this fact that the reason for the failure to give a sample of its product to a retailer is because defendant is of the belief its product infringes that of plaintiffs. I do not believe so, but if I take this fact and take the facts as stated by Delgado in his affidavit and not contradicted by the defendant that the plaintiffs have a registered valid patent for a dryer sheet that has been respected in Canada for over 16 years, and that where it was allegedly not respected an injunction issued or a cease and desist order agreed to, I can infer that the defendant does not show its product for fear that it, in fact, infringes plaintiffs' patent.
[48]
Without repeating what Delgado states in all of his affidavit, I am satisfied from a reading of paragraphs 32, 33 and 34 that I can infer that plaintiffs' claim is not frivolous nor vexatious. I am also satisfied from the uncontradicted statements found in Delgado's affidavit that the plaintiffs have established a prima facie case that the product the defendant wants to market is one that would infringe plaintiffs' product.
[49]
I agree with the submission of counsel for plaintiffs that what defendant is attempting to do in not waiting the approximate eight remaining weeks for the patent to end is to get "a jump start" on any other company that may want to market a dryer sheet and to take whatever market share it can take from the plaintiffs.
Irreparable Harm
[50]
In the case of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at p. 341, the court states, as it relates to irreparable harm:
"'Irreparable' refers to the nature of the harm suffered rather than its magnitude. It is harm which either cannot be quantified in monetary terms or which cannot be cured, usually because one party cannot collect damages from the other. Examples of the former include instances where one party will be put out of business by the court's decision (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Sask. Q.B.);
where one party will suffer permanent market loss
or irrevocable damage to its business reputation (
American  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ); or where a permanent loss of natural resources will be the result when a challenged activity is not enjoined
( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 34, at p. 52, Heald, J.A., states:
"This court has spoken often on this issue in recent years. In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), at p. 408, adopted the requirement of irreparable harm, 'by which I mean harm in respect of which the damages recoverable at law would not be an adequate remedy', as an essential ingredient in establishing a claim for interlocutory injunctive relief.
"The
Cutter
decision was followed by the
Imperial Chemical Industries Co.
case in 1989 where it was said: 'The jurisprudence in this court establishes that the evidence as to irreparable harm must be clear and not speculative.' (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 26 C.I.P.R. 1 (C.A.).) Coming after the decision in
Imperial Chemical
was the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision in 1991;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 135; 126 N.R. 114; 51 F.T.R. 299. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , this court held that the finding by the trial judge that the applicant would be likely to suffer irreparable harm was insufficient to warrant the granting of an interlocutory injunction. The use of the tentative expression 'is likely' was not correct in view of the court's earlier jurisprudence, supra. It was necessary for the evidence to support a finding that the applicant
would suffer
irreparable harm.
"The next relevant decision was the
Nature Co.
case in 1992;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 367; 141 N.R. 363; 54 F.T.R. 240 (C.A.). In that case, Mr. Justice Stone, speaking for the court refused the request for an interlocutory injunction because 'the evidence did not clearly show that [irreparable harm] would result'."
[52]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  makes the following statement relating to irreparable harm in a "quia timet" application:
"Mere assertions of loss of distinctiveness, harm to goodwill or lost sales per se are insufficient to prove irreparable harm. In a 'quia timet' application such as the one at bar, there is no evidence of actual harm because the alleged infringing or passing off party is not yet in the marketplace. Therefore, logical inferences must be drawn. However, loss of distinctiveness, harm to goodwill or loss of sales cannot be inferred simply from evidence of confusion. To demonstrate irreparable harm, an applicant must lead clear evidence showing how such harm will occur and why it will be irreparable. In the absence of such evidence, there is nothing on which an inference of irreparable harm can reasonably and logically be based.
"Counsel for Presidio says that
Centre Ice
means that a 'quia timet' interlocutory injunction could never be obtained. Certainly the standard set by
Centre Ice
is a high one. The reason is that an interlocutory injunction is, by definition, a determination of rights before trial. In an appropriate case, where there is clear evidence upon which reasonable and logical inferences of irreparable harm can be made, the requirements necessary to obtain an interlocutory injunction may be met."
[53]
It is apparent from the above cases that an applicant for an interlocutory injunction, plaintiffs in the case at bar, must show irreparable harm with evidence that is clear and not speculative.
[54]
Under the heading Irreparable Harm in paragraphs 48 and 49 of his affidavit, Delgado states:
"48. It is not possible now, or later, to quantify how many brands of infringing dryer sheets and what volumes of infringing dryer sheets will be sold in Canada over the next two months, and later, as a result of the entrance into the marketplace by Colgate with Ultra Fleecy sheets. Some may enter the market whether or not Ultra Fleecy is sold before July 4, 1995, and others may follow because of Ultra Fleecy. How many will fall into each category is impossible to estimate now or in the future.
"49. There are a number of special programs being put into place by Procter & Gamble to defend the Bounce and Downy brands in the face of the expiry of the McQueary Patent. These programs will be rendered significantly less effective if they are not begun by the time that the exclusive nature of the market ends."
[55]
Delgado does not state in his affidavit how the marketing ability of the plaintiffs will be substantially eroded should competitors be permitted to distribute and offer for sale infringing products in the last two months of the McQueary Patent. He also appears to rely on the affidavit evidence of Miller when he states that if Colgate and others would be permitted to import and sell in Canada prior to the expiry of the McQueary Patent, irreparable harm would be caused to the Canadian plaintiff.
[56]
In his cross-examination, he states, in referring to his statement in paragraph 49 wherein "the licensee under the McQueary Patent will suffer irreparable harm", he was expressing this view in reliance upon what Miller said in his affidavit but goes on to state "although I could put my own experience on this as well and believe that" (p. 74 of cross-examination).
[57]
Under the heading of Irreparable Harm, counsel for plaintiffs refers me to paragraphs 23, 13, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21 and 24 to 29 of the Miller affidavit.
[58]
For the statements made by Miller in his affidavit under the heading The Canadian Market, Miller has no first-hand knowledge as he relied, he states, on p. 7 of his cross-examination, on the affidavit of Delgado and a conversation with a Catherine Pearce who is an employee of Procter & Gamble in Canada.
[59]
It is apparent from reading the cross-examination of Miller on his affidavit evidence that he relied on the affidavit evidence of Delgado and more particularly on paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 which paragraphs "summarized the majority of my (Miller's) knowledge".
[60]
In relation to the activities in Canada of the defendant, Miller states that for this information he relied on paragraphs 32 to 35, 42 to 47 and 49 to 53 of the Delgado affidavit and other than speaking to Ms. Pearce, he did no independent investigation to verify any facts (pp. 10 and 11, cross-examination).
[61]
Under the heading Floodgates, Miller states in paragraphs 14, 16 and 17:
"14. In my opinion, if Ultra Fleecy is marketed in Canada prior to the expiry of the McQueary Patents, other brands of dryer added fabric softening sheets will follow on the coattails of Ultra Fleecy that would not otherwise enter the market prior to the expiry of the McQueary Patents.
"16. One cannot quantify, however, how many competitors will follow into the Canadian market for the following reasons:
(a) It is nearly impossible to find out what is known by others about the McQueary Patent in Canada;
(b) It is impossible to learn from each infringer (e.g. importer, distributor, or retailer) why it entered the Canadian market;
(c) There will be some who may not have the nerve to enter the market unless they do so behind a high profile brand such as Ultra Fleecy. How many followers will follow followers who follow Ultra Fleecy? There is a snowball effect;
(d) It is difficult in any situation to determine the behaviour of competitors in a competitive market and indeed, in this situation to determine what competitive responses will be made after the end of a very long exclusive market.
"17. In my opinion, it is not possible now, or later, to quantify how many brands of dryer sheets and what volumes of dryer sheets will be sold in Canada over the next two months, and later, as a result of the entrance into the marketplace by Colgate with Ultra Fleecy sheets. No doubt, some will enter the market whether or not Ultra Fleecy is sold before July 4, 1995, and others will follow because of Ultra Fleecy. How many will fall into each category is impossible to estimate now or in the future."
[62]
In his cross-examination, Miller admits he has no direct knowledge from having spoken to potential entrants into the market but is of the opinion that some (competition) will enter the market but only on the coattail "of a high profile brand such as Ultra Fleecy" (pp. 14 and 15, cross-examination).
[63]
With regard to Miller's affidavit under the heading Disruption of Planning, he states he received this information from Catherine Pearce, Procter & Gamble's Canadian Marketing Manager for fabric softeners, from having seen a written document and a telephone conversation with Ms. Pearce.
[64]
In paragraph 18 of his affidavit, Miller states:
"18. There is a disadvantage to Bounce and Downy sheets if they do not have the full period of exclusivity in the dryer added fabric sheet market. In my opinion, as supported by commonly held marketing theory, it is important for a company which enjoys an exclusive market, to carefully prepare to properly protect its market position before the exclusivity runs out (to 'defend' the brand). It is my understanding that the plaintiffs have done a thorough investigation of this theory and their current market situation, and have established several plans to be put into effect before July 4, 1995. These plans will be stymied if Ultra Fleecy were to enter the market early. The plaintiffs need this time of exclusivity to properly position Bounce and Downy before the market completely opens after July 4, 1995."
[65]
He states that this statement means that he believes it to be important to prepare for the end of the exclusivity the patent allowed and to prepare for the competitors that one can anticipate coming into the market and to do so before the exclusivity runs out (p. 26, cross-examination).
[66]
Miller admits that to prepare as above stated "should be a continuous process" and that he would expect Procter & Gamble, a prudent company, not to wait until the very end of its exclusivity before it would take steps to protect its position in the market (p. 27, cross-examination).
[67]
It is apparent from a reading of the cross-examination of Miller on pp. 28, 29, 30, 31 and 32 that Procter & Gamble is not waiting to the "last minute" to protect its market position.
[68]
Although this is evident, it does not mean that the plaintiffs would not be harmed if the defendant were permitted to enter the market eight weeks before it normally would be legally permitted to do so.
[69]
It is obvious, from a reading of the evidence, that the plaintiffs are of the belief that the market for fabric softeners of the kind Bounce and Downy sheets is highly competitive and that plaintiffs must continuously take steps to protect its market share.
[70]
In paragraphs 21, 24 and 25 to 29, Miller speaks of what he believes would happen if Ultra Fleecy entered into the market before the expiry of the McQueary Patent.
[71]
In his cross-examination, he states that there could be improvement in the brand loyalty for plaintiffs if Ultra Fleecy were prevented from entering before July 4, 1995 and that plaintiffs could expect greater sales of Ultra Fleecy sheets in the period after July 4, 1995 if Ultra Fleecy entered the market before the patent expiry date.
[72]
As reason for this, Miller states, on p. 33 of his cross-examination:
"Q.	And apart from what you have -- you say in the rest of this section, paragraphs 24, 25 through to 29, is there anything on which you base that opinion?
A.	As is stated, the fact that they would be entering potentially and not having to compete with all of the other likely entries after July 4th gives them potentially significant advantage. Not only in the two months preceding the expiry, but the indefinite time period afterward.
Q.	I see. And when you say the advantage that you speak of is an advantage vis-à-vis others who don't enter at the same time?
A.	An advantage against those people
and also against Procter & Gamble
.
Q.	And the advantage against Procter & Gamble I take it is what you said earlier, is that Procter & Gamble might not be in a position to implement its plans to defend the product over the next two months or so?
A.	There is that and I think there is also the fact that any period of -- any
period of advantage for Colgate, even though it's potentially two months, makes them a much stronger competitor not only to the other subsequent competitors, but also towards Procter & Gamble. And that puts Procter & Gamble also at a disadvantage probably more in an ongoing sense.
It's really a situation of if Colgate came out now and nobody else came out, they would have two months to develop their franchise. However, if they came out July 5th and a number of other large marketers came out on the same day, all of those large marketers would be competing for the same consumer base and that would essentially weaken any one of those players including Colgate, and make them a less formidable competitor.
Q.	I see.
A.	So I'm saying that there is certainly the damage because of lack of disruption of planning, but there is also the disadvantage that Colgate becomes a much stronger competitor on an ongoing basis." (emphasis added)
[73]
I am satisfied that this evidence, which is not contradicted by any expert evidence for the defendant clearly indicates that in the event that the defendant is permitted to enter the market with a fabric softener sheet that infringes the McQueary Patent, there is the very serious potential that plaintiffs will lose some market share. This, I am satisfied, is evident by the fact that the defendant will have a "jump start" over any and all other possible entrants making it the second most "dominant player" and thus being in a position to take a market share which would adversely affect plaintiffs' market share in Canada.
[74]
As was stated by Justices Sopinka and Cory in the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  considered irreparable harm.
[75]
In that I have no evidence to contradict Miller on the issue of market loss, I am satisfied that I cannot but conclude that plaintiffs will suffer some permanent market loss if defendant were to enter the "market" prior to the expiry of the McQueary Patent and thus suffer irreparable harm or damage not quantifiable in monetary terms.
[76]
This irreparable loss is not speculative but, I am satisfied from the evidence, real.
Balance Of Convenience
[77]
I am satisfied that the status quo should remain in place. That is, the defendant, not yet in the market with its fabric softener sheets, should not be permitted to enter the market until the expiry of the McQueary Patent.
[78]
I have been told that some of defendant's product has been delivered to some distributors and possibly retailers in Canada.
[79]
In that I have no evidence that preventing these distributors and/or retailers from putting defendant's product into the "market" in Canada will cause defendant some harm to its reputation or cause it some cost, I can only assume that no harm to reputation or cost will be caused to the defendant.
[80]
The defendant must wait approximately another eight weeks. I have no evidence defendant will be adversely affected if it waits these eight weeks, that is, to July 4 or 5, 1995.
[81]
Plaintiffs' application for interlocutory injunction is allowed with costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/saf
[End of document]