[1]
Muldoon, J.
: By orders dated September 22, 1992, Mr. Justice Joyal, with the parties' consent, ordered that the actions whose suit numbers are above inscribed, be tried together on common evidence. Fibreco Pulp Inc. is a controlled subsidiary of Fibreco Export Inc. The first action, T-2896-89, was initiated by Fibreco Pulp Inc. (hereinafter sometimes "Pulp"). The second and third actions, T-3322-90 and T-3323-90, were instituted by Fibreco Export Inc. (hereinafter sometimes "Export").
Relief Sought
[2]
In the action whose suit number is T-2896-89, the plaintiff, Pulp, claims against the defendant pursuant to subsection 172(2) and subparagraph 175(1)(a)(i) of the
Income Tax Act
, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, as amended. The claim is in regard to an assessment and determination issued by the Minister of National Revenue (hereinafter sometimes the "Minister") on April 3, 1989, for the plaintiff's 1988 taxation year.
[3]
Plaintiff Pulp in paragraph 3.1 of its prayer for relief, pleaded
"3.1(b) that its assessment be referred back to the Minister ... on the basis that the Capital Spares acquired by it were not subject to paragraph 10(5)(a) of the
Act
."
At the trial's opening (transcript 1, p. 5), the plaintiffs' counsel said that "counsel have, with the instructions of course of their respective clients, been able to resolve the dispute, the second dispute at issue, the so-called capital spares issues, and we need not trouble (the court) to hear any evidence in respect of that dispute". So, there is an end of it, whatever the resolution might have been, it is not an issue in these proceedings, meaning Pulp's action T-2896-89, as disclosed in Exhibit 16.
[4]
The matter was explained thus by the plaintiffs' counsel:
"Mr. McDougall:
My Lord, in the taxpayer's submission, this dispute which of course involves three appeals which are to be heard together, they are the 1987 and 1988 taxation years for Fibreco Export and the 1988 taxation year for Fibreco Pulp and in the evidence Your Lordship will have explained to you the nature of the relationship between those two companies.
The Court:
Yes.
Mr. McDougall:
There is, however only one issue and in my submission it is a relatively simple issue. It is the question of whether the taxpayer is entitled to participate in an investment tax credit system. And I would like to emphasize by way of opening that the credit under the statutory scheme is automatic. The taxpayer is entitled to claim on the income tax return for the credit and if entitled, according to law, the credit is automatic. There is no discretionary element in this. It is a question of pure law for Your Lordship.
. . . . .
Mr. McDougall:
A statutory scheme which permits a credit for investments made by the taxpayer, investments made in appropriate circumstances in a capital investment."
(Transcript 1: pp. 5 & 6)
[5]
In the later two actions, whose suit numbers are T-3322-90 and T-3323-90 respectively, the plaintiff in each, Export, prays that the assessments and determinations for its 1987 and 1988 taxation years be referred back to the Minister for reconsideration and redetermination on the same basis as prayed in Pulp's earlier action: that is, that the plaintiff Export's mill be determined to be "a facility" under the
Regional Development Incentives Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. R-3, including regulations made thereunder.
[6]
At the trial, the plaintiffs' counsel handed over, for himself and for the defendant's counsel a document (No. 512) titled "Statement of Agreed Facts and Definition of Issues". It bears suit no. T-2896-89 but serves in all three actions herein, as Exhibit 1(57).
[7]
The issue before this court is one of statutory interpretation. Counsel advise that this is (or these are) a case of first impression. The statutory text is found in section 127 of the
Income Tax Act
(hereinafter sometimes the "
Act
") designated as "Logging Tax Deduction". Subsection 127(5) was enacted to provide for "investment tax credit", and subsection 127(9) provides definitions for that subsection and section 127.1. The matters in issue here find residence in subsection 127(9) which expresses this definition:
"'certified property' of a taxpayer means any property (other than an approved project property) described in paragraph (a) or (b) of the definition 'qualified property'
(a) that was acquired by the taxpayer
(i) after October 28, 1980 and
(A) before 1987, or
(B) before 1988 where the property is
(I) a building under construction before 1987, or
(II) machinery and equipment ordered in writing by the taxpayer before 1987, or
(ii) after 1986, other than a property included in subparagraph (i), and that has not been used, or acquired for use or lease, for any purpose whatever before it was acquired by him, and
(b) that is part of a facility as defined for the purposes of the
Regional Development Incentives Act
and was acquired primarily for use by the taxpayer in a prescribed area."
[8]
In regard to this case being one of first impression, the defendant's counsel states "the fact that the provisions in question have been incorporated by reference from the
Regional Development Incentives Act (R.D.I.A.)
and incorporated into the
Income Tax Act
. ... [A]ny entitlement to an incentive grant under the
R.D.I.A.
was always discretionary, but this is no longer so under the
Income Tax Act
. This is the reason why the definitions in question and the administrative interpretations thereof, which have been in existence since 1969, are only questioned at this time." It is paragraph 127(9) "certified property, paragraph (b), above recited, over which this litigation is generated.
[9]
Here is the text of the aforementioned statement of agreed facts:
"A. FACTS
. . . . .
"2. The plaintiff's 1988 taxation year end was June 30, 1988.
"3. In its 1988 taxation year the plaintiff was engaged in the construction of a bleached-chemi-thermo-mechanical pulp mill (the 'Mill') in Taylor, British Columbia.
"4. In constructing the Mill the plaintiff incurred various expenditures. The plaintiff also purchased spare parts for the Mill (the 'Spare Parts').
"5. In its 1988 tax return the plaintiff claimed, in respect of the expenditures and the cost of the Spare Parts, a refundable investment tax credit of $13,880,138 and calculated its investment tax credit carry-forward balance to be $20,820,206.
"6. By Notice of Reassessment dated April 3, 1989 the Minister of National Revenue (the 'Minister') reduced the plaintiff's refundable investment tax credit by $12,846,659 and calculated the plaintiff's investment tax credit carry-forward balance to be $1,550,220. Detailed calculations showing the Minister's reassessment are found in Schedule 1.
"7. Property in respect of which an investment tax credit is claimed can be either certified property or qualified property. Certified property is entitled to a greater investment tax credit that is qualified property. The plaintiff reported the relevant Mill expenditures on the basis that they were made for certified property. The Minister has reassessed on the basis that the expenditures were for qualified property. The Minister does not take issue with the expenditures or the specified percentages claimed by the plaintiff other than as set forth herein.
"8. A number of requirements must be met in order for the Mill to be classified as a certified property. These requirements are set out in section 127(9) of the
Act
:
'"Certified property" of a taxpayer means any property (other than an approved project property) described in paragraph (a) or (b) of the definition "qualified property"
(a) that was acquired by the taxpayer
(i) after October 28, 1980 and
(A) before 1987, or
(B) before 1988 where the property is
(I) a building under construction before 1987, or
(II) machinery and equipment ordered in writing by the taxpayer before 1987,
(ii) after 1986 and before 1989, other than a property included in subparagraph (i), or
(iii) after 1988,
and that has not been used, or acquired for use or lease, for any purpose whatever before it was acquired by him, and
(b) that is part of a
facility
as defined for the purposes of the
Regional Development Incentives Act
and was acquired primarily for use by the taxpayer in a prescribed area.'
"9. The Mill is a prescribed building or machinery and equipment within the meaning of paragraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of 'qualified property' in section 127(9) of the
Act
and Regulation 4600 of the
Income Tax Regulations, 1971
, as amended for 1988. The Mill is not an 'approved project property'. All of the expenditures related to property that had not been used, or acquired for use or lease, for any purpose whatever prior to their acquisition by the plaintiff. Therefore, the Mill meets the requirements of paragraph (a) of the definition of 'certified property' in section 127(9) of the
Act
.
"10. With respect to paragraph (b) of the definition of 'certified property' in section 127(9) of the
Act
, the Mill was acquired primarily for use by the plaintiff and is in a prescribed area as prescribed area is defined in Regulation 4602 of the
Income Tax Regulations, 1971
, as amended for 1988.
"11. Section 127(10) of the
Act
provides that the Minister may seek advice as to whether property is certified property:
'(10) The Minister may
(a) obtain the advice of the Minister of Regional Industrial Expansion as to whether any property is property as described in paragraph (b) of the definition "certified property" in subsection (9);
(b) obtain a certificate from the Minister of Regional Industrial Expansion certifying that any property specified therein is property as described in paragraph (b) of the definitions "certified property" in subsection (9); or
(c) provide advice to the Minister of Regional Industrial Expansion as to whether any property qualifies for certification under the definition "approved project property" in subsection (9).'
"12. In order for the Mill to be classified as certified property and to justify a refundable tax credit in the amount of $13,880,138, an investment tax credit carry-forward balance of $20,820,206 and the concomitant adjustments, it must be found to be a facility as defined for the purpose of the
Regional Development Incentives Act
, (the '
R.D.I.A.
').
"13. The definition of 'facility' for the purposes of the
R.D.I.A.
applies for the purpose of the definition of certified property in subsection 127(9) of the
Act
.
"14. Section 2 of the
R.D.I.A.
defines 'facility':
'"Facility" means the structures, machinery and equipment that constitute the necessary components of a manufacturing or processing operation other than an initial processing operation in a resource-based industry.'
"15. By paragraph 15(a) of the
R.D.I.A.
, the Governor-in-Council is empowered to make regulations defining the expressions 'manufacturing or processing operation', 'initial processing operation' and 'resource-based industry'.
"16. The
R.D.I.A. Regulations, 1974
, were originally enacted by Order-in-Council P.C. 1974-571, SOR/74-166. As applicable to the plaintiff's 1988 taxation year, subsection 2(2) of the
R.D.I.A. Regulations
, defined 'manufacturing or processing operation', 'initial processing operation' and 'resource-based industry':
'"manufacturing or processing operation" means an operation whereby any goods, products, commodities or wares are created, fabricated, refined or made more marketable, but does not include
(a) the merchandising of any goods, products, commodities or wares except where they are products of, and their merchandising is integral with, an operation whereby they are created, fabricated, refined or made more marketable,
(b) the growing, catching or harvesting of any natural or cultivated product of nature,
(c) the extracting of minerals by any method,
(d) the production of energy except as an integral part of and solely for use in an operation whereby any goods, products, commodities or wares are created, fabricated, refined or made more marketable,
(e) the mixing of concrete or asphalt if, in the opinion of the Minister, such operation is carried out to a significant degree for direct application in plastic form to roadway paving or for direct use in construction in metropolitan and surrounding areas,
(f) salt or potash extraction,
(g) any mobile manufacturing or processing operation, except where the applicant agrees to use the assets of the operation for a period of at least five years in such area of the designated region as is specified by the Minister.
(h) construction work,
(i) repairing as distinct from rebuilding,
(j) the rendering of consumer services,
(k) publishing other than printing, and
(l) the manufacture of primary petrochemicals from any source of hydrocarbon including the manufacture of methanol, ethanol, ethylene, propylene, butadiene, butynes, benzene, toluene, xylenes and ammonia.
'"Initial processing operation" means an operation the product of which is a fossil fuel or a material mainly used for further processing or manufacturing, and includes the refining of petroleum, the production of newsprint and the processing of ores to form mineral concentrates, but does not include:
(a) the processing by roasting, leaching or smelting of mineral concentrates to produce metals,
(b) the processing of wood by the sulphite process into bleached sulphite pulp in a pulp mill that prior to January 1, 1972 produced dissolving and high alpha cellulose pulp on a regular basis,
(c) the converting of wood pulp into paperboard or paper other than newsprint, or
(d) the processing, other than petroleum refining, of a product resulting in a significant chemical change in the principal material used.
'"Resource-based industry" means an industry that uses as a principal material a material
(a) the original location of which is not the consequence of human design, and
(b) that is in or close to its natural state.'
"17. The Mill is comprised of structures, machinery and equipment constituting the necessary components of a manufacturing or processing operation for purposes of the
R.D.I.A. Regulations
.
"18. The product of the Mill is pulp. Woodchips are the principal material used by the Mill to make the pulp.
"19. In the making of the pulp the woodchips undergo a significant chemical change.
"20. The pulp made by the Mill is mainly used for further processing or manufacturing by persons other than the plaintiff.
"21. With respect to the Spare Parts the Minister has reassessed upon the basis that the Spare Parts were inventory. The Minister has now agreed that the Spare Parts were capital. The Minister takes the position that the Spare Parts fall within Class 8 of Schedule II of the
Income Tax Regulations, 1971
(as amended) while the plaintiff maintains its position that the Spare Parts fall within Class 29 of Schedule II of the
Income Tax Regulations, 1971
(as amended).
"B. ISSUES
"22. The issues to be decided are:
(a) whether the Mill is an initial processing operation in a resource-based industry within the meaning of the
R.D.I.A.
and the
R.D.I.A. Regulations
; and
(b) whether the Spare Parts should be classified as Class 8 or Class 29 assets.
"This Statement of Agreed Facts and Definitions of Issues is agreed to by the parties for the purposes of this action and any appeal therefrom but shall not bind the parties in any other action. No evidence inconsistent with this Statement of Agreed Facts may be adduced at the hearing of this action or any appeal therefrom but additional evidence may be adduced by either party."
[10]
The plant or mill in question is a bleached-chemi-thermo-mechanical pulp mill, or as it is sometimes called a B.C.T.M.P. mill. It is owned 80% by Slocan Forest Products whose president, Irving Kirl Barber testified at the trial of this action. Mr. Barber is also the chairman of Pulp's board.
[11]
Before the construction and equipping of the subject B.C.T.M.P. mill, in the interior (as distinct from the coast) segment of the forest products industry which started its major development in British Columbia in the mid-1950s, woodchips were produced as part of the manufacture of lumber from the sawmill industry. There was a base of around 75 independent sawmills and very few, around four or five, integrated pulp mills. Those sawmills today largely produce lumber, veneer, plywood and woodchips. Because interior trees and logs are significantly smaller than those on the coast, according to Mr. Barber, the production of lumber and chips is accomplished by linear flow on one machine all at the same time.
[12]
The sawmills sold woodchips to those few pulp mills, which had their own integrated sawmills. According to Mr. Barber, there was a chronic surplus of woodchips generated in the interior, and transportation was required to dispose of it in "bone-dry" units of 2,200 pounds, from which all moisture had been extracted. The surplus was estimated by the "independent sawmill community" to be probably in the order of 500,000 to 600,000 bone-dry units per year. There was a market for woodchips in Japan, provided the supply were consistent and constant. This situation was the genesis of Fibreco Export Inc., a 10-year export to Japan of 500,000 bone-dry units per annum, on the basis of averaging freight charges to make the collection of woodchips for export viable from the far corners of British Columbia.
[13]
There was still a surplus of production and, in the early years, a shortfall of exports because the Japanese did not take their full contracted amounts. So, the Fibreco directorship and some "key" members sought ways to make a profit from that continuing surplus, and, Mr. Barber said, "... we examined the opportunities and the one which seemed most obvious to us on a business sense was the development of a B.C.T.M.P. pulp [sic] mill."
[14]
The manner in which the chips are treated in the manufacturing of pulp in the plaintiffs' B.C.T.M.P. mill is demonstrated in Exhibit 1(21) about which Mr. Antony Jarrett, Export's president, was cross-examined; so:
"Q.	Once Fibreco has screened and rescreened and removed any metallic objects or rocks and resliced or rechipped the oversized chips, then I take it that the general process described further on page 3 with respect to paragraph 3.03 CTMP, then that actual process whereby the chips start to be treated takes place.
A.	Correct. And in general terms this whole feasibility describes the process. There are minor changes compared to the existing mill to the one that was proposed."
(Transcript: vol. 1, pp. 132-133)
The B.C.T.M. manufacturing process of manufacturing pulp by means of chemical additives, heat and mechanical pulping is seen surely to be chemical, thermal and mechanical and the product is indeed bleached. Paragraphs 3.02 to and through 3.13 i, pp. 3 to 13 of Exhibit 1(21) constitute a detailed description of that process, from which there are only minor changes in practice, according to Mr. Jarrett, above quoted.
[15]
On cross-examination Mr. Jarrett revealed why northern spruce is the preferred tree for chips:
"Q.	And you know that, generally speaking, northern spruce has a lower resin content.
A.	Yes.
Q.	And are you able to tell His Lordship whether you know that northern spruce also has a lower density?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And that it has good strength?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And that is has comparatively low extractives?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And further, that it has a high natural brightness?
A.	Yes.
The Court: Let's back up one.
. . . . .
Ms. Burch: Lower extractive.
The	Court: And would someone, perhaps Mr. Jarrett of course, tell me what that means?
A:	In very general terms. ... My understanding is that they are materials that are taken up by the tree, are generally water soluble, and are removed very easily from the pulp by the washing within the manufacture. And they're not the soluble portion of the tree. They're not the solid fibre piece.
. . . . .
Ms. Burch:
Q.	And the high natural brightness that we've referred to, Mr. Jarrett, has a direct impact on the brightness of the pulp produced, is that correct?
A.	Correct.
. . . . .
Q.	So how much pulp, say, does one tonne of bone-dry unit make in the B.C.T.M.P. process?
A.	Approximately one for one, approximately.
Q.	Approximately -
A.	One for one. One tonne per. It's a little less because you do lose a little of it, but it's in the --
Q.	It's a high yield process.
A.	It's a high yield. It's in the 90 per cent, 90-95 per cent yield."
(Transcript: vol. 2, pp. 231-233)
Mr. Barber was in error in his testimony on the matter of yield.
[16]
Counsel for the defendant spent some time in cross-examining Mr. Jarrett on correspondence (with enclosures) between the plaintiffs and the Deputy Minister and other officials in the Department of National Revenue the subject of which was the matters in issue in this litigation. In re-examination he was accorded the opportunity to give an explanation about Exhibit 2(4), a letter dated January 5, 1989, from one Keith Allen of the audit division, Revenue Canada to one Howard J. Kellough, the plaintiff Pulp's solicitor, which mentions a plaintiffs' "Memorandum of Law re: Fibreco dated January 27, 1987". Mr. Jarrett was re-examined, thus:
"Q.	Now what memorandum of law is that referring to?
A.	I believe it to be the memorandum of law that Howard Kellough and his company put to the Department on January the 27, 1987, in which he pointed out that we should be considered a facility.
Q.	And what was the memorandum addressing, a pulp mill or a pulp mill and a paper mill?
A.	A pulp mill.
Q.	A pulp mill alone?
A.	A pulp mill alone.
Mr.	McDougall: Needless to say, My Lord, that document is not in evidence. Those are my questions in re-examination, My Lord say, My Lord, that document is not in evidence. Those are my questions in re-examination, My Lord."
(Transcript: vol. 2, pp. 242-243)
One wonders how it matters to the issues in dispute in this litigation what the parties or their agents or solicitors opined about the questions of law back in 1987 or in 1989. The court is the authentic and authoritative finder of facts (albeit in an adversarial mode of trial), and interpreter of the law. It is here that the parties make their submissions on law and facts, not to each other, but to the court. That memorandum of law (which is disregarded by the court in any event) and the Department's "Discussion Paper" in reply, are simply irrelevant in time and in substance, unless of course, the defendant be now adopting and ratifying the content of the discussion paper as and for defendant's argument, subject to any discrepancies between the facts found here and assumed there. Neither party is bound by those presentations inter se, of 1987 and 1989, and neither party is entitled to derive any benefit from the adversary's presentation. It is apparent that the parties failed to agree or to persuade each other and so, in face of the Minister's statutory power of assessing tax, the plaintiffs have sued; and they and the defendant have placed their respective contentions before the court to be adjudicated upon the evidence adduced and their respective submissions of law.
[17]
The subjects of the admissibility of the defendant's administrative practice in regard to the legislation in question, and of the use of Hansard, both as aids to the interpretation of that selfsame legislation, were debated by the parties' respective counsel at great length. The defendant's counsel sought strenuously to introduce both categories of evidence and the plaintiffs' counsel objected adamantly.
[18]
There is one factor common to both subjects which militates against the admission of the evidence, and that is the rule of law. It will be discussed further on in these reasons.
[19]
Hansard passages really ought not to be introduced for purposes of interpreting the legislation then being debated in the Senate or House of Commons, or for almost any other purpose. The "mischief", if any, which the legislation aims to suppress or moderate is the most notable, if not sole, exceptional purpose. The defendant's solicitors prepared an impressive book of authorities on this subject, including both jurisprudence and doctrine in the form of passages from:
Elmer A. Driedger,
Construction of Statutes
, Butterworths Toronto, 1983, pp. 76-79 and 156-158; and
Pierre-André Côté,
The Interpretation of Legislation in Canada
, Les Editions Yvon Blais Inc., Cowansville, 1984, pp. 364-367.
[20]
At page 156 of Driedger's work cited for the defendant under the headline "C. Parliamentary Materials", the author states flatly: "It is well-established that debates or materials before Parliament are not admissible to show Parliamentary intent." Lord Reid in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1967] 2 All E.R. 1197 (H.L.), at pp. 73-74  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , is cited in support to illustrate certain valid reasons.
[21]
At page 364 of Côté's work cited for the defendant under the headline "4. Resort to parliamentary history in statutory interpretation", the author states:
"In both theory and principle, parliamentary history is inadmissible, absent a constitutional context, for the purpose of interpreting a specific provision of an enactment. However, this principle is riddled with derogations and exceptions to such a point that we may ask whether it is on its last legs, if not completely finished.
"Frequently the principle is simply ignored by the court.
98
These derogations would undoubtedly have less weight were it not for the fact that they occasionally find themselves cited in decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada.
99
"98. [many instances cited]
"99.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 487 (Lamer, J.), commented by Graham Parker (1982), 60 Can. Bar Rev. 502;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 5310 (F.C.A.), in which Mr. Justice MacGuigan wrote the decision for a unanimous bench of this Court's Appeal Division. The following passages from the decision of MacGuigan, J.A., are pertinent to this very topic of interpretation of legislation:
"The Supreme Court of Canada in recent tax decisions has cleared out a great deal of the underbrush that previously surrounded tax law. For example, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 282-283, dealing with tax provisions that derogate from taxpayers' rights, Estey, J., said for the court:
'In more modern terminology the courts require that, in order to adversely affect a citizen's right, whether as a taxpayer or otherwise, the Legislature must do so expressly. Truncation of such rights may be legislatively unintended or even accidental, but the courts must look for express language in the statute before concluding that these rights have been reduced. This principle of construction becomes even more important and more generally operative in modern times, because the Legislature is guided and assisted by a well-staffed and ordinarily very articulate Executive. The resources at hand in the preparation and enactment of legislation are such that a court must be slow to presume oversight or inarticulate intentions when the rights of the citizen are involved. The Legislature has complete control of the process of legislation, and when it has not for any reason clearly expressed itself, it has all the resources available to correct that inadequacy of expression. This is more true today than ever before in our history of parliamentary rule.'
"Similarly, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.R. 241, at pp. 263-265, the Supreme Court, again speaking through Estey, J., expressed its point of view with respect to allowance or benefit provisions in tax statutes:
'Income tax legislation, such as the federal
Act
in our country, is no longer a simple device to raise revenue to meet the cost of governing the community. Income taxation is also employed by government to attain selected economic policy objectives. Thus, the statute is a mix of fiscal and economic policy. The economic policy element of the
Act
sometimes takes the form of an inducement to the taxpayer to undertake or redirect a specific activity ...
'Indeed, where Parliament is successful and a taxpayer is induced to act in a certain manner by virtue of incentives prescribed in the legislation, it is at least arguable that the taxpayer was attracted to these incentives for the valid business purpose of reducing his cash outlay for taxes to conserve his resources for other business activities.'"
Although one rarely dares to ask questions about the state of the emperor's clothing, one must really wonder if Senators and M.P.s do in fact earn their pay by understanding what it is which they inflict on their fellow citizens by solemn enactment. Given the difficulties experienced by the courts and the incidence of appeals allowed, and then sometimes subsequently reversed, given the incidence of judicial commentary and complaint about the mind boggling complexity of the
Income Tax Act
, one finds it easy to conclude that the legislators do not understand the legislation which they enact. They and the Minister of the day apparently rely on the statute-crafters in the public service and the tax-law bar whom they consult, all seemingly with an interest in keeping it complex, to express the statutory provisions which the Senate and House of Commons respective majorities dutifully enact.
[23]
What everyone seems to overlook, or is too polite to mention is that the House of Commons is sometimes riven with bloody-minded partisanship. It at least embodies the notion of no taxation without representation partially reified in sections 53 and 54 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
, U.K. 30 & 31 Victoria, c. 3, and in theory M.P.s are elected to know what taxation they participate in imposing on the taxpayers of Canada. The fact that they, the guardians of the people's purses (and purse) seem not to understand what they enact (and how could they?) is all the more reason to leave its interpretation to the courts and not to the mandarins and Minister charged with the duty to collect taxes from the people, for those officials are notionally in a conflict of interest between the duty to collect and the evenhanded treatment of taxpayers. So a Minister, fully briefed by his staff and those who have drafted his Bill as to what to say in the House of Commons on the presentation of a budget or other taxation measure, is hardly a reasonable source of interpretation of the legislation about to be passed.
[24]
Nothing herein is intended to impugn the honour of those concerned, but their consistency frequently leaves much to be desired. How often over the past few decades has a party on the "outs" or in opposition in Parliament taken a vehement stand on some governmental proposal, only to support it wholly when their fortune has improved? And vice versa. That may well be the norm, which mature folk have come to expect, but it represents no reliable guide for the interpretation of tax law or other law to be found discussed in Hansard. Can anyone pretend that the presentation of the budget has no partisan overtones? Indeed that is the profound flaw in trying to interpret legislation from Hansard, the record of a house divided on highly partisan lines of postures, expressions and voting. It is an enormously unreliable source of serious interpretation of the legislation which it and the Senate participate in passing. Indeed, even the responsible Minister is not immune from expressing the party line, be it ever so solemnly.
[25]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  refer to the budget statement of the Minister of Finance of the day, not for help in interpreting the provisions of the
Income Tax Act
under consideration, but rather to divine the "mischief" at which the legislation was aimed, "any slowdown in investment" and that in turn suggested to the court a confirmatory interpretation of the provisions being considered.
[26]
Associate Chief Justice Jerome came to the same conclusion and acted upon it in the same way in another of the defendant's cited cases:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). Jerome, A.C.J., is reported, at page 5644, thus:
"To answer the question then I have to go to the language of the statute itself, and I think it is appropriate in cases of this sort to look first at the purpose of the enactment.
"It is, of course, improper to look at parliamentary Debate for the purpose of statutory interpretation. If the proposer of legislation in the course of debate says that a given section has a given purpose or a given interpretation, that is only that speaker's opinion. The governing determination or factor will be the text of the language itself. If it doesn't say what the debater says it should, it is the text that governs.
"Why then should we go to the Parliamentary Debates in this case? Only
to set the context, to clarify the purpose of
the enactment."
(Emphasis not in original text)
[27]
Another case cited for the defendant is that of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 5408 (F.C.A.), where the decision of the Appeal Division was written by Mr. Justice Décary, (at p. 673, F.C.) thus (with footnotes omitted):
"This is the new approach which MacGuigan, J.A., described in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the taxing provisions'.
"Additionally, in determining the object of the legislation, this court no longer hesitates to refer to the parliamentary debates when the latter rise above mere partisanship, and in particular in tax matters to refer to the budget speech made by the Minister of Finance.
"Finally, since reference will later be made to the Interpretation Bulletins published by Revenue Canada, it is worth noting at once the rules governing use of these Bulletins to interpret a particular provision.
"It is well settled that Interpretation Bulletins only represent the opinion of the Department of National Revenue, do not bind either the Minister, the taxpayer or the courts and are only an important factor in interpreting the
Act
in the event of doubt as to the meaning of the legislation. Having said that, I note that the courts are having increasing resource to such Bulletins and they appear quite willing to see an ambiguity in the statute - as a reason for using them - when the interpretation given in a Bulletin squarely contradicts the interpretation suggested by the Department in a given case or allows the interpretation put forward by the taxpayer. When a taxpayer engages in business activity in response to an express inducement by the government and the legality of that activity is confirmed in an Interpretation Bulletin, it is only fair to seek the meaning of the legislation in question in that bulletin also. As Prof. Côté points out in
The Interpretation of Legislation in Canada
. 'The administration's presumed authority and expertise is never more persuasive than when the judge succeeds in turning it against its author, demonstrating a contradiction between the administrator's interpretation and its contentions before the court.'"
Is it not remarkable how ordinary is the observation of the government's own interpretations of Parliament's enactments in several cases being wrong? It is far, far from unthinkable. It is notable that Décary, J.A., posits the need for parliamentary debates to "rise above mere partisanship" in order to be useful. The only problem is to perceive when in fact they do "rise above mere partisanship" which is not necessarily evinced by yelling, exclaiming and desk thumping. Often ministers are not so crude as all that, but still quite partisan.
[28]
Another case cited by the defendant is not exactly redolent of support for the defendant's posture on this issue. It is, at tab 6,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 6129 (F.C.A.). Mr. Justice MacGuigan wrote for the Appeal Division, expressing in his opening paragraph (at p. 6129  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ):
"This is a case of statutory interpretation where a technological change has occurred after the passage of a statute. The statute in question is the
Income Tax Act
(the '
Act
'), and the technological change the development of fibre optic transmission systems for telecommunication in place of copper-based and microwave systems."
MacGuigan, J.A., went on subsequently to write (at p. 6132  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ):
"The respondent's contention, wrong as presented, does, however, point up a latent ambiguity which might otherwise be masked by the sweep of the words-in-total-context approach. Four separate elements, in fact, may be distinguished within it: the words themselves, their immediate context, the purpose of the statute as manifested throughout the legislation, and extrinsic evidence of parliamentary intent to the extent admissible. These elements are not always concordant, and a court has the obligation of weighing them against each other in order to arrive at a proper construction. Sometimes this task will be very simple, when as in the
Canadian Marconi
case, the plain meaning of the words is obvious and there is nothing else to be taken into account. In other cases, as in the case at bar, it is a somewhat more complex process. There is, in my opinion, no simple rule that can effectively make the problem disappear or resolve a court's intellectual difficulty. The issue as to weight must be squarely faced and honestly answered. Nevertheless, in my view it is a fair conclusion from several centuries of statutory interpretation in England and Canada that, in its balancing exercise, a court should give greater weight to clear words supported by their immediate context than to larger assertions of parliamentary intention, particularly those based on extrinsic evidence, which our courts have always approached with extreme caution.
"In the case at bar, I find no substantiation for the holding of the Trial Judge that a glass fibre can be considered to be a wire, and indeed his conclusion to that effect was not defended by the respondent. On the other hand, there is strong support for the Trial Judge's conclusion that glass fibre, as used in the appellant's telecommunications system, can be considered to be a cable. The presumption is that statutory language is to be construed according to the meaning of words in common parlance even in statutes dealing with technical scientific matters:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ."
And further he wrote (at p. 6133  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) these passages:
"The appellant's strongest contention was based upon parliamentary intention as revealed in Budget Paper C, where allegedly both the mischief sought to be remedied (misclassification of telephone industry assets) and the remedy to such mischief were clearly articulated. Class 3(j), it was said, was a remedial measure to classify lines and poles so that CCA rates would accord with historic patterns of depreciation. Given the Trial Judge's finding that the CCA for optical fibre needed to be higher than that allowed for copper cable, the argument is that the effect of including optical fibres in Class 3(j) would be to perpetuate the very mischief which the legislation sought to cure.
"It is sufficiently clear from Budget Paper C that the object of the CCA system is only to classify and afford different rates of CCA to assets according to actual physical depreciation and obsolescence? It is common ground that the changes proposed moved in that direction, but the respondent made a point of adding that the proposal also provides for the tax treatment of assets upon disposition through a system of terminal losses or recapture of gains. More important, it seems to me, the thrust of the principle argued for by the appellant is blunted by surrounding limitations. The most relevant part of the Paper is as follows (Appeal Book, App. I, at pp. 23-24):" (Quoted)
But in conclusion, MacGuigan, J.A., found that the very words of the law presented the surest guide to interpretation (at p. 6134  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) by asserting this:
"This is indeed a proposed change in the pre-existing law, but a change of a highly qualified kind, which is by no means clearly intended to go beyond what it actually specifies. It is, in my opinion, not so much a clarion call to a logically-defined new system, as an uncertain trumpet whose invitation does not pass beyond the words themselves. I cannot think, that therefore in the weighing process necessary for interpretation, the vague and limited language of the Budget Paper could have been intended to outweigh the much clearer ordinary language employed by Parliament in Class 3(j), which must be considered to be open-textured so as to include fibre optic transmission systems for telecommunication."
So, finally, the court came to the conclusion (for those, if not all, circumstances) that the actual statutory text was a much better source of interpretation than the Budget Paper. In cases of ambiguity or of competing interpretations found in the Bill or its resultant Statute on the one hand, and the parliamentary budget papers or statements by the Minister, this court concludes that the better and safer course is to find meaning in the statute's expressions. Even if such seem to be ambiguous or unclear, judges hold office just for the purpose of rendering a serious and reasonable, as well as authoritative interpretation of the statutory text. If the judicial interpretation fall short of - or overshoot - the governmental or parliamentary expectations, Parliament can hopefully, and should soon state what was truly meant to be enacted. But any amendment to state what was truly meant must be enacted by the majority of each chamber and assented to by the sovereign's representative. It is not, again, just what the cabinet and high officials say it is.
[29]
Another jurisprudential expression cited by the defendant in support of the position argued by the defendant's counsel is the decision of the Alberta Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 4 W.W.R. 175; 94 A.R. 304; 65 Alta. L.R.(2d) 289 (C.A.). The decision of the three-judge bench is unanimous in the result, but not in regard to the means to reach that result - the very point for which the defendant cited it. The headnote of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> judgment (D.L.R.) suffices to illustrate the matter.
[30]
Madam Justice Hetherington in deciding to quash a decision of the guardian stated, inter alia, according to the headnote at pages 579-580:
"... This interpretation of the legislation is supported by a speech given in the legislature by the then Minister of Social Services and Community Health when he moved second reading of the
Act
in which he explained that an important aspect of the legislation was the separation of the advocacy role, to be performed by the Children's Guardian, from the service provider role, to be performed by the directors. If legislative debate is an acceptable aid in the interpretation of a statute in constitutional law cases, it should also be an acceptable aid in the interpretation of statutes in nonconstitutional law cases so long as it is relevant. Statements made in the legislature are not, of course, conclusive as to the intention of the legislature and their weight must be determined in light of factors which will vary from case to case. Considerable weight could be given to the statements made by the then Minister of Social Services and Community Health when he moved second reading of the
Act
. No inconsistent statements were made by other members of the legislature nor were the views of the minister inconsistent with the
Act
in its final form.
"Per Stratton, J.A., concurring in the result: It is not necessary to rely upon the evidence of legislative debate in order to allow the appeal.
"Per Côté, J.A., concurring in the result: It is not necessary to consider the quotation from Hansard or its admissibility. ..."
If the Minister's recorded remarks were in such sweet accord with the provisions of the statute, then it was hardly necessary for the judge to consider them: the judge had only to construe the statute with resolution and a modicum of self-confidence. If the Minister's remarks had been at odds with the judge's appreciation of what the statute meant then the Minister's remarks would have had to be ignored in any event. The two concurring judges were correct in law, if only with regard to the particular case. This court considers that Stratton and Côté, JJ.A., were correctly stating the law in general, but probably expressing their respective statements with gentle deference to their colleague.
[31]
One is, in any event, moved to wonder: how reliable are passages from the Alberta Legislative Assembly's Hansard now? Is there more or less partisanship afoot, and recorded in Hansard, in that August assembly? Are Ministers inevitably above it all? And how can one tell, from what they are recorded as saying, even in regard to the introduction of legislation these days? This court supports the rule that Hansard is not to be consulted. Today's judiciary's juridical ancestors were not all fools about the marked and persistent unreliability of Hansard for the interpretation of legislation.
[32]
The court has noted the pertinent jurisprudence and doctrine cited for the plaintiffs, and agrees with counsel's choice, without taking the time and paper to analyze it all. The court further agrees with the plaintiffs' counsel's analysis of this jurisprudence, especially the judgments which, at first blush seem to go against the plaintiffs' contentions. Those authorities are:
Ward's
Tax Law & Planning
, vol. 1, Carswell, Toronto, 1983, pp. 243-244;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
Commission de l'Industrie de la  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 104; 31 D.L.R.(4th) 641;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , [1989] 5 W.W.R. 577; 59 D.L.R.(4th) 726;
Multiform Manufacturing Co. et autres v. R. et autres
, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 624; 113 N.R. 373; 32 Q.A.C. 241; 58 C.C.C.(3d) 257;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
Pembina on the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 5626 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 63 N.R. 266, [1986] 1 W.W.R. 481; 23 C.C.C.(3d) 289; 48 C.R.(3d) 289; 24 D.L.R.(4th) 536;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.);
[33]
The defendant sought to introduce the government's administrative practice in dealing with first grantees and later taxpayers in order to bolster its case against the present plaintiffs. Included would be policy formulations and memoranda between government offices. This is rather like communications between one synapse of the government's "brain", and another synapse - it is all within the government's "mind". It is utterly disregarded by this court on that very basis. To do what the defendant wants to do here is to breach the rule of law, whose principles inform and motivate the Constitution of Canada.
[34]
Given that in this tax case, as in all others where the government is the adversary with all the weight of the eternal intimidating State, the previous unadjudicated practices of the government's servants unfairly bear on the taxpayers. To assert that government's view of the law can be proved and enforced because its view is supported by how the government has previously always dealt with taxpayers is to assert autocracy. Fair enough if the government puts its view of the law before the court in intellectual competition with the plaintiffs' view, but when the government seeks to adduce evidence of its own previous practices to support the alleged correctness of its own interpretation of the law, the government seeks to breach the rule of law.
[35]
It would be condoning special pleading to permit the proof of public servants' own agreed internal interpretations of the law to be offered to the court in support of the government's contentions. They have no meaning in such litigation, for under Canada's Constitution the courts are the authoritative, authentic interpreters of the law. Of course many and various officers of State are delegated, by law, the authority to administer certain laws and even to perform first instance administrative adjudications, but it is a notable feature of the Constitution that the judiciary jealously guards its own power of judicial review, even in face of legislated privative provisions. One could make a proper discourse on the rule of law, again with unlimited time and paper, but suffice it to note that the rule of law, not the rule of officials, is what is implanted in the Constitution.
[36]
It is possible to overstate this notion that the Crown should be entitled to adduce evidence of its own administrative practices in order to demonstrate its own interpretation of the law, violates the rule of law. It smacks of the executive high-jacking of the law's authentic interpretation.
[37]
The roots of the rule of law can be traced into the thought of Plato, Aristotle and Aquinas as Kenneth Henley shows in
The Impersonal Rule of Law
(1992), 5 Canadian Journal of Law & Jurisprudence 299. Dicey, of course, provides a literate source of definition of the rule of law. Madam Justice Beverley McLachlin, of the Supreme Court of Canada provides good insight in
Rules and Discretion in the Governance of Canada
(1992), 56 Sask. L.R. 167. One of the twelve requirements of the rule of law which she cites (at p. 169) is that the ordinary (substantive) law should possess certainty, generality and equality. That surely means at least that the governed do enough if they comply with the law as enacted by Parliament. They are not obliged to adhere to the opinions and administrative experience of Crown servants expressed in inter-office memos. And those opinions and experience, in turn, are not to be levied against the governed as if such opinions and administrative experience and practices inherently possessed the force of law.
[38]
Subsection 127(10) provides for the obtaining and providing of advice by the Minister concerning the definition "certified property". That is the substance of the subsection: advice on that subject flowing between Ministers of the Crown. It is nowhere provided that such advice is or would be juridically conclusive, nor that such advice would be binding on a taxpayer who appeals to the court to declare that the Minister's assessment is wrong. In such absence the subsection is constitutionally inoffensive. It does not purport to usurp the judicial function. The evidence suggests that subsection 127(10) had been invoked, but the court in rejecting evidence of the advice tendered, in common with all intra-governmental communications, policy memos and interpretation bulletins, takes this position: If the Crown believes that any such advice is so good in interpreting statutory provisions, the Crown may submit the same advice in the form of legal argument to the court. If the Crown adopts that advice as argument, it will be before the court, without its being considered to be evidence. That, too, is why the court disregards Exhibit 2, early correspondence inter partes.
[39]
In terms of the requisite generality, the law must apply openly to all, but the memos and practices generated thereby cannot be applied against a person's or corporation's interest unless such memos and practices be properly legislated and promulgated in the public domain. In terms of equality, everyone who comes within the contemplation of the law may take equal benefit and equal obligation of the law without concern for the memos and administrative procedures invented by the Crown's servants unless the same be ratified either by legislation or approved by the courts. So, in terms of the very issues at stake in this present litigation, that which the Crown seeks to adduce to shore up its defence is prematurely put forward. That prematurity in attempted presentation of inside policy formulation and as yet unadjudicated administrative experience and practices, inclines against the certainty, generality and equality required by the rule of law. In the court's view, none of it can properly be adduced to support the defendant's case.
[40]
Neither side was aware of the Appeal Division's recent judgment in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), a unanimous ruling expressed by Mr. Justice McDonald. He repudiates the introduction of "legislative debates" by citing the words of Heald, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). Both sides will be interested in the reasons of McDonald, J.A., in that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case. This judge allows, however, that he has not reread the
Income Tax Act
in its entirety for the purpose of disposing of the present litigation.
[41]
Finally one may wonder why the parties' respective counsel made such a big issue about the introduction of previous administrative experiences, practices, unadjudicated policies and internal memos when on the record, as the court has found, they are all irrelevant insofar as the law's meaning to these parties is concerned. The transcript is replete with the Crown's admissions to that very effect! Here they are.
"Counsel for the Crown stated 'However, I would like to put on record what the Minister did 20 years ago really has, again, no bearing on what we are talking about now, or some Minister did 20 years ago'."
(Transcript: vol. 3, p. 477)
"Crown Counsel also stated that '... [W]hat we are looking at is facts. What the government's policy is is irrelevant as to what it is at issue here.'"
(Transcript: vol. 3, p. 476)
"Counsel for the Crown further stated 'I am sure on the record somewhere is an answer that was considered that this was a complete specific provision dealing with the pulp as such and, therefore, a general provision like (d) [excluded from 'initial processing operation'] had no application.
"I'm sure that if you go and review your transcripts and the answers to the undertakings you will find that. In any case that is the answer now. And whether the government is right or wrong is a question for the courts to decide.'"
(Transcript: vol. 3, pp. 481-482) (Plaintiffs' argument, p. 6)
[42]
Finally, the disposition of the parties' litigation herein turns upon the pleadings as modified by the agreed statement of facts already recited earlier herein, the statutory provisions under consideration and some of the viva voce testimony elicited at trial, as well as the relevant doctrine and jurisprudence cited, of course.
The Parties' Agreed Substantive
Issue
[43]
It remains to be decided as stated in paragraph 22(a) of the parties' "agreed facts and definition of issues",
"whether the Mill is an initial processing operation in a resource-based industry within the meaning of the
R.D.I.A.
and the
R.D.I.A. Regulations
."
Indeed, as the case developed at trial and in the arguments of the respective counsel, the importance of the stated issue is to discover if the plaintiffs' mill is a "facility" mentioned in the definition of "certified property" included in subsection 127(9) of the
Act
. This is the finding which the plaintiffs seek in paragraph 3.1(a) in each of the three statements of claim.
[44]
In interpreting the statute it will be a reasonable first step to note again the statutory definition of a "facility", the interpretation of two of whose ingredients will answer the question posed in paragraph 22(a) of the parties' agreed statement quoted above. The statutory definition of a "facility" is:
"'Facility' means the structures, machinery and equipment that constitute the necessary components of a manufacturing or processing operation,
other than an initial processing operation in a resource-based industry
." (Emphasis not in original text)
[45]
In deductive style the ultimate resolution will proceed from analysis of the component parts, starting with "a resource-based industry". It is stated in subsection 2(2) of the
R.D.I.A. Regulations, 1974
, enacted by Order-in-Council P.C. 1974-571, SOR/74-166 as the parties agree in paragraph 16 of their statement of agreed facts and definition of issues, recited above.
"A 'resource-based industry' means this:
... an industry that uses as a principal material a material
(a) the original location of which is not the consequence of human design, and
(b) that is in or close to its natural state."
The evidence amply discloses, and the defendant in paragraph 18 of the agreed statement admits, that the principal material used by the plaintiffs' mill to manufacture pulp is "woodchips". The "original location" of woodchips is the various sawmills which supply the plaintiffs' B.C.T.M.P. mill. Those various sawmills are obviously "the consequence of human design" as stated in subparagraph (a) the definition. Woodchips are made of wood which is the principal material substance of trees found in the forest which is usually not a consequence of human design. However, the mill's principal material is woodchips, not just the trees of the forest. Woodchips of the kind used by the plaintiffs are not found in the forest. An apt example of what is meant by (b) would be uniform lengths of cut or severed trunks or branches with bark intact.
[46]
The woodchips are made from lumber, which in turn is made from trees, which in turn have been cut down and hauled (near or far) to a sawmill. Item (b) refers to natural "state", not "material": Woodchips, then, are far from being in a natural state. Paragraph (b) then misses the plaintiffs' mill. Therefore, and not untypical of such regulations which seem to fly in the face of the ordinary expectations and understandings raised by simple language, this court finds on the law and evidence that the plaintiffs' operations are not in "a resource-based industry".
[47]
That finding would seem to escalate the disposition of the issue like a "run" or "ladder" in a silk stocking, or an interpretive chain reaction. Because the plaintiffs' operation is not in a resource-based industry, it would seem not to matter whether it be an initial processing operation, since it cannot be an initial processing operation as defined in the regulation in any event (i.e., "in a resource-based industry"). The better course of judicial interpretation is, however, to follow along with each term which needs to be interpreted, despite the perceived chain of interpretive reaction, or "run" of conclusions.
[48]
The same regulation which defines resource-based industry also defined the other exception to what constitutes a "facility", that other exception (if it be not a part only of the one big exception, emphasized earlier above) being "an initial processing operation". The definition of "an initial processing operation" evinces four exceptions (a) to (d). Item (d) is the important one.
"'Initial processing operation' means an operation the product of which is a fossil fuel or a material mainly used for further processing or manufacturing, and includes the refining of petroleum, the production of newsprint and the processing of ores to form mineral concentrates, but does not include:
(a) the processing by roasting, leaching or smelting of mineral concentrates to produce metals,
(b) the processing of wood by the sulphite process into bleached sulphite pulp in a pulp mill that prior to January 1, 1972 produced dissolving and high alpha cellulose pulp on a regular basis,
(c) the converting of wood pulp into paperboard or paper other than newsprint, or
(d)
the processing
, other than petroleum refining,
of a product resulting in a significant change in the principal material used
." (Emphasis not in original text)
Clearly the plaintiffs' B.C.T.M.P. mill operations are not included in the definition of "an initial processing operation", but are included in exception (d). Paragraph 19 of the parties' statement of agreed facts asserts as a fact that "in the making of the [B.C.T.M.] pulp the woodchips undergo a significant chemical change". That is to say, if it be processing at all, "the processing ... of a product [B.C.T.M. pulp] resulting in a significant chemical change in the principal material [the woodchips] used." "Processing" here, in context, means "production" or "making" rather than the detailed process by which it is produced or made. Because the plaintiffs' mill operation (if it be processing at all) is clearly described in exclusion (d) from the definition of an initial processing operation, it is excluded from that rubric. The court finds that the plaintiffs' B.C.T.M.P. mill operation is therefore not "an initial processing operation". Paragraph 17 of the parties' agreed facts, Exhibit 1(57), states that "the [plaintiffs'] Mill is comprised of structures, machinery and equipment constituting the necessary components of a manufacturing or processing operation for purposes of the
R.D.I.A. Regulations
".
[49]
Now, the plaintiffs' mill and operations are not included in "facility's" exceptions, but are included in the definition, so that they are "the structures, machinery and equipment that constitute the necessary components of a manufacturing or processing operation", which is a "facility" defined in section 2 of the
R.D.I.A.
, for the purposes of the
Income Tax Act
.
[50]
There was a contentious issue between the parties as to whether the plaintiffs' mill fitted the description of a manufacturing operation or a processing operation, as in the notion of "a manufacturing or processing operation". The plaintiffs contend that it is a manufacturing operation and that the phrase ought to be read disjunctively. The defendant states that the phrase is conjunctive and the plaintiffs' mill and operation are, in any event, a processing operation if the phrase be disjunctive as the plaintiffs contend. In that event, the defendant argues, they are moreover an initial processing operation which, the court finds, they are not.
[51]
This court reads the phrase "a manufacturing or processing operation" as being conjunctive because the noun is a comprehensive singular and not repeated for each disparate gerundive adjective. The "or" gives an alternative mode for the same comprehensive operation, (the noun). Had the legislator intended a disjunctive meaning, the phrase, even where tight economy of words is effected, would most probably have been "a manufacturing operation or a processing operation". The defendant is right in this interpretation of the phrase. It is to be noted that the parties, in their statement of agreed facts, (Exhibit 1(57), paragraph 17), have agreed that the mill is "a manufacturing or processing operation" since it has the necessary components thereof.
[52]
The plaintiffs counsel argued very persuasively on the contention that the mill is "a manufacturing operation", dealing with the following jurisprudence in written argument:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 5001,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.).
Not surprisingly the defendant's arguments considered some of the same jurisprudence. The plaintiffs' reference to the appropriate definitions in
The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
is most apt. In effect the plaintiffs' counsel persuaded the court that their B.C.T.M.P. mill conducted a manufacturing operation but it does not matter in the premises; and the parties' efforts in this contentious matter were wasted. They, after all, agreed upon its being "a manufacturing or processing operation" and this court upon the evidence, especially the agreed evidence, finds that the mill is not, and is not conducting, "an initial processing operation". That surely ends the matter.
[53]
Consideration should be accorded again, but briefly, to the key matter of that "initial processing operation" which does not characterize the plaintiffs' operation of their B.C.T.M.P. mill. The Crown, of course, evinces no emotion in matters of this kind, but if it did, one might perceive surprise, if not chagrin, at the plaintiffs' argument that their mill operations conform with exclusion (d) of the definition of "initial processing operation", a crucial finding by this court.
[54]
Counsel for the Crown argued energetically that the plaintiffs should have no advantage from exception (d) of the definition. It will be recalled that "initial processing operation"
"... means an operation the product of which is a fuel or a material used for further processing or manufacturing and includes the refining of petroleum, the production of newsprint and the processing of ores to form mineral concentrates."
Now, that is a curious mixed bag, for there is, as everyone knows, nothing "initial" about the production of newsprint! The text is clear and unambiguous from the point of view of judicial interpretation, but the legislative intention to be derived from it indicates a specific, peculiar list willed by the legislator without any consistency, without ejusdem generis.
[55]
From that mixed bag, the regulation specifically takes four exclusions:
"(a) the processing by roasting, leaching or smelting of mineral concentrates to produce metals,
"(b) the processing of wood by the sulphite process into bleached sulphite pulp in a pulp mill that prior to January 1, 1972 produced dissolving and high alpha cellulose pulp on a regular basis,
"(c) the converting of wood pulp into paperboard or paper
other than
newsprint [newsprint being the exception to the exclusion enunciated in (c)], or
"(d) the processing
other than
petroleum refining, of a product resulting in a significant chemical change in the principal material used."
It must be remembered that the legislator's intention here was so complex and mixed, if not eclectic, that the legislator found it apt to fashion the special rubric of "initial processing operation" for the special, and clear, meaning attributed to those words, used not entirely within their ordinary meanings. That evidently accounts for the four exclusions from the general definition.
[56]
In regard to the general definitions inclusion of "a material mainly used for further processing or manufacturing", counsel for the Crown argues:
"It has been admitted that the pulp produced by the Fibreco mill is mainly used for further processing or manufacturing (See Exhibit 1(57), Statement of Agreed Facts; Paragraph 20). The definition also contains three very specific exclusions from initial processing operation and one general one."
This line of argument is not persuasive, for it has been seen that the legislator chose the definition in order to describe special circumstances of mixed operations, and then made mixed exclusions from them. While the meaning is clear, the internal consistency of this hotchpotch of a regulation is not entirely apparent. It just says what the legislator wanted it to say, which in regard to newsprint at least excludes some veritably "initial processing" from the operations defined therein. There is no particular logic to these provisions; they pragmatically state the specially configured will of the legislator.
[57]
The defendant's argument, filed, pages 13 et seq. demonstrate the vigour of the defendant's submissions on the question of subparagraph (d)'s applicability. Here are some pertinent paragraphs:
"With regard to the pulp and paper industry, only the production of newsprint is specifically mentioned as an initial processing operation. However, as is the case in the mining industry, certain activities precede the production of newsprint, such as the harvesting of the timber, and the chipping and pulping of the wood. These operations are all 'initial' to the production of newsprint. One must proceed from woodchips to pulp to newsprint as was borne out by the evidence at trial. (See for instance Evidence, Mr. Jarrett, p. 239.) It was also admitted by the plaintiff's own expert and other witnesses that any type of pulp obtained by whatever process (including Fibreco's B.C.T.M.P. pulp) could be used in the production of newsprint. (See Evidence, Dr. Styan, p. 283, 287, 311, 337, 341; Mr. Jarrett, p. 148, 150, 239; Mr. Black, pp. 447-448.) It is also clear that the final use of the pulp is not necessarily known when the pulp is produced at the plaintiff's mill (Mr. Black, pp. 465-467).
. . . . .
"This provision [subparagraph (c)] formed part of the definition from its inception in 1969. It is submitted that from the fact that the conversion of wood pulp into paper or paperboard has to be specifically excluded as an initial processing operation, one must infer that any activity which precedes this conversion of pulp into paper must be an initial processing operation. Therefore, the processing of woodchips into pulp logically must be an initial processing operation as it precedes the conversion of pulp into paper or newsprint.
"This conclusion is further borne out by the fact that in 1973 the
Regulations
were amended by the addition of subparagraph (b) to allow one specific pulp mill, [Tembec] using the sulphite process to produce dissolving and high alpha cellulose pulp, to escape from being caught by the definition of initial processing operation.
"It is submitted, therefore, that in the same way as the body of the definition and subparagraph (a) provide a complete scheme for dealing with the mining industry, so the body of the definition together with subparagraphs (b) and (c) provide a complete scheme for dealing with the pulp and paper industry. There is no specific exception dealing with the petroleum industry, but in subparagraph (d), which is a very general and not an industry specific provision, we find that petroleum refining is explicitly excluded from this general provision dealing with chemical change." (pp. 13 & 14)
Petroleum refining in this instance is excepted from the exclusion in subparagraph (d) and, in this instance, thrown consistently back into the general definition.
[58]
The defendant's counsel argues that the body of that general definition and subparagraph (a) provide a complete scheme for dealing with the mining industry, in the same way that the body of the definition together with subparagraphs (b) and (c) provides a complete scheme for dealing with the pulp and paper industry. What, then, to make of subparagraph (d)? Counsel argues:
"It is submitted that, reading the definition and its specific inclusions and exceptions in context, the general provision contained in subparagraph (d) cannot possibly apply to the operations which are specifically included in the definition of initial processing operation. The dictates of logic and statutory interpretation surely prevent a finding that on the basis of a general provision dealing with chemical change, an operation which precedes an activity which by Regulation is explicitly stated to be an initial processing operation, is not an initial processing operation while the next step in the production chain again becomes an initial processing operation. If there is a reasonable and logical interpretation which avoids such an absurd result that is the interpretation which should be adopted. (See also P.A. Côté,
The Interpretation of Legislation in Canada
(2nd Ed., 1984), at pp. 373-383; E.A. Driedger,
Construction of Statutes
(2nd Ed., 1983), pp. 101-103.
"Furthermore, it was agreed that there is a significant chemical change in the processing of the woodchips into pulp whether it was by the so-called chemical or the B.C.T.M.P. pulping processes. (See Dr. Thomas, pp. 748-751, 761-763; Dr. Styan, pp. 303-304, 308). It must, therefore, be concluded that, if subparagraph (d) could be applied to a pulp mill in which the woodchips undergo a significant chemical change, there would have been no need to amend the
Regulations
in 1973 by Order-in-Council P.C. 1973-1830 (Exhibit 15) to allow the Tembec mill to escape from the definition of 'initial processing operation', especially since the process used in that mill constitutes the most drastic change in the chemical composition of wood of all pulping processes to produce the purest dissolving pulp. (See Exhibit 19, Table at p. 10; Exhibit 3, p. 3.)
"It is submitted, therefore, that the administrators were not in error in holding that subparagraph (d) did not apply to pulp mills as such a general provision could not override the very specific provisions dealing with the pulp and paper industry." (Exhibit 13, Discovery, Mr. Croteau, pp. 55-58)
[59]
The court, in finding the regulation unambiguous has no difficulty in noting that, if it truly expresses the legislator's will, it is not unreasonable. That will does not need to possess the quality of logic, and it is clear that it does not. To purport to impose logic and consistency upon it would, in the court's opinion, thwart the legislator's will. So the Crown's argument invests an inappropriate requirement of logic and consistency in a regulation whose "agenda" does not include those unnecessary characteristics.
[60]
The court should not habitually explain the reasons for judgment by importing suppositions and analogies. There is one supposition however which brings all the elements together and gives acute focus to the court's reasoning. One might suppose that, by oversight, the administrators overlooked a mill which fitted exactly the description of Tembec's mill for which subparagraph (b) was specially legislated. Now, if the taxpaying proprietors of that other mill came forward to claim the tax credit, presumably the Crown's posture would be the same as it is here in regard to subparagraph (d). Presumably it would reject that claim on the basis that the Crown never intended subparagraph (b) to apply to any mill but Tembec's and the proprietors of the other identical, but overlooked mill, could not invoke subparagraph (b) to keep it from being considered an initial processing operation. Presumably the Crown would also, as here, purport to present all of its internal memos and advice to the Minister to show that the government officials never intended any such invocation of subparagraph (b), other than for the benefit of Tembec.
[61]
Now, why in that case would that material be at all relevant? It would surely breach the rule of law to consider it relevant. Surely those proprietors of the other mill would be entitled to look at, and take whatever benefit they could in regard to the subparagraph as drafted. It does not specifically limit its sway to Tembec. Therefore it would matter nothing at all what the government officials intended, or thought it means.
[62]
Is that supposition not exactly what the Crown purports to do in the reality of this case. Its argument clearly acknowledges that subparagraph (d) is a provision of general application, or as the court would also call it: a "catchall". However, because the Crown did not or could not foresee a pulp mill such as the plaintiffs' invoking (d), the Crown says that the plaintiffs are not entitled to invoke it. In fact and in law, if their circumstances are contemplated by (d), and this court holds that they are, then the plaintiffs are quite entitled to have the benefit of it. Subparagraph (d) is not drafted so as to exclude the plaintiffs' mill, nor any other such operation, "other than petroleum refining". The court holds that the configuration of (d)'s drafting expresses the will of the legislator, and none has gainsaid that proposition. The Crown, just because its officials had, and shared among themselves, some preconceived notions about legislation, simply cannot prevent the taxpayers here from invoking it when the legislative expression is general and does not specifically exclude those taxpayers. That, inter alia, is the rule of law.
[63]
In conclusion and for all of the foregoing reasons the court holds that
(a) the plaintiffs' mill is not an initial processing operation in a resource-based industry within the meaning of the
R.D.I.A.
and the
R.D.I.A. Regulations
, in answer to the question posed in paragraph 22.(a) of Exhibit 1(57); and
(b) the plaintiffs' appeal is allowed and that their assessments and determinations are to be referred back to the Minister for reconsideration and redetermination on the basis that their mill is a facility under the
R.D.I.A.
for the purposes of the
Income Tax Act
; and
(c) the plaintiffs are to recover their full party-and-party costs from the defendant, in each action, in recognition that this litigation is (and is said by the parties to be) a case of first impression.
[64]
In these circumstances, the court invokes rule 337(2)(b). The plaintiffs' solicitors are to draft an appropriate form of judgment in order to reify these reasons. They should consult the defendant's solicitors in that regard, and, if possible secure those solicitors' approval as to form. Since it is the not-yet-drafted judgment which disposes of this litigation the parties' solicitors are invited to inform the court of any deficiency in these reasons in terms of failure to dispose of any argued contentions whose disposition is essential to the proper disposition of the action; and also of any unwarranted overreach of these reasons. The court will dutifully consider any such observations. If the parties disagree as to the form of the judgment in any fundamental way, they may be heard on the subject of their disagreement, which, hopefully will not arise.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/blk
[End of document]