[1]
Addy, J.
: The applicant is requesting by motion to this court that the respondent corporation and three of its corporate officers or management personnel be held in contempt of the terms of an arbitration award and that a Writ of Attachment issue against them together with a committal order and other appropriate remedies. The decision of the arbitrator was filed in this court pursuant to s. 159(1) of the Canada Labour Code as re-enacted by S.C. 1972, c. 18, s. 1, and amended by 1977-78, c. 27. Upon being so filed, s. 159(2) provides that the award shall be registered and thereafter
"has the same force and effect, and all proceedings may be taken thereon, as if the order or decision were a judgment obtained in the court."
[2]
The award includes the reasons and lengthy extracts from the collective agreement in effect between the applicant and the respondent at the time. The substantive portion of the decision is to be found in the last paragraph of the award which reads as follows:
"Having regard to the evidence which was adduced, the terms and provisions of the Collective Agreement and in particular the specific provisions of Appendix F.4(d) and to the fundamental principles of collective bargaining enunciated above, it is my Award that the answer to the stated issue, namely 'Does management at Canada Post Corporation have the right to order a letter carrier out onto the p.m. portion of his walk if that letter carrier still has some mail to process at the station at his sortation case?' is in the negative."
[3]
Preliminary objections were raised by counsel for the respondent. They include the questions of whether service was properly effected, whether the three individuals should be named as respondents in the style of cause and whether two of these individuals were in fact amenable in these proceedings since allegedly they were not "officers" of the corporation as defined in the Canada Corporations Act, R.S.C. 1970 (1st  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  court.
[4]
Without deciding any of these issues and before entering into the merits of the case, I raised with counsel for the applicant the very fundamental question of whether the award, having regard to its very nature and substance, was actually capable of supporting any contempt of court proceedings.
[5]
It is on its very face clearly declaratory in nature and no such judgment or order is capable of sustaining, without more, any execution process nor a fortiori any contempt of court remedy. As stated by H.W.R. Wade in his text on Administrative Law (Oxford Clarendon Press 1977 at p. 500):
"... A declaratory judgment by itself merely states some existing legal situation. It requires no one to do anything and to disregard it will not be contempt of court. But by enabling a party to discover what his legal position is it opens the way to the use of other remedies for giving effect to it."
[6]
It seems almost redundant to state that one cannot be held in contempt for failing to obey an order to do something or to refrain from doing something when no such order has been issued.
[7]
The motion is therefore dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]