[1]
Strayer, J.
: On March 7, 1994, at the end of a hearing, I dismissed the applicant's application for a stay of the immigration inquiry pending the disposition of his application for leave and for judicial review of the decision of the adjudicator to compel him to testify. Following are my reasons for that decision.
[2]
It was common ground that the purpose of the hearing before the adjudicator is to determine whether the applicant is a member of an inadmissible class, being allegedly a person described in s. 19(1)(c.1)(i), namely a person convicted outside Canada of an offence that, if committed in Canada, would be punishable by a maximum term of ten years imprisonment or more. I understand it is alleged that the applicant was so convicted in Germany and that he escaped imprisonment prior to completing his sentence. During the course of the inquiry, the adjudicator ordered that he testify. He objected to testifying and counsel made an argument before the adjudicator based essentially on s. 7 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, contending that to oblige the applicant to testify in such circumstances would constitute a denial of his liberty or security of the person contrary to the principles of fundamental justice. The adjudicator rejected that proposition.
[3]
I dismissed the application for a stay because I felt that the material before the court raised no serious issue. The applicant's argument before me was essentially as presented to the adjudicator, based on s. 7 of the
Charter
. I am satisfied that there is no arguable issue raised by the applicant, having regard to the jurisprudence binding on me. Firstly, I note that the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 197, held that deportation for serious offences committed in Canada cannot be conceptualized as a deprivation of liberty or a punishment. This should be even more the case of deportation by reason of disentitlement to enter Canada due to the conviction of an offence in another country. Secondly, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 184  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Supreme Court of Canada stated, even in the case of a permanent resident being deported following the commission for a serious offence in Canada:
"In such a situation there is no breach of fundamental justice in giving practical effect to the termination of their right to remain in Canada. In the case of a permanent resident, deportation is the only way in which to accomplish this."
At the very least, the same must apply to a person who is neither a citizen nor a permanent resident who was allegedly inadmissible at the time he originally entered Canada. Further, it is difficult to see what principle of fundamental justice is involved in requiring the applicant to testify at the hearing before the adjudicator. This is a purely civil proceeding to determine whether the applicant was indeed inadmissible when he entered Canada. There is nothing to suggest that he is about to be prosecuted in Canada and that any evidence he might give could be used against him in such prosecution. His counsel hypothesizes that he could be prosecuted under s. 94(1)(b) or (h) of the
Immigration Act
for making representations or false statements in respect of his entry to Canada. His counsel relied in part on the Supreme Court decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 161; 54 C.C.C.(3d) 417; 76 C.R.(3d) 129; 67 D.L.R.(4th) 161; 29 C.P.R.(3d) 97; 47 C.R.R. 1. I cannot ascertain that that case decided anything inconsistent with my present conclusions. The Ontario Court of Appeal had held in that case that s. 17 of the
Combines Investigation Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-23 which provided for compelling evidence concerning matters that might subsequently be the subject of a prosecution under the
Act
, did not violate s. 7 of the
Charter
. The appeal from that decision was dismissed, the Supreme Court being divided on the issue of s. 7. In any event, if the applicant were subsequently prosecuted in Canada he could invoke s. 13, and perhaps s. 7 of the
Charter
to prevent his evidence in the adjudicator's hearing being used against him.
[4]
Counsel for the applicant further speculated on the use by German authorities in their country, for the purpose of subsequent prosecutions there of the applicant, of evidence which he might be compelled to give before the adjudicator in Canada. Even if a Canadian court someday were to hold that evidence so compelled at a hearing before an adjudicator could not constitutionally be used in the prosecution in Canada of the subject of that adjudicator's inquiry, I do not think we can concern ourselves with what a German court might hold in respect of the use of such evidence there. As the Supreme Court said in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 161; 58 C.R.(3d) 1; 28 C.R.R. 280; 39 D.L.R.(4th) 18; 33 C.C.C.(3d) 193, at 527  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , our constitutional standards cannot be imposed on other countries when determining whether to extradite. (It must be kept in mind at all times in the present case that there is no claim for refugee status involved).
[5]
The stay is therefore refused and the adjudicator is at liberty to continue his hearing. I am not, of course, disposing of the application for leave as not all the material has yet been filed on that application. If, somehow, another judge is persuaded by that material that a serious issue is raised in the application for leave, and leave is granted, it may be open to the applicant to seek some further stay if anything remains to be stayed at that point.
[6]
There is no right of appeal in the present circumstances, s. 83(1) of the
Immigration Act
applying only on an application for judicial review for which, in this case, leave has not yet been granted. I have not, therefore, considered certifying any question (See e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  considered certifying any question.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David Weir/mdc
[End of document]