[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application by the defendant The Wellcome Foundation Limited ("Wellcome") in court action number T-3197-90, and by the plaintiffs Wellcome, and Burroughs Wellcome Inc. ("B.W."), in court action number T-2624-91 for an order pursuant to rules 1715 and 1716, and any other relevant rules, for the consolidation and joinder of the actions insofar as they relate to issues of validity and infringement of Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,238,277, and for associated orders joining parties and permitting amendment to a statement of defence in a consolidated action.
[2]
An application for the same purpose was filed without ordinary notice in advance of the regular motions day in Ottawa on February 9, 1993 and was then adjourned. A revised motion dated March 25, 1993 was then served and filed and heard on April 1, 1993, when decision was reserved. Counsel were invited to consult concerning any mutually acceptable terms of an order in the nature of that sought by the plaintiffs. Ultimately no terms were agreed upon. I regret delay in dealing with the matter. An order goes this day dismissing the application. These are reasons for that order.
The Impeachment Action
[3]
In the first of these actions (T-3197-90) ("the impeachment action"), commenced in December 1990 the plaintiffs, Apotex Inc. and Novopharm Ltd. seek a declaration that Canadian Patent No. 1,238,277 ("the zidovudine patent") held by the defendant Wellcome is invalid and a declaration that the prescription drug zidovudine that the plaintiffs then planned to manufacture and sell, and now do so under notices of compliance issued by the Minister of Health and Welfare in 1992, does not infringe the patent. Some progress in advancing that action has been made, with a demand for particulars answered and with amended particulars of objection filed in March 1991; a statement of defence and defence to amended particulars of objection filed in August 1991; affidavits of documents filed by plaintiffs in August 1992; an application for directions by plaintiffs and an order in October 1992 directing the defendant to file an affidavit of documents by January 7, 1993; an affidavit of documents filed in accord with that order; and applications in February 1993 by both plaintiffs and defendants for orders for further and better affidavits of documents, by defendant for a confidentiality order and by defendant for joinder of issues of these two actions.
The Infringement Action
[4]
The second of the actions (T-2624-91) ("the infringement action"), was commenced 10 months after the impeachment action by statement of claim filed October 16, 1991. In this, the plaintiffs, Wellcome and its wholly owned Canadian subsidiary, BW, seek remedies in relation to alleged activities of Apotex Inc., Interpharm Inc. and Allen Barry Shechtman, who is said to be responsible for Interpharm Inc.'s operations in Canada, said to constitute infringement of the Wellcome Canadian Patent No. 1,238,277 under which the plaintiff BW is the licensed user with exclusive rights in Canada. The action also alleges infringement of certain patents relating to the drug acyclovir (Canadian Patents Nos. 1,062,257 and 1,096,863), also held by the plaintiff Wellcome, of which the plaintiff BW is the licensed user. Further, the action alleges the defendants are guilty of unfair competition contrary to the
Trade-marks Act
relating to the plaintiffs' registered trademarks "Retrovir" (for their zidovudine drug) and "Zovirak" (for their acyclovir drug).
[5]
The infringement action was the subject of an application to stay filed by the defendants in T-2624-91 in December 1991 which motion was refused in January 1992. The basis for the stay action was that, in the view of the defendants, the issue of infringement of the zidovudine patent should be dealt with in the first action, T-3197-90, the impeachment action initiated by Apotex and Novopharm, and the issue of infringement of the acyclovir patents should be dealt with in a third action (T-1458-90) previously initiated by Wellcome and BW against Apotex and others in relation to alleged infringement of acyclovir patent rights. Subsequently, an application by Wellcome and BW for an interlocutory injunction in the infringement action (T-2624-91) was dismissed, on terms, in February 1992, the defendant Apotex being ordered to maintain records and undertake to pay any damages of all defendants in the event damages are awarded at trial. In the infringement action a statement of defence was filed in December 1992. That statement of defence pleads invalidity of the zidovudine patent on the grounds set out in the impeachment action as there pleaded by Apotex and Novopharm.
The Motion For Joinder
[6]
The applicants, defendant in the impeachment action and plaintiffs in the infringement action, seek various orders including orders
(1) consolidating those portions only of these two actions which relate to infringement and validity of the zidovudine patent, joining BW, Interpharm Inc. and Allen Barry Shechtman in action T-3197-90 in relation only to the infringement and validity of that patent, No. 1,238,277;
(2) permitting Wellcome and BW to file and serve an amended statement of defence and counterclaim in T-3197-90, which, inter alia, would include a counterclaim for infringement of the patent, a claim not included in the defence filed by Wellcome, and providing for defence to the counterclaim and reply to that defence to be filed;
(3) directing Wellcome and BW to amend their statement of claim in T-2624-91 to delete their prayer for relief and allegations relating to infringement of the zidovudine patent at the same time as an amended statement of defence and counterclaim is filed in T-3197-90.
[7]
The purposes of the motion are to eliminate duplication in pretrial preparations, including document production and examination of witnesses, and in trials, concerning issues of validity and infringement of the zidovudine patent. The validity issues are the same in both actions, as the defendants in T-2624-91 have pleaded by incorporating by reference the pleadings in T-3197-90. Those issues relate to obviousness and inventorship for which the same witnesses, perhaps nine or more, mostly located in the United States, would be expected to be involved in pretrial discovery and at trial. Expert witnesses, some probably from outside Canada would be required for trial. The infringement issues in both actions are the same, but I note for the record that in proceedings before me counsel for the plaintiffs in T-3197-90, noted that infringement is admitted if the patent is upheld as valid, and that is acknowledged by the defendant Wellcome, so that infringement is no longer an issue to be tried in T-3197-90.
[8]
In the impeachment action counsel is Mr. Malcolm Johnston, Q.C., representing the plaintiffs, and he is also counsel for defendants in relation to validity issues in the infringement action where general counsel for the defendants is Mr. Harry Radomski of Goodman and Goodman, and counsel for Wellcome, and for Wellcome and BW, in the two actions is the same, Mr. Patrick E. Kierans of Ogilvie, Renault.
[9]
Counsel for the plaintiffs in the impeachment action argues the court has no jurisdiction under the rules to consolidate some of the issues in one action with issues in another, that combining the two actions for trial of all issues would be too complex and would prejudice the interests of some of the parties, that apart from Wellcome and Apotex who are parties common to both actions the other parties are not common to both actions. Even combining for trial the issues of validity and infringement, as proposed by the motion for joinder, would prejudice interests of Novopharm for, on the basis of pleadings filed in the two actions, no claim has yet been made for infringement by Novopharm of the zidovudine patent. Extending that claim to Novopharm is one of the objectives proposed in connection with the motion for joinder, which includes application for an order authorizing amendment of the statement of defence so that a claim for infringement in T-3197-90 would be made against all defendants currently included in the two actions who, it is proposed, be joined as defendants.
[10]
Alternative suggestions are submitted by counsel opposing the motion to achieve similar goals of avoiding duplication of pretrial preparations and trial in both on the validity issue. For the plaintiffs in the impeachment action (T-3197-90) it is urged that an order should issue that the infringement action (T-2624-91) be stayed insofar as it relates to the issues of infringement and validity of the zidovudine patent and that the parties in the latter action be bound by the findings of the court in action T-3197-90 in relation to those issues, and further that BW may be joined as a party to that action. This proposal is supported, with an added qualification by general counsel for defendants, in T-2624-91.
[11]
In response, counsel for Wellcome and BW questions the authority of the court to make findings in relation to validity and infringement of the zidovudine patent in T-3197-90 binding upon persons or corporations not joined as parties to that action, i.e., the defendants Interpharm Inc. and Allen Barry Shechtman in action T-2624-91. Moreover, it is urged that the court has no jurisdiction to decide validity and infringement issues in one action that would bind those who are not parties, and that the trial judge in the infringement action would have no jurisdiction to award relief or damages in relation to a claim he or she had not heard. To that objection counsel for all defendants in T-2624-91 undertakes that all defendants would consent to be bound by findings in relation to validity, and infringement if that still be an issue, in action T-3197-90. If damages should be awarded, they could be subject to a reference. Counsel for Wellcome and BW contends awaiting determination of T-3197-90 could cause delay that would prejudice their interests claimed in T-2624-91.
[12]
All counsel are agreed steps should be taken to avoid duplication, particularly of pretrial processes and trial of the issues of validity and infringement in the two actions. Unfortunately they have been unable to agree on how this might usefully be done. Following hearing of the motion I reserved the matter, urging counsel to consult further to see if there was not a process they could all agree upon, but agreement has eluded them.
[13]
Rules 1714, 1715 and 1716 of the
Federal Court Rules
deal respectively with joinder of causes of action, joinder of parties, and with the addition and removal of parties in actions. None of them specifically provides for the joinder of issues in one action with issues in another where the parties to the two actions are not the same, and the issues raised in the second action are more numerous than those raised in the first. In addition the court has jurisdiction under s. 50 of the
Federal Court Act
to stay proceedings in any cause or matter, inter alia, where for any reason it is in the interest of justice that the proceedings be stayed. In my view, there can be no question about the court's inherent jurisdiction to order proceedings in two actions insofar as those concern the same issues to be arranged in a manner that simplifies the proceedings, and reduces the costs, for the parties and for the court. In doing so, the court should seek to meet the convenience of the parties without substantial prejudice to any.
[14]
In the circumstances I am not persuaded that the motion, for consolidation and joinder of issues from the impeachment action and certain issues of the infringement action, should be allowed in the face of objection to that by plaintiffs in the impeachment action, T-3197-90. That action was commenced some 10 months before the infringement action was initiated by Wellcome and BW in October 1991, and it is somewhat more advanced at this stage than is the preparation for trial in T-2624-91, though perhaps not by much.
[15]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 379 (T.D.) my colleague Mr. Justice Cullen declined to order consolidation or joinder, or consecutive hearing, of three separate actions initiated by different parties against the Crown, arising in relation to similar issues, in circumstances where one plaintiff's action was practically ready for trial and the others were not. Cullen, J., relied upon the principle set out by Muldoon, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) at p. 278
"... a genuine onus rests on an applicant seeking to interfere with a plaintiff's right to pursue a lawful cause of action. Such applicant must persuade the court that continuing the action would be an abuse of process in which the applicant would somehow be prejudiced and not merely inconvenienced."
It is true that Muldoon, J., was dealing with an application to stay proceedings initiated in the Federal Court on the ground that an action, commenced later and with somewhat broader issues, was underway in the Superior Court of Quebec. Nevertheless, the principle seems to me equally applicable to a motion to join actions, especially where the motion would join some issues from a second action, one of which, infringement, is here now admitted
by the plaintiffs Apotex and Novopharm in their impeachment action if the validity of the zidovudine patent is upheld. In light of that admission, incorporating in the T-3197-90 action the infringement claims from the infringement action of Wellcome and BW would, in my view, be unnecessary. Moreover, the plaintiffs in T-3197-90 oppose the motion that the actions be joined, emphasizing their interest to proceed with their action as originally framed. It is for these reasons that I dismiss the motion on behalf of Wellcome as defendant in T-3197-90 and on behalf of Wellcome and BW as plaintiffs in T-2624-91.
[16]
Yet I record the interest of all parties and of counsel involved in resolving the procedural difficulties in managing pretrial preparations and trial in separate actions which at least in part involve the same primary issues. The proposals of counsel for the plaintiffs in T-3197-90 and of counsel for the defendants in T-2624-91 seek to achieve the same primary goals as the applicants seek by their motion for consolidation or joinder. As noted, they would have trial of the issues of validity and infringement in relation to the zidovudine patent, as raised in the infringement action, T-2624-91, stayed pending determination of the issues in T-3197-90, with defendants in T-2624-91 prepared to consent to findings made in the other action. I have seen correspondence exchanged by counsel after the hearing, and note that at that stage there was objection to this procedure by counsel for the applicants in the joinder motion, and I do not consider it appropriate to order as counsel for the respondents suggest, without an opportunity for the matter to be fully argued, if the parties wish, by appearance.
[17]
In these circumstances an order is issued, dismissing the application to consolidate and join issues from the two actions, but it directs counsel for the parties to arrange with the Office of the Associate Chief Justice for a pretrial conference with a view to considering further appropriate steps to simplify and avoid duplication in pretrial preparations and trial of the issues of validity and infringement in relation to Canadian Patent 1,238,227.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]