[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for an interlocutory injunction pursuant to rule 469 of the
Federal Court Rules
, seeking an order preventing the respondents Her Ma­jesty The Queen and Royal Canadian Mounted Police Chief Superintendent A. Gordon Clarke, from transferring the appli­cant within the Royal Canadian Mounted Police until trial of the action commenced May 22, 1991, or the determination of the grievance concerning the proposed transfer, initiated by the applicant under the legisla­tion relating to the R.C.M.P.
[2]
As noted by counsel for the respondents an injunction will not be granted against Her Majesty The Queen, though it may lie, in an appropriate case, against a servant of Her Majesty, as Chief Superintendent Clarke is in this case.
[3]
The applicant, Robert Harry Paul Tka­chuk, is a corporal with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police with some twenty-three years service with the force. Following a motor vehicle accident on February 9, 1990, involving the applicant, disciplinary pro­ceedings were commenced pursuant to Part IV of the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. R-10, as amended. A disciplinary hearing was held over three days on March 5, 6 and 7, 1991, as part of those proceedings. The Adjudication Board hearing Corporal Tkachuk's case found that he had contravened the
R.C.M.P. Code of Con­duct
. Then, in determining what recommen­dations it should make respecting sanctions to be imposed against Corporal Tkachuk, the Board considered the submission of the Commanding Officer's representative at the hearing that a transfer would be an ap­propriate sanction, and the Board expressly recommended against the imposition of a transfer, concluding that in all the circum­stances a transfer would be "counterpro­ductive".
[4]
By internal memorandum dated March 12, 1991, from Superintendent Clarke, sign­ing for Deputy Commissioner D.K. Wilson, and appearing as Exhibit "B" to the affidavit of the applicant, the applicant was informed that he would be transferred from his plainclothes posting to uniformed duties. The memorandum advised:
"It is my view that service in a plainclothes function requires a keen sense of responsibility and a high degree of integrity. The duties being performed by Cpl. Tkachuk are predicated on those requirements, and therefore I am not pre­pared to leave him in his present position. I will be initiating a transfer to Uniform duties at an early date. This action will enable management to select someone who has demonstrated the prerequisites of such a position, and at the same time, provide an opportunity for Cpl. Tkachuk to devel­op his credibility and integrity in a more controlled environment.
"I would add, that this action is not intended to be disciplinary in nature. It is a necessary Administrative decision based on the needs and best interests of the Force."
Corporal Tkachuk was then transferred from plainclothes duties with the National Se­curity Investigation Section to uniformed duties with the Burnaby detachment. The notice of transfer was dated April 25, 1991, and was said to be effective May 15, 1991. There was no requirement to relocate and no reduction in pay involved in the transfer. The applicant had not reported to Burnaby detachment at the date of hearing because he was recuperating from surgery. He has, however, filed a grievance concerning the transfer, pursuant to s. 31 of the
R.C.M.P. Act
.
[5]
A Statement of Claim was filed May 22, 1991, seeking certiorari quashing the deci­sion to transfer the applicant, and seeking a declaration that the issue of transfer was decided by the Adjudication Board, and that therefore issue estoppel and res judicata apply. On the same date, a notice of motion was filed seeking the interlocutory relief set out above. It is the applicant's view that the transfer is punitive in nature and that he would be professionally embarrassed were the transfer to be allowed to proceed.
[6]
The principles governing the granting of interlocutory injunctions and stays of pro­ceedings set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1; reving. [1988] 3 F.C. 235 (F.C.T.D.). Those principles as applicable in the context of an action against a public authority have been especially dealt with by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241; 18 C.P.C.(2d) 273; 38 D.L.R.(4th) 321, and by this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), and in numerous other cases. What is required before an interlocutory injunction will be granted is that a serious issue be established, the applicant demon­strate that irreparable harm will be suffered if the injunction is not granted, and that the balance of convenience, after careful con­sideration of the public interest involved, lies in favour of granting the injunction.
[7]
For the applicant it was urged that recent amendments to the
R.C.M.P. Act
, effective in 1988, were intended by Parliament, in part, to introduce a new regime for dealing with disciplinary offences within the force, including the controlling by Adjudication Boards dealing with violation of the force's
Code of Conduct
, of transfers imposed for disciplinary reasons.
[8]
Counsel for the applicant urged, as au­thority for his submission that a serious question is here established,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Rouleau, for this court, held that the transfer of the R.C.M.P. officer there in question should be quashed because the exercise of discretion by the Commissioner in that case constituted an abuse of discretion. Similarly, in this case, submits counsel for the applicant, the deci­sion to transfer, while ordinarily within the administrative decision-making authority of the Chief Superintendent, must not be exer­cised on grounds other than those upon which the proper exercise of discretion should be based. In the face of the statement by the Adjudication Board, comprised of three senior officers of the force, that it would be "counter-productive" to transfer the applicant, it is submitted that the subse­quent decision to transfer was not made in good faith.
[9]
Counsel for the applicant also suggested that, once decided by the Adjudication Board, the principle of issue estoppel and res judicata applied, effectively removing the issue from the purview of the Chief Super­intendent. No authorities were cited to sup­port that proposition. Counsel for the re­spondent, on the other hand, relied upon
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , for the submission that issue estoppel or res judicata have no application except within the context of judicial pro­ceedings where the principles underlie the objective of resolving issues efficiently once and for all. Even in that context, as Madame Justice Wilson noted, dissenting in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 814 (S.C.R.), there are three criteria required to be established before issue estoppel will apply. That is, that "(a) the identical question must have been decided in both cases; (b) the judgment creating the estoppel must be a final judgment; and (c) the parties must be the same in both actions". Counsel for the respondent sug­gested that the decision to transfer was not made in the course of any judicial proceed­ings but rather within the administrative responsibilities of Chief Superintendent Clarke. In that decision-making context it was appropriate for him to take into account broader considerations than those taken into account by the Adjudication Board. The decision by the Superintendent was made in the administrative context, for reasons set out in the affidavit of A. Gordon Clarke, sworn June 4, 1991, and was expressly stated to be not for disciplinary purposes. Superintendent Clarke evidently made his decision based on his sense of the needs of the National Security Investigation Section, to which the applicant was attached prior to the transfer.
[10]
My appreciation of matters is that a serious question has been established by the applicant. I do not agree that issue estoppel applies, given the differing decision-making contexts of the Adjudication Board, which considered the contravention of the
Code of Conduct
by the applicant, and the Superin­tendent, who considered the broader context of the proper functioning of the force at large. Nevertheless it may be that the appli­cant will be successful in proving that the discretion exercised by the Superintendent constituted an abuse of discretion. As noted by Mr. Justice Rouleau in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, courts are not inclined to intervene in the day-to-day internal administration of the force, but it may be that the applicant's situation, like the situation of the applicant in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , is not one which involves the "routine" matter of transfer. I note that this stage of proceedings is early, and additional evidence may be adduced, through pretrial or trial proceedings.
[11]
It is my view, however, that this is not an appropriate case in which to grant an interlocutory injunction, for two reasons. The first has to do with the matter of irreparable harm. In order to obtain an interlocutory injunction, an extraordinary remedy, an applicant must establish that he or she will suffer harm that is not compensable in dam­ages. As noted above, the applicant, in his affidavit, states that the transfer to uniform duties "... is a punitive transfer and pro­fessionally embarrassing to me". The appli­cant will suffer no reduction in salary and is not required to relocate.
[12]
It is my view that there is insufficient evidence to accept the applicant's statement that the transfer is a punitive transfer. In the applicant's view the transfer is punitive, and the effect on the applicant may be the same, in the circumstances of this case, whether the motivation for the transfer is punitive or based on proper administrative reasons. The Superintendent states that the reasons are the latter. As for the statement that the transfer is professionally embarrassing, I cannot accept that a transfer within the force to another detachment and to new duties with­out a reduction in pay, however embarrass­ing that may be to the applicant personally, constitutes irreparable harm sufficient to warrant the grant of an interlocutory injunc­tion. Moreover, whatever harm the applicant suffers due to embarrassment may ultimately be remedied by any vindication which may result from a successful prosecution of the claimant's grievance or of his rights at the trial of this action, if he be successful.
[13]
The second reason that an interlocutory injunction should not be granted is that the transfer which is objected to has already been effected. Indeed, that transfer was said to be effective May 15, a week before the application for an injunction was filed. Save for the applicant's recuperation from surgery, he would be carrying out his duties at the Burnaby detachment to which he was trans­ferred. As stated by Mr. Justice Walsh for this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 22-23:
"With respect to the applications for inter­locutory injunction it may be said at once that they must be dismissed as the event sought to be enjoined, namely the cancel­lation of some services and operation of others at less frequent intervals had already taken place when they came on for hearing and an injunction cannot be issued to prevent something which has already taken place."
[14]
The applicant is free, of course, to continue with his action for a declaration and for certiorari quashing the decision to transfer. An interlocutory injunction, how­ever, is invariably, and in the case at hand, a prohibitory injunction, and Walsh, J.'s words in the above-cited passage are ample reason for refusing to grant an injunction in the circumstances of this case.
[15]
In light of these conclusions, it is un­necessary to address the issue of the balance of convenience.
[16]
The application for an interlocutory injunction is dismissed. In view of the fact that there has been no request from the respondent for costs of the application, costs are not awarded to either party.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]