[1]
Dubé, J.
: The plaintiff ("Airseal"), an Ontario corporation, is the owner of Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,266,199 ("the Airseal patent") issued on February 27, 1990 in respect of an invention entitled "Damper Construction" and naming Waldemar H. Greiner as the inventor, which patent Airseal claims has been infringed by the defendant ("M & I"), also an Ontario corporation.
[2]
As agreed by both parties, the Airseal patent relates generally to dampers and particularly to an improved air damper construction in which the mechanism for controlling the damper achieves movement of the damper through a system of rollers, cams or pins following suitably designed tracks or guideways, powered by an element such as an air-operated cylinder. Airseal claims that M & I is offering for sale and has sold in Ontario a damper ("the M & I damper") which employs a damper controlling mechanism that achieves movement of the damper through a system of rollers, cams or pins following tracks or guideways, the movement powered by an air-operated cylinder. According to Airseal, the M & I damper is an embodiment of the Airseal patent.
[3]
M & I admits that it is offering for sale and has sold the M & I damper, but denies that it is an embodiment of the Airseal patent. It claims that the Airseal patent is invalid on grounds that the specification is insufficient under s. 34 of the
Patent Act
("the
Act
"), R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4, that the language of the patent is ambiguous, and that it is obvious. The ground of obviousness was dropped at the trial.
1. The Construction Of The Airseal
Patent
[4]
As noted by Collier, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 234 the first duty of the court is to construe the claims alleged to be infringed. As stated by Collier, J.:
"The language in the claim is in the end determinative, but each claim must be considered against the background of, in the context of, the specification as a whole ... It is directed to skilled men in the particular field and they will read it against their knowledge of the prevailing conditions in the field at the time the patent is granted, and against their knowledge of earlier work which may have been done in this same field."
[5]
The construction of the patent and its claims is to be carried out in light of the dispositions of s. 34 of the
Act
, which seeks to answer the questions: "What is your invention? How does it work?" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 203; 56 C.P.R.(2d) 145). Principles relating to the construction of patents established by the jurisprudence (see, for example,
AT & T  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 238 at 257 (T.D.).) were set out by Mr. W.L. Hayhurst in a 1933 article commissioned by the National Judicial Institute as follows (W.L. Hayhurst,
The Art of Claiming and Reading a Claim
, 1993 National Judicial Council, Intellectual Property: Patent Law, at 17-43 (and particulary at 22-25.):
"i. The relevant date for construction is the effective date of filing the patent application.
"ii. Construction is for the court, viewed through the spectacles of a person skilled in the art.
"iii. The Specification must be construed as a whole.
"iv. A specification is construed without reference to other documents.
"v. Construction precedes consideration for validity and infringement.
"vi. Construction must be purposive, neither benevolent nor harsh.
(a) What is 'essential' is a question of construction.
(b) The same principles of construction apply to all patent specifications.
(c) Where more than one construction may reasonably be reached, the court favours one that upholds the patent.
(d) Where possible, different meanings should be ascribed to different claims."
[6]
To assist the court in construing claim 1 (the only claim alleged to be infringed), each party called its own expert witness. As is often the case in infringement actions, both experts were knowledgeable, enlightening to the court, confident in their views, but of differing opinions. However, they agreed that the key paragraph in issue is claim 1(c), which reads:
"1. A damper for controlling fluid flow, comprising:
(c) stabilizing track means on the brackets from said guideway and registry means, the stabilizing track means requiring the second bracket 1) to substantially retain a given angular orientation with respect to the first bracket while the registry means slides from a first end to a second end of said elongate guideway thus moving said closure member in translation with respect to said frame, and 2) to rotate with respect to said first bracket about said second end of said elongate guideway thus moving said closure member in rotation with respect to said frame."
[7]
Although claim 1(c) is the central issue, it has to be considered in the context of the patent as a whole and of the prior art.
[8]
As stated in the patent, a reliable damper control is essential to proper air distribution in large modern buildings which are sealed units. The distribution system includes a central source that provides conditioned return air which can be mixed with a percentage of outside air. The mixture is then circulated throughout the building. Air valves or "dampers" are used to tightly close off the air passage or open it as desired.
[9]
The prior art in this field is exemplified by Canadian patent 1,143,992 which was issued to Mitco Corporation on April 5, 1983 ("the Mitco patent"). The Mitco patent is based on quasi-parallelogram linkages and requires closure members of a substantial size for the necessary rigidity.
[10]
The Airseal patent seeks to improve the mechanism controlling the damper by eliminating all linkages and to achieve the desired movement of the damper through a system of rollers, cams or pins following suitably designed tracks or guideways under the influence of a power element. The general description of the invention provides as follows:
"Accordingly, this invention provides a damper for controlling fluid flow. The damper includes a frame having an opening through which fluid is intended to flow when the damper is open. A closure member is movable between a first position in which it blocks the opening, and a second position in which the opening is unblocked and the closure member is rotated with respect to its first position, so as to minimize its interference with fluid flow through the opening. A mechanism controls the movement of the closure member, the mechanism including:
a) a first and a second bracket fixed with respect to the frame and the closure member, respectively,
b) an elongate guideway defined by one bracket and registry means defined by the other bracket, the registry means being movably captive within said elongate guideway.
c) stabilizing track means on the brackets spaced from said guideway and registry means, the stabilizing track means requiring the second bracket 1) to substantially retain a given angular orientation with respect to the first bracket while the registry means slides from a first end to a second end of said elongate guideway thus moving said closure member in translation with respect to said frame, and 2) to rotate with respect to said first bracket about said second end of said elongate guideway thus moving said closure member in rotation with respect to said frame; and
d) power means to positively move the brackets with respect to each other."
Paragraph c) is identical to the disputed claim 1(c), supra.
[11]
The general description of the drawings provides that several embodiments of the invention are illustrated by the drawings, which are admitted to contain an error in respect of figure 4. In this figure the word "upwardly" should have been "downwardly", and figure 4 appears upside down in the drawing (much was made of that mistake early in the trial, but eventually the defendant conceded it was not consequential).
[12]
Figure 1 is an elevational view of a portion of a control mechanism constituting a first embodiment of the invention.
[See Printed Version]
[13]
Figure 2 is a top view of the mechanism shown in figure 1.
[See Printed Version]
[14]
Figure 3 is a sectional view taken at the line 3-3 of figure 1.
[See Printed Version]
[15]
Figure 4 is a sectional view through an air duct, showing the control mechanism of figure 1 in place and the way in which it cooperates with the closure member of the air damper (this is the figure which appears upside down in the drawing by error.)
[See Printed Version]
[16]
Airseal called as its expert John Douglas Hubbert, a consulting professional engineer who has been involved over the years in some 3,000 design projects involving fans, ducts and dampers, including the Remote Manipulator ("Canadarm") Facility for Spar Aerospace. He impressed me as being a very competent witness with full knowledge of the relevant damper patents. His definitions of the key words of the Airseal patent (as provided in his affidavit and as further refined in his oral evidence) are outlined by Airseal as follows:
"'registry means': roller or pin that stays within and slides along a track or guideway to keep the brackets in proper correspondence with each other.
"'guideway': a slot or track that guides a roller or pin along its path. The path or shape of the guideway may be a straight line or curve or any combination thereof along its length.
"'stabilizing track means': a mechanism that includes a track with a roller or pin within it, separate from the registry means and guideway, to stabilize the movement of the closure member in translation and rotation from a closed to an open position.
"'substantially retain': insubstantial rotation of the closure member bracket occurs as the registry means slides along the elongate guideway moving the closure member in translation away from the frame.
"'rotate about a second end': the closure member bracket rotates with respect to the frame bracket about a position in the elongate guideway defined by the length of travel of the registry means along the guideway. 'A second end' is not defined by the length of the guideway, although the registry means may slide to the very end of the guideway in some cases. The claim deliberately uses the indefinite article 'a' not the definite article 'the' in conjunction with the words 'first end' and 'second end'. A 'first end' is the starting point of travel of the registry means which may not be the extreme of the guideway. Likewise, 'a second end' may not be in all cases the extreme end of the guideway."
[17]
According to Mr. Hubbert, the main difference between the Airseal patent and the prior art - in particular the Mitco patent - is that the closure member movement control mechanism uses "pins following suitably designed tracks or guideways". The invention provides a damper construction in which "there are no linkages". The invention is defined by the mechanism for controlling or effecting the movement of the closure member. There are four main elements in the Airseal damper:
(a) a frame;
(b) a closure member;
(c) a mechanism for controlling the movement of the closure member; and
(d) a power element.
[18]
The only element which differs from those of the Mitco damper is element (c), the mechanism for controlling movement of the closure member. It includes:
1. A bracket affixed with respect to the frame and a second bracket affixed with respect to the closure member;
2. An elongate guideway - a slot - in one bracket and a registering device - a pin - in the other bracket, the registering device being captive or contained, but movable, in the guideway; and
3. A stabilizing track mechanism - e.g., another slot and a pin - on the brackets, spaced from the elongate guideway and registering device.
[19]
Mr. Hubbert explains in his affidavit that the action of the stabilizing track mechanism in combination with the movement of the registering device within the elongate guideway "causes the closure member to undergo translational and rotational movement as it proceeds from a closed to an open position". He claims that the improved mechanism of the Airseal provides much more stability than the Mitco damper when the closure member is in the partially open position.
[20]
In both dampers, the closure member must undergo sufficient translational movement before undergoing any rotational movement so that there be no physical interference between the closure member and the damper frame. However, Mr. Hubbert states that the written description of the patent does not limit the invention to a mechanism in which rotational movement occurs only after all translational movement has taken place. The words in claim 1 "to substantially retain a given angular orientation" do not exclude some rotational movement as the registering device moves along the elongate guideway.
[21]
Nor does the written description preclude using elongate guideways of any shape, with registering devices within, to achieve a less definitive motion sequence: the invention works only if there is sufficient initial translational movement to provide clearance for rotation. The clearance is essential in all three dampers, Mitco, Airseal and M & I.
[22]
Similarly, Mr. Hubbert is of the view that the invention is not limited to the specific embodiments shown in the figures. He infers, for example, from the description of the guideway as "elongate", that "the guideway need not be rectilinear and may be shaped in any fashion - e.g. curvilinear - so as to achieve the desired movement of the closure member as referred to in paragraph 30".
[23]
The expert called by the defendant, Habib U. Khawja, is a professional consulting engineer who has some practical experience in installing Mitco dampers but who has never used the Airseal dampers. Although undoubtedly competent, he appeared to me to be less knowledgeable, or not as well prepared as Mr. Hubbert. He admitted that he had read the Airseal and Mitco patents only once or twice and that only one draft of his affidavit had been prepared for him by the defendant's patent attorney. On several occasions during cross-examination, he had to retreat from previous statements in his evidence. He has never been involved in the design of dampers. He admitted that he did not have sufficient experience in the field to be able to create the Airseal invention directly from the Mitco patent. He found that the words and terms "track", "registry means", "stabilizing means" and "stabilizing track means" to be ambiguous.
[24]
In Mr. Khawja's view, "there are very few if any advantages to be gained by replacing the Mitco linkage arrangements with the slot and pin arrangement described and illustrated in the Airseal patent". He also devoted much of his affidavit to the obviousness of the Airseal patent, a ground which, as mentioned, was dropped at the end of the trial. Mr. Khawja concludes that all of the limitations and requirements of claim 1 in the Airseal patent are met by the M & I damper except for two features. These features will be reviewed under the heading of infringement.
[25]
I find, from my reading of the patent and from my consideration of the evidence, that the essence of the Airseal patent is a damper control mechanism whereby the closure member undergoes translational and rotational movement by means of pins following suitably designed tracks and guideways. The control mechanism comprises a bracket affixed to the frame and a second bracket affixed to the closure member. It also comprises an elongate guideway. It includes a slot in one bracket and a registering or registry device (for example, a pin) in the other bracket, the registering device being captive or contained, but moveable in the guideway. The third element of the mechanism is a stabilizing track, which is really another slot and a pin on the brackets spaced on the elongate guideway and registering device.
[26]
In the specific commercial embodiments of the Airseal damper, there is a two-phase profile, a translation phase followed by a rotation phase, but the actual profile is not essential to the invention. The patent requires that there be translation and rotation of the closure member. Translation in the mechanical sense is a movement forward of a body whereby the parts move in the same direction.
[27]
In simple terms, the closure member, which may be in the form of a disk, is displaced outward from its frame sufficiently to allow clearance and then rotates or bends towards and into the opening (up to a 90° angle for full movement of air, or to any other angle to achieve the required control).
[28]
According to Mr. Hubbert, whose opinion I accept, claim 1 does not call for an immoveable pivot point for the rotation of the closure member, but merely that the closure member rotate about a second end in the guideway. In his affidavit, and in his evidence in court, he demonstrated that the words "substantially retain a given angular orientation" and "to rotate ... about said second end of said elongate guideway", found in element (c) of claim 1, contemplate that there can be some rotational movement during the translational movement phase: "It is immaterial whether or not all the translational movement of the closure member occurs before the rotation of the closure member begins. It is material only that the closure member undergo an initial translational movement phase before rotation, so that there will be no physical interference between the closure member and the damper frame as the closure member moves from its closed to open position".
[29]
In the preferred embodiment of the Airseal damper, the registry means does slide all the way to the extreme end of the guideway, but patent claims are not limited to physical embodiments. As it turns out, in the commercial embodiment "a second end" is the physical extreme end of the guideway, "a second end" does not have to be so because it is defined by the length of travel of the registry means. Under the well-known canons of construction, if one word has a meaning in a text and it repeats itself, it must retain the same meaning. Therefore, "a first end" is the starting point of travel of the registry means which may not necessarily be the extreme end of the guideway. Likewise, "a second end" may not be, in all cases, the other extreme end of the guideway.
2. The Infringement
[30]
Under s. 44 of the
Act
, the patentee enjoys the exclusivity of his invention. The general principle is set out very clearly by Fox in H.G. Fox,
Canadian Patent Law
, 4th Ed. (Toronto: Carswell, 1969), at 349-350.
"In general, infringement is committed where any person without license from the patentee, either directly or indirectly makes, uses, or puts into practice the invention or any part of it that is embraced by the claims."
[31]
Thus, there is infringement when the essential components of an invention have been appropriated by the infringer. It is also well established that an infringement is not assessed by comparing the product of the invention to the product of the infringer, but by comparing the infringer's product to the patent of invention, and in particular to its claims. Fundamentally, it must be determined whether the infringer has taken the "pith and marrow" of the invention. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 5628 at 539-540 (T.D.).) Moreover, although a defendant has applied for and obtained its own patent for an "improvement", it may have appropriated the pith and substance of the patent alleged to be infringed (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 261 at 271 (T.D.).)
[32]
In a statement of admitted facts, the defendant conceded that it makes and sells in Canada the M & I damper which are embodiments of the device described in its U.S. patent No. 5,106,052 ("the U.S. patent"), and continues to sell the dampers to the present. It agreed that the U.S. patent accurately describes the parts of the M & I dampers and how they work and move in relation to each other and that there is a pending Canadian patent application on file that corresponds to the U.S. patent. It is useful at this stage to reproduce Figures 1 and 4 of the U.S. patent:
[See Printed Version]
[33]
The U.S. patent in question does indeed accurately describe the parts of the M & I damper and how they work and move in relation to each other. A review of its description and claims, as well as the affidavit evidence of Mr. Hubbert, and several demonstrations carried out in the course of the trial, indicate quite clearly that the U.S. patent and the M & I damper involve an arrangement of pins following suitably designed tracks or guideways, as described and claimed in the Airseal patent, to control the closure member movement.
[34]
As mentioned earlier, Mr. Khawja, the defendant's expert, conceded in his affidavit that all limitations and requirements of claim 1 of the Airseal patent are met by the defendant's damper, except for two features. These two features are as follows:
(a) The requirement that the stabilizing track means requires the second bracket to substantially retain a given angular orientation with respect to the first bracket while the registry means slides from a first end to a second end of the elongate guideway, thus moving the closure member in translation with respect to the frame;
(b) The requirement that the stabilizing track means also requires the second bracket "to rotate with respect to said first bracket about said second end of said elongate guideway thus moving the closure member in rotation".
[35]
Mr. Khawja claims that the first of these two features are not found in the M & I damper because in the Mitco damper rotation of the second bracket with respect to the first bracket commences shortly after the closure member has moved away from its opening. As to the second feature, Mr. Khawja alleges that the second bracket of the M & I damper is not caused to rotate with respect to the first bracket about the second end of the elongate guideway. As mentioned earlier, I accept the opinion of Mr. Hubbert in these two matters. In my view, the M & I damper does embody the invention of claim 1 of the Airseal patent and infringes it literally.
[36]
The movement of the M & I damper shows that the arcs traced out by the pins following the guideways provide for translation and rotation. There is a registry means (pin 78), a guideway (slot 54), a stabilizing track means (pin 76 and track 52). The M & I damper registry means slides from a first end of the guideway to a second end (pin 78 slides from position A to position E or F
1
). The M & I damper closure bracket rotates about the second end of the guideway (the closure member bracket 68 substantially rotates about position E or F
1
) moving the closure member in rotation with respect to the frame. Finally, the M & I damper closure bracket substantially retains a given angular orientation as a registry means slides from a first end to a second end of the guideway and thus insubstantial rotation occurs as the pin slides to position E or F
1
.
[37]
Thus, there is literal infringement of the Airseal patent. There is pith and substance infringement as well. As mentioned earlier, the essence of the Airseal invention is a damper control mechanism which comprises brackets affixed to the frame and to the closure member, an elongate guideway, and a stabilizing track mechanism. It is not necessary for the working of the invention that all translation occur before there is any rotation, or that substantial rotation occur only after all translation has occurred, or that substantial rotation occur precisely about a point in the guideway. The essence of the invention calls for the closure member to undergo sufficient initial translation to allow rotation to begin after proper clearance with the frame has been provided and that the closure member move from its closed to its open position.
[38]
In my estimation, the evidence shows clearly that the essential elements constituting the pith and substance of the Airseal patent have been borrowed by M & I. In short, what the defendant did was to achieve the profile of movement of the Mitco damper by utilizing the Airseal system of rollers and pins following suitably designed tracks or guideways.
3. The Alleged Invalidity Of The
Airseal Patent
[39]
In its statement of defence, M & I claims that the Airseal patent is invalid on grounds of deficiency of specification, ambiguity, and obviousness. As mentioned earlier, the last ground was dropped at the hearing. It is trite law that a patent, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, is presumed to be valid. (
Patent Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4, s. 45.) The burden is on a defendant challenging a patent to show, on the usual standard of the balance of probabilities, that a patent is invalid. The burden is heavy and is not easy to overcome. (
Diversified Products Corp. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 350 at 359 (F.C.A.);
Standal's Patents Ltd.
, supra, at 277 and
Pro-Vertic (1987) Inc.
, supra, at 530.)
(a) The Insufficiency Of The
Specification
[40]
Under s. 34 of the
Act
a specification is sufficient if it will teach a person skilled in the art the embodiment of the invention, even if routine trials and experiments not amounting to invention might be necessary to arrive at the desired result (
Cabot Corp. and Cabot Canada Ltd. v. 318602 Ontario Ltd. and 502078 Ontario Ltd.
(1988), 17 F.T.R. 54; 20 C.P.R.(3d) 132 at 160 (T.D.).) Attacks on the validity of a patent under s. 34 are technical and ought not to defeat a meritorious invention (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 104). It is also a well known principle that the claims, as well as the disclosure of a patent, are directed to the skilled worker and must be construed by a mind willing to understand, not desirous of misunderstanding. The specification should be given a purposive rather than purely literal construction (
Burton Parsons Chemicals Inc.
).
[41]
Where the language of the specification, upon a reasonable view of it, can be so read as to afford the inventor protection for that which he has actually in good faith invented, the court, as a rule, will endeavour to give effect to that construction. A patent should be approached with a judicial anxiety to support a really useful invention. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 160 (F.C.T.D.).
[42]
The defendant's main allegation is that the claims of the Airseal patent are broader than the invention. In what he described as a "back-handed argument", counsel argues that the invention of the Airseal damper is in fact defined correctly by its claims, as they are read in full, but if the essence of the patent is broadly a damper using pins and guideways, then that description is too broad and is, in that sense, also ambiguous.
[43]
If I understood counsel and the transcript of his argument correctly, his position is "that indeed the patent of Airseal is completely understandable": however, words have to be read carefully in conjunction with one another without extending or unduly narrowing the claims. In other words, if the patent works notwithstanding the ambiguity, then the claims are broader than the invention. This argument that the claims of the invention are too broad, although appearing in the statement of defence, was raised only at the end of the trial, was not directly supported by any evidence, and was only made in a general way and without further explanation.
(b) The Ambiguity Argument
[44]
Under this heading, the issue to be resolved is whether the patent is invalid for failing to meet the requirements of s. 34(2) of the
Act
in that some of the terms of the claims are ambiguous. The section stipulates that the claims must state "distinctly and in explicit terms the things or combinations that the application regards as new". It is a well known principle that a claim is not invalid merely because it is difficult to construe or is capable of more than one construction (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 33 at 37-38 (F.C.A.).) Moreover, a court should be wary of an assertion of ambiguity where obviousness has also been raised. On that score, this court said as follows:
"At first blush, it is not easy to fathom how the same patents that were attacked for being too obvious are now described as vague and ambiguous. The defendants did not put much stock on that argument and neither will I." (
Standal Estate
, supra, at 277-278 (C.P.R.(3d)):
[45]
The defendant argues that the key terms already discussed are ambiguous: "registry means", "stabilizing track means", "end of elongate guideway".
[46]
Again, a court should be reluctant to find ambiguity so as to invalidate a patent and should refuse to do so where a claim may, although with some effort, be construed in a meaningful way. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 430-431 (T.D.), aff'd (1987), 79 N.R. 351; 18 C.P.R.(3d) 1 at 8 (F.C.A.).) These terms were all satisfactorily explained and defined by Mr. Hubbert. In any event, some similar terms appear in the M & I U.S. patent which places the defendant in a difficult position to argue now that it does not understand the terms or that they ought not to have been used by the plaintiff. This conclusion of mine is not based on "prior art" or on "future art" but is merely a self-evident observation.
4. Disposition Of The Action
[47]
Judgment therefore will go in favour of the plaintiff, including a declaration that its patent is valid and has been infringed by the defendant. Also, a permanent injunction as requested in the prayer of the statement of claim is granted and delivery up to the plaintiff ordered. By order dated December 21, 1992, Reed, J., directed, at the request of the parties, that questions of damages and profits be the subject of a reference after trial under rule 500 of the Federal Court. All with costs to the plaintiff.
Judgment for plaintiff.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/slm
[End of document]