[1]
Wetston, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of a single member of the CRDD dated December 21, 1992, wherein the member dismissed the applicant's motion for a rehearing of the applicant's claim pursuant to rule 30 of the
Convention Refugee Determination Division Rules
. This provision has been repealed by SOR/93-45. The applicant is a citizen of Mexico. He arrived in Canada on May 27, 1989. He was determined not to be a Convention refugee on November 14, 1991. His application for leave to appeal of the decision dated November 14, 1991, was dismissed by the Federal Court of Appeal on March 25, 1992, for failure to file his affidavit within the time for doing so. An application for reconsideration of the denial of the leave application was dismissed by order of the Federal Court of Appeal on April 15, 1992. The Federal Court of Appeal's order reads as follows:
"The applicant cannot disassociate himself from oversight of his counsel nor rely on his failure to maintain necessary contact with counsel in the prosecution of his application for leave to appeal. The application for a further extension of time to file material in support of the leave application is refused. Reconsideration of the order of March 25, 1992, is denied."
[2]
It would appear, after the original court decision denying refugee status, new counsel was retained, and on July 6, 1992, a rehearing application was brought pursuant to rule 30 of the former
Rules
. The motion was denied by a decision dated December 21, 1992. This decision is the subject matter of this judicial review application.
[3]
The motion before the member was based on two grounds:
(1) New evidence in support of the claim is available.
(2) The applicant was not properly heard in that he suffers from post-traumatic stress syndrome and could not communicate effectively.
[4]
The new evidence consists of two medical reports: one from a doctor in Mexico who treated the applicant dated November 1991, and the other a psychiatrist's report from Toronto dated the 13th of February 1992. Neither report was available at the time of the hearing in August of 1991. The report of the Toronto psychiatrist deals with the question of post-traumatic stress syndrome.
[5]
The applicant argues particularly that the evidence of post-traumatic stress syndrome takes on importance in this matter. Counsel argues that the Board, in rendering its decision on the refugee claim, may have asked itself the wrong questions and points to certain parts of the decision to explain that a different outcome would have occurred if the panel was aware of the applicant's alleged condition. Counsel argues that, in effect, the applicant was not
heard
at his hearing as he suffers from a post-traumatic stress disorder.
[6]
The decision under review in this proceeding is the Board member's refusal to reopen the hearing into the refugee claim. There is no explicit statutory authority to reopen or rehear a decision of the CRDD. Section 35 of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as repealed by S.C. 1992, c. 49, s. 25 is not applicable herein. Rule 30 of the
Rules
of the CRDD cannot, in the absence of specific statutory authority, provide a basis for reopening or rehearing once a final decision is made. In the context of administrative tribunals the concept of functus officio and its application was considered in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 321, at p. 861:
"I do not understand Martland, J., to go so far as to hold that functus officio has no application to administrative tribunals. Apart from the English practice which is based on a reluctance to amend or reopen formal judgments, there is a sound policy reason for recognizing the finality of proceedings before administrative tribunals. As a general rule, once such a tribunal has reached a final decision in respect to the matter that is before it in accordance with its enabling statute, that decision cannot be revisited because the tribunal has changed its mind, made an error within jurisdiction or because there has been a change in circumstances. It can only do so if authorized by statute or if there has been a slip or error within the exceptions enunciated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
"To this extent, the principle of functus officio applies. It is based, however, on the policy ground which favours finality of proceedings rather than the rule which was developed with respect to formal judgments of a court whose decision was subject to a full appeal. For this reason I am of the opinion that its application must be more flexible and less formalistic in respect to the decisions of the administrative tribunals which are subject to appeal only on a point of law. Justice may require the reopening of administrative proceedings in order to provide relief which would otherwise be available on appeal.
"Accordingly, the principle should not be strictly applied where there are indications in the enabling statute that a decision can be reopened in order to enable the tribunal to discharge the function committed to it by enabling legislation."
[8]
As indicated above, there are no indications in the enabling statute that the matter may be reopened. These principles were implicitly at the core of the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 312 (F.C.A.). Marceau, J.A., states at p. 315:
"I have no hesitation in reasserting here what this court has already determined in
Singh
and
Nabiye
, supra, namely that the Board does not have jurisdiction to reopen an application for redetermination of refugee status which it has already disposed of solely in order to hear evidence of new facts."
and at p. 317:
"2. The power of the Board to reopen a redetermination hearing, not to consider new facts but to allow the introduction of evidence that the applicant has failed to adduce cannot be so readily discarded. Indeed, it is now firmly established, in the jurisprudence of this court, that if the hearing of an application has not been held according to the rules of natural justice, the Board may look at its decision as a nullity and reconsider the matter (see
Gill, Singh
and
Nabiye
)."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the applicant is not of the type which was in question in the
Kaur
case, i.e., not a direct and immediate one; it certainly cannot be seen as having affected the hearing to the extent of making it a travesty of justice. The Board, on the sole allegation contained in the affidavit filed in support of the application to reopen the hearing, could not come to the conclusion that its initial decision could be regarded as a nullity. It follows that the Board had no more jurisdiction to reopen the hearing to allow the applicant to introduce the particular information he wanted to introduce than to allow him to bring evidence of new facts."
[9]
This reasoning echoes the language by Sopinka, J., at p. 863 of
Chandler
, supra:
"If the error which renders the decision a nullity is one that taints the whole proceeding, then the tribunal must start afresh. ... They involve a denial of natural justice which vitiated the whole proceeding. The tribunal was bound to start afresh in order to cure the defect."
[10]
Counsel for the applicant also argues that the failure to reopen would be a denial of his s. 7 rights under the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. Neither the applicant nor the respondent argued the s. 7 issue at the hearing of this matter. As was stated by Linden, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.):
"If there is a denial of natural justice during the original inquiry, the Board could treat its earlier decision as a nullity and reopen it in order to avoid the denial of fundamental justice. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.))."
[11]
In the case at bar the applicant points to the circumstances at the time of the original hearing which denied him fundamental justice.
[12]
It is evident that there are a number of competing values in determining whether or not to reopen a hearing. For example, the finality of tribunal proceedings versus the opportunity to have new or additional evidence which may affect the tribunal's findings. However, this is an application for judicial review and must be examined in the context of the denial of the motion to reopen. Fundamentally, did the Board member exercise his discretion in a manner which allowed the applicant an opportunity to have the new evidence heard and assessed by an authoritative body (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  correctly? Did he also assess the appropriate jurisprudence? Did he address the question of natural justice and the right to be heard? Did he assess whether the new evidence might render the original decision a nullity? In my view, the answer to all these questions is yes.
[13]
Accordingly, the application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Donna E. Mitchell/nmg
[End of document]