[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The hearing of this originating motion, in which the applicant appeared on his own behalf, took place in Vancouver on October 7 and 8, 1987. The last written submission of the applicant was received herein on April 21, 1988.
[2]
The applicant originally had engaged solicitors who formulated and filed his originating notice herein on February 21, 1986, seeking:
"(a) a declaration that the registration of the trademarks 'Expo', 'Expo 86', '86' registered on August 23, 1985, September 13, 1985 and a date unknown under Registration Numbers 306,272, 306,792 and a number presently unknown and presently maintained pursuant to the provisions of the Trade Marks Act is invalid;
"(b) an order that the entries of such registrations in the register be struck out;
"(c) ... costs ...;
"(d) such other order ... as ... may seem just."
[3]
The registration number and date for "86" are admitted and supplied by the respondent in paragraph 13 of her reply, filed March 27, 1986, and confirmed in paragraph 17 of Catherine D. Mutala's filed affidavit, sworn on October 28, 1986. "86" was registered as a trademark on October 25, 1985 as number 307,702.
[4]
On May 29, 1987, the applicant personally sought leave to file his supplementary affidavit in support of expungement of the registered trademarks. At about the same time the respondent sought leave to file the affidavit of Brian McDonaugh, former manager of corporate purchases employed by Expo 86 Corporation, and sought an order that the affidavits of Bruce D. Woolley, sworn on November 24, 1986, and of Catherine D. Mutala, above mentioned, be deemed to have been filed within the 30-day period required by rule 704(6). All such applications were allowed by Mr. Justice Teitelbaum.
[5]
Later, in September, the applicant, again personally, sought leave to file additional evidence in support of his written expungement proceedings with special permission as stated in Mr. Justice Teitelbaum's above recited order. On September 28, 1987, his request was thereupon granted in the following terms:
"ORDER:
"The applicant's affidavit sworn and filed herein on September 23, 1987, may be, and is, filed as additional evidence in these proceedings by special permission hereby granted pursuant to the order made by Mr. Justice Teitelbaum on May 29, 1987, subject to the following conditions:
1. Exhibit 'A' shall be ignored as irrelevant and may be expunged or removed from the affidavit, together with narrative reference to it;
2. All passages of argumentation not being evidence, in said affidavit shall be ignored and may be expunged or obliterated;
3. No further introduction of evidence, apart from the respondents' response to the applicant's said affidavit, shall be permitted in these proceedings at first instance under any circumstances;
4. Because of the time constraints which the applicant has inflicted upon the respondents as a result of his tardiness in bringing this application, the applicant shall be awarded no costs of this application in any event of the cause.
"FURTHER the applicant's oral application for compelling a list of the respondents' documents which he made at the hearing of the above application is dismissed without costs."
The parties are about equal in their tardiness in bringing evidence before the court.
[6]
In his original affidavit in support of this application, sworn on March 6, 1986, the applicant deposes, among other matters, the following selected passages:
"4. While working in Australia in the early 1960s I created a design incorporating a world globe with two rings around it and titled 'International Introductions of the World'.
....
"6. I attended Expo 67 in Montreal, Quebec and, at that time, came to the conclusion that there would likely be a world's fair in Vancouver, British Columbia in its centennial year, 1986 and in 1977 I revised my design to incorporate the word 'Expo 86' in which each of the three circles in the numerals "86" contained a representation of the world globe. [shown as Exhibit 'A']
....
"8. I obtained copies of an Expo 67 information bulletin and the Trade Marks Journal entry of October 7, 1965 advertising the registration of Expo 67 as a trademark and now shown to me and marked Exhibit 'B' to this my Affidavit is a copy of the said information bulletin and Trade Marks Journal entry.
"9. I had my copyright for the said design registered in the copyright office under number 346900 on October 23, 1985.
"10. By an application dated July 15, 1985 and accepted for filing on July 23, 1985 under number 546526 I have applied to have the said design registered as a trademark to be used in association with various clothing and accessories, household wares, novelty items, transportation and advertising and literature.
"11. Since September, 1985 I have been producing and selling T-Shirts and baseball caps incorporating my copyrighted designs and on or about December 28, 1985 I received a letter on the letterhead of 'Expo 86', over the signature of Bruce Woolley described as corporate solicitor.
"12. In the said letter I was advised that 'Expo 86 is the trademark of the Expo 86 Corporation and its unauthorized use is strictly prohibited'."
[7]
It may be noted that, through his then solicitors, the applicant must have received another letter - this one from an examiner in the trademarks office - bearing file no. 546,526, and dated February 25, 1986. The letter is too long to be fully recited here, but selected passages run as follows:
"The mark which is the subject of this application is considered by s. 9(1)(n)(iii) of the Trade Marks Act, by reason of GC 1-99-388 Nos. 1515 to 1519 inclusive (copies attached). Therefore in view of the provisions of s. 12(1)(e) of the Trade Marks Act, this mark does not appear registrable.
"The mark which is the subject of this application is considered to be confusing with the registered trademark Nos. 306,792; 309,934 and 309,935 identified on the attached copies.
"In view of the provisions of s. 12(1)(d) of the Trade Marks Act, this mark does not appear registrable.
"Having regard to the provisions of s. 16 of the Trade Marks Act, the applicant herein does not appear to be the person entitled to registration, since the date of filing namely July 23, 1985 of the instant application is subsequent to the date of filing namely July 10, 1984; September 21, 1984; October 26, 1984 and March 12, 1985 disclosed in the attached copies of co-pending and confusing application Nos. 524,965; 528,811; 530,719; 538,155 and 538,157.
"[Serial No. 524,965 was published in the Trade Marks Journal on October 9, 1985 and has been opposed by The Molson Companies Limited and also by Joyce R. Delus. Serial No. 528,811 was published in the Trade Marks Journal on October 9, 1985 and allowed on December 13, 1985. Serials Nos. 538,155 and 538,157 have been approved and will appear in the Trade Marks Journal on or about April 23, 1986.]
....
"Having regard to ss. 12(1)(a), 12(1)(b) and 34 of the Trade Marks Act, paragraph 3 of this application should have read, 'The applicant disclaims the right to the exclusive use of the words VANCOUVER, B.C., BRANKO MIHALJEVIC, and INTERNATIONAL and to the representations of the maps apart from the trademark'.
....
"Although no colour claim was included in the application (as is required) you have indicated that a colour claim is desired. There is no provision in the Trade Marks Act or Trade Marks Rules for such a complex colour claim; any colour claim should fall within the scope of rule 32(3) of the Trade Marks Rules and a description of the colour(s) claimed must be incorporated in the application. In this case it would seem that no colour claim should have been made; this would permit the use of the trademark in any colour or combination of colours or shades desired by the applicant.
"The drawings furnished with this application are not acceptable since they exceed the size requirement (i.e. 2 3/4 in. by 2 3/4 in.) stipulated in rule 32(1). Furthermore the symbol c representing copyright material should not have been included on the drawing as it does not properly form part of a trademark."
A copy of the foregoing letter is annexed as Exhibit "H" to Ms. Mutala's affidavit.
[8]
The applicant's affidavit continues:
"13. All of my souvenirs clearly identify the manufacturer and all of my said designs are distinctive and purely of my creation and are not copies of any designs created by Expo 86 Corporation or others.
"14. I have searched the Trade Mark Journals and am advised by my solicitor, William F. Murray, that he has done a trademark search revealing that the respondent is the registered owner, inter alia, of the trademarks 'Expo', 'Expo 86' and '86' and I am further advised by my said solicitor that only The Royal Bank of Canada and Specialty Manufacturing Ltd. are registered as licensed users of the said trademarks.
"15. In all my searches, checking and viewing of souvenirs I have not found anywhere the word marks 'Expo', 'Expo 86' or '86' are used to distinguish the wares of the respondent from others.
....
"17. I have seen the words 'Expo 86' with and without the designation 'TM' on the packing and wares of various manufacturers and now shown to me and marked Exhibit 'C' to this my affidavit are photocopies of the following items bearing the word mark 'Expo 86': [list, (a) through (m)].
"18. I have seen numerous brochures and advertisements for the wares and services of various persons using the word marks 'Expo 86', 'Expo' or '86' and now shown to me and marked Exhibit 'D' to this my affidavit are photocopies of the following brochures and advertisements using word marks 'Expo', 'Expo 86' or '86': [list, (a) through (ff), with subitems].
"19. I have seen billboards around the City of Vancouver advertising Canadian Pacific Airline flights using the words 'Expo 86' to promote that airlines's flight services.
"20. I have heard advertisements on the radio for tuxedo rentals by Classy Wear Shops using the words 'Expo 86' to promote their rentals of evening wear.
"21. I have seen a banner on the side of Andy's Restaurant on Davie and Thurlow Streets in Vancouver using the words 'Expo 86' to promote that restaurant.
"22. I have noticed that cars sold by Wolfe Chevrolet Olds carry Expo 86 stickers advertising Wolfe Chev Olds and I have noticed that all renewal licence plates bear an Insurance Corporation of British Columbia sticker of Expo 86.
"23. [hearsay]
"24. [hearsay, but continues] ... now shown to me and marked Exhibit 'E' to this my affidavit is an article from the February 20, 1986 Sun that says that Jerry Ruddock is one of seven persons that have purchased the rights to the use of Expo 86 on novelties for 25% of his gross profits from Ace Novelty Ltd., the American parent of Specialty Manufacturing Ltd.
"25. I see the words 'Expo 86' innumerable times daily in all of Vancouver's newspapers and magazines and for several weeks the Province described itself as 'Your Expo Newspaper'.
"26. Now shown to me and attached hereto and marked Exhibit 'G' to this my affidavit is an announcement in the Expo 86 Information Manual of November 15, 1985 announcing that various B.C. Wineries were given the right to use labels bearing the Expo 86 symbol and an announcement in the Expo 86 Manual of September 16, 1985 announcing that Canadian Pacific Airlines Limited was given the right to paint four of its airplanes with the Expo 86 name and logo.
"27. [no such paragraph in affidavit]
"28. Now shown to me and attached hereto and marked Exhibit 'H' to this my affidavit is an announcement in the Expo 86 Information Manual of September 18, 1985 announcing that the Expo logo will appear on millions of Lily cup products in hotels, hospitals, ferries and concession stands across Canada.
....
"30. I have visited various retail stores selling souvenirs described as 'Expo 86 Official Souvenirs' and have noted that, while the ball caps give no indication of the manufacturer or seller but only whether the said caps are made in Korea or Taiwan the T-Shirts and sweat shirts carry neck bank labels identifying a manufacturer or producer of the shirt as follows: [list, (a) through (j)].
....
"33. While travelling in the new light rapid transit system I noticed that the Stadium station identifies the stop as being 'Expo'.
"34. I make this affidavit in support of an application to have the Expo 86, Expo and 86 trademarks expunged from the Trademark Register."
[9]
Except for the words and numerals "Expo 86" and "86" if one ignores the globe designs constituting the round loops of those numerals, one is struck by the dissimilarity of the applicant's device from any such other device - and in particular the pertinent three - for which the respondent holds the aforementioned registered marks. The applicant's drawing of the planet's globe with not one, but two, Saturn-like parallel rings straddling this planet's equator makes up in distinctiveness whatever it may lack in aesthetics: it is quite unlike the respondent's impugned marks. On the other hand, the respondent's most prevalent mark is a contrived design of "86" which makes the loops look like a triple-looped pretzel, or again, makes the whole design look like a stylized shamrock tipped 135
o
to the left from the vertical stance on its stem.
[10]
However, the focus of this litigation is the three registered marks which the applicant claims ought to be expunged. All three are registered in the name of "The Government of British Columbia, as represented by the Ministry of Tourism, and its exclusive agent, Expo 86 Corporation". (Exhibit "E" to Catherine Mutala's affidavit.)
[11]
The "Government of British Columbia" does not, of course, refer to any partisan political group per se, but rather to the operating authority in which vests all the honour, dignity, property, governmental responsibilities of the provincial State which is British Columbia. The Head of State and nominal defendant or respondent in proceedings at law is Her Majesty the Queen in Right of the Province of British Columbia, according to s. 7 of the Crown Proceeding Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 86.
[12]
The other registrant of the trademarks is "Expo 86 Corporation", designated as exclusive agent of the provincial government in the three registered trademarks. On February 12, 1981, the Transpo 86 Corporation Act, S.B.C. 1980, c. 59, came into force. This provincial enactment created a corporation called the Transpo 86 Corporation which was charged with the planning, organizing, holding and administering of the 1986 world exposition in Vancouver. It was legislated to be a nonprofit agency of the Crown in Right of British Columbia. The incorporating statute was amended by the Transpo 86 Corporation Amendment Act, S.B.C. 1982, c. 31, to which Royal Assent was accorded on June 7, 1982. The amendment was made because, around the end of September, 1981, the Corporation's directors had resolved to adopt the word "Expo" and the number "86" and discontinued the use of the word "Transpo". (Affidavit of Bruce D. Woolley, the corporation's solicitor.)
[13]
So, the three impugned registered trademarks were and are owned concurrently by two registrants who, or which, are in reality only different emanations of one. According to the Interpretation Act, R.S.B.C. 1979, c. 206, s. 29 "government of British Columbia" means Her Majesty in Right of the province. The Crown and its agent, the Expo 86 Corporation, are the registrants who are metaphysically one and the same, if not also legally so for present purposes. Her Majesty in Right of British Columbia, having relied upon the provisions of a law of Canada, is properly impleaded here.
[14]
Of the three registered trademarks, the respondent has given notice and purportedly adopted two of them as official marks pursuant to s. 9 of the Trade Marks Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. T-10. That section prohibits any person from adopting in connection with a business, as a trademark or otherwise, any mark consisting of, or so nearly resembling as to be likely mistaken for royal, national, provincial, territorial or civic arms, badges, crests and the like, of which public notice of their adoption and use, and internationally recognized flags, signs or symbols such as those of the Red Cross and Red Crescent. But, where notice of adoption and use by Her Majesty, any public authority or university is given, the subject badge, crest, emblem or mark becomes the exclusive official mark of the authority so requesting notice to be given by the Registrar of Trademarks.
[15]
Section 9, supporting public order as it does, places public authorities, not least of which is the Crown in a particularly invulnerable redoubt in regard to the subject matter. Instructive is what was written by Mr. Justice Cattanach, of this court, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . There, the appellant was established by provincial legislation to be an agent of Her Majesty the Queen in Right of British Columbia. It derived its powers, purposes and functions from the statute which created it. At p. 679 (F.C.), Cattanach, J., is reported thus:
"The board of directors consisting of the Minister and other members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council met on November 9, 1973 and by bylaw adopted the 'Autoplan symbol' and the appellant apparently proceeded to use that symbol in association with the services it performs.
"There is no question that this use is the same use as a trademark use. A trademark is an asset and by virtue of the statute incorporating the appellant the assets and property of the appellant are assets and property of Her Majesty in the right of the Province.
"It was within the competence of the board of directors of the appellant to enact the bylaw it did. Thus the mark was derived from and sanctioned by persons in office and hence was authorized and authoritative precisely within the meaning of the word 'official'.
"The mark was self-bestowed but that is what this particular public authority was enabled to do and similar powers are bestowed on many public authorities.
"The mark so adopted falls within the dictionary meaning of the word 'official' and therefore is an 'official mark' within the meaning of these words.
"This I think the Registrar accepts."
The status and powers of that appellant were closely similar to those of the Expo 86 Corporation here. Cattanach, J., gave his interpretation of that provision of law, subparagraph 9(1)(n)(iii), which is most germane to the case at bar, in writing this, reported at pp. 683 and 684 (F.C.):
"Section 9 is a prohibition against the adoption in connection with a business, as a trademark or otherwise, the list set forth in the section.
"Basically they are the arms, crests, standards, flags, words, symbols, heraldic emblems, signs, badges and like indicia associated with Her Majesty, the Royal Family, the Governor General, the Government of Canada, the Provinces of Canada and certain named public bodies, domestic and foreign. Section 11 prohibits the use of the devices which s. 9 prohibits the adoption of.
"The logical consequence of the prohibition of the adoption and use of any mark as a trademark or otherwise consisting of or resembling any of the devices mentioned in s. 9 is to reserve to the person and bodies mentioned the exclusive user of those devices.
"That is the basic scheme of the section to be derived from its language.
"The same applies to the arms, crest or flag adopted or used by Canada, and any province or municipality in Canada of which those authorities may have requested the Registrar to give notice. The purpose is to grant an exclusive use to these authorities. That is the logical converse of the prohibition.
"The same, too, applies, to any badge, crest, emblem or mark adopted and used by Her Majesty's Forces, any university or by any public authority in Canada as an official mark for wares or services.
"Clearly s. 9(1)(n)(iii) contemplates the use of an official mark which a public authority has seen fit to adopt to be a use exclusive to that authority. The purpose of the Registrar giving public notice of the adoption and use of an official mark is to alert the public to that adoption as an official mark by the public authority to prevent infringement of that official mark. It does not, in my view, for the reasons previously expressed bestow upon the Registrar any supervisor functions."
One might differ from Mr. Justice Cattanach's views about the Registrar's power of supervision if only in regard to verification of the authenticity of the putative public authority who, or which, requests the Registrar to publish the notices. Again, assuming such authenticity be verified, one must think of the unthinkable. It is, no doubt, unthinkable, but if the government of British Columbia were to seek an official mark falsely implying that west coast seafood products were processed and packed in Newfoundland, the Registrar would be obliged to decline the request on a matter of public order. Again, if an official mark were so composed as to express an obscenity in the other official language, the Registrar would be obliged to decline to publish the notice. Again, and always, the consideration is one of public order. In any such case, the public authority requesting publication of such notice could apply to this court to resolve the dispute. Such is the independence of the Canadian judiciary that even the Queen (in an institutional rôle, at least) participates in litigation in her courts.
[16]
The conclusions drawn by Cattanach, J., in the Insurance Corp'n of B.C. case may seem to be somewhat draconian, but they have stood since October, 1979, without being demonstrated to be erroneous. At p. 684 ([1980] 1 F.C.), they appear, thus:
"I fully realize the consequences. A public authority may embark upon a venture of supplying wares and services to the public and in so doing adopt an official mark. Having done so then all other persons are precluded from using that mark and, as a result of doing so, on its own initiative, the public authority can appropriate unto itself the mark so adopted and used by it without restriction or control other than its own conscience and the ultimate will of the electorate expressed by the method available to it.
"That, in my opinion, is the intention of Parliament which follows from the language of s. 9 of the Act and that is the policy which Parliament, in its omnipotent wisdom, has seen fit to implement by legislation.
"I do not understand what right a court of justice has to entertain an opinion of a positive law upon any ground of political expediency. I think, when the meaning of a statute is plain and clear, the court has nothing to do with its policy or impolicy, its justice of injustice. The legislature is to decide upon political expediency and if it has made a law which is not politically expedient the proper way of disposing of that law is by an Act of the legislature, not by a decision of the court. If the meaning of the statute is plain and clear a court has nothing to do but to obey it - to administer the law as the court finds it. To do otherwise is to abandon the office of judge and to assume the province of legislation.
"If the true intention of Parliament was not as I have found it to be so expressed in s. 9 of the Trade Marks Act then the remedy lies in Parliament to express its true intention in clear and unequivocal language."
[17]
Thus it is apparent that the "official mark" is hardy and virtually unexpungeable. Indeed Cattanach, J., at p. 685 (F.C.), gave examples of highly descriptive marks which, were they not "official", would have to be held to be unregistrable by virtue of paragraph 12(1)(b) of the Trade Marks Act. Such were "Canada Savings Bonds", "T.V. Ontario", "British Columbia Games" and a stylized "Nepean", "and a host of others numbering in the hundreds". He added that these circumstances do not detract from the conclusion that if s. 12 were applicable, those "official marks" would not be registrable. So, the status and privilege of the "official mark" override the provisions of s. 12.
[18]
Insofar as the holder of an "official mark" be the Sovereign, by whatever designation of The Queen, the Crown, the Governor-in-Council, the Government of Canada, or of British Columbia, or any other province, or their respective statutory agents, no person can assert the right of equality in law. So it can be taken as established in the following jurisprudence:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.(3d) 134, per Tarnopolsky, J.A., at page 145  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. Thus when s. 9 of the Trade Marks Act levies its prohibition in terms of "no person" adopting "in connection with a business, as a trademark or otherwise, any" [official] "mark", the expression "no person" levies no prohibition against Her Majesty, the respondent herein, whether or not described as the Government of British Columbia, nor against her agent, Expo 86 Corporation. Expressed in other words, the Government of British Columbia (or any other province), the respondent or her statutory agent may indeed adopt in connection with a business, as a trademark or otherwise, its, her or their own lawful official mark or official marks. The same conclusion applies to the provisions of s. 11.
[19]
There is no reason shown in law why a registered trademark of Her Majesty's government cannot stand validly in the shadow of, or be subsumed or buttressed by, Her Majesty's, one of her governments', or one of her statutory agents' prior official marks. Section 12 of the Act does not provide any such reason.
"12(1) Subject to s. 13 [not applicable here], a trademark is registrable if it is not ...
(e) a mark of which the adoption is prohibited by s. 9 or 10 [10 n/a here]."
Of course, as demonstrated above, a trademark registered to Her Majesty, her agent or the government is not one whose adoption is prohibited by s. 9, under which it might be an identical official mark.
[20]
Two of the three impugned registered trademarks, "Expo" Registered as No. 306,272, and "Expo 86" Registered as No. 306,792, are buttressed by prior official marks which refer to the event, the exposition which then was to be held in 1986. "Expo" alone or stylized by design is certainly distinctive, and was so as of the date of institution of these proceedings, and is unexceptionable; and "Expo 86" alone or stylized by design is also distinctive, was so, and is unexceptionable.
[21]
The two marks "Expo" and "Expo 86" are not rendered invalid pursuant to s. 18 of the Act. In one specific aspect, not to derogate from the generality of the foregoing finding, the court finds on all the evidence that those two marks were indeed distinctive at the time at which these proceedings were commenced. They do not offend paragraph 18(1)(b) of the Act.
[22]
"86" stylized by design, as in the tipped shamrock or pretzel configuration or in combination with "Expo", is equally distinctive, and was so, and is unexceptionable; but 86 in plain numerals is unregistrable and ought to be expunged. Even if plain "86" were promoted as an official mark it would go against public order to accord a monopoly even to the Sovereign or to a government over the mere numerals "86", which designate a year in the life of the world which simply must be lived or endured and cannot be avoided by the living. Too many corporations and too many models of automobiles and other machines and wares of all kinds will unavoidably need "86" in their designations and advertising to permit it to be sterilized by a trademark monopoly. Public order demands that "86" be freely usable by all in numeral form without having to render it into the words "eighty-six" or "quatre-vingt-six". Registering "86" is akin to recording a monopoly by registration of definite articles, "the" or "le" or "la", or the numeral "l", or any of the natural sequence of Arabic, if not Roman, numerals. They belong to all, the numerals and the numerical expression of the passing years. Since "86" and its companions belong to the public, it is a matter of public order that they be accessible. Since this mark was never registrable, it was clearly not registrable as of its date of registration, as asserted in paragraph 18(1)(a) of the Act. Trademark "86", Registration No. 307,702 shall be expunged.
[23]
A trademark is a species of property and the taxpayers through the Government of British Columbia have incurred considerable expense to protect their Crown corporation's property in the registered, and eminently registrable, trademarks "Expo" and "Expo 86". The court finds, upon sifting through the evidence and hearkening to the arguments, that the applicant, despite the volume of paper he has tendered, has not discharged the burden of proof or persuasion required for expungement of these two marks. In addition, the very widespread ingrained popular knowledge of the historic succession of world exposition's militates against the applicant's case. Expo 86 in Vancouver was, and is, no exception.
[24]
The respondent's counsel tried to demonstrate that the applicant is not a "person interested" within the meaning of ss. 2 and 57 of the Trade Marks Act. Branko Mihaljevic rightly and reasonably apprehends that he may be affected by the register entries he seeks to have expunged. After all in suit No. C861068 of the Vancouver Registry of the Supreme Court of British Columbia he is being pursued by Her Majesty the Queen in Right of the Province of British Columbia and Expo 86 Corporation for passing off, and he has been enjoined from manufacture and commerce in wares in association with "Expo 86", an injunction upheld by Esson, J.A., of the Provincial Court of Appeal on July 7, 1986, in CA005871, Vancouver Registry. It is recalled that in the copy of the trademark examiner's letter (Ex. H to C. Mutala's affidavit sworn October 28, 1986), the applicant's attempt to obtain trademark registration of his own design was "considered to be confusing with the registered trademark Nos. 306,792 ... identified on the attached copies". In view of the above factors and this court's earlier judgment in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the court finds, despite the respondent's best efforts, that the applicant does indeed evince standing as a "person interested" in the premises.
[25]
Since success in these proceedings is divided between the parties, there will be no award of costs. Except in regard to registered trademark "86", No. 307,702, the applicant's originating motion for an order that the three entries in the register be struck out, or expunged, is dismissed. Registered trademarks "Expo", No. 306,272, and "Expo 86", No. 306,792, are not to be struck out, but are found to be valid and subsisting. Registered trademark "86", No. 307,702, is to be struck out as having been, and being, unregistrable for reasons of public order.
Application allowed in part.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]