[1]
Martin, J.
: This matter came on for hearing at Toronto, Ontario on March 10, 1986. The applicants apply, under s. 18 of the Federal Court Act, for a writ of certiorari quashing the decision of the Canadian Immigration official refusing the applicant Sing Lee's application for permanent residence in Canada on the grounds that his son, the applicant Hon Man Lee did not meet the medical requirements for immigrants. Application is also made for a writ of mandamus directing that Sing Lee's application be considered in accordance with the Immigration Act, 1976 and the Immigration Regulations, 1978 and that the respondents determine, independently of the deafness of Hon Man Lee, whether it would be contrary to the Act and Regulations to grant landing to Sing Lee and his dependents.
[2]
The issue in this application is the manner in which the medical officers of the Medical Services Branch of Health and Welfare Canada assessed Hon Man Lee as a member of an inadmissible class in that he was a deaf-mute whose admission into Canada would or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands upon health or social services.
[3]
Early in 1984, the applicant Sing Lee of Hong Kong made an application for permanent residence in Canada for himself and four of his children, one of whom was the applicant Hon Man Lee who was born in June 1967.
[4]
On June 26, 1984, a Dr. Fu, to whom Hon Man Lee had been referred by the Canadian authorities, completed his medical report for Canadian immigration. He reported that Hon Man Lee was a congenital deaf-mute of dull normal development who presents himself well in dress and manner, whose signature is above average hand writing, who has been attending a deaf-mute school and whose mother advised was doing very well in school.
[5]
After reviewing that brief report Dr. Webster, a medical officer for the purposes of the Immigration Act, completed a Medical Report For Canadian Immigration on June 28, 1984 (the "Medical Report") which included a medical profile (to which reference will later be made) and the following observation
"Applicant has a severe personal handicap that may well impede his ability to maintain an independent life. He is considered to be inadmissible.
DIAGNOSIS:
Deaf-Mutism (congenital, aetiology unknown)"
[6]
Dr. Webster also indicated in the Medical Report that he wanted a report from Hon Man Lee's own doctor concerning the disability as well as a report from the appropriate school authorities and on June 28, 1984, he wrote to Hon Man Lee as follows:
"MEDICAL CONFIDENTIAL Our Ref: HHK-139920
Mr. Lee Hon Man
9 San Kung St.,
G/F., Sheung Shui,
N.T.
Date: 28 June 1984
"Dear Sir
"Before we can complete the processing of your medical examination for entry to Canada we require the following further information:
1) A report from your own doctor to include cause/history, diagnosis, results of investigations, treatment, and prognosis for: - deaf-mutism.
2) A report from the appropriate school authorities concerning the applicant's intellectual and social level of function, his scholastic progress to date and prognosis for eventual social independence and employment.
"Would you please present this letter to your own doctor to act as our request. The report(s), once completed, should be mailed directly to the following address
Zone Director
Medical Services
Commission for Canada
P.O. Box 20264
Hong Kong
Yours sincerely,
Sgd. (P. Webster)
Zone Director
Asia Pacific Zone
Medical Services
Commission for Canada
Hong Kong
PSW/wt"
[7]
On July 31, 1984, Mr. Ng, the Principal of the Hong Kong Mongkok Lutheran School for the Deaf, reported to Dr. Webster as follows
"July 31, 1984.
"Your Ref: HHK-133920
Our Ref: 77256
MLSD/Zone Director,
Asia Pacific Zone,
Medical Services,
Commission for Canada,
P.O. Box 20264,
Hong Kong.
"Dear Sir,
Re: LEE Hon-man
"Refer to your letter dated June 28, 1984 to Mr. LEE Hon-man, our student, I am pleased to give you the following information.
"Hon-man was admitted to study P.1 in our school since Sept. 1977. Now he has just finished Middle one in this summer. During the past seven years, Hon-man achieved outstanding performance in his academic studies. In classroom, he is very attentive; initiative to learn; eager to discuss with teachers and classmates when he has queries and willing to co-operate with others. On the whole, his academic progress in the past was excellent.
"Concerning his social level of function, Hon-man is a responsible young man with potential leadership. He is willing to help his classmates when they have problems. He can promote class activities with harmonious atmosphere. In addition to his cleverness, initiative and independence, we believe that Hon-man can adjust to the new environment very well provided enough support and guidance are given by his family.
Yours faithfully,
Sgd. (K.W.Ng)
K.W. Ng
Principal
KWN/cmh"
[8]
On August 3, 1984, Hon Man Lee's own doctor, Dr. Wu, reported to Dr. Webster as follows:
"August 3, 1984
"Zone Director
Medical Services
Commission for Canada
P.O. Box 20264
Hong Kong
"Dear Sirs:
Re: Mr. Lee Hon Man, Male, DOB 18/6/67 H.K.I.D. No. C-506671
"I had been asked to see the above named who was in the process of applying for entrance into Canada.
"He is a case of congenital deaf-mutism with severe loss of hearing since birth. The exact cause of this may not be definitely identified now. The mother had denied any significant material illness during pregnancy. One thing to rule out is endolymphatic hydrops in congenital syphilis. In this respect a venerologist's opinion should throw some light. As the deafness had been present long before the critical age of speech and language development at around the first two years in life, this faculty is grossly deficient in Mr. Lee.
"All through his childhood and teens he had been placed in special schools where he received his education.
"His physical development, however, is quite normal and he is quite capable of looking after himself.
"The wearing of a hearing aid is of limited value and the means by which he communicate with other people is essentially by lip-reading as well as hand signals.
"
Concerning his intellectual level and functions in relationship with social life and employment a qualified psychologist should give the best possible opinion.
Sincerely yours,
Sgd. (P. Wu)
Philip Wu
PW:ls"
(Underlining added.)
[9]
Dr. Webster accepted the suggestion made by Dr. Wu and on September 27, 1984, he wrote to Hon Man Lee in the following terms
"MEDICAL CONFIDENTIAL
Our Ref: HHK-139920
MR. LEE HON MAN
9 SAN KUNG ST.,
G/F., SHEUNG SHUI,
N.T.
Date: 27 Sept 84
"Dear Sir
"Before we can complete the processing of your medical examination for entry to Canada we require the following further information: -
"A report from a psychologist following appropriate clinical assessment, concerning the level of social and intellectual development attained.
"Would you please present this letter to your own doctor to act as our request. The report(s), once completed, should be mailed directly to the following address
Zone Director
Medical Services
Commission for Canada
P.O. Box 20264
Hong Kong
Yours sincerely,
Sgd. (P. Webster)
Zone Director
Asia Pacific Zone
Medical Services
Commission for Canada
Hong Kong
PSW/wt"
[10]
In response to this request Dr. Lam Choh Ming, a Hong Kong psychiatrist, examined Hon Man Lee on October 8, 1984 and on October 9, provided the following report to Dr. Webster
"Psychiatric Report on Mr. Lee Hon Man, Aged 17 years
9th October, 1984.
"I saw Mr. Lee Hon Man on 8th October, 1984. I have also interviewed his mother and have talked to Miss Lau Wai-Yee, his classmistress at the School for the Deaf, as well.
"Patient is a full term normal spontaneous delivery, and his developmental milestones were normal except for speech development and hearing. He was first noticed to be deaf at age of 2 years, but E.N.T. specialists told his mother that patient's deafness was congenital. Patient was almost totally deaf in his left ear, but he retained a useful range of hearing in his right ear which enabled him to benefit from hearing aid devices satisfactorily. With hearing aid devices, he was able to hear ordinary conversations. However due to his hearing impairment, his speech development was also impaired. He is now studying at Form 2 in a School for the deaf, and Form 2 in this Special school is roughly equivalent in academic standard to Primary 5 or 6 in an ordinary school. Patient has always been an excellent student. Every year, he was always among the top 3 students in the class as regards to academic excellence. His conduct has always been excellent too. He is always willing to help other people, is hard-working, and has a good power of self-restraint so that he never makes any troubles in the school and at home. He is also actively involved in many extra-curricular activities, including sports and other outdoor activities. He mixed well with his classmates, siblings and friends. His mother reported that patient very often brought his classmates home at weekends and holidays and he appeared to be well-liked by all his friends. He is always good-tempered.
"On psychiatric examination, patient looked quiet and calm. He wore a hearing aid and was able to understand questions put to him in Cantonese. However his spoken language is difficult to understand, although he could express his feelings and ideas well by written languages in Chinese. His power of concentration was satisfactory. His intelligence is within normal limits. He did not exhibit any delusion, hallucination or other psychotic symptoms. His affect was also normal. His memory was also normal.
"In my opinion, patient is suffering from bilateral deafness probably since birth, with the consequent impaired speech development. The deafness can be satisfactorily overcome with hearing aid devices. His spoken language is impaired, but he can use written language, signs and gestures and other methods for communications. His intelligence is intact. His social development is also good. I am further of the opinion that patient should be arranged to continue his study in a Special School for the Deaf, rather than in an ordinary school, and that speech therapy may be helpful to improve patient's spoken language. Patient does not show any significant social or psychological maladjustment.
Sgd. (C.M. Lam)"
[11]
Before referring to the operative medical report upon which Sing Lee's application for permanent residence in Canada was rejected, it would be helpful to first refer to the relevant sections of the Act and Regulations.
[12]
Part III of the Act deals with inadmissible classes of persons seeking entry into Canada. Section 19(1)(a) of Part III is relevant to this application and provides as follows
"19.(1) No person shall be granted admission if he is a member of any of the following classes:
(a) persons who are suffering from any disease, disorder, disability or other health impairment as a result of the nature, severity or probable duration of which, in the opinion of a medical officer concurred in by at least one other medical officer,
(i) they are or are likely to be a danger to public health or to public safety, or
(ii) their admission would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services;"
[13]
Section 22 of the Regulations contain specific directions to medical officers in the following terms
"Section 22
22. For the purpose of determining whether any person is or is likely to be a danger to public health or to public safety or whether the admission of any person would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services, the following factors shall be considered by a medical officer in relation to the nature severity or probable duration of any disease, disorder, disability or other health impairment from which the person is suffering, namely,
(a) any reports made by a medical practitioner with respect to the person;
(b) the degree to which the disease, disorder, disability or other impairment may be communicated to other persons;
(c) whether medical surveillance is required for reasons of public health;
(d) whether sudden incapacity or unpredictable or unusual behaviour may create a danger to public safety;
(e) whether the supply of health or social services that the person may require in Canada is limited to such an extent that
(i) the use of such services by the person might reasonably be expected to prevent or delay provision of those services to Canadian citizens or permanent residents, or
(ii) the use of such services may not be available or accessible to the person;
(f) whether medical care or hospitalization is required;
(g) whether potential employability or productivity is affected; and
(h) whether prompt and effective medical treatment can be provided."
[14]
In addition to those provisions Employment and Immigration Canada has prepared an Immigration Manual for the guidance of its officials, including its medical officers, which, among other matters, contains detailed guidelines of the basic medical criteria for completing the medical profile contained in the Medical Notification to Employment and Immigration Commission (the "Medical Notification") to be completed by the two medical officers and submitted to it.
[15]
The Medical Notification as contemplated by s. 19(1)(a) of the Act upon which the Lee family's application for permanent residence in Canada was rejected is the joint report of the medical officers, Dr. Webster and Dr. Ferrari dated August 14, 1984, as to Dr. Webster's signature and November 13, 1984, as to Dr. Ferrari's and is duplicated in this order as Appendix "A".
[16]
Of significance in the Medical Notification is the medical profile and the narrative. The medical profile is given in coded numbers which are referrable to the detailed "Outline of Basic Medical Criteria" contained in the Immigration Manual to which reference has already been made. The meaning assigned to the numbers of Hon Man Lee's medical profile are as follows
"H1 - No risk to public health due to communicable diseases, or to public safety.
D2 - Requires or may well require regular medical care but not more than a minimum of hospitalization.
T5 - No effective treatment exists or is available.
S1 - No surveillance required.
E3 - Employable or productive under permanently restricted conditions. A narrative statement is necessary with this factor.
E5 - Unemployable or unproductive.
M7 - Inadmissible (health or social services).
Has a condition which cause excessive demands on health or social services, and is not likely to respond to treatment. Inadmissible as A19(1)(a)(ii) applies."
[17]
The narrative contained in the Medical Notification required as a result of the E3 designation is as follows
"Applicant has a serious handicap that may well impede his ability to maintain an independent life. He is considered to be inadmissible.
DIAGNOSIS:
Deaf-Mutism (congenital, aetiology unknown)."
[18]
In this respect I note that both the numerical designation and the narrative contained in Dr. Webster's August 14, 1984, Medical Notification are precisely the same as contained in his June 28, 1984, Medical Report which was completed before he could have considered the subsequent reports of Dr. Wu, Mr. Ng or Dr. Ming and at which time Dr. Webster had only the benefit of Dr. Fu's report. Of course there is no intrinsic reason why these two medical assessments should differ, but in the light of the several reports which followed Dr. Fu's report of June 26, 1984, there were certainly grounds for some changes in Dr. Webster's original medical assessment.
[19]
There was, for example, no indication in any of the reports that Hon Man Lee would require any hospitalization. The fact that he would require support and guidance from his family in order to adjust to his new environment in Canada and that he might better improve his quality of speech by attending a special school for the deaf instead of an ordinary school does not support the D2 designation that he "requires or may well require regular medical care but not more than a minimum of hospitalization".
[20]
Similarly, the T5 conclusion that "no effective medical treatment exists or is available" does not seem warranted, at least if one assumes that his defects are deafness, which Dr. Ming considered could be satisfactorily overcome with respect to the right ear by the use of hearing aid devices, and the consequent deficiency in his spoken language, which he considered could be helped by means of speech therapy.
[21]
More significant, however is the dual E3 and E5 designation to the effect that Hon Man Lee is both "employable and productive under permanently restricted conditions" and "unemployable and unproductive". Perhaps the imagination can be stretched to eliminate the apparent incompatibility of these designations, but in the light of the optimistic report of his school principal and the normal, apart from partial deafness and speech difficulty, report from the psychiatrist, an E2 designation
"Employable and productive under restrictive conditions at present, but likely to become fully employable or productive during the near future. A narrative statement is necessary with this factor."
would appear to have been more appropriate.
[22]
Finally there is the M7 designation that he is inadmissible due to "a condition which cause excessive demands on health or social services and which is not likely to respond to treatment". Not only is it difficult to find support in the reports for this designation, but the report of Dr. Ming appears to be to the contrary. More consistent with the medical reports and, at the same time a very conservative designation, would seem to be the M3 designation which provides as follows
"Conditional (health or social services)
Has a condition for which the potential demand on health or social services is not sufficient to exclude admission under A19(1)(ii), but which risk should be considered in relation to other personal and social criteria."
[23]
Along with the reservations which I have with respect to the appropriateness of the M7 designation in the light of the reports requested by Dr. Webster is the question of the basis on which Doctors Webster and Ferrari came to the conclusion, pursuant to s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the Act, that Hon Man Lee's disability might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services. That is to say, given Hon Man Lee's disability, how did the two doctors arrive at the conclusion that the disability would cause excessive demands on health or social services.
[24]
There is nothing in the record to indicate how Dr. Webster might have come to this conclusion. There are, however, two affidavits which bear on the conclusion to which Dr. Ferrari came. The first is her own affidavit sworn on January 13, 1986, the relevant paragraphs which are as follows
"5. On the basis of my review of the documentation attached hereto as Exhibit A, I concluded Hon Man Lee suffers from congenital deaf mutism and a severe hearing loss, that Hon Man Lee's ability to speak is grossly deficient because of his deafness during the critical age for language and speech development and that, while Hon Man Lee has benefitted from several years of training in a school for the deaf in China and can lip read and communicate by sign language in Chinese, he will require further specialized language and vocational training.
"6. On the basis of advice from Mrs. S. Carroll-Thomas, the Director of Communication Disorders at the Royal Ottawa Rehabilitation Centre, I concluded that Hon Man Lee would probably require two (2) years of specialized training in Canada before he would possess the language and vocational skills necessary for him to be competitive in the open labour market.
"7. In view of the number of persons in Canada who are waiting to receive the type of specialized training which, in my opinion, Hon Man Lee would require, it is my further opinion that the admission of Hon Man Lee would add further to the number who need but, because of excess demand, cannot now obtain such specialized training, thus creating an even greater demand on health and social services."
[25]
Exhibit "A" attached to Dr. Ferrari's affidavit contains the following reports:
Mr. Ng - July 31, 1984,
Dr. Wu - August 3, 1984,
Dr. Ming - October 9, 1984,
The Medical Notification, August 14, 1984, and November 13, 1984.
[26]
The second affidavit is that of Diane C. Smith, a solicitor in the offices of counsel for the applicants, who on February 5, 1986, listened to a telephone conversation between Mrs. Carroll-Thomas and counsel for the applicants and who purported to report "the substance of the conversation that he had with her on an accurate word for word basis" as follows
"ROTENBERG: I would like to make some enquiries, a Dr. Ferrari spoke to you within the last month about a certain deaf child?
CARROLL-THOMAS: Oh Yes, I remember.
ROTENBERG: And the issue is what kind of specialized training was to be given to this deaf child if at all and I would just like to talk to you a little bit about that. First of all, did you have details of the child in question?
CARROLL-THOMAS: Very little, simply that he had learned some language with signing and appeared to be of normal intelligence, that is about all the information I have.
ROTENBERG: I see, I had spoke to Bob Rumball about this, I am sure you know who he is.
CARROLL-THOMAS: Yes, I do.
ROTENBERG: And he said that ...
CARROLL-THOMAS: I suggested to Dr. Ferrari that she get in touch with him.
ROTENBERG: I see, well the problem is that this child speaks very well, he is totally deaf and he speaks very well in international sign language and if that were the case, do you think he would need any training?
CARROLL-THOMAS: I don't know, I am really the wrong person to ask, you know, because we don't work a great deal with the deaf in this centre.
ROTENBERG: I see
CARROLL-THOMAS: Our primary input is in areas of brain damage and so Reverend Rumball would be in much better position to answer that question, I think.
ROTENBERG: I see, alright.
CARROLL-THOMAS: There is another person that you should perhaps talk to and if you want someone in Ottawa, that is Dr. Andrei Smith and the Children's Hospital.
ROTENBERG: Dr. Andrei Smith, eh, alright. Thank you very much. I am sorry to trouble you.
CARROLL-THOMAS: That is quite alright.
ROTENBERG: Thank you
CARROLL-THOMAS: Good-bye."
[27]
On the basis of these two affidavits I was invited to conclude that Dr. Ferrari had, on March 14, 1984, formed her opinion with respect to the demands which Hon Man Lee's entry into Canada would make upon the Canadian social system without the benefit of Mrs. Carroll-Thomas' advice and that it was only after the event, some time in January 1986, that Dr. Ferrari sought to buttress her earlier conclusions by consulting with Mrs. Carroll-Thomas.
[28]
While the affidavit evidence may point in that direction it is by no means conclusive and I am not prepared to make such a finding. Dr. Ferrari could have been cross-examined on her affidavit and counsel's suggestion could have been put to her. Counsel elected not to take that course and, having done so, he is not now in a position to impute misconduct on the basis of the inconclusive evidence which he intimates supports it.
[29]
Counsel for the applicants tendered additional medical reports by Dr. Tang (July 31, August 1, 1985) and Dr. Kline (May 27, 1985) relating, respectively to Hon Man Lee's educational and future planning assessment and the effect which his entry into Canada would have upon this country's medical and social services. In view of the decision at which I have arrived and the fact that these reports were not available to either Dr. Webster or Dr. Ferrari at the time the Medical Notification was completed, I do not regard them as relevant.
[30]
Counsel for the applicants also tendered the affidavit evidence of Reverend Rumball who claims to have some considerable experience in dealing with deaf persons in Canada. His evidence is helpful in that it raises the question of whether deafness should be considered as a medical problem, as it appears to be by the Canadian Immigration authorities, or as a disability which, as Reverend Rumball claims, has but a minimal effect on the employability or productivity of those who suffer from it. Once again, however, in view of the decision to which I have come, I do not consider his evidence relevant to the application.
[31]
Although the formal decision rejecting the application for permanent admission into Canada is the November 29, 1984, letter to the applicant Sing Lee by the Second Secretary of the Immigration Section of the Commission for Canada in Hong Kong, it is clear that the basis for refusing to approve the application is the Medical Notification completed by Doctors Webster and Ferrari. It is their decision to which I must look in order to determine the success or failure of the application in this matter.
[32]
The decisions made by Doctors Webster and Ferrari are administrative decisions and, while they may be subject to review by this court, the review is somewhat constrained. As I appreciate the jurisprudence, I may not quash their decision and substitute my own, nor may I direct them to reach any particular decision, for under the provisions of s. 19 of the Act it is the medical officers who are charged with that responsibility. (Mr. Justice Strayer in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  some limitations on medical officers in reaching the opinions which they express for the purpose of s. 19. If, for example, medical officers base their decision on matters which under the relevant statutory provisions they have no right to take into account their decision can be quashed on certiorari. (Mr. Justice Stone in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 693-4).
[34]
In the recent decision of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Mr. Justice MacGuigan had occasion to review a Medical Notification prepared pursuant to s. 19 of the Act and, having found inconcistencies in it to the point of incoherence, determined that it could not constitute the opinion of the medical officer for the purpose of s. 19 and set it aside.
[35]
In the present matter I have already expressed my reservations with respect to the internal inconsistencies contained in the numerically designated medical profile contained in the Medical Notification and the inconsistencies in the medical profile with the external medical reports. It is not necessary, however, for me to take the next step and find, as did Mr. Justice McGuigan, that the Medical Notification is so flawed on that account that it should be quashed for in my view there has been a more fundamental error which allows me to set it aside.
[36]
Medical officers are charged with the obligation under s. 22 of the Regulations of considering
"(a) Any reports made by a medical practitioner with respect to the person ..."
[37]
In this matter prior to the time that Dr. Ferrari made her decision on November 13, 1984, there were four reports with respect to Hon Man Lee made at the following times
Dr. Fu, June 26, 1984,
Mr. Ng, July 31, 1984,
Dr. Wu, August 3, 1984,
Dr Ming, October 9, 1984.
[38]
From paragraph 5 of her affidavit of June 13, 1986, it is apparent that Dr. Ferrari did not, as she was required to do, consider Dr. Fu's report of June 26, 1984. Although there is little in that report which would likely change her opinion, one cannot be certain. What is certain, however, is her duty to consider it.
[39]
Dr. Webster, on the other hand, did have Dr. Fu's report of June 26, 1984, and from his report of June 28, 1984, it is apparent that he gave consideration to it. At the time of completing his opinion as contained in the Medical Notification on August 14, 1984, Dr. Webster did not have Dr. Ming's report of October 9, 1984, and thus could not have considered it. It may be argued that Dr. Webster had no more obligation to consider Dr. Ming's report than he had to consider Dr. Tang's or Dr. Kline's reports which were made well after the event and which, in my view, are irrelevant to these proceedings. I would not accept that argument but instead take the contrary view that Dr. Ming's report, having been requested by Dr. Webster, was a report which he was obliged to consider prior to forming his opinion under s. 19 of the Act.
[40]
In reaching his non-judicial or administrative decision, even if Dr. Webster could escape the statutory obligation to consider Dr. Ming's report on the grounds that it was not in existence at the time he formed his opinion, he cannot escape the duty to act reasonably and fairly towards the applicant Hon Man Lee in considering his application. It will be remembered that in September 1984, Dr. Webster wrote to the applicant Hon Man Lee advising him that before the processing of his medical examination could be completed, a report from a psychologist would be required.
[41]
Having requested that report and having received it within two weeks there was, in my opinion, a duty upon Dr. Webster to consider it before he came to his conclusions with respect to Hon Man Lee's admissibility into Canada. There is nothing on the record to indicate that Dr. Webster ever considered this report. In fact, his medical opinion being dated August 14, 1984, there is every reason to believe that Dr. Webster did not consider Dr. Ming's report when he was considering Hon Man Lee's application.
[42]
Among the several documents tendered by counsel for the applicants were two which indicated that the Immigration Medical Services Branch has reassessed its guidelines for the classification of applicants under the Immigration Act who suffer from deafness. The revised guidelines directed to medical officers are dated July 1985 and thus were not applicable at the time Hon Man Lee's application was considered by either Dr. Webster of Dr. Ferrari. My decision is not based upon any alleged failure on the part of the medical officers to comply with the more enlightened treatment of the deaf required by the revised criteria, but instead it is based upon the narrow grounds of failure to comply with the mandatory provisions of the Regulations.
ORDER
[43]
Accordingly, the application must succeed and it is therefore ordered that
1) the decision of either or both of the respondents as disclosed in the letter of the Immigration Section of the Commission for Canada dated November 29, 1984, be, and it is hereby quashed,
2) the respondents and their officers and officials consider and process the applicants' application for permanent residence in Canada in accordance with the Immigration Act, 1976 and applicable Regulations and in so doing, consider all reports made by medical practitioners with respect to the applicant Hon Man Lee,
3) the applicants have the costs of this application.
[Appendix omitted. See original source.]
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]