[1]
Collier, J. [orally]
: This is a motion for judicial review, by way of certiorari, to quash a decision of the respondent, made January 3, 1986. That decision approved the application of one Ronald Morash to build a bridge and causeway at a certain location in St. Margaret's Bay, Halifax County, Nova Scotia. The approval was given pursuant to s. 5(1)(a) of the Navigable Waters Protection Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. N-19.
[2]
Morash commenced construction of his proposed causeway in September, 1985. Someone complained of his doing this without the required statutory approval. He then formally applied, on September 16, 1985, for the necessary approval. The appropriate departmental officers made some investigations. On September 18, 1985, they recommended to their superiors that the application be approved.
[3]
On September 25, 1985, Morash was notified he was required to deposit the plans for the structure in the local registry office, and to publish a notice in the Canada Gazette, and in the legal section of two newspapers.
[4]
Those requirements are called for by ss. 8(1) and 8(3) of the statute. The legislation is silent as to any method of inviting objections from interested parties, or a method of handling any objections.
[5]
The Minister, in this case, through his officials, apparently directed that the notice of application, to be published, contain the following:
"Written objections based on the effect of the work on marine navigation may be directed to: Director General, Aids and Waterways, Canadian Coast Guard, Department of Transport, Ottawa, Ontario."
[6]
The notice was published in local newspapers in the first week of October, 1985.
[7]
The applicant is the owner of property in St. Margaret's Bay.
[8]
On October 25, 1985, through its solicitor, the applicant wrote the Director General outlining specific objections to the proposed bridge and causeway. Some of the objections related to matters of marine navigation. Others related to environmental and ecological matters. Copies of the letter were sent to various government departments, including Environment and Fisheries. A copy was sent to Tom Bradley. He was a Navigable Waters Protection Act Officer who did the site investigations of the proposed structure.
[9]
In the letter of October 25, the applicant requested an extension of time.
"... to these proceedings, so that all concerned persons may be given the opportunity to submit a notice of objection and for a fair hearing."
[10]
The letter concluded as follows:
"I also request notice of the time, date, place and manner of proceeding of the hearing of this matter."
[11]
Four other letters were received, expressing opposition to the causeway.
[12]
The applicant's objections, and requests, were not even given the courtesy of an acknowledgement receipt. There was utter, cold silence until the Director General wrote the applicant's solicitors on January 2, 1986. That letter referred to the solicitor's letter of October 25, 1986. The Director General indicated the objections would not be given effect to, for withholding approval under the statute.
[13]
The letter was dated one day before the decision granting formal approval was made. The letter was not received by the applicant's solicitors until January 9, 1986.
[14]
The solicitors wrote, in reply, on January 28, 1986. They protested the ruling, particularly because no hearing had been held.
[15]
This time there was a prompt reply from the Director General: February 6, 1986. I sent out the letter in full:
"Dear Sir: Causeway construction - Mosher's Back Cove, Burnt Island, N.S.
I refer to your correspondence of January 28, 1986, regarding the above noted matter. Although the Navigable Waters Protection Act does not provide for 'hearings' to be held in respect to works proposed for construction in navigable waters, Coast Guard officials of our Dartmouth Regional office are available to discuss those issues which have a bearing on the public right of navigation. In this respect we have requested Mr. Tom Bradley of our Dartmouth office to contact you directly to arrange a date and time that would be acceptable to you both.
Yours sincerely."
[16]
The evidence discloses that Mr. Bradley endeavoured to arrange a meeting with the applicant's solicitor. It did not take place. According to the evidence submitted on behalf of the applicant, Mr. Bradley indicated he was prepared to discuss the matter, but the decision which had been made would not be altered.
[17]
There was no evidence before me as to the fate of the other four opponents of the causeway, or how their protests were handled.
[18]
The material filed on behalf of the respondent discloses Mr. Bradley made his first official site inspection on September 17, 1985. He made another inspection on November 26, 1985. Mr. Bradley does not say why this second inspection was made. He does not say it was because of the applicant's objections, or because of the opposition which had been expressed by other objectors.
[19]
This is clear. The applicant knew nothing of these matters. After its letter of October 25, 1985, it knew nothing until the receipt of the Director General's letter of January 2, 1986, and the formal approval dated the next day.
[20]
The steps taken by the Director General's department were outlined in Mr. Bradley's affidavit, of October 10, 1986, a week ago. That was the first knowledge by the applicant.
[21]
That concludes my summary of the essential facts.
[22]
The applicant contends the respondent was, in the circumstances here, in breach of a duty of fairness: That some kind of hearing, or opportunity, ought to have been given in respect of the objections made by the applicant.
[23]
The respondent replies that there is no statutory requirement for a so-called hearing. Even if a common law duty of procedural fairness arose, it is said, the requirements were met; the objections were considered, and investigated; in the circumstances that was all that was necessary.
[24]
I do not accept the respondent's contentions.
[25]
It is quite true the statute is silent as to any procedure for soliciting objections to a proposed work which might affect navigable waters. Here the Minister, set up the start of a procedure by requiring Morash, in this case, to include a statement in his published notice, that written objections could be sent. An administrative tribunal, such as the Minister, through the Director General here, can provide for its own procedure.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case, it was held that the procedures set up by the Commissioner of Patents were sufficient compliance with "natural justice".
[26]
I point out, however, the Hoffman-LaRoche case must be treated with care. It was long before the seminal Canadian case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.R. 410, now the cornerstone of modern Canadian administrative law, and judicial review.
[27]
Quite apart from statute, a duty of fairness may arise, in the circumstances of a particular case, at common law. The duty of fairness may, again in a particular case, require a hearing, in the sense of an oral hearing.
[28]
Essentially, the complaints made to an investigating or deciding body, must be considered. The complainant must be given an opportunity to meet the so-called case against him - the right to reply. The whole process may, in a particular case, meet the requirement of fairness by being done by correspondence or writing. See the Nicholson case, and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 149:
"A purely ministerial decision, on broad grounds of public policy, will typically afford the individual no procedural protection, and any attack upon such a decision will have to be founded upon abuse of discretion. Similarly, public bodies exercising legislative functions may not be amenable to judicial supervision. On the other hand, a function that approaches the judicial end of the spectrum will entail substantial procedural safeguards. Between the judicial decisions and those which are discretionary and policy-oriented will be found a myriad decision-making processes with a flexible gradation of procedural fairness through the administrative spectrum. That is what emerges from the decision of this court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In these cases, an applicant may obtain certiorari to enforce a breach of the duty of procedural fairness."
[30]
And again at 150-151:
"It is wrong, in my view, to regard natural justice and fairness as distinct and separate standards and to seek to define the procedural content of each. In Nicholson the Chief Justice spoke of a '... notion of fairness involving something less than the procedural protection of the traditional natural justice'. Fairness involves compliance of only some of the principles of natural justice. Professor de Smith (3rd Ed. 1973, p. 208) expressed lucidly the concept of a duty to act fairly:
'general it means a duty to observe the rudiments of natural justice for a limited purpose in the exercise of functions that are not analytically judicial but administrative.'
"The content of the principles of natural justice and fairness in application to the individual cases will vary according to the circumstances of each case, as recognized by Lord Justice Tucker in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  answered is this: Did the tribunal on the facts of the particular case act fairly toward the person claiming to be aggrieved? It seems to me that this is the underlying question which the courts have sought to answer in all the cases dealing with natural justice and with fairness."
[31]
I put that simple question in this case: Did the Director General, on the facts of this particular case, act fairly towards the applicant-objector?
[32]
My answer is "No".
[33]
The Director General invited objections. He received one from the applicant. I assume that the objections were considered. But no replies were given, until far too late, rejecting the objections. No opportunity was given to the applicant to respond to the rejections of its objections, or even of the grounds of rejection.
[34]
Failure to give that opportunity was, to my mind, a breach of fairness, sufficiently tainting the approval decision, to warrant quashing it.
[35]
I do not say the applicant should have had an oral hearing. An oral hearing may not have been necessary in this case. But at the least, an opportunity to respond in writing to the Director General's views on the objections, should have been given.
[36]
The Director General appeared quite willing, after the event, to have a departmental officer discuss the matter with the applicant. That was a method open to the Director General before his decision was made, as well as other methods of complying with the fairness rule.
[37]
The decision of January 2, 1986, is quashed.
[38]
The Trial Division of this court has no power to refer the whole matter back to the Director General to reconsider his decision, in the light of these reasons. The only power, under s. 18, in the circumstances of this case is to quash.
[39]
Finally, I wish to make this clear. I am not suggesting that what I have said in this particular case necessarily applies in respect of all applications for approvals made under s. 8 of the Navigable Waters Protection Act.
[40]
The applicant is entitled to the costs of this motion.
Application allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]