[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an application by Subah Sadiq (Sadiq) for a declaration against the Crown under the Citizenship Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29 (the Act), and for an order quashing a reference to this court by the Secretary of State. In File T-1559-88, the Secretary of State (the Minister), applied to the Governor-in-Council pursuant to s. 9 of the Citizenship Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29, to revoke the citizenship of the respondent Sadiq on the ground that such citizenship was obtained "by false representation or by fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances". This application has been referred to the Federal Court by the Minister pursuant to s. 18 of the Act. On December 19, 1989, Sadiq brought an application in T-1559-88 seeking a declaration that ss. 10 and 18 of the Act are of no force and effect in that they infringe the rights of Sadiq guaranteed by ss. 7 and 12 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the Charter). This application was adjourned sine die by McNair, J. On May 17, 1990, Sadiq filed a statement of claim (T-1360-90) seeking
(1) a declaration pursuant to s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 that ss. 10 and 18 of the Citizenship Act are of no force and effect on the grounds that they infringe the rights of the plaintiff guaranteed under s. 7 and s. 12 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms;
(2) a declaration that the application for revocation to the Governor-in-Council and the reference to this court were made out of time and are therefore statute-barred because of this delay;
(3) a judgment quashing the reference or staying the proceedings in respect thereof.
[2]
Counsel for Sadiq had requested that both the Charter application in T-1559-88 and the relief requested in the statement of claim in T-1360-90 be heard at the same time and place, which request was granted by the Associate Chief Justice.
Facts
[3]
On April 11, 1974, Sadiq entered Canada as a visitor from his native Pakistan. He remained in Canada beyond the time permitted under his visitor's visa and was ordered deported from Canada on May 9, 1978. Six days later, on May 15, 1978, Sadiq married Lucia Dizep, a Canadian citizen. He departed voluntarily from Canada at his own expense on May 20, 1978.
[4]
Subsequently, on July 25, 1979, Sadiq applied for permanent residence in Canada from Pakistan on the sponsorship of his wife. In this application, Sadiq did not disclose that he had been under a deportation order when he left Canada. On January 24, 1980, Sadiq's application for permanent residence was granted, and he was granted admission to Canada as a permanent resident on February 15, 1980.
[5]
Sadiq applied for Canadian citizenship on March 8, 1983. In this application, he stated that he had never been subject to a deportation order from Canada. Sadiq was subsequently ordered deported from Canada again on August 23, 1983, on the ground that he had misrepresented his status in respect of his departure from Canada on May 20, 1978, for the purpose of obtaining permanent resident status in Canada. Sadiq appealed the deportation order to the Immigration Appeal Board, but the appeal has been stayed pending the outcome of the application by the Secretary of State to revoke the citizenship of Sadiq, which was approved by a citizenship court judge on August 30, 1983. Citizenship was granted to Sadiq on his taking of the oath of Canadian citizenship on December 15, 1983.
[6]
Sadiq is presently and has been since 1980 employed with Domtar Packaging. In December, 1980, Sadiq was divorced from Lucia Dizep. In January, 1984, Sadiq married Farida Haji Yousef in Pakistan, and sponsored her application for permanent residence in Canada, which was granted in 1985. They have a child, Omar, born January 22, 1986. They are currently being divorced. Sadiq presently has a common law relationship with a Canadian citizen who is pregnant with Sadiq's child.
Sadiq's Position
[7]
The position of Sadiq is that at the time he made his application for permanent residence, he was not aware that he had been ordered deported from Canada. He also states that he was unaware of having been the subject of any deportation order at the time he applied for citizenship. In support of this claim, he states that he relied on legal advice of Mr. G. Jamieson, the fact that he was permitted to marry a Canadian citizen on May 15, 1978, and the fact that he left Canada voluntarily on May 20, 1978. In essence, he states that at the material times that he was granted permanent residence status on January 24, 1980 and Canadian citizenship on August 30, 1983, both the Minister of Employment and Immigration and the Secretary of State ought to have known that he had been ordered deported on May 9, 1978 and August 23, 1983.
[8]
Sadiq also states that s. 31 of the Act is a bar to any further revocation proceedings. Section 31 reads as follows:
"31. Any proceedings in respect of an offence under this Act or the regulations that is punishable on summary conviction may be instituted at anytime within but not later than three years after the time when the offence was committed."
[9]
Sadiq also seeks an order pursuant to s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982 that ss. 10 and 18 of the Citizenship Act are of no force or effect because they conflict with ss. 7 and 12 of the Charter, and consequently an order staying the revocation proceedings initiated pursuant to those provisions. He seeks a further order pursuant to s. 24(1) of the Charter staying the proceedings on the ground that his rights under ss. 7 and 12 of the Charter were infringed. The essence of the alleged infringement is the prejudice that would befall Sadiq because of the delay in applying for the revocation.
The Minister's Position
[10]
With respect to the reference to this court initiated by the Minister to revoke Sadiq's citizenship, the Minister's position is that Sadiq has obtained citizenship on the basis of false representations made in his application for Canadian citizenship, or by knowingly concealing material circumstances, in that he falsely stated in both his application for permanent residence and citizenship that he had never been deported from Canada. The Minister further states that when Sadiq was granted admission to Canada on February 15, 1980, such entry was without the consent of the Minister of Employment and Immigration as required in such circumstances by subs. 55(1) of the Immigration Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 which reads:
"55(1) Subject to s. 56, where a deportation order is made against a person, the person shall not, after he is removed from or otherwise leaves Canada, come into Canada without the written consent of the Minister unless an appeal from the order has been allowed."
[11]
The Minister states that if there was delay, the delay was necessary to investigate the circumstances of the case and to consider the consequences of revocation of citizenship upon Sadiq. With respect to the Charter issues, the Minister has denied any infringement of Charter rights.
Issues
[12]
1. Are the revocation proceedings barred by virtue of s. 31 of the Citizenship Act?
2. Does the prejudice, if any, caused by the delay in initiating revocation proceedings infringe Sadiq's Charter rights under s. 7 or s. 12?
3. Are ss. 10 and 18 of the Citizenship Act inconsistent with ss. 7 and 12 of the Charter and therefore of no force and effect to the extent of the inconsistency, pursuant to s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982?
Analysis
[13]
Revocation proceedings are governed by ss. 10 and 18 of the Citizenship Act, which read as follows:
"10(1) Subject to s. 18 but
notwithstanding any other section of this Act
, where the Governor-in-Council, on a report from the Minister, is satisfied that any person has obtained, retained, renounced or resumed citizenship under this Act by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances,
(a) the person ceases to be a citizen, or
(b) the renunciation of citizenship by the person shall be deemed to have had no effect,
as of such date as may be fixed by order of the Governor-in-Council with respect thereto.
"10(2) A person shall be deemed to have obtained citizenship by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances if the person was lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances and, because of that admission, the person subsequently obtained citizenship.
"18(1) The Minister shall not make a report under s. 10 unless the Minister has given notice of his intention to do so to the person in respect of whom the report is to be made and
(a) the person does not, within thirty days after the day on which the notice is sent, request that the Minister refer the case to the court; or
(b) that person does so request and the court decides that the person has obtained, retained, renounced or resumed citizenship by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances.
"18(2) The notice referred to in subs. (1) shall state that the person in respect of whom the report is to be made may, within thirty days of the day on which the notice is sent to him, request that the Minister refer the case to the court, and such notice is sufficient if it is sent by registered mail to the person at his latest known address.
"18(3) A decision of the court made under subs. (1) is final and, notwithstanding any other Act of Parliament, no appeal lies therefrom." (Emphasis added)
[14]
Reference must also be made to rule 900 ff. of the Federal Court Rules.
[15]
Thus, the task of the court on the reference was to decide whether citizenship was obtained by false representations or fraud
. This was of course, a matter of examining the evidence and determining the credibility of Sadiq. Because of the seriousness of the proceedings, the standard of proof required of such alleged civil fraud in revocation proceedings will be a high level of probability. As Collier, J., held in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  preponderance of evidence, or a balance of probabilities. But in that standard there may be degrees of the quality of the proof required.
"The position I shall adopt here is that set out by Lord Scarman in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of probability is, in my opinion, required in a case of this kind. What is at stake here is very important; the right to keep Canadian citizenship, and the serious consequences that may result if that citizenship ceases."
Application Of Time Limit In Section 31:
[16]
The time limit of three years referred to in s. 31 of the Act relating to the initiation of proceedings in respect of offences under the Act has no application to revocation proceedings. This provision is confined to the initiation of proceedings in courts of criminal jurisdiction. The revocation of citizenship is not a criminal proceeding.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R. 12 (F.C.T.D.), Muldoon, J., held (at 18 Imm. L.R.), that a proceeding taken under the revocation provisions "is entirely civil in nature; it is not a criminal law proceeding". As there is no penal result from the outcome of a citizenship revocation proceeding, the reference to "offence" in s. 31 does not contemplate application to revocation proceedings.
[17]
In any event, it should be noted that the provisions of s. 10 state that the citizenship of a person is revoked as soon as the Governor-in-Council is satisfied that the citizenship was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation,
notwithstanding any other sections of this Act
. It is my view that the provisions applicable to the Governor-in-Council apply mutatis mutandis to the Federal Court when the person elects to refer the matter to the court. It would certainly be anomalous if it were possible for a person to circumvent the revocation provisions after three years had elapsed from the date of the misrepresentation by applying to the Federal Court if s. 31 were to apply to it, but not the Cabinet. The time limit in s. 31 was not intended to have any application to revocation proceedings either before the Governor-in-Council or the Federal Court, and there is no statutory time limit to such a proceeding.
[18]
The delay in initiating the proceedings could be considered an acquiescence of any fraud by Sadiq, and thus the Minister is estopped from initiating proceedings. Estoppel, however, requires a representation to be made by one party to another. The Minister makes reference in one of the motions to a memo in the Immigration Department which could found an estoppel. However,
estoppel is an equitable remedy, and one must come to a court of equity with "clean hands"
. If Sadiq made false representations, he could be disentitled to equitable relief. The Federal Court does have the discretion to deny relief sought under s. 18 of the Federal Court Act if there has been undue delay in commencing proceedings:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). Quaere, however, if the same discretion applies to proceedings under the Citizenship Act? In my opinion, it does apply, as the policy considerations would be the same. In any event, the result would only be to give the court the discretion to deny the Minister.
Infringement Of Sections 7 And 12 Of The Charter:
[19]
Sadiq alleges that the delay in initiating proceedings and the consequential prejudice infringe his rights under ss. 7 and 12 of the Charter. The two Charter sections read as follows:
"7. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.
"12. Everyone has the right not to be subjected to any cruel and unusual treatment or punishment."
[20]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 138 (F.C.T.D.) Dubé, J., had to consider whether the delay associated in processing the revocation of person's citizenship infringed the right of a person not to be deprived of security of the person except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. Dubé, J., acknowledged that the term "security of the person could encompass a wide variety of interests, including the right to be protected "from serious hurt of a corporeal or incorporeal nature". In this case, the person's passport and birth certificate had been seized, and the person claimed that she lived in fear of her status in Canada being challenged because of her lack of documentation pending the hearing. Dubé, J., however, found no infringement of s. 7 because of the delay as there was no prejudice to the person. His Lordship stated, at 144 Imm. L.R.:
"Even if I were to apply the 'expansive approach', I could not come to the conclusion, in this matter, that the delay in the processing of the revocation of citizenship of the respondent has caused her serious incorporeal hurt. It stands to reason that the longer the revocation was delayed, the longer she could stay in Canada; she would undoubtedly be happier if the delay had lasted her lifetime. The deprivation of her identity documents undoubtedly caused her much distress, but she was guilty of misrepresentation and impersonation and she has only herself to blame if her Canadian passport was taken away from her. As to her birth certificate, I presume that she could readily obtain a certified copy from her country of origin, as it is obviously not a Canadian document. Having entered the country under false pretences and having been caught by the authorities, she is in no position to blame them for her present anxiety."
[21]
The same argument could be made with respect to the argument on "cruel and unusual punishment or treatment". In law there is nothing intrinsically "cruel and unusual" about the revocation of citizenship.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  cruel and unusual about an executive order by the Cabinet that denied a grant of citizenship pursuant to s. 18 of the Act, as it then was, because the Cabinet felt that it would be prejudicial to the security of Canada. It is conceded that the applicant in the Reyes case could have continued to stay in Canada despite the lack of citizenship. However, in Re Gittens Deportation Order, [1983] 1 F.C. 152; 68 C.C.C.(2d) 438, Mahoney, J., held that the execution of deportation orders generally do not constitute cruel and unusual treatment. His Lordship stated, at 446 C.C.C.:
"The incidents of deportation, whatever their degree, do not render it cruel and unusual treatment of an adult.
"As a norm, execution of a deportation order is not, in the abstract, cruel and unusual treatment."
[22]
Therefore, if deportation is generally not cruel and unusual treatment, it follows that revocation of citizenship that could lead to deportation is also not cruel and unusual treatment.
[23]
With respect to the declaration of invalidity sought for ss. 10 and 18 of the Citizenship Act, it is clear from  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 161; 18 C.C.C.(3d) 385; 18 D.L.R.(4th) 321; 37 Alta. L.R.(2d) 97; 85 C.L.L.C. 14,023; 13 C.R.R. 64, that both the purpose and effect of legislation were relevant in determining whether a statute was in conformity with the Charter. In this case, there is no evidence of an unconstitutional purpose in the statute.
[24]
As to the effects, the analysis above is applicable here. The intent of the nation in ensuring compliance with immigration rules is a guide in support of the measure of revoking citizenship for misrepresentation.
Conclusion
[25]
The reference by the Secretary of State to this court is in order. The application for revocation is not statute barred. However, there is clearly a violation of the Charter. There is a duty on the part of the Citizenship officials to be fair and in my view they have failed in that responsibility due to delay.
[26]
Sadiq secured permanent resident status on January 24, 1980. On March 8, 1983 he applied to become a Canadian citizen. Although ordered deported again on August 23, 1983, his citizenship application was approved on August 30, 1983 and on December 13, 1983 he took his oath of Canadian Citizenship. The citizenship officials
never
checked to determine if Sadiq was subject to a deportation order. The Immigration people knew this fact May 28, 1979, and certainly by April/May 1981. Immigration did not communicate this information to Citizenship and that's not surprising but what is incredible is that Citizenship never asked. The bland response by Citizenship was that they relied on the applicant's answer. One is moved to wonder if they check with the R.C.M.P. when a person says he has no criminal record. The sequence of events
after
Sadiq secured Canadian citizenship also provides some insight into the almost lackadaisical approach taken by the Citizenship people. Counsel for Sadiq, after reading the affidavit by a Ms. Lane, states, and I agree:
"We have an explanation that is rife with systemic delay, delay that is not justified on any kind of interpretation of the way that a government department such as the Citizenship Department ought to work; delay that would not be countenanced, my Lord, by the Supreme Court of Canada having regard to the Askov case."
[27]
The facts, or at least the dates, are not in dispute: Sadiq's Canadian Citizenship application was approved August 30, 1983 and he took his oath as a Canadian Citizen December 13, 1983. The notice of revocation, according to Ms. Lane, the Registrar of Canadian Citizenship, was signed July 21, 1987 (although the document given to the court was dated June 7, 1988). In any event some four and a half to five years elapsed before Sadiq had any notice of revocation.
[28]
In the Lane affidavit we learn that Canada Immigration, Calgary, notified the Citizenship Department on March 21, 1984, that Sadiq had been ordered deported twice, once in 1978 and again in 1983. (Exhibit A to the affidavit of Sadiq is a two-way office memorandum confirming he had been deported, that he was allowed voluntary departure and
that they had no objection to his return
).
[29]
At page 19 of the transcript counsel for Sadiq:
"It's unbelievable in my respectful submission, to think that in the 1980's two government departments that are so closely allied would have such a lack of communication that it would take three years for the Citizenship Department to know that Mr. Sadiq had been deported. And certainly, sir, given the fact that he made his application in March 6, 1983, it is equally shocking to find that it took a year before a telephone call was made from Immigration to the Citizenship Department advising that Mr. Sadiq had been deported twice. And when one follows the flow of this affidavit subsequent events show an equally surprising lack of effort and performance on the part of the Citizenship Department to get this revocation application in gear."
[30]
What are the facts according to Lane?
1. March 21, 1984 - Citizenship received notice of deportation order;
2. July 17, 1984 (four months later) - the case was referred to a Programme Officer for review and action;
3. November 16, 1984 (another four months) - the case was referred to the department legal services unit for an opinion;
4. Three months later, a legal opinion was secured and advice received that the case was being referred to the Department of Employment and Immigration (C.E.I.C.);
5. Five months later, Lane was provided with the position of C.E.I.C. as well as other cases where revocation was being considered;
(Thus, seven years elapsed from the first time Sadiq was deported and a year and a half after he applied for citizenship, for C.E.I.C. to notify Citizenship of its position on Sadiq.)
6. November 17, 1985 (five months later) - in response to a request from one Programme Officer, Canada Immigration in Calgary provided Sadiq's last known address;
7. March 10, 1986 - the case was being prepared for consideration by the Minister together with six other cases;
8. October 24, 1986 (six months later) - a memorandum was prepared for the Minister concerning seven persons who obtained citizenship allegedly in the same fashion as Sadiq which memorandum had legal opinions;
9. July 21, 1987 (nine months later) - A notice of revocation was signed. It was mailed to Sadiq and returned as undeliverable. (How long did it take to get back from Canada Post - weeks, 2 weeks?);
10. September 3, 1987 - the R.C.M.P. were asked to locate Sadiq;
11. January 5, 1988 - R.C.M.P. provided Sadiq's address;
12. January 7, 1988 - a second notice of revocation was signed, and mailed to Sadiq.
[31]
Lane attests there is no way she ought to have known on or before December 15, 1983, of the two deportation orders. Might I be so bold as to suggest a phone call, a letter, a two-way memorandum, could have been sent to C.E.I.C. and not to rely on the attestation in the application. If Citizenship didn't know shortly after the application was made March 15, 1983, that Sadiq had been ordered deported, then it should have. I read the other "reasons" for delay but they are just not credible.
[32]
What really occurred here was an interminable delay by officials, and during that time Sadiq was getting established. This case was not given the priority it deserved. Revocation of one's Canadian citizenship is a serious matter and called for more immediate responses than are evident here.
[33]
On another matter, I do not believe one can truly determine the credibility of Sadiq on the basis of reading his affidavits, with no cross-examination or oral evidence. What is clear, however, is that, had Sadiq, after one year sought Ministerial approval as required by the Immigration Act, that approval most assuredly would have been given. The document filed by counsel for Sadiq clearly establishes the Department had no objections to his returning to Canada and that Immigration officials considered his marriage as valid, and not one of convenience. In his affidavit, Sadiq attests that he sought a legal opinion, names the lawyer and states he voluntarily left, paid his own expenses and that officials permitted him to marry before he left Canada. Sadiq was not cross-examined on his affidavit, and that option was open to Sadiq for the revocation but not initiated. On balance, I believe the long, inappropriate delay did not give Sadiq that to which he was entitled - a duty of fairness. Dubé, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  J.'s, direction in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sadiq, it is my decision that the application for revocation is dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]