[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.:
This application came on for hearing at Toronto on September 21, 1993. The applicant seeks an order quashing the decision of the respondent Minister of Labour (the Minister) to appoint an adjudicator pursuant to s. 242(1) of the
Canada Labour Code
(the
Code
) and prohibiting the respondent adjudicator from proceeding to adjudicate the complaint of the respondent Hefni. In the alternative, the applicant seeks an order quashing the decision of the adjudicator that the complaint was not barred by s. 242(3.1)(b) of the
Code
. At the conclusion of argument, I took the matter under reserve and indicated that these reasons would follow.
Facts
[2]
Mr. Hefni was dismissed from his employment as a payment officer with the applicant bank in May, 1991 because of an alleged lack of productivity. On June 18, 1991 Mr. Hefni filed a complaint of unjust dismissal with Labour Canada pursuant to Division XIV of the
Code
. Seeking to have an adjudicator appointed, Mr. Hefni wrote to the District Manager at Labour Canada on December 4, 1991:
"With reference to our meetings of Oct. 18, 1991 and Nov. 5, 1991, I hereby formally request that my case be refered [sic] to an adjudicator forthwith.
"I further request the Labour Board persue [sic] my case based on racial and religious discrimination, and discrimination against my handicap, as well as failure to follow fair procedures."
[3]
The Minister of Labour appointed Mr. Langille as adjudicator in late January, 1992 and the adjudication hearing was held on October 21, 1992. The applicant challenged the adjudicator's jurisdiction on essentially the same grounds advanced here, but was unsuccessful.
[4]
In his written reasons released October 27, 1992, the adjudicator made the following comments about s. 242(3.1)(b) of the
Code
(at pp. 3-4):
"... Mr. Hefni's complaint is that he was discharged without just cause. The employer alleges cause and as required by the
Code
, has spelled out the alleged cause in terms of 'substandard performance'. The complainant contests that allegation. This is a perfectly straightforward complaint, clearly within the ambit of these provisions of the
Canadian
[sic]
Labour Code
, For
this complaint
there is no 'procedure for redress ... provided elsewhere in or under this or any other "Act of Parliament"'.
"The fact that a complainant
may
have
other
complaints about his or her employer's conduct is irrelevant. It may be, for example, that an employee has a complaint of sexual harassment arising out of the employment relationship. But the victim of the sexual harassment may also have an independently good case against dismissal on purely 'employer-employee relations' terms. ...
"One of the purposes of the subsection relied upon by counsel for the employer is to prevent situations arising in which there are multiple fora dealing with the
same
complaint. It does not address the problem of multiple fora relating to multiple complaints."
[5]
The adjudicator further pointed out that at the time of the hearing, Mr. Hefni had no current complaints before any other tribunal and that his claim of unjust dismissal was not based upon any element of discrimination. He was merely contesting the employer's assertion that his performance was substandard or that he was unproductive. In addition, the adjudicator did not feel that Mr. Hefni's letter of December 4, 1991 to the District Manager should be given much weight as it was drafted without the benefit of legal counsel.
Issues
[6]
The following issues are raised by this application:
1. Did the respondent Minister err in appointing an adjudicator?
2. If the answer to question 1 is no, did the respondent adjudicator err in concluding that Mr. Hefni's complaint of unjust dismissal was not barred by s. 242(3.1)(b) of the
Code
?
Statutory Provisions
[7]
The following sections of the
Code
are relevant to this application:
"240(1) Subject to subss. (2) and 242(3.1), any person
(a) who has completed twelve consecutive months of continuous employment by an employer, and
(b) who is not a member of a group of employees subject to a collective agreement,
may make a complaint in writing to an inspector if the employee has been dismissed and considers the dismissal to be unjust.
"240(2) Subject to subs. (3), a complaint under subs. (1) shall be made within ninety days from the date on which the person making the complaint was dismissed.
"240(3) The Minister may extend the period of time referred to in subs. (2) where the Minister is satisfied that a complaint was made in that period to a government official who had no authority to deal with the complaint but that the person making the complaint believed the official had that authority.
"241(1) Where an employer dismisses a person described in subs. 240(1), the person who was dismissed or any inspector may make a request in writing to the employer to provide a written statement giving the reasons for the dismissal, and any employer who receives such a request shall provide the person who made the request with such a statement within fifteen days after the request is made.
"241(2) On receipt of a complaint made under subs. 240(1), an inspector shall endeavour to assist the parties to the complaint to settle the complaint or cause another inspector to do so.
"241(3) Where a complaint is not settled under subsection (2) within such period as the inspector endeavouring to assist the parties pursuant to that subsection considers to be reasonable in the circumstances, the inspector shall, on the written request of the person who made the complaint that the complaint be referred to an adjudicator under subs. 242(1),
(a) report to the Minister that the endeavour to assist the parties to settle the complaint has not succeeded; and
(b) deliver to the Minister the complaint made under subs. 240(1), any written statement giving the reasons for the dismissal provided pursuant to subs. (1) and any other statements or documents the inspector has that relate to the complaint.
"242(1) The Minister may, on receipt of a report pursuant to subs. 241(3), appoint any person that the Minister considers appropriate as an adjudicator to hear and adjudicate on the complaint in respect to which the report was made, and refer the complaint to the adjudicator along with any statement provided pursuant to subs. 241(1).
"242(2) An adjudicator to whom a complaint has been referred under subs. (1),
(a) shall consider the complaint within such time as the Governor-in-Council may by regulation prescribe;
(b) shall determine the procedure to be followed, but shall give full opportunity to the parties to the complaint to present evidence and make submissions to the adjudicator and shall consider the information relating to the complaint; and
(c) has, in relation to any complaint before the adjudicator, the powers conferred on the Canada Labour Relations Board, in relation to any proceeding before the Board, under paragraphs 16(a), (b) and (c).
"242(3) Subject to subs. (3.1), an adjudicator to whom a complaint has been referred under subs. (1) shall
(a) consider whether the dismissal of the person who made the complaint was unjust and render a decision thereon; and ...
"242(3.1) No complaint shall be considered by an adjudicator under subs. (3) in respect of a person where
(a) that person has been laid off because of lack of work or because of the discontinuance of a function; or
(b) a procedure for redress has been provided elsewhere in or under this or any other Act of Parliament ...
"243(1) Every order of an adjudicator appointed under subs. 242(1) is final and shall not be questioned or reviewed in any court.
"243(2) No order shall be made, process entered or proceeding taken in any court, whether by way of injunction,
certiorari
, prohibition,
quo warranto
or otherwise, to question, review, prohibit or restrain an adjudicator in any proceedings of the adjudicator under s. 242."
Applicant's Submissions
[8]
The applicant contends that the Minister could only appoint an adjudicator if he was satisfied, after a thorough review of the material before him, that all of the qualifying conditions had been met. These qualifying conditions are: twelve months of continuous employment (s. 240(1)(a)); the timeliness of the complaint (s. 240(2)); the status of the complainant (employee, not manager: s. 167(3)), (not subject to a collective bargaining agreement: s. 240(1)(b)); dismissal not the result of shortage of work (s. 242(3.1)(a)); and the absence of alternative procedure for redress in the
Code
or any other Act of Parliament (s. 242(3.1)(b)).
[9]
Since Mr. Hefni's complaint raises human rights issues, for which redress has been established under the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, the Minister exceeded his jurisdiction in appointing an adjudicator.
[10]
In the alternative, counsel for the applicant argued that the adjudicator erred in his conclusion that s. 242(3.1)(b) of the
Code
did not bar Mr. Hefni's complaint.
Respondent's Submissions
[11]
Relying on the following reasoning from the decision of MacKay, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 126, aff'd. (1993), 161 N.R. 66 (F.C.A.), both the Minister and the complainant contended that the Minister's responsibility in appointing an adjudicator is not quasi-judicial:
"... While the use of the word 'may' [in s. 242(1)] implies discretion, in my view the Minister has little discretion, except perhaps in the most obvious case of an exemption where there is no dispute about excluding factors ..."
[12]
Both respondents also defend the adjudicator's interpretation of s. 242(3.1)(b) of the
Code
that the alternative procedure for redress must provide redress for an unjust dismissal claim, which the
Canadian Human Rights Act
does not so provide.
[13]
It is also pointed out that Mr. Hefni's letter of December 4, 1991 was written without the benefit of legal counsel. In addition, the actual complaint filed by Mr. Hefni made no mention whatsoever of discrimination, rather, it stated that he felt that he had been unjustly dismissed. Furthermore, at the time of the hearing before the adjudicator, Mr. Hefni had no complaints of any sort before any other Tribunal. Finally, it was pointed out that his counsel had indicated to the adjudicator that the essence of the unjust dismissal complaint involved no discrimination or human rights components.
[14]
With respect to the issue of the appropriate standard of review, both respondents submitted that the court should not interfere with the adjudicator's decision unless it could be shown that it was patently unreasonable.
Analysis
[15]
The declining importance of the distinction between judicial and quasi-judicial decisions on the one hand, and administrative ones on the other, was commented upon by Madame Justice L'Heureux-Dubé in
Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 385:
"In light of this court's judgments since
Re Nicholson and Haldimand-Norfolk Regional Board of Commissioners of Police
(1978), 88 D.L.R.(3d) 671; [1979] 1 S.C.R. 311; 78 C.L.L.C. ¶14,181, the importance once enjoyed by the distinction between 'administrative' and 'quasi-judicial' decisions has faded away. For instance, under the common law, that distinction no longer determines when judicial review can be obtained. As Laskin, C.J., writing for the Court, remarked in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 36 N.R. 519:
'In my view, it is no longer sensible to retain the old stereotyped classifications of statutory authority as being either administrative or judicial (or quasi-judicial) as providing a basis for review by the courts in the latter case but not in the former. It is more compatible with substance to look at statutory tribunals or boards or authorities in terms of the functions which, either at large or in a particular situation, they are obliged to discharge.'"
[16]
See also the Federal Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where Pratte, J.A., concluded that
certiorari
was available to review decisions of public bodies on substantive as well as procedural grounds:
"... Violation of natural justice (in the case of judicial or quasi-judicial decisions) and lack of procedural fairness (in the case of administrative decisions) are merely grounds on which certiorari may issue; but it may also issue on other grounds, irrespective of the judicial or administrative character of the decision under attack, namely lack of jurisdiction and error of law on the face of the record. Once it is accepted, as it must be since the decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Nicholson
[supra] and [
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], that purely administrative decisions are no longer immune from certiorari, it follows, in my view, that those decisions may be quashed by certiorari not only, in appropriate cases, for lack of procedural fairness but also for lack of jurisdiction and error of law on the face of the record."
Clearly, therefore, judicial review is available here.
[17]
For the appropriate standard of review, I turn to
Pollard
, supra, para. 11 at 8-10, where Décary, J.A., made the following comments:
"... The subsequent application to particular cases of the 'functional and pragmatic approach' suggested by Beetz, J., in
Bibeault
[
U.E.S., Local 298 v. Bibeault
, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 1048] should not distract us from the essential teaching of that decision, i.e. that at the very beginning of the judicial review process there is but one question the court should ask itself:
whether the legislator intended, expressly or by implication, the question to be within the jurisdiction conferred on the tribunal
...
"When the answer to the question is that the legislator did not intend the question to be within the jurisdiction conferred on the tribunal, the tribunal will still have jurisdiction to answer the question, but a mere error in the interpretation of the provision will constitute what has been referred to as a jurisdictional error and cause the tribunal to lose jurisdiction. ...
"When the answer to the question is that the legislator did intend the question to be within the jurisdiction conferred on the tribunal, the tribunal will be deemed to have acted within its jurisdiction ... and the court ... will not intervene unless the tribunal has erred in a patently unreasonable manner. ...
"To get back, then, to the first step in judicial review, which is to determine the tribunal's jurisdiction having regard to the legislative intent, the court is to make a pragmatic and functional analysis of the legislation, consisting in the examination of: a) the wording of the provision conferring jurisdiction on the tribunal; b) the purpose of the statute creating the tribunal; c) the reason for the tribunal's existence; d) the area of expertise of the tribunal's members; and e) the nature of the problem before the tribunal. ..." (emphasis added)
[18]
I also note in
Pollard
, the Federal Court of Appeal agreed with MacKay, J., that the adjudicator's interpretation of s. 242(3.1)(b) had been the correct one. The adjudicator had stated:
"The alternative procedure for redress referred to in s. 242(3.1)(b) must be a procedure that will 'redress' the issue of whether the dismissal was unjust." (Cited in
Pollard
(Trial Division) at p. 120).
This conclusion was the result of the following analysis, which although concerned with the relationship between the unjust dismissal provisions and those prohibiting dismissal because of antiunion activity, is equally valid when considering the anti-discrimination in employment provisions of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
:
"... The present complaint is concerned with the question of unjust dismissal. The previous complaint dealt with the question of dismissal because of union activity an act which is prohibited by ss. 184 and 186 of the
Code
. In such unfair labour practice cases the specific issue to be decided is whether or not the discharge was associated in the mind of the employer with antiunion bias or discrimination and not the question of whether 'just cause' existed.
"Evidence relating to the defence of 'just cause' is relevant in cases involving charges of a breach of statutory provisions prohibiting antiunion activities only insofar as such evidence may assist in determining whether 'just cause' comprised the sole cause for discharge free from any taint of antiunion bias. The presence or absence of such a bias is the real issue in the unfair labour practice sections and not the presence or absence of just cause. ...
. . . . .
"... Those sections do not embody a procedure from [sic] redress for dismissal without just cause in circumstances where breach of their respective provisions is not the issue. The fact that a similar remedy may be awarded in either case does not mean the procedure for redress has been provided elsewhere ..." (Cited in
Pollard
(Trial Division) at p. 119).
[19]
A similar interpretation of s. 242(3.1)(b) was proposed in
Employment Law in Canada
:
"The premise for these exceptions, presumably, is that collective agreement 'just cause' articles and various forms of statutory redress render s. 240 otiose. Nevertheless, one adjudicator has intimated that s. 240 will be barred even though the alternative statutory procedure is less favourable to the employee. It is submitted that this approach does not accord with the spirit of the
Code
. It has been held that, in order to exclude s. 240, the alternative statutory procedure must remit to adjudication the issues of 'just cause' for dismissal. Thus, the availability of an action under the
Human Rights Act
or Part I of the
Canada Labour Code
(dealing with unfair labour practices which interfere with collective bargaining rights) or under the statutory protection of the right to refuse unsafe work does not bar a s. 240 complaint.
The reviewable issues under the
Human Rights Act
and Part I of the
Canada Labour Code
are whether dismissal is tainted by, respectively, one of the proscribed 'human rights' grounds or an antiunion element. These issues are distinct from the issue of 'just cause' for dismissal, although the presence of 'just cause' is plainly relevant as evidence of whether an employer's motive for dismissal is tainted by the proscribed grounds
." (emphasis added) (I. Christie, G. England & B. Cotter,
Employment Law in Canada
, 2nd Ed. (Toronto: Butterworths, 1993) at pp. 684-685. (footnotes omittted).)
[20]
Section 242(3.1)(b) will therefore not bar a complaint unless it can be shown that an alternative procedure is available to the complainant to determine the specific issue of whether or not cause existed for the dismissal. Given the complexity of this question as well as the strict procedural limitations imposed on the Minister, it is inconceivable that Parliament intended that important and complex decisions regarding eligibility for adjudication should be made by the Minister who must act on limited information.
[21]
Counsel for the applicant argued that the reference to human rights issues contained in Mr. Hefni's letter of December 4, 1991 to the District Manager prevented the Minister from referring the complaint to adjudication. While there is no doubt that the Minister had access to this letter, I do not agree that the mere passing reference to alleged discrimination was sufficient to invoke the s. 242(3.1)(b) bar.
[22]
Furthermore, the original complaint filed by Mr. Hefni makes no mention of any human rights issues. The words used in the second paragraph of the letter to the District Manager - "[I] further request the Labour Board persue [sic] my case based on racial and religious discrimination ... " - suggest that this case (discrimination) is distinct from the case referred to in the first paragraph (unjust dismissal). Given the fact that these two complaints seek to redress different and independent harms, the s. 242(3.1)(b) bar would not have been applicable at this early stage. Finally, the letter was obviously written without the benefit of legal counsel. As such, it would have been unduly harsh to interpret it in such a way as to preclude Mr. Hefni's complaint from proceeding. Dismissed employees are often prone to overstating the merits of their case, particularly when operating without the calming effect of independent legal counsel. Given all these considerations, the Minister was correct in referring the matter to adjudication.
Adjudicator's Decision
[23]
The Federal Court of Appeal's judgment in
Pollard
has essentially determined the outcome of this aspect of the applicant's argument. As noted above, Décary, J.A., ruled that the adjudicator's decision was subject to review for correctness (at p. 17). Furthermore, the Court of Appeal concurred with MacKay, J.'s, conclusion that the arbitrator's was correct when he ruled that:
"The alternative procedure for redress referred to in s. 242(3.1)(b) must be a procedure that will 'redress' the issue of whether the dismissal was unjust." (Cited in
Pollard
(Trial Division) at p. 120).
I note that this interpretation is identical to the one made by the adjudicator in the present case where he stated (at pp. 3-4):
"... Mr. Hefni's complaint is that he was discharged without just cause. The employer alleges cause and as required by the
Code
, has spelled out the alleged cause in terms of 'substandard performance'. The complainant contests that allegation. This is a perfectly straightforward complaint, clearly within the ambit of these provisions of the
Canadian
[sic]
Labour Code
. For
this complaint
there is no 'procedure for redress ... provided elsewhere in or under this or any other "Act of Parliament"'."
In reaching this conclusion, the adjudicator considered the letter of December 4, 1991 and reached essentially the same conclusions as this court, namely that it was not to be given much probative value. Furthermore, the adjudicator stressed that the fact that Mr. Hefni had no current complaints before any other tribunal, as well as the fact that his counsel assured him that Mr. Hefni's complaint contained no human rights components, compelled a finding in favour of proceeding with the adjudication. I agree that this decision was the correct one.
Conclusion
[24]
Essentially, all the issues in this dispute were addressed by my colleague MacKay, J., in
Pollard
. His refusal of the relief sought here was affirmed by the Court of Appeal.
[25]
Therefore, for the reasons set out by MacKay, J., in the
Pollard
decision, and as I have attempted to summarize above, this application is dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/slm
[End of document]