[1]
Addy, J.
: The applicant is requesting a writ of prohibition against the respondent to prohibit the respondent from conducting a hearing pursuant to s. 21.3(2) of the Parole Act. Sections 21.3(1) and (2) read as follows:
"(1) The Commissioner shall cause the case of an inmate to be reviewed by the Service, before the presumptive release date of the inmate, where the inmate is serving a term of imprisonment that includes a sentence imposed in respect of an offence mentioned in the schedule that had been prosecuted by the indictment.
"(2) Where the Service, after reviewing the case of an inmate pursuant to subs. (1)), is of the opinion that
(a) the inmate is serving a term of imprisonment that includes a sentence imposed in respect of an offence mentioned in the schedule that has been prosecuted by indictment,
(b) the commission of the offence caused the death of or serious harm to another person, and
(c) there are reasonable grounds to believe that the inmate is likely to commit, prior to the expiration according to law of the sentence the inmate is then serving, an offence causing the death of or serious harm to another person,
the Service shall, not later than six months before the presumptive release date of the inmate, refer the case to the Board together with all information that, in the opinion of the service, is relevant to the case."
[2]
These provisions, along with several other sections in the Act, were added as part of an amendment to the Parole Act enacted in 1986. There is no dispute that the applicant was properly sentenced pursuant to an offence which was prosecuted by indictment and which caused serious harm to another person. Therefore, the sole matter to be determined by the Parole Board would be that raised in s. 21.3(2)(c) above quoted, namely whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the inmate is likely to commit, prior to the expiration of the sentence, an offence causing death or serious harm to another person.
[3]
There is no dispute about the fact that the case was referred by the Commissioner to the Board six months previous to the presumptive release date (formerly the mandatory release date).
[4]
Section 16(2) of the Regulations issued pursuant to the Parole Act reads as follows:
"(2) The hearing held by the Board pursuant to paragraph 15.4(2)(b) (now 21.4(2) (b)) of the Act shall be held
(a) not later than thirteen weeks prior to the inmate's presumptive release date, where the case of an inmate has been referred to the Board or the Chairman of the Board seventeen weeks or more prior to that date;"
[5]
The sole question to be determined is whether the word "shall" in s. 16.1(2) of the Regulations above mentioned is imperative or directory. Should it be imperative, then the Parole Board will have lost all jurisdiction to hear the case and the applicant will be entitled as of right to be released on parole on the 11th of March, 1990.
[6]
He was formally advised on the 8th of October, 1989, that the hearing before the Board would take place on February 15, 1990. He had been previously advised in September that the hearing would be some time in February. There are obviously not thirteen weeks left between the due date of presumptive release and the date orginally set for the hearing. It is undisputed that the date of February 15th was set in error and that as soon as the respondent became aware of the error, shortly after the 15th of February, the hearing was immediately rescheduled for the 19th of January, 1990. An earlier date was not set at the time, in order to ensure that the applicant would have sufficient time to prepare his case. When the present application was launched in the Federal Court, the hearing before the Parole Board was again rescheduled for the 6th of February in order to give the court time to rule as to whether or not the Parole Board still had jurisdiction in the matter.
[7]
In the decision of the Privy Council in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (P.C.), we find the following statement of law by Sir Arthur Channell at pages 174 and 175 of the report:
"The statutes contain no enactment as to what is to be the consequence of nonobservance of these provisions. It is contended for the appellants that the consequence is that the trial was coram non judice and must be treated as a nullity.
"It is necessary to consider the principles which have been adopted in construing statutes of this character, and the authorities so far as there are any on the particular question arising here. The question whether provisions in a statute are directory or imperative has very frequently arisen in this country, but it has been said that no general rule can be laid down, and that in every case the object of the statute must be looked at. The cases on the subject will be found collected in Maxwell on Statutes, 5th Ed., p. 596, and following pages. When the provisions of a statute relate to the performance of a public duty and the case is such that to hold null and void acts done in neglect of this duty would work serious general inconvenience, or injustice to persons who have no control over those entrusted with the duty, and at the same time would not promote the main object of the Legislature, it has been the practice to hold such provisions to be directory only, the neglect of them, though punishable, not affecting the validity of the acts done."
[8]
Collier, J., of this Court approved and applied the above mentioned principle in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). At page 14 of the report we find the following:
"The section, and the statute, is designed to compel regulation-making bodies to make their regulations public. But, the provisions requiring timely transmission to the clerk of the Privy Council, do not, in my view, make this Order-in-Council ineffective. I apply the principle laid down in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). The following statement can be found at page 71:
"Examination of the object of the statute reveals that a decision which would render the surrender null and void solely because of noncompliance with the formalities of s. 51(3) would certainly not promote the main object of the legislation where all substantial requirements have been fulfilled; it might well cause serious inconvenience or injustice to persons having no control over those entrusted with the duty of furnishing evidence of compliance in proper form. In the subsection, unlike subs. (1), where it is provided that unless it is complied with no surrender shall be valid or binding, there is no provision for any consequences of nonobservance. I therefore conclude that the provisions of subs. 51(3) are merely directory and not mandatory."
[10]
In deciding whether the word "shall" in s. 16(2) of the Regulations is directory or imperative one must, therefore, consider whether there are provisions somewhere in the statute which might clearly indicate that it was the legislator's intention to make the provision mandatory. If so, then obviously the court must give effect to the intention of the legislature. Also in the present case there are no consequences of any kind indicated in the Act or the Regulations which would flow from nonconformance with the provision regarding a hearing to be held at least thirteen weeks before the projected date of release nor is there anything to indicate that the stipulation would be mandatory. As there is no such indication, then one must consider the general object of the legislation. As to the general object of the Parole Act, it seems to be clear that the Act itself and, more particularly, the amendments introduced in 1986, which substituted a presumptive release date for mandatory release, was enacted not only for the purpose of benefitting the prisoners but also, and mainly for the protection of the public against the possible consequences of a release from parole, since the absolute right of the inmate for release on parole when a certain portion of the sentence served has been removed and release becomes subject to control by the Parole Board.
[11]
One can well imagine the danger to which the public might be exposed in certain cases if the provision were to be considered imperative. By a mere clerical error, as in the present case, an habitual psychopathic murderer would have to be released on his presumptive release date regardless of the fact that he might be considered a very dangerous criminal and most likely to kill again.
[12]
I have no difficulty in the present case in finding that "shall" in section 16(2) of the Regulations is merely a directory and that, therefore, the Parole Board still has a jurisdiction to proceed with the hearing.
[13]
The respondent will be entitled to the costs of this application.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slg
[End of document]