A. Introduction
[1]
Evans, J.
: Master Warrant Officer Ronald William McTague was scheduled to work a long day at the Fort York Armouries in Toronto on November 10, 1992. He reported for duty at 7:30 a.m. and was to train recruits in the use of equipment until 11:30 that night.
[2]
At about 6:00 p.m. he and other non-commissioned officers went out to a local restaurant for dinner because there were no mess facilities on the base; that is, unlike most other military establishments, there was nowhere there to eat. In recognition of the absence of this customary facility, the army agreed to reimburse M.W.O. McTague the cost of his dinner.
[3]
While crossing the road to return to the base from the restaurant he was hit by a vehicle and seriously injured.
[4]
M.W.O. McTague's subsequent claim for a pension was rejected on the ground that he was not suffering from disability as a result of an injury that, in the words of the relevant statutory provision, "arose out of or was directly connected with" military service.
[5]
M.W.O. McTague has made an applica­tion for judicial review of the decision by the Veterans Review and Appeal Board confirming its earlier determination that he was not eligible for a disability pension. His counsel submitted that the Board erred in law when it found that, on these facts, the applicant's injury did not "arise out of" or was not "directly connected with" military service, and accordingly should be set aside.
[6]
He had also argued before the Board that the injury fell within one of the specific situations listed in s. 21(3) of the
Pension Act
in which an injury is deemed to have arisen out of or to have been directly con­nected with military service. The Board did not refer to this aspect of the claim.
[7]
Although counsel raised this omission in his memorandum of law and fact, he did not seriously contend in oral argument that this invalidated the Board's conclusion. In neither his written submissions, nor his oral argu­ment, did counsel urge me to find that the Board had erred in law in failing to conclude that the applicant's injury fell within one of the situations deemed by s. 21(3) to be pensionable under s. 21(2)(a).
[8]
In these circumstances I reject any con­tention that the Board's failure to address this issue rendered its reasons defective in law. I infer from the way that counsel has structured his argument in this case that he regarded the s. 21(3) point as relatively minor in nature. Indeed, having considered the point myself, I do not think that it was a strong one.
B. Legislative Framework
[9]
The following provisions of the
Pension Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-6 are relevant to this application:
"2. The provisions of this Act shall be liberally construed and interpreted to the end that the recognized obligation of the people and Government of Canada
to provide compensation
to those members of the forces who have been disabled or have died as a result of military service, and to their dependants, may be fulfilled.
"21(2)(a)
where a member of the forces suffers disability resulting from an injury
or disease or an aggravation thereof
that arose out of or was directly connected with such military service, a pension shall, on application, be awarded to
or in respect of
the member
in accordance with the rates for basic and additional pension set out in Schedule I;"
"2. Les dispositions de la présente loi s'interprètent d'une façon libérale afin de donner effet à l'obligation reconnue du peuple canadien et du gouvernement du Canada
d'indemniser
les membres des forces qui sont devenus invalides ou sont décédés par suite de leur service militaire, ainsi que les personnes à leur charge.
"21(2)a) des pensions sont, sur demande, accordées aux membres des forces ou à leur égard, conformément aux taux prévus à l'annexe I pour les pensions de base ou supplémentaires, en cas d'invalidité causée par une blessure ou maladie -- ou son aggravation -- consécutive ou rattachée directement au service militaire;"
[10]
The
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
, S.C. 1995, c. 18 is also relevant to this application:
"3. The provisions of this Act and of any other Act of Parliament or of any regula­tions made under this or any other Act of Parliament conferring or imposing jurisdic­tion, powers, duties or functions on the Board shall be liberally construed and interpreted to the end that the recognized obligation of the people and Government of Canada to those who have served their country so well and to their dependants may be fulfilled.
"31.
A decision
of the majority of mem­bers of an appeal panel is a decision
of the Board
and
is final and binding.
"39. In all proceedings under this Act, the Board shall
(a) draw from all the circumstances of the case and all the evidence presented to it every reasonable inference in favour of the applicant or appellant;
. . . . .
(c) resolve in favour of the applicant or appellant any doubt, in the weighing of evidence, as to whether the applicant or appellant has established a case."
"3. Les dispositions de la présente loi et de toute autre loi fédérale, ainsi que de leurs règlements, qui établissent la compétence du Tribunal ou lui confèrent des pouvoirs et fonctions doivent s'interpréter de façon large, compte tenu des obligations que le peuple et le gouvernement du Canada reconnaissent avoir à l'égard de ceux qui ont si bien servi leur pays et des personnes à leur charge.
"31.
La décision
de la majorité des membres du comité d'appel vaut décision
du Tribunal
; elle
est définitive et exécutoire.
"39. Le Tribunal applique, à l'égard du demandeur ou de l'appelant, les règles suivantes en matière de preuve:
a) il tire des circonstances et des éléments de preuve qui lui sont présentés les conclusions les plus favorables possible à celui-ci;
. . . . .
c) il tranche en sa faveur toute incertitude quant au bien-fondé de la demande."
C. The Board's Decision
[11]
The applicant's claim had been originally rejected by the Department of Veterans Affairs, and an appeal from that decision to a review panel of the Veterans Review and Appeal Board was dismissed. There was no dispute about the primary facts relating to either the cause and extent of the applicant's injury, or the circumstances in which it occurred. However, these facts were found not to satisfy the statutory criterion of eligibility for pension purposes.
[12]
In a decision dated August 13, 1997 an entitlement appeal panel of the Veterans Review and Appeal Board dismissed an appeal from the Board's review panel. The applicant requested a rehearing by the Board in light of the subsequent decision of this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). In that case it was held that the Board had misinterpreted s. 21(2)(a) of the
Pension Act
by denying a pension on the ground that the claimant was not "on duty" when the injury occurred. Gibson, J., stated that an injury could "arise from" or be "directly connected with" military service within the meaning of s. 21(2)(a), even if the claimant was not at that time "on duty" for other military purposes.
[13]
In its decision of April 1, 1998 the Board agreed with counsel that its reasons were erroneous because, in view of Gibson, J.'s, decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , they placed undue weight on the fact that M.W.O. McTague was not "on duty" when he was hit by the vehicle while returning to the base from dinner. Whether the claimant was "on duty" at the time that the injury occurred was simply one of the factors to be considered.
[14]
Nonetheless, the Board affirmed the appeal panel's decision: any causal link between the applicant's military service and the injury was insufficient to satisfy s. 21(2)(a). Despite the fact that the army was paying for the dinner, it was not the occasion for the conduct of any military business, and the applicant and his colleagues freely chose where to eat.
[15]
This second decision of the Board is the subject of this application for judicial review. However, counsel for the applicant submitted that, in order better to understand the Board's reasoning, I should read its reasons for the decision under review together with those that it gave for its first decision, with the exception, of course, of that part of its original reasons that the Board subsequently disavowed.
D. Issues And Analysis
1. Standard Of Review
[16]
Counsel for the applicant argued that, since there were no primary facts in dispute in this case, the dispute centred on questions of law. By virtue of s. 18.1(4)(c) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, the court has jurisdiction to set aside a decision of a federal tribunal, such as the Board, if it erred in law in making its decision. Consequently, it was for the court to determine for itself whether the applicant's injury "arose from" or was "directly connected with" military service, and if it found that it was, it should set aside the Board's decision as erroneous in law.
[17]
Counsel for the Attorney General, on the other hand, submitted that the Board was entitled to a degree of deference from the court in its interpretation and application of the
Pension Act
, especially in view of the statutory provision that the Board's decisions are "final and binding" (
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
, s. 31), and that the Board had full and exclusive jurisdiction to determine all matters relating to appeals (s. 26). Accordingly, he submitted, the Board's decision was only erroneous in law if patently unreasonable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 449; 45 Admin. L.R. 161;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 75 W.A.C. 1.
[18]
Counsel for the applicant appeared to argue that the court's jurisdiction to set aside a decision of a federal administrative tribunal for error of law mandates the court to review any question of law decided by the tribunal under review by asking whether it was correct. This, with respect, is not the law. Indeed, it is quite contrary to the elaboration by the Supreme Court of Canada since the mid-1980s of a pragmatic or functional analysis for determining the standard of review that legislatures should be regarded as implicitly prescribing when a specialist tribunal's interpretation or application of its constitutive statute is challenged in judicial review proceedings.
[19]
The search for legislative intent in this context is at bottom about determining a rational allocation of decision-making responsibility between specialist tribunal and reviewing court. An important element of this quest is an assessment of whether the tribunal or the reviewing court is better equipped to decide the issues in dispute:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 241.
[20]
Also important is a concern that the administration of the statutory scheme not be encumbered with costly and protracted litigation. In public administration, quality cannot be considered in the abstract without regard to its attendant costs and the implications for the system of limited resources. Accordingly, even if a reviewing court might conceivably make a "better" decision than the tribunal under review, Parliament may be regarded as nonetheless preferring the benefits of finality and a relatively inexpensive and expeditious administrative decision-making process.
[21]
I turn now to consider the components of the pragmatic or functional approach relevant to this case in order to determine the applicable standard of review.
(a) The Statutory Language
[22]
Two matters require consideration here: the wording of the statutory definition of eligibility for a pension as a result of disability, and the provisions relating to the review of the administrative decisions made in response to claims for a pension.
[23]
The words of the
Pension Act
relevant in this case are that the claimant's injury "arose out of" or was "directly connected with" military service. These are not terms of legal art, and can be applied to the facts of a given case in a way that is consistent with the purposes of the statute by persons without the particular expertise of judges.
[24]
Rather, what is generally required is a thoughtful and open-minded assessment of the facts of the particular case that is informed by the insights that the decision-maker has obtained by consulting his or her previous experience with the scheme, or the reasons given by colleagues for decisions that they have rendered, in the disposition of similar disputes.
[25]
However, because they appear in a statute, even open-textured words that are familiar from every day speech have a legal significance. Their meaning and application must therefore be determined in the light of the purposes of the particular statutory scheme in which they are employed. Further, the words in question in this case are apt to conjure up concepts that are well known to lawyers from other legal contexts, including the law of vicarious liability and workers' compensation.
[26]
In my opinion, given the context of a statutory scheme designed to enable claims to be decided with the minimum of formality, cost and delay (see, for example, s. 40 of the
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
), the words defining entitlement indicate that on an application for judicial review considerable deference should be given to the Board's decision.
[27]
The second aspect of the statutory language to be considered is the extent to which it expressly contemplates or precludes access to the court from decisions by the Board. The absence of a right of appeal from the Veterans Review and Appeal Board, and the exclusive jurisdiction and finality provisions (ss. 26 and 31 of the
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
) are indicative that Parliament did not intend the Board's decisions to be subject to close judicial surveillance.
[28]
This conclusion is also evident in the provisions creating a series of administrative appeals against a rejection of a claim for a pension: from Veterans Affairs to the entitlement review panel of the Veterans Review and Appeal Board (
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
, s. 19), and from there to an appeal panel of the Board (ss. 25 and 26). In addition, both review and appeal panels are expressly empowered to reconsider their own decisions (ss. 23(1) and 32(1)).
[29]
When, as here, Parliament has custom-designed a system of administrative appeals to and within an independent administrative agency, and conferred a power on the tribunals to reopen decisions that they have made, the statutory avenues of recourse will normally be regarded as constituting an adequate remedy. Accordingly, a reviewing court should not lightly intervene in their decisions.
[30]
The precise extent to which a finality clause precludes or limits judicial review must be determined within the context of the particular statutory scheme in which it appears (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 1). In my opinion, the provisions considered above strongly indicate that Parliament intended the court to afford considerable deference to the Board's decisions when challenged in an application for judicial review.
(b) The Statutory Decision-maker
And Its Decisions
[31]
A range of considerations is relevant under this compendious heading. First, the degree of expertise of the administrative tribunal must be assessed. The essentially adjudicative nature of the Board's responsibilities suggests that its expertise should be regarded as relatively limited (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), compared, for instance, with a regulatory agency with broad policy-making functions and powers, such as a securities commission (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Board is composed of full-time and
part- time
members (s. 4), and prescribes no particular qualifications that they must possess. Moreover, unlike many "tripartite" tribunals determining disputes between employers and employees (including workers' compensation tribunals in some jurisdictions), the Board's members are not statutorily required to include nominees of the Minister on the one hand, and representatives of veterans, for instance, on the other.
[33]
Second, the nature of the rights determined by the Board is also relevant. Disability pensions are doubtless of great importance to the individuals concerned, but their denial is not normally likely to consign unsuccessful claimants to destitution, nor to preclude their pursuit of other remedies such as, in this case, a claim in tort against the owner of the vehicle that hit M.W.O. McTague, or a statutory claim under the provincial motor vehicle compensation fund.
[34]
In my opinion, the rights at stake here are not of the same order of importance as the right to be recognized as a refugee ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra), or to be free from discrimination (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The statutory rights in question in those cases were closely linked to constitutional rights protected by ss. 7 and 15 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
respectively.
[35]
Third, the statutory purpose underlying the creation of the tribunal under review must also be taken into account. The administration of programs of social benefits, especially after the first-level decision has been made, are commonly entrusted to independent, specialist administrative tribunals in an attempt to ensure a fair, accessible, inexpensive and expeditious determination of claims.
[36]
Indeed, s. 40 of the
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
indicates that these considerations were taken into account when Parliament conferred on the specialist tribunals jurisdiction to determine whether an injured member of the armed forces is entitled to a pension. In addition, of course, the familiarity that tribunal members will acquire from a regular exposure to recurring factual situations and to the legislative scheme should enhance the quality of their decisions.
[37]
To summarize, while the limited powers of the Board are indicative of a legislative intent that the standard of review should be towards the correctness end of the spectrum, the nature of the rights at stake and the reasons for the Board's creation are more consistent with a deferential standard.
(c) The Issues In Dispute
[38]
As I have already indicated, there is no dispute in this case about the primary facts. The issue in contention principally concerns the application to those facts of s. 21(2)(a) of the
Pension Act
: in particular, whether M.W.O. McTague's injury "arose out of or was directly connected with" military service within the meaning of the statute.
[39]
In addition, counsel for the applicant maintained that, in using language not found in the statute to reach its decision, the Board "asked itself the wrong question" or, in other words, misinterpreted the
Act
. Counsel also submitted that the Board erred in law because it failed to give effect to the statutory instruction to interpret the statute broadly and to draw from the evidence and all the circumstances of the case any reasonable inference in favour of the claimant.
[40]
While a conceptual distinction between the interpretation and application of a statute can be drawn, in reality, as the Supreme Court of Canada pointed out in
Director of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , "pure" questions of interpretation tend to merge imperceptibly into "fact specific" applications.
[41]
That an issue falls towards the "interpretation" end of the spectrum is an indicator that correctness review is appropriate because of the precedential value of the decision and the relevance of judicial interpretative skills for reaching the "best" result. Conversely, an issue that has no or little significance beyond the facts of the particular case will tend to be characterized as one of application, and will attract judicial deference because its determination calls for an assessment of those facts, an exercise that is within the tribunal's area of expertise and does not require the expenditure of court resources for determining the "correct" answer.
[42]
While it is a part of the lawyer's art to identify in a tribunal's decision some "general questions" that have a significance beyond the facts of the particular case, in my opinion a reviewing court should normally resist counsel's appeal to "principle" when the statutory language in question, as in this case, is non-technical in nature and relatively open-textured, and thus invites the tribunal to decide on which side of a hazy line the particular facts fall in any given case.
[43]
To "legalize" the process by breaking into a series of questions of "interpretation" what ought to be an exercise in assessing the factual situation as a whole seems to me apt to undermine Parliament's intention that decision-making by the administrative tribunals determining pension entitlement should be accessible, informal, cost-effective and expeditious.
[44]
In my opinion, the questions in dispute in this case are at the "application" end of the spectrum. The applicant's complaint in essence is that the Board did not give sufficient weight to the fact that, in the course of a long day at work, M.W.O. McTague was compelled to go out for dinner by the absence of eating facilities on the base, something that the army recognized when it agreed to reimburse him the cost of his dinner. Allocating an appropriate weight to the relevant facts is an exercise of judgment for which the Board is at least as well equipped as a reviewing court. A deferential standard of review is thus indicated by the nature of the issues in dispute in this case.
[45]
The applicant's allegation that the Board erred in law by failing to give him the benefit of the doubt and to interpret the legislation in a broad and liberal fashion should be taken into consideration at the stage of deciding if the Board's decision falls short of the standard of reasonableness.
[46]
Finally, I should note that it is well established in this court that the less demanding standard of patent unreasonableness is applicable when the issue in dispute is the Board's weighing or interpretation of often conflicting or inconclusive medical evidence and determining from it whether the claimant's disability was in fact caused or aggravated by military service:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 164 F.T.R. 42 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 153 F.T.R. 75 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 152 F.T.R. 58 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 144 F.T.R. 71 (T.D.).
[47]
Factual determinations of this nature are at the very heart of the specialized jurisdiction of the Board. Considerations of cost effectiveness and relative institutional competence call for maximum curial deference to findings of fact.
(d) Conclusion
[48]
The weight of the factors considered above in the pragmatic or functional analysis suggests that Parliament should be regarded as prescribing a deferential standard of review in this case. However, they do not indicate that the most deferential standard should be applied. "Patent unreasonableness" seems increasingly to be reserved as the standard of review applied to the decisions of administrative agencies that are protected by strong preclusive clauses and have a wider range of regulatory responsibilities than the merely adjudicative functions performed by the Board. It is also the appropriate standard, as I have indicated above, where the issue in dispute involves findings of primary fact, including the drawing of inferences from the evidence.
2. Was The Board's Decision
"Unreasonable"?
[49]
In my opinion it was not. The Board was faced with a classic example of a fact situation that fell in the "grey area" of the relevant statutory language: some facts indicated that the injury satisfied the definition of eligibility for a pension under s. 21(2)(a) of the
Pension Act
, while others indicated that it did not.
[50]
The following facts support M.W.O. McTague's claim: his injury occurred during a scheduled break in the performance of military duties; it was entirely foreseeable that he would leave the base for dinner because there were no eating facilities at the base, and might be hit by a vehicle while crossing a road on his way to or from a restaurant; and the army recognized and supported the applicant's decision to go out for dinner by reimbursing him the cost of his meal.
[51]
However, the
Pension Act
does not provide a pension to members of the armed forces simply because they are injured while they are in the armed forces. There must be some causal connection between the injury and the performance of military service. Thus, some of the facts support the Board's decision that the applicant was not eligible under the statutory test.
[52]
For example, his injuries did not occur on the base and were not caused by another member of the armed forces. M.W.O. McTague was not required to eat at a particular restaurant, and was not required to eat out at all because he could have brought food from home. Unlike the unusual situation considered in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the dinner served no "business" purpose, except that of providing sustenance to the applicant prior to his resumption of military activities.
[53]
In determining whether this finding was unreasonable I must also bear in mind Parliament's directive in the
Pension Act
that the legislation must be construed broadly in order to discharge Canada's obligation to compensate those members of the armed forces who have been disabled as a result of military service, and that any reasonable inference should be drawn from the evidence in favour of claimants. The similar, but not identical, wording of s. 3 of the
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
must also be considered.
[54]
Even with these considerations in mind, which the Board stated in its reasons that it had taken into account, the resulting decision was not "unreasonable": it will withstand the "somewhat probing examination" called for  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Inc.
, supra, at page 776  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In view of the requirement that the injury "arose from or was
directly
connected with" the claimant's military service, the facts taken into consideration by the Board do not so clearly point towards a finding of eligibility that the Board's decision to refuse a pension must be characterized as unreasonable.
[55]
Counsel also relied on cases previously decided by the Board. For instance, he argued, in the cases of
Galbraith
(VAB/E-122; September 13, 1988), and
Brown
(VAB/E-12014; March 15, 1995) the Board had found in favour of claimants on facts materially similar to those of this case. However, inconsistency is generally not an independent ground of judicial review:
Domtar Inc.
, supra;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[56]
Counsel also argued that the Board was at least obliged to explain in its reasons why it reached a different conclusion from that in the earlier cases. Without such reasons, he submitted, the Board would be permitted to lapse into unprincipled and arbitrary decision-making, and there would be no adequate means for ensuring its accountability.
[57]
It would no doubt have been desirable if the Board had addressed those cases but, in my opinion, it was not legally obliged so to do. Different panels may always reach different conclusions about which side of an imprecise line similar facts fall. Moreover, no two factual situations are ever identical: for example, in
Brown
the claimant had been injured by another soldier, apparently while they were on military premises.
[58]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.), the Supreme Court recently reminded us that, in assessing the adequacy of a tribunal's reasons, reviewing courts should consider the administrative decision-making context as a whole, and be alert not to set the standard too high for fear of unduly burdening the due administration of the statutory scheme.
[59]
When the Board is essentially making a determination based on the facts of the specific case before it, it would be unrealistic to expect the Board to provide reasons that contain an analysis of the factually similar cases to which counsel referred it and, in view of the considerations outlined above, the need to avoid arbitrary decision-making does not so require.
3. Did The Board Misinterpret
The Statute?
[60]
Counsel for the applicant argued that the Board's decision was legally flawed because it was apparent from the reasons that it had misinterpreted the statutory phrase "arose from or was directly connected with" military service.
[61]
First, he submitted that it could be inferred from the Board's reference in its reasons to the fact that the phrase in question had a long legal pedigree, including its early appearance in British workers' compensation legislation, that it had failed to approach its application in a manner consistent with the very different context of the
Pension Act
.
[62]
Unlike workers' compensation legislation, pensions are payable under the
Pension Act
regardless of whether the claimant's injury resulted in loss of income. Rather, as s. 2 of the
Pension Act
and s. 3 of the
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
make clear, the provisions dealing with pension entitlement are to be interpreted broadly, since they are a statutory recognition of the nation's debt to men and women who have been willing to put life and limb at risk in the service of their country, and to suffer the other inconveniences of a military career.
[63]
There are two difficulties with this argument, however. Despite its generous wording, s. 2 of the
Pension Act
still speaks of an obligation to
compensate
members of the armed forces disabled
as a result of
military service. The analogous s. 3 of the
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
does not, however.
[64]
Moreover, the Board's reasons do not indicate that it took an inappropriately strict compensatory approach to the statute. Nowhere did the Board state whether or not M.W.O. McTague had sustained any loss of income-earning capacity as a result of his injury. What it did say is this:
"It appears that a common thread throughout the Canadian Compensation cases (workers and veterans) regarding injuries sustained during meal break is the requirement that the employment or the service was a 'contributing cause' and was not merely the setting in which the event occurred."
(Veterans Review and Appeal Board, Decision No. 6965033, April 1, 1998, p. 2)
[65]
I cannot infer from this that the Board failed to interpret the relevant phrase in the statutory context of the
Pension Act
. It had already noted that the phrase also appears in Australian veterans legislation.
[66]
Second, counsel submitted, the Board misinterpreted the
Pension Act
by importing terms not contained in the language of the statute itself, namely the distinction between "contributing cause" and "setting". In particular, it stated in its reasons that the fact that the applicant's injury occurred in the course of a working day did not provide a sufficient causal nexus to bring it within s. 21(2)(a). That the injury occurred during a working day was merely the "setting" not a "contributing cause".
[67]
It is true that these words are not in the legislation; however, the phrase "
directly
connected" in my opinion required the Board to consider the strength of the causal connection between the injury and the applicant's military service. In contrasting "contributing cause" with "setting", the Board was distinguishing stronger from weaker causal connections between the injury and the performance of military service. Given that it is not sufficient that, when injured, the applicant was serving in the military, I find that the Board committed no error of law here in its understanding of the statutory test.
[68]
Finally, counsel argued that the Board had failed to take into account the statutory directives that the legislation should be interpreted broadly and that claimants should, in effect, be given the benefit of any reasonable doubt. That it failed to do this was obvious, he submitted, from the fact that the Board had found in favour of the claimants in the cases of
Galbraith
, supra, and
Brown
, supra, where the facts were materially identical.
[69]
Counsel acknowledged, however, that the Board had stated in the introduction to its original decision that it had taken these provisions into account in reaching its decision. He took no issue with the fact that the Board did not repeat this in the reasons that it gave on its reconsideration, which is the decision that is the subject of this application for judicial review.
[70]
It is difficult to maintain that the Board failed to take into account a matter that it stated that it had considered. However, its reasons would undoubtedly have been strengthened if they had indicated more clearly that the Board had kept these provisions firmly in mind when it grappled with the case.
[71]
Nonetheless, in my opinion counsel's real objection is that the Board failed to give sufficient weight to the statutory directives: this is a matter of application rather than interpretation, and is reviewable on a standard of unreasonableness. And, while I might have been inclined to come to a different conclusion from that of the Board if I had been in its position, I cannot say, as I have already indicated, that its conclusion was either unreasonable, or even clearly wrong.
E. Conclusion
[72]
For these reasons the application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Jocelyne M. Caissie/clh
[End of document]