[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The appellant's application for Canadian citizenship was declined by the Citizenship Judge K.A. Schellenberg by reasons dated May 21, 1992, in file #15422.
The Citizenship Court's Decision
[2]
Here are pertinent passages from those reasons:
"I refer to your application for the grant of Canadian Citizenship which is dated October 29, 1991, filed at the Court of Canadian Citizenship in Vancouver, B.C. and was heard by me at Vancouver Court on March 31, 1992.
"The only issue in your case, Mr. Hui, is whether or not you have satisfied the residence requirement, as set forth in subsection 5(1)(c) of the
Citizenship Act
, bearing in mind the interpretation given to 'residence' in decisions of the Federal Court of Canada.
. . . . .
- You initially entered Canada on July 23, 1988 with your wife, son and daughter under the EN2 category which is the Entrepreneurial section with Canadian Immigration.
- You presented a letter from Immigration Canada dated July 24, 1991, stating that you met the Terms and Conditions of your admission to Canada. Therefore, we are not dealing with any immigration problems with regard to your application.
- All the formal documentation required for Residency applications was submitted by you, showing that you had purchased a home, filed income tax, maintained bank account(s), paid provincial medical premiums, purchased an automobile and maintained your family in Canada.
- You did not terminate your employment in Hong Kong until June 30, 1989 which was one year following your initial entry. According to the Court's calculations with regard to the period of question which is from date of entry until date of application (October 29, 1991), you are 537 days short of the required 1095.
- During this period in question, three years and three months, you were absent from Canada 20 times (636 days). The average absence was approximately 30 days, never over 46 days. Your trips were to China, Japan, Taiwan and Hong Kong.
- You travel with a British passport which will expire on June 30, 1997. You travel freely in and out of Canada and will be able to continue to do this, as long as you do not jeopardize your Landed Immigrant status.
- With a partner, you incorporated 'Hui & IP Electronics Ltd.' in B.C. on February 5, 1990 (one year and seven months after landing).
. . . . .
[Reference is next made to what was said by the respective Federal Court Judges who decided the appeals of
Re: Anita Leung
(1991), 42 F.T.R. 149, and
Re: Anquist
, [1985] 1 W.W.R. 562.]
. . . . .
"You would make a very fine citizen, Mr. Hui, but you must meet all of the requirements of the
Act
.
"I have considered and decided against making an affirmative recommendation under subsection 5(3) or 5(4) of the
Act
, especially since there was no evidence of any health disability, or of any special or unusual hardship, or services of exceptional value to Canada.
"Pursuant to the provisions of subsection 14(3) of the
Citizenship Act
, this letter constitutes formal notice of my nonapproval of your application.
. . . . .
"Should you not decide to appeal my decision, you may file a new application whenever you can comply with the requirements of the
Citizenship Act
. I strongly advise you to take ESL [English as a Second Language] classes."
[3]
The question of compliance with statutory residence criteria - especially the criterion expressed in s. 5(1)(c) of the
Citizenship Act
, above cited, three years of residence in Canada within the preceding four years - has been a vexed topic of this court's jurisprudence. Here, where the citizenship judge's computation is not even challenged by either the appellant or the amica curiae, the resolution of this appeal is actually agonizing. The appellant needed 1095 days, and he had only 558 days. Moreover, he applied very much before the four year mark.
Conflicting Jurisprudence
[4]
The jurisprudence in this court as between strict and loose construction of the
Act
evinces the variety of interpretation which can be found among the various sects of the world's three great monotheistic religions regarding their respective sacred scriptures. One text can be, is, interpreted to mean different tenets.
[5]
Decisions relatively recent evincing what may be termed loose construction, are:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.); and
Re
Cheung
(1992), 59 F.T.R. 71 (T.D.).
[6]
Other recent decisions of this court, evincing the strict statutory construction are:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.);
Re
Leung
(1991), 42 F.T.R. 149 (T.D.);
Re
Badrool B. Shaw
(1991), 49 F.T.R. 270 (T.D.);
Re
Pourghasemi
(1993), 62 F.T.R. 122; 19 Imm. L.R.(2d) 259 (T.D.);
Re
Khalife
(1993), 62 F.T.R. 239 (T.D.);
Re Habib Farid
Khalife
, T-2564-92, April 1993; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  two disparate collections of samples or examples, only, out of many more both reported and unreported. It must be difficult for citizenship judges to grasp the fundamental principles enunciated by the judges of this court on citizenship appeals. There should be more certainty and predictability to the law than have been evinced by this court, which, of course, enjoys no unifying direction of any Court of Appeal in these matters.
Application Prior To Four Years
[8]
In this case, it is noted, the appellant made a premature application, before he had resided in Canada over an interrupted span of four years. Having spanned only about three years and three months of that interrupted residence, (entry on July 23, 1988 and application for citizenship dated October 29, 1991) he could never achieve accumulation of three years residence
within the four years immediately preceding the date of his application
. In that time span of three years and three months approximately, he could possibly have achieved the requisite 1,095 days needed, had he not absented himself.
Analysis Of Two Notions Of Residence
[9]
Reference will be made to s. 24 of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, because it is referred to in s. 5(1)(c). Let it be noted with certainty that, in terms of that section, and s. 25, no question arises of the appellant's loss of permanent residence or remaining outside Canada with any intention of abandoning Canada as his place of permanent residence. After all, his wife and children reside in Vancouver, in his and their family residence.
[10]
Section 5(1)(c) of the
Act
has a peculiar configuration in regard to this portion of its text:
"(c) ... has not ceased since such admission to be a permanent resident pursuant to section 24 of the Immigration Act, and has, within the four years immediately preceding the date of his application, accumulated at least three years of residence in Canada, calculated in the following manner:
(i) for
every day
during which the person was
resident in Canada
before his lawful admission to Canada for
permanent residence
the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one-half of a day of
residence
, and
(ii) for every day during which the person was
resident in Canada
after his lawful admission to Canada for
permanent residence
the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one day of residence." (Emphasis not in statutory text)
[11]
It appears that in order to avoid the confusion of trying to merge two distinct concepts which cannot logically or easily operate together, the legislator stated that for one qualification the applicant must
not have ceased to be a permanent resident
pursuant to s. 24 of the immigration statute. The qualification then is simply to have not ceased to be a permanent resident: it is certain as earlier noted that this appellant continued to be a permanent resident
pursuant
to s. 24. The qualification stated, in fact, does not import all the notions, concepts machinery and complexity of s. 24, it is simply not to have lost "permanent residence" status by whatever means, as that is understood by s. 24. It is equally certain that not ceasing to be a "permanent resident" is not dispositive of the 5(1)(c) residence qualification.
[12]
To that on-ceasing-to-be-a-permanent-resident of Canada are added then the other qualifications which require not the notions of "permanent residence" but simply having been a "resident in Canada" by the half-day and by the day until one accumulates, day-by-day or half day-by-day (*while not ceasing to be a permanent resident) - residence, being calculated in that day-by-day manner - until one has, within the four preceding years accumulated three years, still calculated day-by-day, of residence in Canada. So without ceasing to be a permanent resident
and
upon accumulating three years of residence calculated in the painstaking day-by-day manner one can meet the residence criterion. That day-by-day accumulation of residence - residing day-by-day in Canada - is expressed in the way which betokens presence in Canada.
[13]
The legislated rule can be understood in terms of the exception to residing within the boundaries of Canada, that of permitting residence outside Canada as expressed in s. 5(1.1) in which Parliament more recently considered its prescription for accumulating the requisite number of days for three years' residence during the preceding four years:
"5(1.1) Any day during which an applicant for citizenship resided with the applicant's spouse who at the time was a Canadian citizen and was employed outside of Canada in or with the Canadian armed forces or the public service of Canada or of a province, otherwise than as a locally engaged person, shall be treated as equivalent to one day of residence in Canada for the purposes of paragraph (1)(c) and subsection 11(1)."
Now it is impossible to understand how one could comply with that exceptional prescription without really residing under the same roof as does the spouse. Can anyone pretend that an applicant could reside elsewhere but still accumulate any prescribed days by sending his or her furniture, clothing goods and so forth to be deposited in the spouse's house? Was it intended that the spouse's house be a mere pied-à-terre? Of course not. So, residing in Canada is not to be accomplished by being absent from Canada, except pursuant to s. 5(1.1).
[14]
But must not some permanent residents travel abroad for some reason or other? Assuredly that need is amply accorded by one whole year of days abroad in the generous span of four years, out of which only three need to be accumulated of "residence in Canada".
Legislative Purpose
[15]
What is the purpose of this legislative standard? It is surely not that applicants be out of Canada for any less than three out of four years. Parliament intends to confer citizenship not on de facto foreigners, but on persons who have been "in residence" in Canada, not absent, for three years during the previous four. It intends to confer citizenship on applicants who have "Canadianized" themselves by residing among Canadians in Canada. This cannot be accomplished abroad. Nor can it be accomplished by depositing bank accounts, rental payment, furniture, clothing goods, and more importantly, spouses and children - in a word, all except oneself - in Canada, while remaining personally outside Canada. Parliament prescribes three out of the preceding four years for qualifying for citizenship. Parliament does not speak of depositing anything, nor of a pied-à-terre where one's furniture can become "Canadianized", nor yet of intentions, some day, to become a Canadian, nor of the acquisition of provincial driver's licences. It is true that one can frustrate Parliament's purpose by residing in a religious ghetto in Canada, but that exceptions conduct, that adoption of apartheid as a way of life in Canada does not derogate from the manifest purpose of s. 5(1)(c) of the
Citizenship Act
. This is a strict construction and it appears to be a justifiable and correct interpretation of the will of Parliament.
Judicial Departures From Legislative
Purpose
[16]
Would it be justifiable for the judges to assert that they know better? To assert that Parliament really wants to loosen the qualification, or to qualify it, but that Parliament, because it is too preoccupied with other matters will never get around to it, so the judiciary should apply the law other than as it is written? That attitude could lead to the tyranny of "politically correct" judges. That attitude was once known as the criterion of the length of the Chancellor's foot. That attitude is arrogant, for it arrogates to the judiciary the power to legislate, which is Parliament's. When expressed in an allegedly enlightened manner, that attitude attracts the praise of being "pro-active" and progressive. But who is objectively to say what is enlightened? In such an attitude can reside that lack of intellectual fortitude which cannot bear to disappoint the actual litigant or to suffer the criticism of those who clamour to set aside the law for their own purposes. It may appear to some to be the quintessence of judicial independence, but more often it is the antithesis.
[17]
Now the Court respectfully suggests that the criteria of s. 5(1)(c) need to be made more subtle and flexible in order to accommodate certain realities which Parliament may choose to recognize, but which it may equally decline to acknowledge. This Court will not presume to ignore clearly expressed legislation upon the arrogant notion that Parliament is simply not doing its job. This is a "job" which Parliament may simply choose not to address, and would not the Court be fatuous to charge ahead in such a circumstance? Everyone knows that a majority Parliament legislates according to the agenda of the majority government, and that a host of apparently legitimate initiatives will not find a place on that agenda. Even when Parliament had a perfectly serviceable and productive (some even add: "competent") Law Reform Commission operating for more than twenty years, Parliament ignored or declined to debate ever so many of the Commission's thoroughly researched and studied recommendations. Even so, the Commission and the Courts continued to call for law reform measures where they perceived the need or desirability.
Statutory Form And Legislative
Function
[18]
One salient reality which is not directly accommodated by s. 5(1)(c) is that of an applicant who has, like the present applicant, accumulated too few days in too little time, but who nevertheless seems to have Canadianized himself or herself in sweet accord with the obvious
purpose
of the legislation. In truth, Parliament solemnly prescribed "three years residence in Canada" (calculated by half-days and whole days) "within the four years immediately preceding the date of his application" for citizenship, as the minimum time within which the purpose can be achieved.
[19]
Did that prescription perhaps not engage the attention of legislators in the Parliamentary debates preceding its enactment? The provision is so unambiguous, in both official languages, as to preclude any thought of resort to
Hansard
or contemporaneous governmental statements. What makes s. 5(1)(c) so clear and certain is the eye-catching redundancy which is expressed in it. It would have been clear enough to have enacted that the applicant must have "accumulated ... three years", but Parliament enacted "accumulated
at least
three years" - for emphasis! So is it also emphasized in the French language version: "résidé au Canada pendant
au moins
trois ans ... " - for emphasis! It would take judicial arrogance, indeed, to ignore such emphatic statutory prescription.
[20]
Thus, it appears that Parliament cared not that some prodigies, like this appellant, can become pretty well Canadianized in less time than the statute prescribes: it declined to prescribe less time. Rather it accorded the Minister discretion to waive some requirements, as will be mentioned later herein.
[21]
So, it is quite obvious that there is an obvious determinative distinction between: (a) purporting to add to or to subtract from jurisdiction conferred upon an adjudicative body by Parliament, (which is arrogant); and (b) for example, holding that a federal statutory adjudicator contemplated by s. 2 of the
Federal Court Act
, ignored the evidence before him, her or it and thus lost the jurisdiction which Parliament undeniably conferred, (which is a normal judicial function whether correctly or erroneously exercised in the circumstances). So, purporting to pre-empt Parliament by adjudicating as if the statutory text were other than it is, where it is clear in meaning, would appear to be a species of judicial misbehaviour, even if barely covered by the notion of judicial independence. Judicial restraint it is not.
Statutory Provision For Relief From
Operation Of Paragraph 5(1)(c)
[22]
The notion of judicial restraint is sometimes pejoratively called a "black letter" interpretation. In this relatively new era of Canada's constitutional history, in which the judiciary, culminating with the Supreme Court of Canada, is now empowered to strike down or uphold legislation on an infinitely broader basis than the strict division of powers in this federal State, the advisability - nay, need - of judicial restraint should be paramount in order to avoid usurpation of the legislative function in which the people's elected representatives rightly exercise the major rôle. In this case the legislator has considered the potential problem under s. 5(1)(c) and made provision for its resolution by citizenship judges, but apparently not by judges of this court. This resolution is reserved to the Minister's discretion, in regard to which it is enacted that the citizenship judge may make a recommendation.
[23]
Thus, the
Citizenship Act
itself, provides this:
"5(3) The Minister may, in his discretion, waive on compassionate grounds,
(a) ...; and
(b) ... the requirement respecting length of residence in Canada set out in paragraph (1)(c) ..."
In addition to the foregoing, s. 5(4) accords a further discretion to waive requirements of the
Act
, in order "to alleviate cases of special and unusual hardship or to reward services of exceptional value to Canada ...". In the present case, as earlier noted, the citizenship judge indicated that she had considered and decided against making an affirmative recommendation to the Minister under s. 5(3) and (4) of the
Act
.
"especially since there was no evidence of any health disability, or of any special or unusual hardship, or services of exceptional value to Canada."
This finding was certainly within the discretion conferred upon the citizenship judge by virtue of s. 15(1) of the
Citizenship Act
. Had the facts appeared to be different to her, she would no doubt have made the affirmative recommendation, and that might possibly have moved the Minister to grant citizenship to the appellant.
Citizenship Judge's Declining To Make
A Recommendation Exigible To
Overruling?
[24]
In the circumstances of this case, in which it seems that the appellant may have already attained the purpose of s. 5(1)(c), could this court, on appeal, overrule the citizenship judge's decision not to make an affirmative recommendation? Here, this court, without the guidance of an appeal court, manifests divergent jurisprudence. The better reasoned view states that this court is not empowered to intervene. A strongly persuasive decision on this matter was rendered by Mr. Justice Addy of this court in
Re Akins
(1978), 87 D.L.R.(3d) 93 (F.C.T.D.), where he performed an analysis of the structure and sequence of the
Act
's pertinent provisions. He concluded, at p. 96:
"For the reasons previously stated, I find that I have no jurisdiction to make any recommendation that executive action be taken pursuant to s. 5(4). I come to this decision somewhat reluctantly for, after hearing the eloquent representations made by the appellant personally, the latter having acted on his own behalf, and having regard to his statements as to the nature and the alleged results of his work in the Sharel region of West Africa, in connection with a C.I.D.A. approved project, it is conceivable that I might have considered the advisability of making a recommendation on the basis of services rendered which were of exceptional value to Canada. I must point out, however, that the appellant stated to me that he had never presented these facts to the Citizenship Court Judge at the time of the original hearing.
"The appeal is therefore dismissed."
[25]
The above judgment was followed by Mr. Justice Strayer in
Re Khat
(1991), 49 F.T.R. 252 (T.D). Citing with favour
Re Akins
(above);
Re Boutros
, [1980] 1 F.C. 624 (T.D.), and
Re Aaron
, [1982] 2 F.C. 358 (T.D.), Strayer, J., wrote as follows:
"Her representative strongly urged that I should make a recommendation to the Minister to exercise his discretion under paragraph 5(3) of the
Act
to waive the requirement ... on compassionate grounds. The compassionate ground pressed was that Mrs. Khat cannot acquire a better knowledge of Canada and of the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship because she is illiterate in Cambodian as well as in both official languages of Canada. She has made serious efforts to learn English since coming to Canada but has made only moderate progress. This is her second unsuccessful application for citizenship.
"There has been some division of opinion in this Court concerning the jurisdiction of the Court to make such recommendations. I respectfully agree with those judges who have found that the Court has no such jurisdiction. The appeal to this Court which is authorized under subsection 14(1)(5) is an appeal 'from the decision of the citizenship judge under subsection (2) ...', and the decision referred to in that subsection is a decision of the judge to approve or not approve the application. The power given to a citizenship judge in subsection 15(1) with respect to the exercise of discretion on compassionate grounds is that of making a recommendation to the Minister in this respect. This is not a 'decision' under subsection 14(2)." (p. 253).
The force of Mr. Justice Strayer's reasoning is not to be gainsaid. It has been followed in this court in
Re Khouri
, [1992] 1 F.C. D27/F33; 15 Imm. L.R.(2d) 18; 51 F.T.R. 76, and in other citizenship appeal judgments.
[26]
In
Re Khat
, Strayer, J., went on to say (F.T.R. 253, para. [6]):
"Subsection 14(2) provides, however, that as a precondition to making a decision under that subsection, the citizenship judge must consider whether or not to make a recommendation under subsection 15(1). While it is not for this Court, sitting on appeal, to review the conclusion of the citizenship judge as to whether a recommendation should be made, in a proper case it may be open to this Court to refer the matter back to the citizenship judge if this Court is not satisfied that relevant factors have been taken into account in the exercise of that discretion."
No authority is cited for referring the matter back to the citizenship judge, and indeed the power to refer back a matter or consideration does not appear to be an inherent aspect of the appellate jurisdiction conferred on this court.
[27]
Rule 912 exacts that the appeal take the form of a new hearing and that strongly indicates that there be no references back to the citizenship judge. Where powers are conferred on the Court of Appeal, on the other hand, s. 52 of the
Federal Court Act
in paragraphs (b)(iii) and (c)(ii) specifies such a retro-reference, but nothing in s. 21 or rules 914 et seq. so specifies. Since appeals as such were only vestigially, if at all, known to the common law, the power of retro-reference must be conferred by specific legislation. The
Interpretation Act
also yields no general or specific provision to govern this instance.
[28]
Section 16 blocks access to such a power stipulated in s. 18.1(3)(b) and in s. 28(2) of the
Federal Court Act
. That is, s. 16 of the
Citizenship Act
was drafted before s. 28 of the
Federal Court Act
was recently re-enacted to rely on ss. 18 to 18.5 of that same statute in order to confer judicial review jurisdiction on the Court of Appeal. Whether or not the appellant could resort to those provisions in order to invoke the Trial Division's jurisdiction in mandamus is problematic. One cannot find such specific jurisdiction to refer the matter back, as noted, in the
Citizenship Act
.
[29]
In any event, one would not think of overruling the citizenship judge's declining to make an affirmative recommendation in this case, even if it were open to this court to do so, because she surely considered the matters saying that she could find no evidence herein upon which to base an affirmative recommendation.
Change In Law For Parliament
[30]
If the government of the day and Parliament think it sufficiently important and desirable, they could, in view of the jurisprudence, amend the
Act
to provide specifically that citizenship judges' declining to make affirmative recommendations could become reviewable on appeal. However, unless and until such amendment be made the citizenship judges' exercises of their discretion must be respected and this court must not interfere with their dispositions in that regard.
Conclusions
[31]
This court shares citizenship judge Schellenberg's opinion that the applicant would make a very fine citizen of Canada. His wife and children are already citizens, but that fact did not move the citizenship judge to make an affirmative recommendation to the Minister. Nor did she regard the fact that his absences were on business promotion ventures for the enterprise upon whose operations he was granted landing caused a conundrum, but not a hardship. The appellant has engaged a solicitor who can advise him if any other channels be still open to him in regard to the Minister's discretion.
[32]
In addition to the appellant's lack of prescribed time of residence in Canada, which is the gravamen of the appellant's plight, two other matters may be observed. The first is the prematurity of the appellant's initial application, which has already been mentioned herein. The second is that which ought to be known to citizens and would-be citizens: one does not coach witnesses in court by shouting from the public gallery. This is absolute, but it could be an even more serious transgression when the court has pronounced an order for exclusion of witnesses. The appellant so transgressed on the appeal hearing. These observations are left until the end of these reasons in order to make it clear that the second observation played no part in formulating the foregoing reasons.
[33]
However, for those foregoing reasons the court, not without sympathy and a sense of regret, dismisses this appeal.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/mdc
[End of document]