[1]
Noël, J.
: This is an application for review of the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division holding that the applicant is not a Convention refugee.
[2]
The facts in this case are not at issue, and are summarized in the respondent's Memorandum of Argument as follows:
[3]
In 1979, Soviet troops entered Afghanistan, which led to a civil war between the communist government (supported by the Soviets) and various Mujahadin groups. In 1986 Najibullah's communist government was replaced by the pro-Islamic government of Jamiat-e-Islami ("Jamiat").
[4]
In December 1992, the applicant's family's home was ransacked by members of a Mujahadin group. They fled to the property of a family friend (also in the Kabul area) where they stayed for over a year. They were somewhat confined, but the applicant was able to continue working by commuting from door to door.
[5]
The civil war in Afghanistan did not end with the fall of the communist government. Fighting spread to all major cities, particularly Kabul, as two major Mujahadin alliances (i.e. the Jamiat-supported "Shura-e Nezar" and the "Shura-e Hamahangi" or "Shori Ham Aahangi" ("SHA")), supported by Hekmatyar and led by General Dostam competed for control of administrative centres. Control of the applicant's part of the Kabul area was in the hands of Jamiat. Jamiat allies also controlled other parts of Afghanistan.
[6]
In January 1994, a military attack by SHA against Jamiat took place in the area where the applicant was residing. The roof of his home was actually used by SHA as a battle position. Jamiat succeeded in pushing SHA away from the position. Afterwards members of Jamiat shot and killed the applicant's father and brother as suspected collaborators and spies. He does not know what happened to the rest of his family.
[7]
The applicant was arrested near the house, detained for 25 days, interrogated about his role in the battle, humiliated, insulted, denied sleep, beaten, slapped, kicked, hit with gun butts and subjected to electric shocks. He was then transferred to another location (still in the Kabul area) where he was detained for about another eight months. During that time he was subjected to verbal abuse and kept in a crowded cell.
[8]
On October 15, 1994 he escaped after the prison was hit by a rocket. He went back to the house where they had been staying, and found that it had been destroyed. He went to an uncle, who had no news. He visited Jalalabad, where for more than a week, he unsuccessfully checked refugee camps to find his family. He walked for three days to Pakistan. He went to Peshawar, Karachi and Islamabad, but decided to leave because of the Mujahedin presence there. He looked without success for family members. He met a close family friend who owned a business in Pakistan. The friend gave the applicant money to leave Pakistan. He did so January 31, 1995. Upon his arrival in Canada, he claimed refugee status.
[9]
On the basis of these facts, the Board found that the applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution at the hands of the Jamiat and its allies which control at least seven of the 30 provinces of Afghanistan. However, the Board went on to find that the applicant had available to him an Internal Flight Alternative (IFA) in other parts of Afghanistan.
[10]
At the end of its reasons, the Board also noted that its decision "... that the claimant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution in Afghanistan outside the area of Jamiat control may be seen as a finding based on changed country conditions.". It went on to consider whether there were compelling reasons to nevertheless find the applicant to be a Convention refugee in accordance with s. 2(3) of the
Act
. In this regard the Board noted that the applicant suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder. However it concluded that such a disorder is much too common and prevalent amongst victims of civil war to be considered as a compelling reason within the meaning of s. 2(3) of the
Act
.
[11]
The applicant attacks the Board's conclusion that he had available to him an IFA on the ground that it is based on an erroneous finding of fact made without regard to the evidence. He also alleges that the Board exceeded its jurisdiction in deciding that he was not a person described in s. 2(3) of the
Act
without providing to the applicant notice that it was going to consider this issue.
[12]
The application must succeed on both grounds. Dealing with the latter, the Board could not embark upon a consideration of s. 2(3) of the
Act
without first having found that there existed a factual basis upon which it could conclude to a change in country conditions pursuant to s. 2(2) of the
Act
. That in turn required a finding that the applicant had established to the satisfaction of the Board that he had a reasonable fear of persecution throughout Afghanistan prior to the advent of the change in country conditions.
[13]
It is well established that prior to embarking upon a consideration of changed country conditions, the Board had the duty to notify the claimant that it considered this issue to be relevant to the determination of the claim. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).) This is not a case where the evidence adduced was such that a change in country conditions should have been apparent to the claimant as a relevant issue. The case proceeded throughout as one involving the sole question as to whether an IFA was available to the applicant.
[14]
Nor can the decision of the Board pursuant to ss. 2(2) and 2(3) be viewed as a mere obiter as counsel for the respondent suggests. If the Board believed that its decision could be considered as being based on changed country conditions, it had to be because, in its view, the evidence was capable of establishing that the applicant was at some point in time the subject of persecution throughout Afghanistan. However, its conclusion as to the existence of an IFA was necessarily based on the opposite conclusion. Both conclusions therefore stand on independent and alternative grounds upon which the Board chose to reject the claim.
[15]
As the applicant was not given the opportunity to be heard on the second ground of refusal, it cannot stand.
[16]
The conclusion of the Board as to the existence of an IFA is equally flawed. The Board in its decision fails to identify exactly, where in Afghanistan the applicant could reasonably be expected to find a safe haven. Rather, the Board refers to "the area controlled by General Dostam", the "area outside Kabul" and "the areas outside the control of the Jamiat-e-Islami" as the general areas where the applicant could be expected to flee. The conclusion as to the existence of an IFA requires more than the identification of the approximate area where the agent of persecution is thought to be in control and a general conclusion that the claimant is free to flee elsewhere. A specified geographic location must be identified where the conditions are such as to make it a realistic and attainable safe haven. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).) That in turn requires some discussion as to the prevailing conditions within the identified location. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).)
[17]
Here, not only is this discussion missing, but the documentary evidence indicated that control over the areas referred to by the Board moved back and forth amongst the protagonists with the result that no definite location was in fact identified by the Board. Obviously if the area within which an IFA is said to exist is uncertain, it can hardly be viewed as a realistic and reasonably accessible location.
[18]
For these reasons, the application is allowed and the matter is returned before a differently constituted Board. Neither question submitted by counsel for the applicant is certified.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/aga
[End of document]