[1]
Noël, J.
: The applicant seeks the judicial review of the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board holding that the applicant is not a Convention refugee and that this was not a case which fell within the exception of s. 2(3) which provides:
"A person does not cease to be a 'Convention refugee' (...) if the person establishes that there are compelling reasons arising out of any previous persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection of the country that the person left, or outside of which the person remained by reason of fear of persecution."
[2]
The applicant claims to have a well-founded fear of persecution on the basis of political opinion and membership in a particular social group, the Pakistan People's Party ("PPP"). He fears that if he were to return to Pakistan he would be persecuted by the Islamic Jamhoori Ittehad ("IJI") or the Muharjir Qaumi Movement ("MQM"). The PPP, lead by Benazir Bhutto, came into power as a result of the national elections in November 1988, and obtained the support of the MQM in Karachi. The PPP established an alliance with the MQM but it broke down in October 1989. The MQM then joined the IJI, an alliance of political parties, the Muslim League and religious parties, then forming the opposition to the PPP.
[3]
The applicant was born in Karachi, a city with a population more than 10 million people consisting of Mohajirs (50%), Panthans (20%), Penjabis (15%), and Sindis (15%). His parents are Pantans from Peshawar, an area in the North-West-Frontier province, and he speaks Pashtun and Urdu. He has two brothers, Rehman Mohammed Shah and Aman Shah, who have had long term involvements with the PPP. He lived in Kaemari, the southern area of the city near the harbour, and worked in various labouring positions in the harbour from 1980 through 1989. However, in August 1989, as the work opportunities began to diminish with the decreasing number of ships in the harbour, the applicant decided to join the PPP.
[4]
In August 1989, the local PPP leaders asked the applicant to go to Nazmabad, an area of Karachi where the MQM were the most militant. While distributing political propaganda for the PPP, four people kidnapped the applicant, blindfolded him and took him in a vehicle to an unknown place where he was kept for the next four days. During his detention, he was beaten and tortured with wet towels and by squeezing his head with ropes. His kidnappers asked about the whereabouts of his brother, Rehman Shah, but he gave them no information. They also told him to stop working for the PPP, and he was released when he promised to do so. Later, having recognized that his kidnappers were speaking to each other about Altaf Hussain, their leader, he identified them as IJI militants and MQM members.
[5]
Again in October 1989, four other people kidnapped the applicant while he was on his way home from a meeting at the local PPP office in the Clifton area. They referred to his promise not to work for the PPP during the first incident and asked why he was still doing so. He was detained for four days during which he was beaten. After his release, he reported the kidnapping to Habibur Rehman, the leader of the PPP in his area. Habibur Rehman asked him to identify his kidnappers but he was unable to.
[6]
Subsequently, at the end of November 1989, two policemen arrested the applicant and detained him at the Clifton police station for twenty-four hours. Habibur Rehman was able to have him released, and to have the policemen placed on suspension for arresting the applicant without proper verification of the complaint filed against him.
[7]
A year later, in November 1990, the applicant's house was set on fire by a group of people whom he assumed to be political enemies but he was unable to identify. Although his parents decided to move back to their native village near Peshawar in the North-West Frontier province, he stayed in Karachi with relatives. At the end of that month, he was arrested while publicly protesting against the political enemies that he suspected of burning down the family home. He was detained for five days, during which he was beaten.
[8]
Two days after his release, while he was on his way to the PPP office with a friend, four people in a jeep started shooting at them. His friend was shot and killed but he managed to escape. Later he learned that the police were looking for him as a witness to the murder of his friend. He went to the police station, accompanied by his local PPP leader, on November 30, but was unable to identify any of the perpetrators. However, he did convince the police that he had nothing to do with the murder.
[9]
In December 1991, a fellow PPP worker was killed at his family home. When the applicant and the father of the PPP worker went to the police station to register a complaint about the murder, the father claimed that people connected to the IJI had done the killing. The police required that the father present some evidence to support that claim before they would file a complaint against any suspect.
[10]
At the beginning of 1992, the applicant learned that his local PPP leader had been arrested and sentenced to jail. Then, in February 1992, he learned that two relatives in Karachi had been arrested. Because of the situation in Karachi, he left Pakistan by plane on May 12, 1992.
[11]
The Board found that the applicant was not a Convention refugee as he did not have a well-founded fear of persecution in Pakistan. It stated that, even if it had accepted that he had been tortured at the hands of MQM militants when they kidnapped him on two occasions in 1989, there were no circumstances that would lead them to a conclusion that there is a reasonable risk that government authorities or anyone else in Pakistan would seek him in his parents' family village. The Board also found that this was not a case which fell within the exception of s. 2(3) as there were no compelling reasons preventing the claimant from returning to his country.
[12]
The Board found several aspects of the applicant's testimony unbelievable. In particular, it did not believe that he did not know the location of his parents in the family village near Peshawar; that his party colleagues who had been arrested or killed had only been involved in social services; and that the IJI political coalition was involved when he was kidnapped and tortured in August and October 1989. As stated in its reasons:
"(...) We do not believe the claimant when he tells us that he does not know the place of residence of his immediate family near Peshawar, in the North-West Frontier province. (...) The claimant told us about his intense relationship with his mother before her departure from Karachi; we cannot believe that she did not keep some contact with a son she loved. We cannot believe either that his brother, Zahir, has no clues of where he went and where he came back from, after testing the village life with his parents, in November 1990. We cannot believe that the claimant's parents never mentioned in front of him where they came from, as a family, before moving to Karachi. We cannot believe that none of his 150 Pathan relatives, still living in Karachi would also be ignorant of where his parents returned in November 1990. Finally, we find it is contradiction for the claimant to answer, when asked about a possible Internal Flight Alternative (I.F.A.) in the N.W.F. province, that one local political enemy living near his residence in the same ward, in Karachi, could find him if he fled to his family village near Peshawar, because he knew where the claimant's family come from. The claimant told us that he feared this local politician from the I.J.I., Azim Ichan, but at the same time, he told us also that he chose to stay in Karachi, near where his main enemy resided, rather than using an opportunity provided by his family to move away to Peshawar. We do not believe that the claimant had such a fear from a local political enemy.
. . . . .
"(...) The claimant ignored the identity of the killers and he ignored also why his relatives were arrested; he only knew that these relatives had gone to jail many times. When the claimant was asked what charges or accusations were used by the police to arrest the PPP members in Karachi, the claimant answered that all PPP members were working for the poor and none of them committed any illegal action (...).
"It is clear that militants from the PPP have been part of the law and order problems in Karachi until the army intervention in June 1992. We do not believe the claimant when he described the activities of his party colleagues exclusively as social services for the benefit of the poor of Karachi."
[13]
The Board noted that both the refugee hearing officer and counsel for the applicant had taken the position that the applicant fell within s. 2(3) of the
Act
. After analyzing the intent of the provision, it found that the exception provided by s. 2(3) did not apply in this case:
"(...) [W]e believe that subsection 2(3) only applies to those who personally suffered atrocious circumstances from the country authorities, similar to those who suffered a form of 'ethnic cleansing' under the nazis; these circumstances are clearly related to a situation where the general population is co-responsible with the government authorities for the harm caused to the person persecuted. The focus of the test here is less on the actual extreme severity of the harm caused and more with a combination of trauma still persistently re-experienced by the claimant with a source of harm still persistently present in the attitudes of the community, from the country of origin.
"Even if we were to accept that the trauma experienced today by the claimant is related to tortures experienced in 1989, and that these tortures could have been defined then as persecution through the absence of protection by the authorities during these months, we do not see any subsistence [sic] in the community of Karachi of the cause of harm to the claimant. The source of the claimant's problems in 1989 were limited to a few MQM kidnappers, from the Altaf Hussain group, living in West Karachi. The community at large was never involved in any way in any of the problems caused to the claimant or to his family. We can conclude then that subsection 2(3) cannot apply in this case."
Applicant's Position
[14]
The applicant submits that the Board erred in its interpretation of s. 2(3) by making the subsistence of certain attitudes among the general population a necessary condition for the application of the provision. It is urged that the interpretation of s. 2(3) by Hugessen, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at 748, does not impose any requirement of public participation in that persecution, but rather only refers to the gravity of past persecution suffered.
[15]
It is submitted that the applicant meets all three requirements of the test which was set out by McKeown, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). It is urged that the cruel torture suffered by the applicant at the hands of the MQM constituted persecution as the government consciously supported the activities of the MQM at that time and intentionally failed to provide the applicant with protection. It is then urged that it becomes even clearer that the applicant has suffered "atrocious" or "appalling" acts of persecution in Pakistan when the cumulative effect of those acts of torture by the MQM, the persecution of the applicant's brothers, the burning of the family home and the torture suffered by the applicant when detained by the police in 1990 are taken into consideration. It is also urged that the applicant clearly has a subjective fear of persecution, and has been diagnosed as suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder.
[16]
The applicant submits that the Board ignored evidence of the events which were related to the destruction of the family home in mid-November 1990 and his detention and torture by the police a week later. Those events are said to have occurred as a result of his anti-government activities, and to constitute state-sponsored persecution. Further, the Board is also said to have ignored the applicant's plausible explanation as to why he, as a PPP supporter, risked persecution throughout Pakistan. It is urged that those portions of the applicant's testimony which were not specifically challenged by the Board as not believable must be accepted since the Board has not found the applicant to be lacking in credibility generally.
[17]
It is further submitted that the Board's finding that it was not believable that the applicant did not know where his parents resided after leaving Karachi was not supported by the evidence as the applicant has never testified that they returned to their family village.
Respondent's Position
[18]
The respondent counters that the Board's conclusion that the applicant was not credible with respect to key aspects of his claim was reasonable having regard to the evidence and the testimony of the applicant. In any event, credible or not, the applicant did not have an objectively well-founded fear of persecution. This conclusion was also judiciously made given the evidence before it.
[19]
The respondent submits that the issues of whether there is a reasonable chance that the applicant would be persecuted if he were to return to Pakistan and whether s. 2(3) of the
Act
applies to him are both questions of fact and that on the facts, the decision reached was open to the Board.
Analysis And Decision
[20]
In
Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Hugessen, J.A., stated, at page 748:
"On any reading of subsection 2(3) it must extend to anyone who has been recognized as a refugee at any time, even long after the date of the Convention. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that it should also be read as requiring Canadian authorities to give recognition of refugee status on humanitarian grounds to this special and limited category of persons, i.e. those who have suffered such appalling persecution that their experience alone is a compelling reason not to return them, even though they may no longer have any reason to fear further persecution."
[21]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), McKeown, J., established the following test for the application of s. 2(3):
"(1) The claimant must have suffered from 'atrocious' or 'appalling' acts of persecution in the country from which he or she is claiming asylum;
"(2) The claimant must have a subjective fear of persecution such that he refuses to return to his country of origin and asks for the protection of the authorities of that country.
"(3) The claimant must suffer continuing psychological after-effects of the previous persecution."
While considering the general humanitarian principle underlying s. 2(3) as set out in the
UNHCR Handbook
, Hugessen, J.A.'s, interpretation of that provision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, and the definitions of "atrocious" and "appalling" in the
Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English
, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1990, McKeown found that the torture and sexual assault experienced by the applicant qualified as "atrocious" and "appalling" acts. There was evidence before the Board, in that case, a psychiatric report, which showed that the applicant was suffering from post traumatic stress disorder. Since the applicant had established that he suffered psychologically and emotionally as a result of the past persecution which he and his family members suffered in El Salvador, he demonstrated "compelling reasons" for refusing to avail himself of the protection of El Salvador and thus, refugee status should have been granted.
[22]
Section 2(3) of the
Act
has been recently considered by this court in the following cases:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
[23]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Gibson, J., allowed the application for judicial review. The applicant's son, a labour union leader pursued by death squads by reason of his union activities, had fled El Salvador in 1983. In April 1984, three members of the death squads looking for the applicant's son entered her home while she was at work. Only the applicant's seventy-eight year old husband was in the home. They ransacked the house, raped the applicant's husband and pushed a stick up his rectum, and attempted to suffocate him. The applicant's husband was able in the struggle to pick up a machete and the three fled. The applicant's husband took a taxi to the hospital where he remained for two days and underwent two operations. He never fully recovered. The applicant and her husband fled El Salvador in June 1984. Her husband died in the United States two years after the attack. Gibson, J., noted in his reasons:
"While the applicant herein may not have suffered, directly, appalling persecution, I conclude that there are few who would differ with the view that her husband suffered appalling or atrocious persecution. It is important to note that the quotation from the
UNHCR handbook
indicates that this of itself can be sufficient to constitute compelling reason not to return an applicant in the situation of the applicant here."
[24]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Rothstein, J., allowed the application for judicial review. He stated that the question to be determined under s. 2(3) is whether the applicant must demonstrate an existing or ongoing fear of persecution both subjectively and objectively. He found that the Board had erred in law by interpreting s. 2(3) as requiring ongoing fear of persecution. As he stated in his reasons:
"Lest there be some concern that this interpretation of subsection 2(3) detracts from the normal requirement of applicants demonstrating ongoing fear of persecution, it should be recognized, as Hugessen, J.A., pointed out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , that subsection 2(3) applies only to a tiny minority of present day claimants - those in a special and limited category who can demonstrate that they have suffered such appalling persecution, that their experience alone is a compelling reason not to return them to the country in which they suffered persecution. While many refugee claimants might consider the persecution they have suffered to fit within the scope of subsection 2(3), it must be remembered that the nature of all persecution, by definition, involves death, physical harm or other penalties. Subsection 2(3), as it has been interpreted, only applies to extraordinary cases in which the persecution is relatively so exceptional, that even in the wake of changed circumstances, it would be wrong to return refugee claimants."
[25]
It seems clear, having regard to <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, that the Board erred in construing s. 2(3) as requiring ongoing fear of persecution. The Board, once it embarked upon the assessment of the applicant's claim under s. 2(3), had the duty to consider the level of atrocity of the acts inflicted upon the applicant, the repercussions upon his physical and mental state, and determine whether this experience alone constituted a compelling reason not to return him to his country of origin. That it failed to do. While I have serious doubt as to whether the claimant can, in this instance, meet the high threshold established by the case law, this is a matter for the Board to decide after consideration of the relevant factors. The decision will accordingly be quashed, and the matter will be returned for a new hearing before a differently constituted tribunal.
[26]
At the end of the hearing, Counsel for the respondent requested that I certify the following question:
"What is the meaning and import of the expression 'compelling reasons' found in s. 2(3) of the
Immigration Act
?"
[27]
I believe that the legal underpinning of s. 2(3), insofar as the considerations relevant to the ascertainment of "compelling reasons" are concerned, has been clearly identified by the Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. What remains is the determination in each instance as to whether the facts give rise to its application. Thus the issue stands to be decided on the facts of each case. The certification of the question is therefore denied.
Application allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/gms
[End of document]