[1]
Joyal, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review seeking to set aside the decision of the Refugee Division dated September 16, 1993, in which it concluded that the applicants were not Convention refugees.
The Facts
[2]
The applicants, who are citizens of Israel, claimed refugee status on September 21, 1993, for reasons of religion, nationality, political opinion and membership in a particular social group. They based their claims on the following facts.
[3]
The applicants, who are of Russian nationality and the Christian religion, left Tadzhikistan for Israel in February 1991. When they arrived in Israel, they experienced some difficult moments. Specifically, on May 17, 1992, the son, Andrey, was beaten up at school by some schoolmates. The parents' complaint to the police was in vain, since the officers replied that this was simply an adolescent quarrel. On August 23, 1992, some adolescents threw stones at the female applicant. In response, the police came to make a report, but did not return to do a follow-up as they said they would. On September 2, 1992, Andrey received death threats from some adolescents. This time, the applicants did not make a complaint, thinking that it would be futile to do so. In addition, the applicants were opposed to circumcision and refused to do compulsory military service, since they were convinced that they would be sent into the occupied territories and Russians were persecuted in the Israeli army.
Decision Of The Refugee Division
[4]
The Refugee Division concluded that the applicants had not met their burden of establishing a well-founded fear of persecution for one of the reasons advanced. On this point, the Refugee Division pointed out that there was no evidence in respect of two essential components of the refugee definition: the concept of persecution and the inability of the state to protect its citizens.
[5]
Specifically, the Board held that the events experienced by the applicants constituted discrimination rather than persecution. For example, according to the Refugee Division, the work-related problems were not the result solely of their origins, since there is a high unemployment rate in Israel. Moreover, the documentary evidence established that 85% to 90% of Russian immigrants find employment after two years. On the issue of military service, the applicants knew that when they immigrated to Israel they would have to comply with this duty. The Board also pointed out that it is always possible to apply for an exemption for special reasons or to be given an alternative form of service.
[6]
Finally, the Refugee Division stated that the applicants had not established in a clear and convincing manner that the state was unable to protect them. According to the Board, the applicants did not persevere in their attempts to obtain protection and did not avail themselves of the assistance provided by organizations that have been formed in Israel to defend victims of discrimination.
Applicants' Position
[7]
According to the applicants, discrimination is recognized in Canadian law as a distinction that has the effect of imposing obligations or disadvantages, or preventing or restricting access to opportunities, benefits or advantages offered to other members. In light of this definition, the applicants submit that the fact that they were beaten and threatened is not discrimination, but rather persecution. Thus, by putting these acts in the same category as discrimination, the Board erred in law. The applicants also point out that persecution was defined in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as "sustained or systemic violation of basic human rights demonstrative of a failure of state protection". The applicants assert that this is the situation in the case at bar, in view of the violation of their right to security of the person. The applicants also point out that they do not have to prove that they were persecuted, but only that they have a well-founded fear of persecution for one of the reasons advanced.
[8]
According to the applicants, the Refugee Division stated the opinion in its decision that all citizens must know the laws and infrastructures of their country. The applicants were never given the opportunity to respond to this comment, as the rules of procedural fairness require. In addition, according to counsel for the applicants, the Refugee Division imposed additional requirements on the claimants and thereby created its own exclusion clauses.
[9]
On the question of military service, the applicants submit that the type of military action that they fear is condemned by the international community as contrary to basic rules of human conduct. In addition, engaging in attacks on the civilian population may constitute a war crime in certain circumstances.
Respondents' Position
[10]
According to the respondents, the courts have clearly established that discrimination does not necessarily found a fear of persecution. In addition, the respondent pointed out that the question is certainly not whether other conclusions could have been drawn from the evidence submitted, but rather whether the conclusions drawn by the Board were perverse, capricious or unreasonable. In the case at bar, the respondent contends that the conclusions of the Refugee Division are fully supported by the evidence. The fact that the applicants suggest different conclusions does not make the Refugee Division's conclusions perverse or capricious.
[11]
On the issue of state protection, the respondent contends that the applicants have not established, by clear and convincing proof, that Israel was unable to protect them. Thus the presumption that nations are capable of protecting their citizens applies. In addition, the applicants have not established that it was objectively unreasonable for them to avail themselves of the protection of the authorities in their country. The respondent also points out that the Federal Court of Appeal has recognized, in
Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 334, that the mere fact that the authorities are not always successful at protecting their citizens will not be enough to justify a claim.
[12]
The applicants were aware that the panel would necessarily be considering the documentary evidence file. Right at the beginning of the hearing, the panel informed counsel for the applicants of this, and naturally he did not object. This means that there was compliance with the rules of fairness.
[13]
The respondent contends that the Federal Court of Appeal has clarified the state of the law in respect of conscientious objection to military service that is mandated by an ordinary law of general application.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the court held that the intent of the legislation in question must be examined, and it must be determined whether it implies persecution within the meaning of the definition. In light of this test, the respondent contends that the Israeli law does not engender persecution, since the rules are the same for everyone and they are directly related to the political situation in that region of the world. In addition, the respondent notes that when they emigrated to Israel the applicants knew full well that they would have to do military service. In short, the respondent contends that there is no palpable and overriding error which would justify this court in intervening.
Analysis
[14]
First, I could not conclude that the events experienced by the applicants constitute persecution, in light of the remarks of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 863  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the court stated:
"There is no doubt that the Board found as a fact that, while there was evidence to support discrimination against the appellant because of his religious beliefs, there was no evidence on which he could reasonably found a fear of persecution on grounds of his religious beliefs or political opinions. These were findings which it was open to the Board to make on the material before it."
[15]
In addition, this court expressed the same opinion in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), in which Mr. Justice Marceau stated:
"It is true that the dividing line between persecution and discrimination or harassment is difficult to establish, the more so since, in the refugee law context, it has been found that discrimination may very well be seen as amounting to persecution. It is true also that the identification of persecution behind incidents of discrimination or harassment is not purely a question of fact but a mixed question of law and fact, legal concepts being involved. It remains, however, that in all cases, it is for the Board to draw the conclusion in a particular factual context by proceeding with a careful analysis of the evidence adduced and a proper balancing of the various elements contained therein, and the intervention of this court is not warranted unless the conclusion reached appears to be capricious or unreasonable."
[16]
Thus, with respect, I do not believe that in this case the conclusions reached by the Refugee Division could be characterized as unreasonable or capricious.
[17]
Second, I do not believe that the Refugee Division erred in its assessment of the evidence relating to the applicants' obligation to do military service. As the Board clearly pointed out, and as the transcript shows, the applicants knew that there was compulsory military service in Israel and nonetheless decided to immigrate to that country. When this question was put to them, the applicants answered as follows:
(Translation)
"Q.	When you were in the Soviet Union, were you aware of the fact that you would be required to serve in the army eventually if you became a citizen of Israel?
A.	Yes, I knew. But I thought that the Israeli army was fighting against Arab terrorists. And once we got to Israel, we saw then that the actions were directed against women and children."
[18]
In addition, as the Refugee Division noted, there is always the possibility of obtaining an exemption or electing to do alternative service. Finally, as Mr. Justice MacGuigan pointed out, speaking for the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the applicant has the burden of establishing that the law of general application is inherently persecutory. This is certainly not the situation in the case at bar, since there is a possibility of exemption and alternative service.
Conclusions
[19]
According to counsel for the applicants, the situation for Russian immigrants in Israel is not the best. In fact, there is documentary evidence dealing with the reaction of native Israelis to the many Russians who have been admitted to the country in recent years. The test that the applicants must meet is to establish persecution imposed by the authorities, or from which that the authorities cannot provide the necessary protection.
[20]
Regardless of the evidence that all these document files provide, on either side, the facts before the panel may be summarized as three incidents of so-called persecution: the incident at the school, in which the police took no interest, since they saw it as a simple adolescent quarrel; the police investigation when the wife was stoned, which was initiated but was not pursued the next day; and finally, the threats made by some adolescents against the son. On the question of the last two incidents, it seems to me to be completely unreasonable that the applicants would not have pursued their complaints with the police. While recognizing the applicants' frustration, their conduct seems to me to have been simply a manoeuvre to establish the grounds for their claims. I would say the same about their objections to military service even before they knew the rules and the exceptions. The panel did not err in deciding that the circumstances did not constitute a well-founded, objective fear of persecution.
[21]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Mr. Justice Teitelbaum of this court, faced with similar circumstances, decided that the state of Israel could not be found guilty of engaging in discrimination and that it was able to protect all its citizens. On the facts before me, I draw the same conclusions.
[22]
The application must therefore be dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/nmg