[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is a s. 18 application for certiorari quashing the respondent's refusal to process an application for permanent residence. Other remedies are sought on which I need not elaborate here except that the applicant sought an order of prohibition enjoining the respondent from continuing with an Immigration Inquiry held under s. 27 of the Immigration Act, or from removing the applicant from Canada until such time as the decision in the matters herein is heard and finally determined. I made such an order from the Bench to put the respondent on notice and will incorporate the pronouncement in my formal order.
[2]
The applicant has been in Canada since July 25, 1980, and believed he had visitor status until May 14, 1981. Since that date he has resided illegally in Canada. The salient facts are not really in dispute, and the affidavits of the applicant, of Mr. Richard Graham, Immigration Officer and of Mr. John Stevenson, Manager of Canada Immigration Centre, Winnipeg, make that quite clear.
[3]
Counsel for the applicant sees the issues as:
1) Was the procedure followed in accordance with the guidelines of the Department of Immigration and applied fairly?
2) and was the manner in which the decision was made by the officer and overturned by the manager in accordance with guidelines?
[4]
Parliament, moved by compassion or frustration, adopted the De Facto Illegal Residents Program and prepared guidelines to determine what persons might qualify. The applicant believed that the requirements relating to his application for permanent residence are set out in the following guidelines:
a) NHQ HULL CONCEM dated January 31, 1986, relating to the De Facto Illegal Residents Program;
b) 1S 1.39 Immigration Manual relating to landings in Canada; and
c) 1S 251 titled landings in Canada.
[5]
In a nutshell, the guidelines really come down to whether an illegal immigrant has economically and socially established himself/herself in Canada.
[6]
The De Facto Illegal Residents Program provides an opportunity for illegals to come forward to make their case and
probably
to gain permanent residence status. I say probably rather than possibly because Parliament recognized an obvious problem, the growing number of illegals and an intention to do something about it - to grant permanent residence status to the vast majority of illegals. Also, Parliament must have been aware that the people who chose to come forward sincerely believed they qualified under the program and most if not all probably had legal advice before taking this monumental (for them) step. Naturally, if they didn't qualify action of one kind or another could be expected to be taken against them leading to eventual deportation.
[7]
Another reason for my use of the word probably is the direction from headquarters contained in NHQ HULL CONCEM of January 31, 1986, referred to earlier. Even those with criminal convictions -
"which would [normally] make them inadmissible or reportable ... shall not be considered ... UNLESS they already meet eligibility for rehabilitation under the Act or would be eligible for a Permit for reasons outlined in IS 10.15 and there are strong reasons for seeking approval of rehabilitation or a Minister's Permit."
Also,
"Persons who entered and remained in Canada illegally through an organized plan and/or who are reportable under A27(2)(f)(g)(h) or (k) will be excluded from consideration under these guidelines."
and then follows the comment that,
"... it may be difficult and impracticable for officers to obtain proof of misrepresentation after the passage of several years."
And yet again,
"It is also recognized that most persons who are in Canada illegally have come to this country with the intention of remaining permanently, whether they admit it or not. In addition, a certain amount of illegal activity, such as obtaining a SIN card, almost always accompanies the attempts of illegals to establish themselves in Canada. Officers are therefore encouraged to look at the
overall picture
when assessing evidence of misrepresentations in order to reach
a decision that is fair and humane
." (emphasis added)
[8]
In light of that background what occurred here? The applicant, with the benefit of legal advice, attended at the Canada Immigration Centre, Winnipeg, on February 7, 1987, to apply for permanent residence under the Program. On February 16, 1987, he was interviewed by an immigration officer, R. Graham, and submitted the necessary application forms (previously provided to him) relating to his application for permanent residence, and for his request for a visa exemption. On March 5, 1987, the refusal of his application for permanent residence was communicated to him by letter under the signature of J. Stevenson, the manager of Canada Immigration Centre, Winnipeg. For the record, the applicant had never been interviewed by Mr. Stevenson nor was he provided with reasons in the letter for his failure to meet the requirements of the Program. On March 26, 1987, the applicant received a Notice to Appear for an inquiry pursuant to s. 27 of the Immigration Act.
[9]
On April 14, 1987, this Notice of Motion was filed with the court and an affidavit of the applicant was filed in support of the motion. As a consequence of the motion being filed, two affidavits, one by Richard Graham and the other by John Stevenson earlier referred to, were filed on behalf of the respondents who oppose the motion. From these affidavits we learn all of the facts and it is only necessary to cull out a few.
[10]
After the interview, Mr. Graham's recommendation to Mr. John Stevenson was for
favourable consideration
of the applicant for permanent residence in Canada under the Program. He also sent a memorandum dated February 26, 1987, to Mr. Stevenson. This memorandum confirms that the applicant had visitor status, through various extensions, until 14 May 1981 - as the applicant believed.
[11]
The memorandum is important for several reasons and I incorporate it here, and will make further reference to it later:
"Mr. Johal entered Canada as a visitor at Winnipeg International Airport on 25 July 1980 and was, through various extensions, granted status until 14 May, 1981. He initially stayed with a cousin, Mr. Harbans Singh Takhar.
"Upon the expiry of his last visitor extension, Mr. Johal moved to Edmonton. He began working as a cook in a restaurant, retaining that employment until August 1983. In October 1983 he began a second restaurant job which lasted until September 1984. He left that position when he feared that the false name and social insurance number he was using were under suspicion. Mr. Johal has since held three other positions as a cook for nine months, seven months and three months respectively. He left the first two positions to avoid detection and the last one when the business closed. He is presently staying with friends and receiving support from his cousin.
"Although Mr. Johal is presently unemployed, he has an outstanding job offer from Bombay Restaurant in Winnipeg. He awaits only our permission to begin working.
"Mr. Johal has small savings and has acquired few possessions in Canada. This is obviously as a result of changes of employment. He has acquired friends in Winnipeg, Edmonton and Calgary during his time in Canada. His closest relative in Canada is his cousin in Winnipeg.
"Mr. Johal became known to us through his own efforts. He does not wish to continue with his unsettled lifestyle.
"In my opinion, although Mr. Johal has not yet settled successfully, he would do so given the opportunity. He has no dependents and appears capable of supporting himself. I recommend we accept Mr. Sukhdev Singh Johal as a long term de facto resident and be processed towards landing in Canada."
[12]
Mr. Stevenson, as manager of the Canada Immigration Centre, Winnipeg, had spoken to the applicant on February 18, 1987, "at which time I gave him a general overview of the long term De Facto Resident Program. I located Mr. Graham, Immigration Officer, and directed that he interview Mr. Johal concerning the Program".
[13]
On March 3, 1987, Mr. Stevenson reviewed Mr. Johal's application and Mr. Graham's memorandum, "as well as material on file at the Canada Immigration Centre concerning Mr. Johal". He then made notes containing
his conclusions
on "Mr. Johal's suitability to the Program". These notes are also important in light of the subsequent cross-examination of Mr. Stevenson and Mr. Graham by counsel for the applicant. They read:
"1) P/C claims to have worked steadily from Nov 81 to Oct 86. During this period he claims to have been out of work for a period of 7 months. In 1983 his earnings were $10,904.71 for 7 months. His last job however saw him earn only $1543 in 3 months time. As a result I am of the opinion he has not become economically established in Canada. At the present time he has little savings and is receiving assistance from a friend in Wpg (relative).
"2) Mr. Johal claims he left because the restaurant known as 'Alberts' Rest.' closed for business. His record of employment however shows he quit. I contacted Alberts' Restaurant (429-1259). They confirmed he worked part-time and that he quit and the restaurant has never been closed. As a result of this untruth the rest of his story is suspect.
"3) Mr. Naghal confirmed by phone (home # 775-2239) that job has been filled for kitchen helper and therefore he is no longer prepared to hire him."
[14]
In his affidavit Mr. Stevenson states, inter alia:
"8. THAT as a result of the fact that Mr. Johal had misrepresented himself and had not worked full time since at least July, 1986, was satisfied that he was not economically established.
"9. THAT, in addition, Mr. Johal failed to provide any information concerning his social adaptation to Canada."
[15]
Then we learn more from paragraphs 11 and 12:
"11. THAT after reviewing Mr. Johal's application to the program, I had occasion to discuss the matter with Mr. Graham, on or about March 4, 1987. At that discussion Mr. Graham advised me that at the time of his original decision, he had had reservations about recommending approval, however had decided to give the benefit of the doubt to the person concerned. He further advised that had the information which had come to my knowledge been known to him at the time of his original recommendation, he would have recommended that Mr. Johal's case not be accepted.
"12. THAT at the time the guidelines contained in Exhibit 'C' to the Affidavit of the Applicant, entitled 'Illegal De Facto Residents', were implemented by the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission, Managers in the Manitoba Region were advised that approval or refusal of all of these cases under 1.S. 1.39(3)(c) could only be given by the Manager, or, in his absence, a person acting in his position. The procedure set out was for the Immigration Officer to interview the person concerned and to collect all relevant material and forward it, along with a recommendation, to the Manager for a decision concerning whether the person would be accepted under this Program. Instructions were given orally to the Managers of the Manitoba Region at a Manager's Meeting, and no written instructions were ever issued, to my knowledge."
[16]
In a letter dated 5th or 6th of March 1987, Mr. Stevenson advised the applicant as follows:
"This is in respect to your request to apply for permanent residence in Canada under the Long Term De Facto Resident Program.
"After careful review of all relevant information provided regarding your request, I regret to inform you that you do not meet the requirements of the program. As a result, I cannot give your request further consideration."
COMMENT
[17]
Immigration officers must realize that Parliament has decreed that illegals can come forward and seek permanent residence status. The headquarters office has prepared guidelines for implementing the program and any honest reading of these guidelines clearly establishes that officers should be liberal and generous when dealing with an illegal under this program, recognizing they are always interviewing a person who has been on the run and constantly in fear of being apprehended. Short-term jobs are the norm, assuming an illegal can obtain one. Illegal use of a SIN card "almost always accompanies the attempts of illegals to establish themselves in Canada", state the guidelines.
[18]
In my view Mr. Graham's written recommendation was the kind of report headquarters had in mind - acknowledging the shortcomings but in the final analysis, "although Mr. Johal has not yet settled successfully, he would do so given the opportunity" and "he appears capable of supporting himself" (which he did very well considering the circumstances).
[19]
Mr. Stevenson, in my view, did not follow the guidelines and this became apparent from the cross-examination. He did not, as the guidelines directed, "look at the
overall picture
when assessing evidence of misrepresentations in order to reach a decision that is fair and humane". Also, he did not even follow his own recommendation that "Mr. Johal should be called in and advised of the results
in person
" (emphasis added). Incidentally, I see nothing wrong with the fact that Mr. Stevenson reviewed the recommendation of Mr. Graham because this is his responsibility. What I do find fault with is his failure to advise (or to permit Mr. Graham to advise) the applicant why he did not meet the requirements. Let's not forget that most serious consequences faced the applicant if he was refused under the Program.
[20]
Mr. Stevenson conceded that he only called one employer at "a restaurant known as Albert's Restaurant in Edmonton, Alberta". So he did not make "calls" as alleged in his affidavit. He did not know to whom he spoke but did confirm that the applicant had worked there and for the period of time he had indicated to Mr. Graham and on his record of employment provided to Mr. Graham that he had quit.
[21]
Incredibly, Mr. Stevenson's cross-examination reveals:
Page 8
"36 Q In terms of employment, that is the only inquiry which you made? You didn't enquire about any other places of employment?
A No.
[22]
Mr. Stevenson then determined by telephone that an offer at the Bombay Restaurant "had been filled" but this was on March 4, and did not deny that it was a firm job offer in January. From November 1981 to October 1986 the applicant had five employers.
[23]
Now it remains to look at what misrepresentation the applicant made which resulted in a negative response to his application. Mr. Stevenson says, "because he put down that the restaurant had closed as a reason for quitting", and "in another area he shows that he was working in Edmonton but residing in Calgary". These were the only two misrepresentations covering his time as an illegal from November 1981 to March 1987. Also, the "misrepresentation" that the applicant was working in Edmonton and living in Calgary was not reflected in Mr. Stevenson's notes made at the time. As counsel stated, "that may have been more of a misunderstanding in terms of perhaps not filling out the form correctly than a misrepresentation", to which Mr. Stevenson said, "I don't know. You'd have to ask Mr. Johal that".
[24]
Precisely! But Mr. Johal was never asked; in fact he never knew what misrepresentations he is alleged to have made. To set the record straight, despite these comments from Mr. Stevenson about living in Calgary and working in Edmonton, we have this exchange in cross-examination on the affidavit:
Page 15
"68 Q All right, so, are you saying, therefore, the misrepresentation had nothing to do with ...
A The ... misrepresentations
69 Q As they were had nothing to do with you coming to the conclusion that he wasn't economically established?
A Yes, that's right.
70 Q And you came to that conclusion based on the other material you had before you, in terms of ...
A Yes, I looked at his past employment, his earnings, his recent employment history."
[25]
The applicant freely admitted he worked under other names from 1980 to 1985. Cross-examination on the affidavit clearly spells out that Mr. Stevenson had the information that was before Mr. Graham and all of the supporting material with respect to employment history. He had a Revenue Canada Taxation form entitled "T4 1983" showing the applicant was employed by the Marathon Restaurant and had income in excess of $10,000. He also had available to him a letter from another employer, John Chios, that from November 1981 to August 1983 he earned a salary of $880.00 per month in jobs varying from cook to dishwasher and that "he is a very good worker, easy to get along with and a very quick learner. His work for me was always to his best standard".
[26]
It was really because of the fact that Mr. Johal had not worked full-time since at least July 1986 that Mr. Stevenson put in his affidavit that the applicant had not become economically established. On cross-examination:
Page 18
"83 Q So, we have already, I think, agreed that the misrepresentations didn't really have anything to do with that determination but that when you made that statement, it was the fact that he had not worked full-time since at least July, 1986?
A Yes.
84 Q But, certainly, he had worked part-time at Albert's Restaurant during that time?
A Yes, I believe at Albert's Restaurant he made an income of a little over $1,500.00 in a three month period.
85 Q And he worked from July to October 1986?
A I'd have to--I can't recall off the top of my head.
86 Q Well, the immigration--
A I think his record of employment would clarify the time he worked there.
87 Q Okay, and the record of employment shows July 16th, '86 to October 3rd, 1986?
A Yes."
[27]
What I am unable to comprehend is why no weight was given to his employment from 1981 to 1983 (page 20 of the cross-examination) nor the employment which occurred from October 1983 to September 1984 (cross-examination, page 21). He was looking only at the present situation. To wrap up this section counsel for the applicant, at page 22 of the cross-examination, asks and receives this answer:
Page 22
"104 Q So, you put no weight on the employment at the Marathon Restaurant, the Concorn Restaurant and the Discovery Restaurant but may have attached some weight to the employment at the Venus Pizza and Steak Restaurant.
A Yes, that is correct.
[28]
I cannot accept that the guidelines were followed vis-a-vis procedure nor were they applied fairly.
[29]
With respect to the manner in which the decision was made by the officer and overturned by the manager, much more should have been done than simply a few phone calls and a meeting between the two immigration officers. This is a serious matter and the applicant was clearly entitled to a letter and/or an interview outlining the reasons his application was refused and an opportunity to reply to the alleged misrepresentations (Mr. Graham called them discrepancies). He should have been advised that none of the earlier jobs had been given any weight in determining his ability to establish himself economically. The applicant did not receive natural justice.
[30]
The applicant must also establish that he has adapted himself socially. Mr. Stevenson suggests he didn't have any information to review that (i.e. social adaptation), but in any event it wasn't a major concern because "he didn't meet the economical part of the program". It is difficult for anyone on the run to adapt socially, but the applicant here had a cousin who would back him, an employer who found him an excellent worker and he managed to become a member of (a) the Sikh Society of Edmonton and (b) the Singh Sotha Society, Winnipeg, rather a remarkable achievement. I need not belabour the matter here because Mr. Stevenson said it was not a major concern with him as he had already decided that the applicant did not qualify in economic terms.
[31]
One matter was raised by counsel for the respondent, namely, a possible shortage of personnel to handle the applicants if they had to see them on more than one occasion. I expressed myself very forcefully that this is not an acceptable reason. Parliament, having established a program, must find the personnel to perform the work so that it can be done properly and fairly.
DECISION
[32]
As indicated earlier, an order will go enjoining the respondent from continuing with an Immigration Inquiry held under s. 27 of the Immigration Act, or from removing the applicant from Canada until such time as the decision in the matter herein is heard and
finally
determined. An order will go quashing the decision of the respondents, which decision refused the applicant's application under the De Facto Illegal Immigrants Program. A further order by way of mandamus will go directing the respondents to assess and determine the application for permanent residence in accordance with the guidelines set out in the De Facto Illegal Residents Program, and to follow the policy relating to the processing of applications for landing from within Canada and requests for visa exemptions pursuant to s. 115(2) of the Immigration Act.
[33]
The applicant is entitled to his costs of this motion.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/cio
[End of document]