Introduction
[1]
Heneghan, J.
: Pfizer Canada Inc. and Pliva d.d. (the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) seek an order pursuant to section 6(2) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, S.O.R./93-133, as amended (the "
Regulations
") prohibiting the Respondent Minister of Health from issuing a Notice of Compliance ("NOC") to Apotex Inc. (the "Respondent Apotex") [see footnote 1] relative to 250 mg azithromycin capsules for oral administration, until the Canadian Patent 1,191,843 ("`843 Patent") has expired.
Facts
[2]
The Applicant Pliva d.d. is the owner of the `843 Patent. That patent includes product by process claims to the medicine azithromycin.
[3]
The Applicant Pfizer Canada Inc. markets the medicine, azithromycin dihydrate, in Canada under the brand name zithromax. Pfizer Canada Inc. has included the `843 Patent on patent lists submitted to the Minister in connection with Notices of Compliance issued to it for azithromycin dihydrate.
[4]
The Respondent Apotex is also a manufacturer of pharmaceuticals. By letter dated June 7, 2000, Apotex made a Notice of Allegation ("NOA") pursuant to the
Regulations
. This letter, directed to the Applicant Pfizer, provides as follows:
"This is a Notice of Allegation pursuant to the Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations.
With respect to Patent 1191843, we allege that no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by us of capsules containing the medicine azithromycin in strength of 250 mg. per capsule for oral administration.
The legal and factual basis for the aforesaid allegation is that we hereby undertake that, notwithstanding the issuance of the Notice of Compliance, we will not make, construct, use or sell the capsules other than as deemed to be noninfringing pursuant to Sections 55.2(1) and 55.2(2) of the Patent Act
. [emphasis added]
More specifically, we want to have a Notice of Compliance issued prior to patent expiry in order to be able to submit to the provinces, so as to enable sales under the provincial programs to commence soon after patent expiry, exactly as intended by Sections 55.2(1) and 55.2(2) of the Patent Act.
[emphasis added]
As aforesaid, you have our undertaking that we will not, prior to patent expiry, make any commercial sales or do anything else not deemed to be noninfringing pursuant to Sections 55.2(1) and 55.2(2) of the Patent Act."
[5]
The Applicants took issue with the sufficiency of this letter as a NOA and in that regard, directed correspondence both to the Respondent Apotex and the Respondent Minister, on July 6, 2000, pointing out the perceived deficiencies. The Applicants requested the Minister to take steps to quash the Notices of Allegation. No such step was taken by the Minister.
[6]
The Respondent served its Notice of Allegation because it wants to obtain a NOC for its version of azithromycin prior to expiry of the patent in order to apply for listing on provincial formularies. The provincial formularies are lists maintained by the provinces of all drug products approved by the provincial Ministries of Health.
[7]
Pursuant to the
Regulations
, the Applicants then commenced this proceeding on July 20, 2000.
[8]
The affidavits of Ms. Theresa Firestone and Ms. Diane Azzarello were filed by the Applicants, for the purpose of addressing the purpose and effect of a listing on a provincial formulary.
[9]
Ms. Firestone, an executive with Pfizer Canada Inc., commented on this review process initiated by a province upon receipt of an application for listing. She stated that a Notice of Compliance is required before a drug producer will be listed on a provincial formulary and said that the NOC, not the provincial formulary listing, permits the sale of pharmaceuticals. Furthermore, she said that since a generic manufacturer like the Respondent does not market its products directly to prescribers, it will use the provincial formulary listing as a marketing tool for the purpose of enhancing its sales.
[10]
Ms. Azzarello, a licensed pharmacist, addressed the purpose and effect of the provincial formulary. The formulary serves two purposes. It lists the drug products for which the provincial governments will pay under the Drug Benefits Program . It also lists all pharmaceutical products, both original and generic, which have been approved for use in a province and which may be used interchangeably with an original drug producer.
[11]
Ms. Azzarello focused on the marketing aspects of the provincial formularies and the potential benefit it confers on a generic manufacturer, allowing access to an expanded market and conferring a commercial advantage. She also addressed some of the requirements for obtaining a listing, including submissions of samples and drug notification form. That form is issued pursuant to the
Food and Drugs Regulations
, 1978, C.R.C., c. 870 and must be requested with in thirty days after the first commercial sale of the drug product. Ms. Azzarello expresses the opinion that in order to comply with provincial requirements to obtain a provincial formulary listing, the Respondent will have to make commercial sales before applying for the listing.
[12]
The Respondent filed the affidavit of Dr. Sherman in response to the affidavits relied on by the Applicants. Dr. Sherman is the Chair and Chief Executive Officer of the Respondent. He too addressed the purpose of the provincial formulary and the requirements for obtaining a listing, including receipt of a Notice of Compliance.
[13]
Dr. Sherman commented on provincial regulation of the sale of drugs through legislation governing interchangeability of one drug produced for another, and through control of the price to be paid for drug products pursuant to provincial drug benefit schemes.
[14]
Dr. Sherman stated that the Respondent requires a NOC prior to the expiry of the Patent in order to facilitate the listing and sale of the generic product upon patent expiry. Further, he says that this is authorized by section 55.2 (1) of the
Patent Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-5, as amended (the "
Act
").
[15]
Dr. Sherman also confirmed the undertaking that the Respondent will not do anything in connection with its application for listing on the provincial formularies that is not exempted from infringement pursuant to section 55.2 (1), before the patent expires.
[16]
Finally, Dr. Sherman denies that an application for listing on the provincial formulary amounts to marketing or offering the product for sale. He also denies that the provincial formularies act as a scheme for commercial purposes, rather than for regulatory purposes governing the use and sale of pharmaceutical products by the provinces. He claims that the Respondent's proposed activities are deemed to be non-infringing pursuant to section 55.2(1) of the
Act
.
Relevant Legislation
[17]
The relevant statutory provisions are sections 55.2(1), 55.2(2) and section 5 of the
Regulations
. These provide as follows:
"55.2(1) It is not an infringement of a patent for any person to make, construct, use or sell the patented invention solely for uses reasonably related to the development and submission of information required under any law of Canada, a province or a country other than Canada that regulates the manufacture, construction, use or sale of any product.
"55.2(2) It is not an infringement of a patent for any person who makes, constructs, uses or sells a patented invention in accordance with subsection (1) to make, construct or use the invention, during the applicable period provided for by the regulations, for the manufacture and storage of articles intended for sale after the date on which the term of the patent expires.
"5(1) Where a person files or has filed a submission for a notice of compliance in respect of a drug and compares that drug with, or makes reference to, another drug for the purpose of demonstrating bioequivalence on the basis of pharmaceutical and, where applicable, bioavailability characteristics and that other drug has been marketed in Canada pursuant to a notice of compliance issued to a first person and in respect of which a patent list has been submitted, the person shall, in the submission, with respect to each patent on the register in respect of the other drug,
(a) state that the person accepts that the notice of compliance will not issue until the patent expires; or
(b) allege that
(i) the statement made by the first person pursuant to paragraph 4(2)(c) is false,
(ii) the patent has expired,
(iii) the patent is not valid, or
(iv) no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by that person of the drug for which the submission for the notice of compliance is filed.
"(1.1) Subject to subsection (1.2), where subsection (1) does not apply and where a person files or has filed a submission for a notice of compliance in respect of a drug that contains a medicine found in another drug that has been marketed in Canada pursuant to a notice of compliance issued to a first person and in respect of which a patent list has been submitted, the person shall, in the submission, with respect to each patent included on the register in respect of the other drug containing the medicine, where the drug has the same route of administration and a comparable strength and dosage form,
(a) state that the person accepts that the notice of compliance will not issue until the patent expires; or
(b) allege that
(i) the statement made by the first person pursuant to paragraph 4(2)(c) is false,
(ii) the patent has expired,
(iii) the patent is not valid, or
(iv) no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by that person of the drug for which the submission for the notice of compliance is filed.
"(1.2) Where a person referred to in subsection (1.1) has served, in accordance with paragraph (3)(b) or (c), a notice of allegation on a first person in respect of a patent included on the register, the person is not required to serve a notice of allegation in respect of the same submission, the same allegation and the same patent on another first person.
"(2) Where, after a second person files a submission for a notice of compliance but before the notice of compliance is issued, a patent list or an amendment to a patent list is submitted in respect of a patent pursuant to subsection 4(4), the second person shall amend the submission to include, in respect of that patent, the statement or allegation that is required by subsection (1) or (1.1), as the case may be.
"(3) Where a person makes an allegation pursuant to paragraph (1)(b) or (1.1)(b) or subsection (2), the person shall
(a) provide a detailed statement of the legal and factual basis for the allegation;
(b) if the allegation is made under any of subparagraphs (1)(b)(i) to (iii) or (1.1)(b)(i) to (iii), serve a notice of the allegation on the first person;
(c) if the allegation is made under subparagraph (1)(b)(iv) or (1.1)(b)(iv),
(i) serve on the first person a notice of the allegation relating to the submission filed under subsection (1) or (1.1) at the time that the person files the submission or at any time thereafter, and
(ii) include in the notice of allegation a description of the dosage form, strength and route of administration of the drug in respect of which the submission has been filed; and
(d) serve proof of service of the information referred to in paragraph (b) or (c) on the Minister.
"55.2(1) Il n'y a pas contrefaçon de brevet lorsque l'utilisation, la fabrication, la construction ou la vente d'une invention brevetée se justifie dans la seule mesure nécessaire à la préparation et à la production du dossier d'information qu'oblige à fournir une loi fédérale, provinciale ou étrangère réglementant la fabrication, la construction, l'utilisation ou la vente d'un produit.
"55.2(2) Il n'y a pas contrefaçon de brevet si l'utilisation, la fabrication, la construction ou la vente d'une invention brevetée, au sens du paragraphe (1), a lieu dans la période prévue par règlement et qu'elle a pour but la production et l'emmagasinage d'articles déterminés destinés à être vendus après la date d'expiration du brevet.
"5(1) Lorsqu'une personne dépose ou a déposé une demande d'avis de conformité pour une drogue et la compare, ou fait référence, à une autre drogue pour en démontrer la bioéquivalence d'après les caractéristiques pharmaceutiques et, le cas échéant, les caractéristiques en matière de biodisponibilité, cette autre drogue ayant été commercialisée au Canada aux termes d'un avis de conformité délivré à la première personne et à l'égard de laquelle une liste de brevets a été soumise, elle doit inclure dans la demande, à l'égard de chaque brevet inscrit au registre qui se rapporte à cette autre drogue:
a) soit une déclaration portant qu'elle accepte que l'avis de conformité ne sera pas délivré avant l'expiration du brevet;
b) soit une allégation portant que, selon le cas:
(i) la déclaration faite par la première personne aux termes de l'alinéa 4(2)c) est fausse,
(ii) le brevet est expiré,
(iii) le brevet n'est pas valide,
(iv) aucune revendication pour le médicament en soi ni aucune revendication pour l'utilisation du médicament neseraient contrefaites advenant l'utilisation, la fabrication, la construction ou la vente par elle de la drogue faisant l'objet de la demande d'avis de conformité.
"(1.1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (1.2), lorsque le paragraphe (1) ne s'applique pas, la personne qui dépose ou a déposé une demande d'avis de conformité pour une drogue contenant un médicament que l'on trouve dans une autre drogue qui a été commercialisée au Canada par suite de la délivrance d'un avis de conformité à la première personne et à l'égard de laquelle une liste de brevets a été soumise doit inclure dans la demande, à l'égard de chaque brevet inscrit au registre visant cette autre drogue contenant ce médicament, lorsque celle-ci présente la même voie d'administration et une forme posologique et une concentration comparables:
a) soit une déclaration portant qu'elle accepte que l'avis de conformité ne soit pas délivré avant l'expiration du brevet;
b) soit une allégation portant que, selon le cas:
(i) la déclaration faite par la première personne aux termes de l'alinéa 4(2)c) est fausse,
(ii) le brevet est expiré,
(iii) le brevet n'est pas valide,
(iv) aucune revendication pour le médicament en soi ni aucune revendication pour l'utilisation du médicament ne seraient contrefaites advenant l'utilisation, la fabrication, la construction ou la vente par elle de la drogue faisant l'objet de la demande d'avis de conformité.
"(1.2) Si une personne visée au paragraphe (1.1) a signifié, conformément aux alinéas (3)b) ou c), un avis d'allégation à une première personne à l'égard d'un brevet inscrit au registre, elle n'est tenue de signifier un avis d'allégation à l'égard de la même demande, de la même allégation et du même brevet à aucune autre première personne.
"(2) Lorsque, après le dépôt par la seconde personne d'une demande d'avis de conformité mais avant la délivrance de cet avis, une liste de brevets ou une modification apportée à une liste de brevets est soumise à l'égard d'un brevet aux termes du paragraphe 4(4), la seconde personne doit modifier la demande pour y inclure, à l'égard de ce brevet, la déclaration ou l'allégation exigées par les paragraphes (1) ou (1.1), selon le cas.
"(3) Lorsqu'une personne fait une allégation visée aux alinéas (1)b) ou (1.1)b) ou au paragraphe (2), elle doit:
a) fournir un énoncé détaillé du droit et des faits sur lesquels elle se fonde;
b) si l'allégation est faite aux termes de l'un des sous-alinéas (1)b)(i) à (iii) ou (1.1)b)(i) à (iii), signifier un avis de l'allégation à la première personne;
c) si l'allégation est faite aux termes des sous-alinéas (1)b)(iv) ou (1.1)b)(iv):
(i) signifier à la première personne un avis de l'allégation relative à la demande déposée selon les paragraphes (1) ou (1.1), au moment où elle dépose la demande ou par la suite,
(ii) insérer dans l'avis d'allégation une description de la forme posologique, de la concentration et de la voie d'administration de la drogue visée par la demande;
d) signifier au ministre une preuve de la signification effectuée conformément aux alinéas b) ou c)."
Section 55.2(2), while in effect when this proceeding was commenced, was repealed in 2001, S.C., c. 10, section 2.
Applicants' Submissions
[18]
The Applicants raise two arguments. First, they allege that the NOA served by the Respondent is defective and insufficient since it fails to set out with any particularity the legal and factual basis upon which Apotex seeks issuance of a NOC. They argue that the NOA is not valid and the Court lacks authority to adjudicate in relation to it. Second, the Applicants allege that Apotex has failed to show that its proposed activities fall within the exemption provided by sections 55.2(1) and (2) of the
Act
.
[19]
The Applicants argue that the NOA fails to comply with section 5(1)(b) of the
Regulations
because it does not contain an allegation identified in that section. They say that Apotex is attempting to combine a statement under section 5(1)(a) with an allegation under section 5(1)(b)(iv) as the basis for its NOA. They submit that Apotex is essentially alleging that it will wait for expiry of the Patent but purports to rely on the exemption in section 5(1)(b)(iv) of the
Regulations
.
[20]
The Applicants argue that the jurisprudence clearly establishes that once the NOA is made, it cannot be rewritten. To the extent that the Respondent now relies only on the exemption provided in section 55.2(1) of the
Act
, rather than on the two subsections identified in its NOA, the Applicants say that Apotex is improperly rewriting its NOA. They argue that Apotex ought to have withdrawn the NOA dated June 7, 2000 and filed a new one. In support of its arguments concerning the impropriety of rewriting the NOA, the Applicants rely on
Merck  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), paragraphs 29, 32-33,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 272 (F.C.A.), at 289 and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 332 (T.D.), at 343 (F.C.T.D.).
[21]
Concerning the merits of the NOA, the Applicants argue that the Respondent's allegation of non-infringement is not justified. They argue that the reference in the NOA to section 55.2(2) of the
Act
means that, as of the date of its NOA, Apotex was already manufacturing a product containing azithromycin, thereby infringing the Applicants' rights, contrary to the law.
[22]
Insofar as reliance is placed on section 55.2(1), the Applicants submit that applying to the provinces for listing on the provincial formularies is a commercial act which constitutes an offer for sale of the product, an activity which falls outside the exemption granted by section 55.2(1).
[23]
Furthermore, the Applicants argue that Apotex will be unable to comply with the requirements for listing on the provincial formularies without providing proof of sales of their product, which will be an infringing act. In this regard, the Applicants rely on the affidavit of Diane Azzarello who offered the opinion that some of the provinces require proof of commercial sales as a condition precedent to such listing.
[24]
The Applicants argue that the mere act of applying for listing on a provincial formulary is an infringing act which is not exempted by section 55.2(1). In this regard, they rely on the decision of the New Zealand Court of Appeal in
Smith Kline and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (N.Z.C.A.).
[25]
The Applicants argue that an application for listing on a provincial formulary necessarily involves the acceptance of a pharmaceutical product as interchangeable for the purposes of being prescribed, as well as being a product for which the provincial drug benefit scheme will reimburse the issuing pharmacist. The Applicants say that these two elements of interchangeability and recognition as a drug benefit fall outside the scheme of "regulation" contemplated by section 55.2(1) of the
Act
.
[26]
The Applicants also argue that provincial drug benefit legislation does not regulate the manufacture or sale of pharmaceuticals. They describe it as social benefit legislation. Consequently, that legislation is not a law which may provide the basis for an exemption under section 55.2 (1).
[27]
The Applicants also argue that the legislation governing interchangeability of drug products cannot be viewed as regulating the sale of pharmaceuticals since that would conflict with the authority given to the federal government, under the
Food and Drugs Act
,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  W.A.C. 165; 74 C.P.R.(3d) 417 (C.A.), at 444 (B.C.C.A.).
[28]
The Applicants say that only the federal government regulates the manufacture and sale of drug products pursuant to the
Food and Drugs Act
, supra and by the issuance of a Notice of Compliance. The Applicants argue that according to the affidavit of Dr. Sherman, the Respondent itself knows that its NOA is not justifiable because the Respondent is unable to meet the requirements for listing on the provincial formularies without selling its product. The act of sale is an infringing act.
[29]
The Applicants argue that the Notice of Allegation is not justified because it depends on an interpretation of section 55.2(1) and section 5(1)(b)(iv) of the
Regulations
which is contrary to the regulatory scheme. In this regard, the Applicants rely on the Regulatory Impact Analysis Statements ("RIAS") which accompanied the
Regulations
in 1993, amendments to the
Regulations
in 1998 and the repeal of certain related regulations in 2000.
[30]
The Applicants submit that the statutory scheme contemplates protection of a patentee's exclusive right in a product until the expiry of the patent and there is no basis in the legislation for the position adopted by the Respondent. The regulatory scheme contemplates the issuance of a NOC, as a marketing approval, after patent expiry or where it is clear that no infringing activity will be undertaken by the second person.
[31]
That is not the situation here. The Respondent has stated that it wants a NOC in order to apply for listing on provincial formularies. The evidence is clear that the purpose of listing on the provincial formularies is to enhance access to a market. That listing is not a requirement for selling a drug product and is not a marketing approval; that role is served by the NOC.
[32]
The Applicants submit that the Respondent is not entitled to obtain a NOC prior to expiry of the Patent. It has failed to show that it is in a position to meet all of the requirements for listing on provincial formularies since it has undertaken not to make commercial sales prior to patent expiry.
Respondent's Submissions
[33]
The Respondent submits that its NOA is valid and complies with the requirements of section 5(1)(b)(iv) of the
Regulations
. The Respondent has clearly set out the legal and factual basis upon which it seeks the issuance of a NOC. In particular, it has stated that there will be no infringement resulting from its proposed activities in respect of applying for listing of its product on provincial formularies.
[34]
The Respondent argues that the Applicants' challenge to the validity of the NOA is erroneously based on an assumption that the Respondent's proposed activities will constitute making offers for sale of the drug, or that there will be actual commercial sales, all in connection with complying with provincial requirements in having the product placed on the provincial formularies. The Respondent says there is no basis in fact for the Applicants' arguments in this regard.
[35]
The Respondent has clearly stated in its NOA that it will do nothing that could constitute infringement and furthermore, has given an undertaking in that regard. It argues that the NOA identifies its proposed activities and these will be limited to non-infringing activities. It will do only what it is permitted to do pursuant to section 55.2(1).
[36]
The Respondent denies that it is attempting to rewrite its NOA by withdrawing reliance on section 55.2(2) of the
Act
. That provision was repealed by Parliament. In consequence, the exemption provided therein is no longer available to the Respondent. However, at the time the NOA was served, section 55.2(2) constituted a legal ground upon which the Respondent could rely.
[37]
The Respondent argues that removal of a legitimate ground of allegation, as the result of legislative activity, is not equivalent to the introduction of a new ground of allegation, after service of a NOA. It says that the present case can be distinguished, on its facts, from the situation prevailing in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  requirements that a NOA set out the factual and legal grounds relied on, in order to avoid surprise to a patentee. Removal of a ground in a NOA is not the same as the introduction of a new ground.
[38]
The Respondent's reply to the Applicants' submissions, on the merits of the NOA, is simply that it is entitled to the exemption provided in section 55.2(1) of the
Act
because its proposed activities, relative to obtaining a listing on the provincial formularies, meet the criteria of section 55.2(1). That section requires the submission of information pursuant to a law which regulates the manufacture, construction, use or sale of a product and the making, using, or selling of the invention must be solely for uses reasonably related to the development and submission of the information required.
[39]
In this case, the Respondent says that the laws and regulations which govern provincial formulary listings are "laws of a province" which regulate the use and sale of a product. The provinces have no primary authority to regulate the sale of pharmaceutical products in Canada; that is a matter falling within the jurisdiction of the federal government. However, the provinces are involved in the dispensing and inter-changeability of pharmaceutical products. The provinces are also engaged in paying for certain drug products pursuant to drug benefits legislation. The Respondent argues the provincial legislation dealing with inter-changeability of pharmaceutical products and drug benefits legislation is legislation regulating the use and sale of pharmaceutical products.
[40]
The Respondent submits that the provincial formulary serves a regulatory process over the use and sale of drug products and that the antecedent steps leading to listing on the provincial formulary should be regarded as the development and submission of information required by a provincial law. It also argues that "regulate" should be broadly interpreted as meaning control and guidance as to the use and sale of the product in issue;
Reference re Proposed Federal Tax on Exported Natural Gas
, [1982] 5 W.W.R. 577; 42 N.R. 351; 37 A.R. 541 (S.C.C.), at 638. It submits that the word "solely" in section 55.2(1) relates to the purpose for which the second person uses the information submitted, not to the purposes of any provincial law. It is not necessary that the provincial laws in question be solely directed to regulation of the use and sale of pharmaceutical products.
Analysis
[41]
This application seeks to prohibit the issuance of a NOC to the Respondent for its pharmaceutical product, azithromycin. The Applicants challenge the Notice of Allegation, procedurally and substantively.
The Statutory Framework
[42]
The
Regulations
provide the relevant framework. An NOC grants marketing approval for drugs in Canada. It is issued by the Federal Government, indicating that all requirements have been met pursuant to the
Food and Drug Regulations
for the protection of public health and safety. The
Regulations
authorize owners of existing patents for pharmaceutical products to file a "patent list" relative to those products for which they hold a NOC. The
Regulations
refer to the person filing such a list as the "first person". In this case, the Applicants are the "first person".
[43]
Generic drug manufactures may rely on prior approval of related pharmaceutical products in applying for marketing approval of the generic form of the products.
[44]
Other manufacturers who produce the same drug may file application for a notice of compliance that refer to and rely on the fact that prior approval has been granted for the brand name. Such a manufacturer is referred to as the "second person" and that is the Respondent's status.
[45]
The
Regulations
prohibit the Minister of Health from issuing a Notice of Compliance until all relevant product and use patents in the earlier approved medicine, as described in the patent list, have expired. Consequently, a second person must either wait until patent expiry before receiving a Notice of Compliance or it may submit a Notice of Allegation to the Minister with its new drug submission.
[46]
The
Regulations
require service of the Notice of Allegation upon the first person. Section 5 of the
Regulations
sets out the grounds upon which a Notice of Allegation is to be based. Briefly, the Notice of Allegation must assert either that the first person is not the patentee, that the patent is expired or invalid, or that it would not be infringed if a Notice of Allegation were issued.
[47]
Following service of the Notice of Allegation the Minister may issue a Notice of Compliance to the second person, unless the first person avails of its right, pursuant to section 6(1) of the
Regulations
, to seek an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a Notice of Compliance. Any such step must be taken by the first person within 45 days after receipt of the Notice of Allegation and once such a proceeding is commenced, the issuance of a Notice of Compliance is stayed for a maximum period of twenty-four months.
The Procedural Issues
i) Is the Notice of Allegation Valid?
[48]
The first issue arising from the proceeding is whether the Respondent's Notice of Allegation is valid. Does it comply with section 5 of the
Regulations
by setting out the legal and factual basis for the allegation of non-infringement?
[49]
As noted above, the Applicants say that the Notice of Allegation does not comply with section 5(1)(b) because it fails to specify with sufficient detail the proposed activities of the Respondent. On the other hand, the Respondent says that the Notice of Allegation does identify the proposed activity and that is whatever activity which does not infringe the Patent.
[50]
Since the Notice of Allegation relies on section 5(1)(b)(iv) of the
Regulations
, the burden of showing the complete legal and factual basis in support of that claim lies on the Respondent pursuant to section 5(3). The Notice of Allegation provides, in part, as follows:
"The legal and factual basis for the aforesaid allegation is that we hereby undertake that, notwithstanding the issuance of the Notice of Compliance, we will not make, construct, use or sell the capsules other than as deemed to be noninfringing pursuant to Sections 55.2(1) and 55.2(2) of the
Patent Act
."
[51]
In my opinion, this statement is sufficient to meet the regulatory requirement that the Respondent state the legal foundation for its Notice of Allegation.
[52]
The factual foundation is found in the following paragraph of the Notice of Allegation:
"More specifically, we want to have a Notice of Compliance issued prior to patent expiry in order to be able to submit to the provinces, so as to enable sales under the provincial programs to commence soon after patent expiry, exactly as intended by sections 55.2(1) and 55.2(2) of the
Patent Act
."
[53]
I conclude that this statement adequately sets out the factual underpinning for the Notice of Allegation.
[54]
In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the Respondent has demonstrated the validity of its Notice of Allegation insofar as it has provided information about the legal and factual basis upon which it seeks the issuance of a Notice of Compliance.
ii) Has the Notice of Allegation Been Rewritten?
[55]
The Applicants have attacked the Notice of Allegation on another ground. They say that the Respondent is now improperly trying to rewrite its Notice of Allegation by abandoning reliance upon section 55.2(2) of the
Act
which was referred to in the Notice of Allegation.
[56]
Dr. Sherman provides the reason why the Respondent is no longer relying on this statutory exemption. Section 55.2(2) of the
Act
, although in force on June 7, 2000, was repealed in 2001. The exemption is no longer available, by operation of Parliament, a matter beyond the control of the Respondent.
[57]
In my opinion this situation is distinguishable from that addressed by the court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). In this case, a second person attempted to raise a new ground after service of the notice of allegation. The court refused to allow the amendment and said at page 6:
"... there cannot be any doubt that a second person in the position of the Cross-Appellant was under a clear obligation, imposed by subsection 5(3)(a) of the
Regulations
, to 'provide a detailed statement of the legal and factual basis for the allegation' (emphasis added). I am not persuaded, therefore, that the Motions Judge erred in refusing leave to file further evidence when it was apparent that its purpose was simply to supply a deficiency of the Cross-Appellant's own making in failing to do what was required of its in its detailed statement i.e. providing all of the facts it intended to reply upon ..."
[58]
In the present case, the Respondent is simply not proceeding on one of the legal basis of its allegation, in response to an act of Parliament. It is not the same situation and does not amount to rewriting the Notice of Allegation.
The Substantive Issue: Is the Notice of Allegation Justified?
[59]
The next issue for determination is whether the Notice of Allegation is justified. Here the onus lies on the Applicants. In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 302 (F.C.A.) at 319, the court comments on the approach to be taken in assessing whether a Notice of Allegation is justified as follows:
"Furthermore, since the
Regulations
clearly allow the Minister, absent a timely application under s. 6, to issue a notice of compliance on the basis of the allegations in the notice of allegation, it would seem that on the hearing of such an application, at least where the notice has alleged non-infringement, the court should start from the proposition that the allegations of fact in the notice of allegation are true except to the extent that the contrary has been shown by the applicant. In determining whether or not the allegations are 'justified' (s. 6(2)), the court must then decide whether, on the basis of such facts as have been assumed or proven, the allegations would give rise in law to the conclusion that the patent would not be infringed by the respondent."
[60]
The allegations in this case rest upon the Respondent's desire to obtain a Notice of Compliance in order to apply for listing on the provincial formularies, in order to begin selling its products as soon as possible after expiry of the Patent. The Respondent undertakes not to make, construct, use or sell capsules containing the medicine azithromycin other than as deemed to be non-infringing pursuant to section 55.2(1) of the
Act
, if the Notice of Compliance is granted prior to expiry of the Patent.
[61]
The goal in this proceeding is the issuance of a Notice of Compliance to the Respondent. The
Regulations
define the Notice of Compliance as follows:
"'notice of compliance' means a notice issued under section C.08.004 of the
Food and Drug Regulations
."
[62]
The question is whether the issuance of a notice of compliance to the Respondent, for the purpose of its application for listing on provincial formularies, falls within the exemption of deemed non-infringement created by section 55.2(1). The answer to that question depends upon the interpretation of both section 55.2(1) and of section 5(1)(b)(iv) of the
Regulations
, in comparison with the provincial legislation governing interchangeability and payment for pharmaceutical products.
[63]
A guide to the interpretation of both section 55.2(1) of the
Act
and of the
Regulations
can be found in the Regulatory Impact Analysis Statement which accompanied the
Regulations
when they were introduced in 1993. Although the RIAS is not part of the
Regulations
, it serves as a guide to parliamentary intention as to the purpose and effect of the proposed legislation. In this regard, I refer to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 293 (F.C.A.), at 296.
[64]
The 1993 Regulatory Impact Analysis Statement,
Canada Gazette
, Part II, vol. 127, No. 6 at pages 1388-1389 provides in part, as follows:
"These Regulations prohibit the Minister of Health and Welfare from granting a marketing approval (a Notice of Compliance) for a drug, that relies upon the earlier approval of a related drug until all the relevant product and use patents pertaining to the earlier approved medicine have expired.
"The regulations permit applicants to submit the patent number and expiration date of all relevant patents that claim either the medicine in or a method of using the drug to treat an illness. HWC is required to maintain a public registry of this patent information. When generic or other drug makers file NOC applications that rely on the fact that approval has previously been granted to an earlier approved drug for which patent information has been filed, the generic/other applicant must certify the status of all patents listed for the earlier approved drug. If it is alleged that some of the patents listed by the earlier NOC applicant are invalid or will not be infringed by the subsequent (generic) applicant must give notice of this allegation to the owner of any contested patent. The patent owner will then have 45 days from receipt of this notice to file suit against the subsequent applicant to enforce its patent. If the patentee files suit within this 45 day period, the granting of an NOC may be delayed up to 30 months pending resolution of the lawsuit.
. . . . .
"These
Regulations
are needed to ensure this new exception to patent infringement is not abused by generic drug applicants seeking to sell their product in Canada during the term of their competitor's patent while nonetheless allowing generic competitors to undertake the regulatory approval work necessary to ensure they are in a position to market their products immediately after the expiry of any relevant patents.
"These
Regulations
together with subsection 55.2(1) will allow patentees to enjoy full patent protection while ensuring off-patented competitors will be able to enter the marketplace immediately upon the expiry of all patents pertaining to a medicine."
[65]
According to the RIAS quoted above, a patentee's exclusive rights to use and enjoy its patent is now limited by the ability of generic manufacturers to use otherwise protected material in making submissions for regulatory approval of their products, such as applying for a Notice of Compliance.
[66]
In the present circumstances, the question is whether an application for listing on the provincial formularies constitutes such regulatory approval.
[67]
The key, then, to determining whether an allegation is justified in this case is a finding that the proposed activities will not infringe the Patent. The crux of the Respondent's position is that its activities are entitled to the exemption against infringement which is provided in section 55.2(1). That provision was discussed by Justice Evans in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at 285, as follows:
"However, in order to ensure that a generic company is in a position to have its infringing drug on the market the moment that the patent on the brand name expires, subsections 55.2(1) and (2) authorize activities that would otherwise constitute an infringement of the patent. Subsection (1) permits use of the patented invention by a 'second person' to demonstrate in its new drug submission for an NOC that its drug is equivalent to the patented medicine. ..."
[68]
This statement suggests that the exemption against infringement is clearly available relative to the activities undertaken by a second person in making submissions to the federal authorities for the issuance of a Notice of Compliance. However, the question here turns on the availability of the exemption when the regulatory approval processes of the provinces are engaged.
[69]
The Respondent characterizes the designation of certain drugs as interchangeable and subject to compensation under the drug benefit program as being regulatory processes relating to the use and sale of drugs. The Respondent bases its arguments in this regard upon the relevant Ontario legislation, that is the
Drug Interchangeability and Dispensing Fee Act
, R.S.O 1990, c. P. 23 ("DIDFA") and the
Ontario Drug Benefit Act
, R.S.O. 1990, c. O.10 ("
ODBA
") and related regulations.
[70]
The Applicants, on the other hand, contest the power of the provinces, including Ontario, to regulate the use and sale of drug products, arguing that these matters are solely within the jurisdiction of the federal government. Furthermore, the sole marketing approval required for the sale of a drug product is the Notice of Compliance.
[71]
The Ontario legislative scheme was discussed in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.R.(2d) 525 (Div. Ct.), at 527-528 relate to the
Prescription Drug Cost Regulation Act
, S.O. 1986, c. 28, the predecessor to DIDFA, as follows:
"It is not possible to understand the issues involved in this application unless the scheme of the regulatory regime is described. In Ontario, drug interchangeability is governed by the provisions of the
P.D.C.R.A.
which is described as 'An
Act
to provide for the Protection of the Public in respect of the cost of certain prescription drugs'. It provides for mandatory and permissive selection of interchangeable brands of drugs and it regulates the price at which the drug products may be resold."
[72]
This statement suggests that the Ontario legislation governing interchangeability and low-cost pricing for drug products is viewed as regulating use and sale of drug products.
[73]
I am prepared to accept that the provincial legislature does regulate use and sale of pharmaceutical products, and without infringing on the federal jurisdiction in that regard. That point was discussed in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  conflict between the
Food and Drug Act
, supra and the British Columbia drug plan policy and said as follows:
"As far as a conflict in terms of objectives is concerned, the Attorney-General freely admits that the purpose of reference-based pricing is to control the amount that the Province will reimburse in respect of prescription drugs under Pharmacare. I am not convinced that any conflict has been shown with the object and purpose of the
Food and Drugs Act
, which is to control the development, manufacture, promotion and sale of drugs in Canada. Nothing in the provincial policy precludes a drug that has been approved for sale in Canada being sold or administered in the Province, and nothing in the policy requires that a drug that is unsafe or has not been approved for sale in Canada, be sold or administered in the Province. As I read the cases on paramountcy that were cited to us, the result is that reference-based pricing and the federal Food and Drug administration may validly co-exist ..."
[74]
According to the evidence in this proceeding, all the provinces require a pharmaceutical manufacturer to hold a Notice of Compliance before a drug product is listed on a provincial formulary. That is the position in which the Respondent now finds itself. However, it cannot rely on the provincial legislative regime over the interchangeability of drug products and their inclusion in provincial drug plans to justify its application for a Notice of Compliance.
[75]
That is what the Respondent is trying to do here when it characterizes the provincial legislation as regulating the use and sale of a drug product.
[76]
The provincial legislation does serve a regulatory purpose over the use and sale of drug products but only after the federal process has been engaged and completed. The provincial regimes are subordinate to the federal scheme mandated by the
Food and Drug Act
, supra and the
Regulations
.
[77]
The Respondent has advanced a novel argument but it cannot succeed because it is contrary to the regulatory scheme affecting both the approval of a drug product and the protection of patent rights.
[78]
The interpretation of section 55.2(1) urged by the Respondent is contrary to the purpose of the
Act
, which is to protect the exclusive rights of a patentee. According to the Supreme Court of Canada in
Rizzo and Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re)
, [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27 at 41 [S.C.R.], the proper approach to statutory interpretation must go beyond mere reliance on the words of the statute; they must be read in their entire context having regard to the scheme of the legislation, its object and Parliamentary intention.
[79]
The Respondent seeks an interpretation of section 55.2(1) which is contrary to the purpose of the
Act
and contrary to section 5 of the
Regulations
.
[80]
While I am not prepared to accept the Applicants' submission that the mere act of applying for listing on the provincial formulary is an offer to sell and consequently, an act of infringement, I am satisfied that the Applicants have discharged the burden of demonstrating that the Respondent's Notice of Allegation is not justified.
[81]
The application is allowed. Pursuant to section 6 of the
Regulations
, the Minister is prohibited from issuing a Notice of Compliance until after the expiry of the patent.
[82]
The issue of costs is reserved for further submissions, unless the parties can otherwise agree.
Order
[83]
It Is Hereby Ordered:
1. The application for an order of prohibition is allowed; and
2. The issue of costs is reserved for further submissions, unless the parties can agree.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/ve
Footnotes
1. The Respondent Minister of Health did not participate in the hearing of this application.
[End of document]