[1]
Reed, J.
: This claim is brought by the plaintiff Barbara Hager against the defen­dants ECW Press Ltd., Dallas Williams (a pseudonym used by Michael Holmes) and General Distribution Services Limited. They are respectively the publisher, author, and distributor of a book entitled
Shania Twain: On My Way
. The plaintiff alleges that 16 major passages from a chapter of her book
Honour Song: a Tribute
were incorporated into the defendants' book, thereby infringing her copyright.
Background Facts
[2]
In April 1996, Barbara Hager was in the process of writing a book about individuals of Canadian aboriginal heritage who have become well known. She sought and was given time to interview the popular country singer and song writer Shania Twain. The book she was writing was eventually pub­lished in September 1996. It contained a nine page chapter on Shania Twain, called "
Shania Twain: Buckskin and Cowboy Boots
".
[3]
While the chapter on Shania Twain included information from a number of sources, it was based primarily on Barbara Hager's interviews with Shania Twain. These were private interviews in which no one else participated. The first was by telephone from Vancouver. The second was an in person interview for which Ms. Hager flew to Los Angeles paying the necessary expenses. On this occasion she not only interviewed Shania Twain but also was allowed "to shadow" her for half a day, and then inter­view her for approximately two hours.
[4]
Prior to both interviews Barbara Hager prepared questions that she wanted to ask in keeping with the theme of the chapter she planned to write. She took notes of the telephone conversation including the responses to the prepared questions. She taped the in-person interview, with Ms. Twain's permission. In Barbara Hager's view the interview was a personal and unique interchange between her and Ms. Twain because they were of a similar age, came from similar backgrounds, and in their child­hood and teen years had had similar experi­ences.
[5]
At about the same time, April 1996, Mr. Lecker of ECW Press Ltd. approached Michael Holmes (Dallas Williams) and suggested that he write a book about Shania Twain. Mr. Holmes was a part-time employee of ECW Press Ltd.; he was the poetry editor. While ECW Press Ltd. was originally a publisher of primarily scholarly works, it had changed direction in recent years so that it was now also producing books for the popular commercial market. The book on Shania Twain was to be one such. It was described by Mr. Holmes, in June 1996, in some promotional material he wrote before he wrote the book, as "a detailed and revealing account of the life, passion, and determination behind Twain's Cinderella story." [see footnote 1]
[6]
Mr. Holmes collected as much published material as he could concerning Shania Twain and from it began putting together his book. He did few original interviews because he found people would charge. For example, David Hartt, a member of one of Twain's first teenage bands, wanted $7,000 to be interviewed. Mr. Holmes states that he did not obtain a copy of Ms. Hager's book until May 5, 1997, at which time he incorporated parts of it into his book. Mr. Holmes kept no drafts of his text so exactly how and when it was prepared cannot be verified by refer­ences to drafts. He did not seek, nor did his publisher seek, permission from Ms. Hager or from her publisher Raincoast Books Distribution Inc. to use any part of
Honour Song
.
[7]
Mr. Holmes submitted his manuscript to ECW Press Ltd. in July 1997. ECW Press Ltd. used a "Guidelines for Authors" pamph­let which contained the following statement:
"Permissions for nonvisual material. You will need to request permission to quote any published material that is still under copyright if your quotation exceeds 'fair use' guidelines (quoting in order to illus­trate or amplify a critical point)." (Exhibit 4(32), p. 6)
Mr. Lecker said this wording might have been derived from something that he had written for use in the U.S.A. The terms of the contract that Mr. Holmes signed with ECW Press Ltd. required him, at his expense, to secure permissions to use any copyrighted materials. The only permissions he sought related to his use of photographs in the book.
[8]
Barbara Hager purchased a copy of the Holmes (Williams) book on December 1, 1997. On noting the similarities between parts of its text and her own, she contacted her publisher to see if permission had been given for such use. When she was told that it had not she contacted her literary agent, Carolyn Swayze, who in turn contacted Mr. Lecker.
[9]
Ms. Hager subsequently wrote to Mr. Lecker setting out her complaints. These are essentially the ones that constitute the basis of the present action:
"I'm sending you the 19 pages in Wil­liams' book that contain excerpts from my chapter on Shania Twain in
Honour Song
. I'm also sending you a copy of my chapter which cross-references the sections that were reprinted in the Williams book. Almost every single direct quote from my interview with Twain that was in
Honour Song
, appears in the ECW book. In addi­tion, a significant amount of the narrative portions in my book appear in the Williams book, however, they have under­gone varying degrees or rewriting from the original manuscript. In some cases, the 'paraphrased sections' (as in the section on Shania's relationship to Canadian singer Lawrence Martin on p. 127) have only a few words changed from my version, and even have the same sentence structure. I consider this reuse of my writing to consti­tute plagiarism." (Exhibit 4(16))
[10]
The present action was commenced December 30, 1997, and at the same time the plaintiff moved for an interlocutory injunction. That motion was first scheduled to be heard on January 12, 1998. The defen­dants requested and were granted an adjourn­ment for the purpose of preparing a response to the motion. The motion was rescheduled for hearing on February 27, 1998. It was not fully argued on its merits at that time. The terms for an interim order, requiring the payment into court of the gross proceeds from the sale of the book in Canada, were agreed upon by the parties and an order to that effect issued on April 22, 1998.
[11]
Sometime around the end of 1997, the defendant ECW Press Ltd. had entered into an agreement with McClelland-Bantam Inc. pursuant to which the latter would publish and distribute a smaller paper-back version of the Holmes (Williams) book, referred to as the "Seal edition". The date of the agree­ment is unknown because the defendants have only found it possible to produce an undated copy. Under the agreement, publica­tion was to be no earlier than June 1998. ECW would retain the copyright, and roy­alties were to be paid to ECW. The defen­dants did not disclose to the plaintiff or the court this planned mass marketing by McClelland-Bantam of the "Seal edition".
[12]
In July 1998 (or perhaps earlier), the mass market paperback edition of the Holmes (Williams) book was released; many of the passages that the plaintiff claimed constituted an infringement of her copyright had been deleted or modified in that version. Among the changes was the addition of a reference to the source of Mr. Holmes' statements about songwriter Lawrence Martin — statements that Barbara Hager had identi­fied in her letter to Mr. Lecker as one of the "paraphrased sections" of her work that even retained the same sentence structure as her own. The source Mr. Holmes cited in the Seal edition for this information was a maga­zine article in
Maclean's
. That article con­tains no reference to Shania Twain.
[13]
With respect to the evidence, I have to note that neither Mr. Lecker nor Mr. Holmes left me with the impression that their evi­dence was reliable. For example, the inabil­ity to produce a dated copy of the agreement with McClelland-Bantam Inc. and the failure to disclose to the court the planned publica­tion and distribution of the Seal edition of the book demonstrates the less than candid approach these defendants have taken to the court and to this litigation.
Use Made Of Ms. Hager's Work
[14]
In order to illustrate the use that was made of Ms. Hager's work, I will set out four of the 16 passages that form the basis of her claim of copyright infringement:
"
Honour Song (Raincoast)
When she was in grade 5, the principal at her school heard that she could sing and asked if she could perform at a parent-teacher program. "I remember telling him that I would need a microphone, a monitor, and a sound system. He didn't know how to respond. Then I told him to call my mother to schedule the performance." For some reason the performance didn't take place, but it was clear that by 10 years old music was more than a hobby to Twain. (
Honour Song
, Pages 12-13)
... she smiles suddenly at something amusing that she remembers from her childhood. "My mom and dad used to laugh at me when I was a kid singing country music. My dad would say I was playing both the cowboy and the Indian because I'd wear a buckskin jacket and cowboy boots."  (
Honour Song
, Page 19)
I don't like to talk to the media about growing up in a Native family because people tend to romanticize it. Some people want me to have grown up with braids and feathers in my hair. My family were hardworking people from Northern Ontario. We trapped and hunted. My grandparents taught me how to track and snare rabbits. But we watched television like everyone else." (
Honour Song
, Page 19)
Not long after finishing high school, Twain teamed up with Cree singer and songwriter Lawrence Martin, who has also become a successful Canadian recording artist. They performed around Ontario and as far away as British Columbia. (
Honour Song
, Page 15)"
"
On My Way (ECW Press)
As a musician, Shania grew up fast. Another incident occurred while she was still in grade school that demonstrates both how quickly she was able to revive her self-confidence and how incredibly professional she was for her age. While she was still in grade 5, her school principal invited her to perform at a parent-teacher event. Shania agreed, then laid out some stipulations. "I remember telling him," she says, "that I would need a microphone, a monitor, and a sound system. He didn't know how to respond. Then I told him to call my mother to schedule the performance" (Hager). For one reason or another -- Shania can't remember -- she didn't end up participating. It is clear, though, that even as a ten-year-old Shania was already taking her career very seriously. (
On My Way
, Page 48)
... Shania recalls, with one of her radiant smiles, "My dad would say I was playing both the cowboy and the Indian because I'd wear a buckskin jacket and cowboy boots" (Hager). (
On My Way
, Page 74)"
... "I don't like to talk to the media about growing up in a Native family," she told Barbara Hager, a Native interviewer,"because people tend to romanticize it. Some people want me to have grown up with braids and feathers in my hair. My family were hardworking people from Northern Ontario. We trapped and hunted. ... But we watched television like everyone else." (
On My Way
, Page 76)
Shortly after graduating from high school, she had hooked up with Cree singer - songwriter Lawrence Martin, now a successful Canadian recording artist in his own right. Together they played gigs in Ontario, and even found themselves filling venues as far away as British Columbia. (
On My Way
, Page 127)"
Copyright Infringement
[15]
Copyright is defined in the
Copyright Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-42, as the right to produce or reproduce a work or any
substan­tial
part thereof. [see footnote 2] Infringe­ment exists when the work is copied either exactly or by way of colourable imitation. [see footnote 3]
[16]
Professor Vaver in his text,
Intellectual Property Law
(Concord, Ont: Irwin Law, 1997), at pp. 80-83, has a useful discussion of the jurisprudence relating to what consti­tutes a "substantial" taking. An annotation is also found in the text by Norman Tamaro,
The 1998 Annotated Copyright Act
, at pp. 164-174. What will constitute a substantial taking must be assessed from both a quanti­tative and qualitative perspective. In
U & R Tax Services Ltd. v. H & R Block Canada Inc.
(1995), 97 F.T.R. 254; 62 C.P.R.(3d) 257 (T.D.), at p. 268, Mr. Justice Richard (as he then was) lists a number of factors that have been considered by the courts when assessing whether there has been a substantial taking:
"(a) the quality and quantity of the material taken;
(b) the extent to which the defendant's use adversely affects the plaintiff's activities and diminishes the value of the plaintiff's copyright;
(c) whether the material taken is the proper subject-matter of a copyright;
(d) whether the defendant intentionally appropriated the plaintiff's work to save time and effort; and
(e) whether the material taken is used in the same or a similar fashion as the plain­tiff's."
[17]
Approximately one-third of Barbara Hager's chapter on Shania Twain found its way into the ECW book. Other than the direct quotes of Shania Twain's words, it was not often verbatim copying, but rather the rearranging of sentences, with additional material interspersed, while following the same concepts, thought patterns and some­times sentence structure. Ms. Hager's re­action on reading the ECW book was that it appeared as though someone had scanned her work onto the computer and then switched the words and sentences around a bit, using a thesaurus to change some words. I doubt that the changes were sophisticated enough to require the use of a thesaurus but the conclusion I draw from the facts is that in terms of quantity, a substantial amount of her work was taken. In addition, the parts of her book that are most valuable to her were taken: the direct quotes from Shania Twain. I conclude that qualitatively a very valuable and significant part of her work was taken. I turn now to consider some of the other factors that the above noted sources have indicated are relevant.
[18]
The plaintiff's evidence was that she has been adversely affected by the defen­dant's copying of her work because she was forced to change the focus of a longer work she was writing on Shania Twain, and rewrite that book. At the same time, the book that she completed has apparently been very well received by the publisher and there are plans to incorporate the whole text of the in-person interview with Shania Twain into it as an appendix. Her work
Honour Song
does not directly compete with the ECW book. These last two factors are dealt with further when discussing damages, although as noted, the references cited to me suggest they are also relevant to whether the taking was substantial. Insofar as the motivation and effect of the taking are concerned, there is no doubt that Mr. Holmes copied Barbara Hager's work for the purpose of saving himself expense and labour and that the taking was intentional. Also, I have no doubt that the effect of authorizing the copying of large portions of an individual's work in the fashion that occurred in this case would decrease an author's incentive to create.
[19]
The determination of whether a substan­tial part of a work has been taken is a ques­tion of fact:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 164 (B.C.S.C.) (Paris, J.) affirmed (1985), 4 C.P.R.(3d) 395 (B.C.C.A.) (Hink­son, J.A.). I have set out in summary form the evidence and conclusions I reach that relate to most of the factors listed in Pro­fessor Vaver's text and in the
U & R Tax Services
case. In the context of this case, I consider the main factors that lead to a conclusion that a substantial part of the work was taken are the quantity of the material taken and the quality of that material (the direct quotes from Shania Twain). I con­clude, on these facts, that the use made by the defendants of the plaintiff's work consti­tuted the copying of a substantial part of that work (some directly, some by colourable imitation).
[20]
I do not find it as easy to come to the same conclusion with respect to the Seal edition. All the direct quotes were dropped from that edition and more than half of the colourable imitation sections were deleted completely. There are still passages that are clearly rearrangements (colourable imita­tions) of Ms. Hager's text, but I find it difficult to conclude in the light of the lesser quantity taken and the deletion of the direct quotes, that the copying constituted the taking of a substantial part of the work, and I do not do so.
[21]
It is now necessary to assess the defen­dants' claim that no breach of copyright occurred because the direct quotations from Shania Twain are not the proper subject of copyright and the use made of Ms. Hager's work was "fair dealing".
Defendants' Position
[22]
The defendants argue that, while Mr. Holmes took parts of Barbara Hager's book, this does not constitute copyright infringe­ment because he took mainly quotations of Shania Twain's words, words used by her in the interviews given to Ms. Hager. It is argued that such quotations are not subject to copyright. Furthermore, the defendants argue that Mr. Holmes only took facts, not the mode of expression in which those facts were recounted by Ms. Hager. Alternatively, counsel argues that Mr. Holmes' actions come within the fair dealing exception of ss. 29 and 29.1 of the
Copyright Act
, R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 29, as amended by R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 7; 1994, c. 47, s. 61; 1997, c. 24, s. 18. Lastly, it is argued that in any event, the practice in the industry is to condone such taking.
[23]
The defendants rely heavily on the recent Federal Court of Appeal decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), leave to appeal denied, (1998), 228 N.R. 200 (S.C.C.). They argue that there was neither creativity nor originality on the part of Barbara Hager in recounting the words used by Shania Twain during the interview and therefore Ms. Hager cannot assert copyright therein. It is argued that the
Tele-Direct
decision has altered the pre-existing jurispru­dence, if it ascribed copyright to the inter­viewer, and that it is now appropriate to consider the United States jurisprudence relating to originality for the purposes of the present fact situation.
[24]
I will refer briefly (1) to some of the Anglo-Canadian jurisprudence upon which counsel for the plaintiff relied, (2) to some of the mainly American jurisprudence to which counsel for the defendants has referred, (3) to the
Tele-Direct
decision, (4) to the arguments relating to lack of copyright in facts, (5) to the fair dealing exception in ss. 29 and 29.1 of the
Copyright Act
, and (6) to the argument based on industry prac­tice.
Quotations From Interviews -
Anglo-Canadian Jurisprudence
[25]
The Anglo-Canadian jurisprudence upon which counsel for the plaintiff relies is:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.R.(3d) 520 (Gen. Div.), affd. (1998), 114 O.A.C. 178; 80 C.P.R.(3d) 161 (C.A.). These cases dem­onstrate that under Anglo-Canadian law, insofar as private interviews are concerned, it is the person who reduces the oral state­ments to a fixed form that acquires copyright therein. That individual is considered to be the originator of the work.
[26]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Roseberry, that were taken down by reporters for
The Times
, belonged to the proprietors of
The Times
, the reporters having assigned their copyright to the proprietors. While counsel for the defendants argues that this is no longer good law for a number of reasons, one being that it predates the 1911 amend­ment to the
U.K. Copyright Act
, at which time the word "original" was added to the
Act
, the jurisprudence does not support that contention. For example, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Aust. H.C.), there is a discussion of the validity of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Act
.
[27]
It was argued  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  & McDougall
that the law now required inventive inge­nuity as well as authorship in the sense used in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  author of the book ... Without his brain and handiwork the book would never have had existence." The court noted that the two expressions "author" and "original work" had always been correla­tive and that the dictionary definition of author was "the person who originates or gives existence to anything." The court held that the
Copyright Act 1911
, which was enacted in part to implement the Berlin Convention of 1908, did not intend to alter the pre-existing law as set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  because it had not existed before, the reporter had "originated" the report.
[28]
More recent jurisprudence has dealt with private interviews, a situation closer to that in issue in this case. In the
Express Newspapers
case, although the decision was based on another aspect of the dispute between the parties, the court made it clear at pp. 379 and 381 that it was the reporters who held the copyrights in the quotations taken down by them in the course of exclu­sive interviews they conducted with the respective celebrities they were writing about, not the interviewees:
"Each of the original stories is made up of two elements. First, there is the news story as such; second, there are the quotations of the words used by the person interviewed.
"... the recorder of spoken words [has] a copyright in the record of those words as distinct from the words recorded."
[29]
In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, the Estate of the late Glenn Gould sought to prevent the publica­tion, by the defendant Carroll, of a book on Glenn Gould when he was a young man. It contained photographs and a narrative. Carroll had taken the photographs and con­ducted an interview with Glenn Gould in 1956, in order to produce an article for a weekend magazine. Carroll kept the photo­graphs and his notes and tapes of the inter­view. In 1995 he decided to use these to produce the book that the Estate sought to enjoin. The narrative portion of the book was comprised of extracts from the defen­dant's conversations with Glenn Gould, which the defendant had recorded in 1956. The Estate argued that copyright in the oral conversations recorded by Carroll rested with the Estate, not with him. This argument was rejected by Mr. Justice Lederman of the General Division, at p. 216, on the ground that oral statements are not expressed in material form and, except in the case of an amanuensis, the speaker has no copyright therein. The greater part of this decision focussed on the tort of appropriation of personality.
[30]
The Ontario Court of Appeal held at p. 164 that it did not need to address the issues in the same manner as the trial judge but would consider the plaintiff's claim only by reference to copyright law:
"[para 5] ... In my opinion, it is not neces­sary to decide the issues in this case on the basis of the relatively new development in tort of appropriation of personality when this case so clearly sounds in intellectual property. Put shortly, the motions judge addressed Gould's right to preserve his privacy and exploit commercially his own fame, whereas I would address the proprie­tary rights Carroll had in the photographs and other material created by Carroll in 1956 and again in 1995."
[31]
The Ontario Court of Appeal held that it was Carroll, not Gould's Estate, that held the copyright in the interviews with Gould. In agreeing with the trial judge that Gould did not hold a copyright in his oral state­ments because such statements were not the kind of disclosure the
Copyright Act
intended to protect - they were not in material form - the Court of Appeal stated at pp. 169-170 that it was the defendant who owned the copyright therein:
"[para 23] ... It is evident from this record that
Gould did not have a copyright with respect to his oral utterances
or in the 'transcriptions' of them, to use the appel­lants' phrase.
To the contrary, Carroll
as the author of the text and captions in the book
was the owner of the copyright in the very written material the appellants are attempting to suppress
.
"[para 24] Once it is established that Carroll owned the unrestricted copyright in the photographs and the written material in the book, there is nothing else to decide. ..." (Underlining added)
Quotations From Interviews -
American Jurisprudence
[32]
I turn then to the jurisprudence on which the defendants' counsel relies. Most of the U.S. jurisprudence respecting quotations from interviews relates to the fair use provi­sions of that country's copyright law (17 U.S.C. § 107). Counsel for the defendants relies particularly on the following cases for the proposition that an interviewer does not have copyright in the statements of an inter­viewee:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.D.N.Y.).
[33]
The <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision dealt with a play that had been written by the defendant about an insane English earl who during part of the play believes himself to be Christ. The plaintiff had written a scientific research study, in the field of abnormal psychology, that dealt with three patients each of whom believed he was Christ. For the purposes of this study, Rokeach, and more commonly his research assistants, recorded and subsequently transcribed sessions in which the three patients were present. The defen­dant borrowed some ideas from the report of this study, one being the confrontation between two delusional Christs. He also used several phrases and words that were reported as having been said by the patients, in order to give his play authenticity. The court held that copyright does not protect ideas, con­cepts, and themes; that the two works bore virtually no resemblance to each other, and that the copying was in any event "de minimus"; and if subject to copyright, which the court did not believe to be the case, the copying would fall under the fair use excep­tion. In discussing the use that had been made of the actual words spoken by the patients to each other, to Rokeach, or to his research assistants, the court stated at p. 161 that Rokeach could not claim copyright in these words because he did not create them.
[34]
In the
Suid
case, the plaintiff alleged copyright infringement by
Newsweek Maga­zine
in a book he had written about John Wayne. Infringement was claimed in quota­tions from two interviews the author had conducted, one with Michael Wayne, the other with William Wellman. The court held at p. 148, citing the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision, that the plaintiff would not have copyright in the interview quotations unless he had obtained copyright assignments from the two inter­viewees. In the case of the Wayne quota­tions, the court refused to consider a consent granted by Wayne to use the quotations as sufficient for the purpose of assigning copy­right. An assignment of copyright had been obtained for the Wellman quotations, how­ever, it had not been registered and thus copyright could not be claimed. The court was of the opinion that with respect to the Wellman quotations fair use would apply because it had never been intended that the interview would have commercial value, and in any case, the amount taken was insubstan­tial.
[35]
Harper & Row
is a fair use case that deals only indirectly with statements made by persons other than the author of the work. It concerned the unauthorized use of the unpublished memoirs of former President Gerald Ford, for the purpose of a pre-publi­cation article about the memoirs. The United States Supreme Court held that the taking of 300 words of a 200,000 word manuscript, in the circumstances, was copyright infringe­ment. It held that fair use could not be justified on the ground that the subject mat­ter was news or because of public interest in it. Counsel for the present defendants relies on a footnote in the dissenting opinion in that case (p. 623, n. 10). The footnote states that the paraphrasing by an author of another's words, and the paraphrasing of government documents, are not covered by copyright, referring to both the
Suid
and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decisions. The majority decision, however, does not deal with the issue of the copyright status in quotations of others, such as Henry Kissinger's words as recounted by Ford, presumably because the majority judges did not find it necessary to do so, having found that there were sufficient reasons based on other parts of the text for concluding that the article constituted a breach of copyright.
[36]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  The defendant, Kobler, had written a biography of the musician Stravinsky, relying on what was referred to as the Craft-Stravinsky litera­ture. This comprised: fifteen books on Stravinsky of which Craft was the either the author or co-author; four "conversation" books written in the form of interviews of Stravinsky by Craft; a three volume com­pendium of Stravinsky's correspondence with explanations by Craft; and, one volume co-authored by Craft and Stravinsky's widow. Craft was described as Stravinsky's personal assistant and amanuensis. Craft had inherited Stravinsky's copyright interest in these works and the case was mainly con­cerned with that interest. The court referred to
Suid
and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and stated that a writer could not claim copyright in the statements of another, and thus the use of quotes of third persons taken from the Craft-Stravinsky sources did not infringe Craft's copyright. However, this conclusion did not relate to Craft's interviews with Stravinsky but to Stravinsky's reports of statements made by third parties. Since the particular passages were not relevant to the overall decision, the court at footnote 8 on p. 124 attributed them to the third persons at face value and did not consider whether they were Stravinsky's narrative invention or whether they were the subject of copyright.
[37]
Reference can be made as well to the descriptions of this area of United States law that are found in several journals and texts. In K. Dunlap,
Copyright Protection for Oral Works: Expansion of the Copyright Law into the Area of Conversations
, (1973) 20 Bulletin of the Copyright Society of the U.S.A. 285, the pre-1976 situation is described. It discusses the protection of oral statements under state "common law" of copyright. In V.L. Ruhga,
Ownership of Interviews: A Theory for Protection of Quotations
, (1988) 67 Nebr. L. Rev. 675 at p. 684, the author describes the jurisprudence respecting the post-1976 statutory copyright in quotations as being split:
"When dealing with statutory copyright, courts have split on the issue of interview ownership. Some courts advocate inter­viewer ownership of the copyright.
Others maintain that the interviewer and the inter­viewee separately own their respective contributions, unless otherwise agreed. Generally, the court's view of ownership determines the degree of copyright protec­tion available." (Footnotes omitted)
The article is concerned with the interviewee being able to control the use that is made of an interview, beyond use by the first inter­viewer. Such use can, of course, be con­trolled by contract.
[38]
In A.S. Hirsch,
Copyrighting Conver­sations: Applying the 1976 Copyright Act to Interviews
, (1982) 31 Am. Univ. L. Rev. 1071 at pp. 1082-1083, it is suggested that interviews constitute works of joint author­ship:
"Under the contemporaneous intent stan­dard, an interview qualifies as a joint work because the interviewer and interviewee meet with each other for the express pur­pose of conducting an interview. This goal is a manifestation of their intent to merge their respective contributions into one work, thereby establishing a work of joint authorship. Furthermore, because inter­views necessitate interaction between two people, individual efforts on the part of either the interviewer or the interviewee cannot produce the same result. A partici­pant in a conversation, therefore, should be considered a joint author of comments made by coparticipants. This proposition has been recognized by some courts. Therefore, although there is precedent support­ing a finding that either the inter­viewer or interviewee individually owns the copy­right in an interview, the better view is that the combined effort creates a work of joint authorship." (Footnotes omitted)
[39]
And in
Latman's The Copyright Law
, 6th Ed. (Washington: BNA Books, 1986) at p. 115, n. 3 the position of the United States Copyright Office is described as being that copyright in an interview can be held in part by the interviewee or interviewer or entirely by one or the other depending upon the agreement between them:
"... with respect to interviews, the Copy­right Office has stated:
'A work consisting of an interview often contains copyrightable authorship by the person interviewed and the interviewer. Each has the right to claim copyright in his or her own expression in the absence of an agreement to the contrary. Where an application for such a work names only the interviewee or the interviewer as the author and claimant, and where the nature of authorship is described as "entire text," it is unclear whether the claim actually extends to the entire work, or only to the text by the interviewee or interviewer. In any case where the extent of the claim is not clear, the Copyright Office must communicate with the appli­cant for clarification.'
"COMPENDIUM II OF COPYRIGHT OFFICE PRACTICES §317.
An application naming only the interviewer or interviewee as the author but listing 'text' instead of 'entire text' as the nature of authorship will be interpreted as assert­ing a claim only for the interviewer or interviewee's portion of the interview."
Effect Of Tele-Direct Decision
[40]
Counsel for the defendants argues that the jurisprudence in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  deals directly with a second person taking the quoted words of an interviewee, is no longer good law in Canada because it is all based on the premise that copyright law protects an author's labour. For example, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  conclusion that the state of the law permitted one man to make profit and to appropriate to himself the labour, skill, and capital of another. And it is not denied that in the case the defendant seeks to appropriate to himself what has been produced by the skill, labour, and capital of others. In the view I take of this case I think the law is strong enough to restrain what to my mind would be a grievous injustice."
And Lord Davey at p. 552:
"... it is a sound principle that a man shall not avail himself of another's skill, labour, and expense by copying the written product thereof. To quote the language of North, J., in another case: 'For the pur­poses of their own profit they desire to reap where they have not sown, and to take advantage of the labour and expendi­ture of the plaintiffs in procuring news for the purpose of saving labour and expense to themselves"."
[41]
Counsel argues that even if the words of an interviewee were previously copyrightable by the interviewer, as set out in the
Express Newspapers
and
Gould Estate
cases, the recent decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
Tele-Direct
has overruled that jurisprudence. As noted above, it is argued that the elements of creativity and originality that are now required for copyright protection cannot exist in the quoted words of another. In addition, as I understand the argument, it is that the
Tele-Direct
decision has turned Canadian copy­right law, at least insofar as it is relevant for present purposes, from its previous alignment with the law of the United Kingdom towards an alignment with that of the United States.
[42]
I do not interpret the
Tele-Direct
deci­sion as having such a broad effect. In both the United States and Canada, jurisprudence has defined the requirement that copyright be granted in an "original" work, as meaning that the work originate from the author and that it not be copied from another. [see footnote 4] In the United States this was initially the result of case law; the statutory requirement of "originality" was only added in 1976. [see footnote 5] The requirement that a work be "original" has been a statutory requirement in Canada since 1924 when the
Copyright Act
enacted in 1921 came into force. That
Act
was largely copied from the United Kingdom
Copyright Act
of 1911. I am not persuaded that the Federal Court of Appeal intended a significant departure from the pre-existing law. [see footnote 6] In the absence of an express decision from the Court of Appeal to the contrary, I think the law as set out in
Express Newspapers
and
Gould Estate
is still the law.
[43]
One reason for being cautious about not over-extending the
Tele-Direct
decision is that it deals with an entirely different type of work from those in issue in this case. It deals with a compilation of data (a sub-compilation of the yellow pages of a tele­phone directory). The appropriate test to be applied when copyright is claimed for works that consist of compilations of data has been a difficult area. This is because such works are not likely to exhibit, on their face, indicia of the author's personal style or manner of expression.
[44]
In the
Tele-Direct
decision the Court of Appeal indicated that the issue before it had arisen because of the amendments to the
Copyright Act
enacted in 1993 as part of the
North American Free Trade Agree­ment Implementation Act
(S.C. 1993, c. 44, s. 53). [see footnote 7] The court noted that one of the elements required under that Agreement was the protection by copyright of data bases, the court questioned at para­graph 16 whether in fact the amendments had been drafted to effectively accomplish this objective. Interestingly, there is now a Bill before the United States Congress [see footnote 8] to overrule the decision of the United States Supreme court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Un.S. Sup. Ct.), a decision in that country that had a result similar to
Tele-Direct
in this. There is debate among both United States and Cana­dian authors as to whether the
Feist
decision is limited to database type cases or will have wider ramifications. [see footnote 9] Given this context and the express references in
Tele-direct
to NAFTA and the implementa­tion of that agreement, I am persuaded that the statements in
Tele-Direct
were not intended to effect a major change in the pre-existing jurisprudence.
Facts
[45]
There is no dispute that copyright does not cover facts. This is trite law. Counsel for the defendants argues that the narrative portions of Mr. Holmes book merely consti­tute the reporting of facts, some of which are only found in Ms. Hager's book, but many of which are also found elsewhere in the published material on Shania Twain. It is argued that there are only so many ways in which you can report facts and this accounts for the similarity in wording and sentence structure.
[46]
I do not accept the assertion that there are a limited number of ways in which to recount facts. The method of expression is individual. It can be very different for differ­ent authors, as is evident from the text of some of the material to which Mr. Holmes refers as an allegedly common source.
[47]
The defendants cited many authorities that have dealt with biographies and that establish the principle that there is no copy­right in facts:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Lah 103 [see footnote 10];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (L.C.);
Harper & Row
, supra at p. 621;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 306;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.D.N.Y.), at p. 788;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in each case involves an assessment of the similarity of the form of expression in which the facts are conveyed, based on the particular facts of the case.
Fair Dealing
[48]
The concept "fair dealing" in ss. 29, 29.1 and 29.2 of the
Copyright Act
is quite different from that of "fair use" in the United States. [see footnote 11] The most significant difference is that under Canadian copyright law the use of the copied material must come within one of the specific purposes identified in the statute: research or private study (s. 29), criticism or review (s. 29.1), or news reporting (s. 29.2).
[49]
The relevant provisions read:
"29. Fair dealing for the purpose of research or private study does not infringe copyright.
"29.1 Fair dealing for the purpose of criti­cism or review does not infringe copyright if the following are mentioned:
(a) the source; and
(b) if given in the source, the name of the
(i) author, in the case of a work,
(ii) performer, in the case of a per­former's performance,
(iii) maker, in the case of a sound recording, or
(iv) broadcaster, in the case of a com­munication signal.
"29.2 Fair dealing for the purpose of news reporting does not infringe copyright if the following are mentioned:"
"29. L'utilisation équitable d'une oeuvre ou de tout autre objet du droit d'auteur aux fins d'étude privée ou de recherche ne constitue pas une violation du droit d'auteur.
"29.1 L'utilisation équitable d'une oeuvre ou de tout autre objet du droit d'auteur aux fins de critique ou de compte rendu ne constitue pas une violation du droit d'auteur à la condition que soient mention­nés :
a) d'une part, la source;
b) d'autre part, si ces renseignements figurent dans la source :
(i) dans le cas d'une oeuvre, le nom de l'auteur,
(ii) dans le cas d'une prestation, le nom de l'artiste-interprète,
(iii) dans le cas d'un enregistrement sonore, le nom du producteur,
(iv) dans le cas d'un signal de com­munication, le nom du radiodiffuseur.
"29.2 L'utilisation équitable d'une oeuvre ou de tout autre objet du droit d'auteur pour la communication des nouvelles ne constitue pas une violation du droit d'auteur à la condition que soient mention­nés:"
[50]
Counsel for the defendants argues that the use made of Ms. Hager's work falls within the concepts "fair dealing for the purpose of research" and "fair dealing for the purpose of criticism".
[51]
I shall refer, first, to some of the evi­dence that describes the ECW book. Mr. Lecker stated that it "
has all the qualities of every scholarly book we publish
, which is synthesis of information, gathering of infor­mation, careful collation of sources, and attribution" [see footnote 12] (emphasis added). A review in
Quill and Quire
, a respected journal of Canadian English lan­guage literature, was not very compliment­ary. It stated that the book "reads like a 200-page press release by a record company publicity hack," [see footnote 13] which relies on newspaper articles and a record store manager who once played in a band with Shania Twain. A review in the
Halifax Daily News
, however, was more favourable. It lauded ECW Press for having "stumbled on a profitable sideline producing biographies of pop culture icons." [see foot­note 14] It described the book as being thorough and comprehensive, although lack­ing in contact with the star herself. A fav­ourable review also appeared in
Country Music News
. [see footnote 15] A review in
The Globe and Mail
referred to the ECW book as a "standard pop bio." [see footnote 16]
[52]
The quality of a work, of course, is not relevant in assessing fair dealing, but the descriptions of the nature of the book found in these reviews (a standard pop biography) is relevant insofar as it sets the context within which an assessment of the type of use that was made of the copied material is to be determined. Counsel for the defendants argues that any biography is a work of research. Mr. Lecker considered the use that was made of Ms. Hager's text to be fair dealing for the purpose of "criticism". The question whether the use made of Ms. Hag­er's text falls within either s. 29 or 29.1 is, of course, for the court to answer.
[53]
There is a paucity of jurisprudence concerning what is meant by the word "research" in the legislation. One looks of course to the companion concept "private study" for assistance in interpreting what is meant. A second source of guidance is the dictionary definition of the word. The
Oxford English Dictionary
, 2nd Ed. (1989) gives the following definition:
"Research (noun):
1. The act of searching (closely or careful­ly)
for
or
after
a specified thing or person.
2.a. A search or investigation directed to the discovery of some fact by careful consideration of study of a subject; a course of critical or scientific inquiry. (Usu. in pl.)
b. Without article: Investigation, inquiry into thing. Also, as a quality of persons, habitude of carrying out such investigation.
"Research (verb):
1. To search into (a matter or subject); to investigate or study closely. Also, to engage in research upon (a subject, a per­son, etc.)."
[54]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ch. D.), "Notes" that were designed for students studying certain literary works that contained large portions from those works were held not to fall under the fair dealing exception. The court rejected the argument that the authors of the Notes, when dealing with the original works, were engaged in private study or research. In addition, the expression "private study" has been interpreted as not including use for educational purposes:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  legisla­tion, the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
(U.K.), 1988, c. 48, ss. 28, 29, 30 in force as of August 1, 1989, specifically provides that it is only use by the researcher him or herself that is included in the excep­tion of fair dealing for the purpose of research.
[55]
An Australian decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C. Aust.), came to a similar conclusion with respect to that country's copyright law. The defendants in that case tried to argue that a news clipping service they provided was fair dealing since their clients were engaged in research. The court stated that the relevant activity was that of the copier (Jeffress) not its customers.
[56]
The most significant factor, in my view, in interpreting what is meant by "research" in our legislation, is the fact that unlike fair dealing for the purpose of criticism or review, or news reporting, there is no re­quirement that the source be identified (when the use is for research). This indicates that the use contemplated by private study and research is not one in which the copied work is communicated to the public.
[57]
I turn then to the meaning of "for the purpose of criticism" in s. 29.1. I note first, that "criticism" is coupled with "review". The principle of statutory interpretation "noscitur a sociis" would suggest that the two words are likely related. One relation­ship is that for the criticism or review to occur there need to be excerpts from and references to the works being criticized or reviewed. Also, when criticizing or review­ing any given work it may be necessary to use quotes from others for comparative purposes.
[58]
Among the definitions of the word "criticism" found in the
Oxford English Dictionary
, 2nd Ed. (1989) are:
"The art of estimating the qualities and character of literary or artistic work; the function or work of a critic. ...
spec. The critical science which deals with the text, character, composition, and origin of literary documents ..."
[59]
The jurisprudence has established that it is not merely the text or composition of a work that may be the object of criticism but also the ideas set out therein.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  tests.
[60]
Despite Mr. Holmes and Mr. Lecker's efforts to characterize the use made of Ms. Hager's work as being for the purpose of research or for the purpose of criticism, it simply does not come within those defini­tions. The use made of the quotations and paraphrases from Ms. Hager's work was not for the purpose of doing research, nor was it for the purpose of criticizing either the text or the ideas in Barbara Hager's book.
[61]
Counsel for the defendants again cited United States authorities:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
Rosemont  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (2nd  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> d (2nd Cir.). As noted above, I am reluctant to refer to these decisions because our law in this area is so different from that of the United States.
Industry Practice
[62]
The evidence concerning industry prac­tice is confused and unreliable. Mr. Lecker gave evidence that there was no difference in the practice in the industry between aca­demic papers and mass market popular commercial works, with respect to when permission to copy the work of another was sought. He indicated that in both cases it was the length of the passage copied that was the governing factor. He stated that "what people will often do when they're writing their articles is to write using smaller quotations precisely so that they don't appear to be taking, you know to be taking, wholesale chunks out of somebody's work." [see foot­note 17] He states that this is done all the time within the Canadian publishing indus­try. Mr. Lecker's opinion was that it was the practice in the Canadian industry for biographers to use quotations from inter­views (private or public) which have been published, without first seeking permission from either the publisher of the interview or the interviewee. His evidence was also that there were no absolute standards. His evi­dence was self-serving, and as I have indi­cated elsewhere, I have no confidence in the accuracy of his evidence.
[63]
Ms. Swayze gave evidence that there is a distinction between academic writing and books written for the popular commercial market. One of her reasons for saying that such exists was that, in her opinion, while academic writing may assist the author in achieving tenure, there is usually little money made from it. Also, she asserted that quite different types of works are involved in the case of commercial writers, and while academic writers are usually pleased to see their works referred to and excerpted by their peers, because it enhances their reputa­tions, commercial writers are not pleased to have their work copied because it can dimin­ish the commercial value of their work.
[64]
Ms. Swayze also indicated that all copying from another's work should be supported by permission from the first author, except for very small parts. When asked, however, whether it was Canadian publishing industry practice to require per­mission for every quote she said "I do not know." [see footnote 18] At one point in her evidence she stated that she doubted "that anyone would seek signed permission to use the actual words spoken by a person," [see footnote 19] while elsewhere she indicated the contrary. In response to whether it was unusual to see permissions given for the quoted words of celebrities, she answered that it was "Not at all unusual, and it's my position that it would be mandatory." [see footnote 20] Ms. Swayze stated that free­lance writers typically would sell an inter­view, in three, four or five different places and that the Professional Writers' Associ­ation of Canada was very active in protect­ing the copyright for writers in such situ­ations. [see footnote 21] From the descrip­tion above it is clear that Ms. Swayze's evidence was confused and contradictory. I am not prepared to rely on it.
[65]
I cannot conclude from the evidence that an industry practice exists that leads to an implied consent to the copying. Indeed I doubt that "industry practice" can sanction breaches of copyright. It may reflect no more than the economic impracticality, in many instances, of pursuing copyright infrin­gement because of the costs involved.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  court held that "academic treatises, research papers and other written material enjoy as much copy­right as any other work," and that "[i]t is not open to anyone to presume that because ... academic treatises are meant to be used by others that they should thereby be fully available to anyone" to copy.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  argument that an infringe­ment was justified because everyone in the industry used everyone else's material. She expressed the view at p. 88 that even if the evidence had established such a practice, it would not constitute reasonable grounds for concluding that there was no copyright in the plaintiff's material (and presumably also for concluding that the use constituted fair dealing).
[66]
The defendants made reference to biographies of Alanis Morissette, Sarah McLachlan and Neil Young and the use therein of quotations. These references tell one nothing, however, unless it is known whether the words of the quotations were spoken in a public forum where the individ­ual was in a sense giving them out to all the world, whether they were spoken in a public forum but the speaker asserted a right to control their subsequent use, or whether they were said in a private interview such that the reporter could hold copyright.
Summary Of Conclusions Re:
Copyright Infringement
[67]
I am not prepared to rely on the United States jurisprudence relating to third party quotes to which counsel for the defendants referred. The Court of Appeal made it very clear in the
Tele-Direct
decision that the use of United States jurisprudence in the copy­right area must be approached with great care. It is well-known that the history of copyright law in that country has been dif­ferent from our own. For example, the United States only became a signatory to the
Berne Convention
in 1989, and the words of the United States
Constitution
have always had a defining role in the develop­ment of jurisprudence in that country. Fur­thermore, it is not as clear as counsel seemed to suggest that the requirement of originality in that country has led to a denial of copy­right by an interviewer in the words spoken by an interviewee.
[68]
I am not persuaded that the
Tele-Direct
decision overrules the earlier jurisprudence found in the
Express Newspapers
and
Gould Estate
cases. Also, while counsel for the defendants sought to characterize Ms. Hager's work as a compilation, it is not of that nature. The fact that she chose to pres­ent her profile of Shania Twain by using the direct quotations she elicited from Ms. Twain in the interview does not lessen its status as an original literary work. In
Slum­ber Magic
, supra, an advertising brochure was described as a compilation of old and new materials, although it could probably also have been described as a pamphlet or "sheet of letter press". [see footnote 22]
[69]
While the decisions in
Express News­papers
and
Gould Estate
do not deal direct­ly with a dispute between an interviewer and a third party who has copied the words of an interviewee, the statements in those cases that the interviewer holds the copyright are unequivocal. I consider them to state the law applicable to the circumstances of this case. The quoted words of Ms. Twain cannot be divorced from the context in which they were spoken. They were elicited by Ms. Hager in response to questions she had framed. They were not made to the public at large. She chose the parts of her interview with Shania Twain that would be incorpo­rated into the monograph she wrote. If she had not created the work
Shania Twain: Buckskin and Cowboy Boots
, the quoted words would not have been available for copying.
[70]
It was made very clear in the
Slumber Magic
decision, referred to above, and in other cases, that when assessing copyright protection one must not dissect the work into fragments. It is not appropriate then to frag­ment Barbara Hager's work and treat the quotes as independent parts. Barbara Hager's work required each of (1) skill, (2) judgment and (3) labour for its creation.
[71]
As appears from what has been written above, I have found that the taking of parts of Ms. Hager's text constituted neither fair dealing, nor could one imply consent as a result of an alleged practice in the industry.
[72]
I conclude that Michael Holmes breached Barbara Hager's copyright in her chapter "
Shania Twain: Buckskin and Cowboy Boots
," when he copied parts of it into his book
Shania Twain: On My Way
.
Damages - Share Of Profits -
Remedies
[73]
That leaves for consideration a determi­nation of the appropriate remedies.
[74]
Section 35 of the
Copyright Act
states:
"(1) Where a person infringes copyright, the person is
liable to pay such damages
to the owner of the copyright as the owner has suffered due to the infringement
and, in addition to those damages, such part of the profits that the infringer
has made from the infringement
and that were not taken into account in calculating the damages as the court considers just.
"(2) In proving profits,
(a) the plaintiff shall be required to prove only receipts or revenues derived from the infringement; and
(b) the defendant shall be required to prove every element of cost that the defendant claims." (Emphasis added)
[75]
Damages are difficult to quantify in this case, as they are in many copyright cases.
Honour Song
and
On My Way
are not directly competing books.
Honour Song
is found in book stores in the Native Studies or Canadian Studies section.
On My Way
is a "pop" biography. At the time that
On My Way
was published Ms. Hager was writing a full length biography of Shania Twain for which she was going to use the notes and tape recording of her interviews. The fact that both her book and the ECW book were in preparation was reported in
The Globe and Mail
in August 1997. [see footnote 23] Thus, both Mr. Lecker and Mr. Holmes would have known that she was writing a book about Shania Twain. Ms. Hager was delayed in producing her book because of an illness in her family. She states that she was forced to change the focus of her book and write a different type of work than had originally been planned, in light of Mr. Holmes' plagiarism of her work.
[76]
In cases where damages are difficult to assess, it is proper to make an award by assuming that there had been a reasonable fee paid by Mr. Holmes to Ms. Hager for the use of her work. Evidence demonstrated that what constitutes a reasonable fee for per­mission to use part of a copyright work varies depending upon the quantity that is to be used and the purpose to which it will be put. Barbara Hager's evidence was that had permission been sought she would not have given it. She considered the interview to be one of the most valuable assets of her career and she intended to use it herself. While counsel for the plaintiff argues that one cannot use the "fee assessment" approach to damages when the author asserts that per­mission would never have been given, I am not persuaded that the law is so categorical. As I understand the jurisprudence it is that one should not force a copyright-owner to accept a court assessed fee in lieu of an injunction. Keeping in mind the plaintiff's reluctance to allow her work to be used at all, I consider $9,000 to be a reasonable fee.
[77]
I turn then to whether the plaintiff should also be awarded a share of the defen­dants' profits. The record keeping by the defendants, or at least that presented to the court, is truly abysmal. It is incomplete and has the earmarks of being deliberately con­fusing. Counsel on his clients' behalf, admit­ted to net revenues by ECW of $25,952 (from Canadian sales) and $52,373 (from sales in the United States and Europe). He then argues that expenses of $26,457.10 should be allocated against the Canadian revenues and that the revenues from non-Canadian sales should not be included in the accounting of profits because the
Copyright Act
does not have extraterritorial effect. Alternately, he argues that the total claimed expenses of $66,142 should be subtracted from the $78,325 revenue, leaving $13,000 profit. I frankly do not believe the revenue figure. I note that the mass market Seal edition was planned for a first run of 50,000 copies. It is hard to believe that a book selling only 8,000 - 9,000 copies would merit a mass market edition of that size. There is evidence that at least 13,000 copies of the original book were published and that the cover price was $16.95. The percentage retained by the distributor varies with the distribution agreements: 12% or 6% for General Distribution Services, depending upon point of shipment; 27% for the U.S. distributor Login; and 40% for the European distributor Turnaround. Nevertheless, the plaintiff is required to prove revenues and thus, on the basis of the evidence before me, I am forced to accept as a starting point the admission that net revenues were $78,325. Insofar as expenses are concerned, counsel for the plaintiff has agreed that the amounts of $2,410.71 for colour scanning, $27,178 for printing, $7,508.19 for photo permissions and $7,176.75 for advertising were proven and are properly deductible from the rev­enues. These are amounts paid to indepen­dent third parties pursuant to invoices that in most instances identify the expense as relat­ing to the Shania Twain book. The other alleged expenses in my view have not been properly proven. This includes not only the expenses that ECW claims but also those claimed by Michael Holmes. Deducting the expenses that have been proven from the admitted revenues leaves $34,053. Ms. Hager should receive 10% of this. I have not taken into account the grants ECW receives from arts councils.
[78]
I do not accept the argument that non-Canadian revenues should not be included. The books were published in Canada, sent from Canada for sale abroad and the rev­enues were paid to the defendants.
[79]
A judgment will therefore issue requir­ing the defendants to pay the plaintiff $12,405 and the costs of her action.
Action allowed.
Editor: Rodney A. Jordan/saf
Footnotes
1. Exhibit 4(45).
2.	"3(1) For the purposes of this Act, 'copyright', in relation to a work, means the sole right to produce or reproduce the work or any substantial part thereof in any material form whatever, to perform the work or any substantial part thereof in public or, if the work is unpublished, to publish the work or any substantial part thereof, and includes the sole right ..."
"3(1) Le droit d'auteur sur l'oeuvre com­porte le droit exclusif de produire ou re­produire la totalité ou une partie impor­tante de l'oeuvre, sous une forme matérielle quelconque, d'en exécuter ou d'en représenter la totalité ou une partie importante en public et, si l'oeuvre n'est pas publiée, d'en publier la totalité ou une partie importante; ce droit comporte, en outre, le droit exclusif:"
3.	"2. In this Act,
'infringing' means
(a) in relation to a work in which copyright subsists, any copy, including any colourable imitation, made or dealt with in contravention of this Act,"
"2. Les définitions qui suivent s'appliquent à la présente loi.
'contrefaçon'
a) À l'égard d'une oeuvre sur laquelle existe un droit d'auteur, toute reproduction, y compris l'imitation déguisée, qui a été faite contrairement à la présente loi ou qui a fait l'objet d'un acte contraire à la présente loi;"
4. H.G. Fox,
The Canadian Law of Copyright and Industrial Designs
, 2nd Ed. (Toronto, 1967), at pp. 42-43, 110ﬀ; H.B. Abrams,
Originality and Creativity in Copyright Law
, (1992) 55 Law & Contemp. Prob. 3 at p. 7.
5. Abrams, ibid at p. 7.
6. Although H.P. Knopf,
Limits on the Nature and Scope of Copyright
, in G.F. Henderson, ed.,
Copyright and Confidential Information Law of Canada
(Toronto: Carswell, 1994) 229 states, at p. 241:
"... As more and more attempts are made to bootstrap high technology and commercial information of no particular aesthetic value into the copyright system, courts seem to be applying a higher and higher threshold of originality in order to preserve some sense of the original purpose of copyright law, which was to encourage literary, artistic, dramatic and musical creativity."
7.
North American Free Trade Agreement Between the Government of Canada, the Government of the United Mexican States and the Government of the United States of America
(NAFTA), [1994] Can.T.S. No. 2.
8. Bill H.R. 2652,
Collections of Information Antipiracy Act
, 2nd sess., 105th Congress, 1998 (passed House of Representations 19 May 1998); currently under consideration in the Senate, Bill Section 2291.
9. There has been considerable debate as to whether
Feist
changed the pre-existing law in the United States in a dramatic fashion or merely added a minor gloss for databases. H.P. Knopf, supra footnote 6, at p. 240, suggests the former. H.B. Abrams, supra footnote 4 at p. 43, states that
Feist
constitutes a fundamental re-examination and reformulation of the concept of originality applicable to all works of authorship, but he concludes that the decision will really have little effect, even on compilations, because the creativity component can be easily satisfied. In
Goldstein's Copyright
, 2nd Ed. (New-York: Aspen Law & Business) §2.2.1 the
Feist
decision is described as a "significant departure from precedent" while at the same time evidencing "an intention to immunize most classes of copyrightable works from case-by-case scrutiny for creative content". Opposing views on the merits of the
Feist
decision are found in David Allsebrook,
Originality is "No Sweat": Originality in the Canadian Law of Copyright
(1992) 9 Can. Intell. Prop. Rev. 270, and Norman Siebrasse,
Copyright in Facts and Information: Feist Publications is Not, and Should Not Be, the Law in Canada
, (1994) 11 Can. Intell. Prop. Rev. 191. An analysis of the decision is also found in Pamela Saumelson,
The Originality Standard for Literary Works Under U.S. Copyright Law
, (1994) 42 AM. J. Comp. L. 393.
10. An unusual case in that the same individual was the author of both books, one being a longer account of the same events mentioned in the first book. The author had assigned his copyright interest in the first book to the plaintiff. The usual indicator of copying, i.e., writing style, was thus not available to assess whether the second text was a copying of the first or an independent creation.
11. Hugues G. Richard,
Concept of Infringement in the Copyright Act
in Henderson, ed., supra footnote 6, 201 at p. 217; Knopf in
Henderson
, ed., supra footnote 6, at p. 258-259; D. Vaver, supra paragraph 15, at p. 101.
12. Transcript, V. 2, p. 339.
13. Exhibit 4(51).
14. Exhibit 4(52).
15. Ibid.
16. Transcript V. 3, pp. 501-502.
17. Transcript, V. 2, p. 280.
18. Transcript, V. 2, p. 235.
19. Transcript, V. 2, p. 227.
20. Transcript, V. 2, p. 239.
21. Transcript, V. 2, p. 240.
22. W.L. Hayhurst,
Copyright Subject-Matter
in Henderson, ed., supra footnote 6, at p. 61.
23. Exhibit 4(13).
[End of document]