[1]
Giles, Associate Senior Prothonotary
: Before me is a notice of motion for a confidentiality order, together with the written submissions and supplementary written submissions of the applicant and a request by the applicant that the matter be disposed of without personal appearance pursuant to rule 324. Also before me is a letter from the solicitors for the respondents/defendants putting forward the proposition that "the application of the provisions of rule 324 enabling a motion to be heard without appearance of counsel should be limited to those circumstances which are not controversial.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  pursuant to the provisions of rule 324(3), that the plaintiff be requested, if so advised, to reapply by way of notice of motion to be heard in the usual course upon such evidence as it deems appropriate in the circumstances, as was done in the Viking case."
[3]
Rule 324 reads as follows:
"RULE 324 MOTIONS IN WRITING
"(1) A motion on behalf of any party may, if the party, by letter addressed to the Registry, so requests, and if the Court or a prothonotary, as the case may be, considers it expedient, be disposed of without personal appearance of that party or an attorney or solicitor on his behalf and upon consideration of such representations as are submitted in writing on his behalf or of a consent executed by each other party.
"(2) A copy of the request to have the motion considered without personal appearance and a copy of the written representations shall be served on each opposing party with the copy of the notice of motion that is served on him.
"(3) A party who opposes a motion under paragraph (1) may send representations in writing to the Registry and to each other party or he may file an application in writing for an oral hearing and send a copy thereof to the other side.
"(4) No motion under paragraph (1) shall be disposed of until the Court is satisfied that all interested parties have had a reasonable opportunity to make representations either in writing or orally."
[4]
Rule 324(1) provides, in effect, that if the party moving so requests and
if the Court or a Prothonotary considers it expedient
the motion may be disposed of without the personal appearance of that party or a solicitor on his behalf upon consideration of that party's submissions. The final words "or of a consent executed by each other party" indicates an occasion when it is not necessary for the moving party to make submissions.
[5]
Rule 324(3) provides in effect that an opposing party may reply by representation in writing or may apply to be heard orally. I do not read the rule as permitting an application by a respondent to require the moving party to make his motion orally. Viking was a case involving contempt of Court, when on the facts it was necessary that the judge hearing the motion be in a position to assess the credibility of the parties. Full argument by counsel was also deemed necessary. Molson involved an apparently novel point of practice to decide which I deemed argument by counsel would be helpful. In neither case, was it suggested that the rule required oral argument but rather that the circumstances required such argument.
[6]
In my view, a controversial motion may be disposed of without the personal appearance of the moving party or his solicitor, if the Court or a prothonotary deems it expedient.
[7]
If an opposing party wishes to be heard orally, he has the right under rule 324(3) to apply to be so heard. Such an oral hearing of a party may be permitted without the appearance of the moving party if the moving party so wishes and the Court or a prothonotary deems it expedient.
[8]
The applicant's motion in this case appears to involve matters of some complexity. The applicant has indicated what it believes the probable position of the respondent to be. If that were indeed the position taken by the respondent, I would not deem it expedient to dispose of the application without oral argument by counsel. I therefore intend to adjourn disposition of this motion sine die. The applicant may again apply for it to be disposed of without personal appearance of the applicant or may serve notice of motion to be heard on a regular motions day or, by arrangement with the Registry, on a special day. If the applicant brings on this motion again under rule 324(1) the respondents have of course the right to make written submissions or to apply under rule 324(3) to be heard orally.
Order
[9]
Motion adjourned sine die.
Motion adjourned sine die.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]