Relief Requested
[1]
Strayer, J.
: Pursuant to a joint application by the parties an order was made on April 26, 1990, by Lefebvre, S.P., for the determination of a Special Case pursuant to rule 475. The questions stated for the opinion of the Court are as follows:
"(a) whether the defendant was under any duty to the plaintiffs to enact the Indian Oil & Gas Regulations at some date earlier than April 22, 1977;
"(b) whether the defendant breached any such duty;
"(c) whether any such breach caused any damages to be suffered by the plaintiffs;
"(d) the quantum of such damages, if any."
The Court is requested, upon determination of these questions, to give judgment in the action accordingly and to make an appropriate disposition of costs.
Facts
[2]
The plaintiffs represent themselves and the Indian Band of which they are members, namely the Alexander Band No. 134 which has a reserve in Alberta.
[3]
On June 24, 1947, the Band executed a surrender to the Crown of all of the petroleum and natural gas rights pertaining to its reserve
"in trust to lease the same to such person or persons, and upon such terms as the Government of the Dominion of Canada may deem most conducive to our welfare and that of our people.
"And upon the further condition that all moneys received from the leasing of the petroleum and natural gas mining rights thereon shall be placed to our credit and the interest thereon paid to us in the usual way."
[4]
From July 31, 1947 to April 21, 1977, the defendant Crown entered into many petroleum and natural gas leases in respect of this reserve and royalties from those leases were credited to the Alexander Band. By an agreement effective March 1, 1960, the interests of the lessees under these leases were unitized by an agreement and thereafter the field was operated by Norcen Energy Resources Limited or its predecessors.
[5]
Although not spelled out in the agreed statement of facts my attention was drawn to certain national and international events commencing in the fall of 1973 which drastically affected the international price of crude oil, and led to extensive governmental intervention in the pricing of oil and gas produced in Canada. There was no dispute between counsel as to the general nature of these developments which were notorious and of which I can take judicial notice. Associated with a crisis in the Middle East in the autumn of 1973 the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries by joint action caused a rapid increase in the international price of crude oil. As this had the effect of causing a sudden and arbitrary increase in the value of oil and gas extracted in Canada, the federal and certain provincial governments were generally quick to act to ensure that the new windfall profits (generated by a sudden multiplication of market prices without any accompanying increase in the cost of production) should be shared with Canadian public treasuries and Canadian owners of mineral rights (provincial governments being among the major owners). It was stated by counsel for the plaintiffs, and not disputed, that the Province of Alberta enacted measures which had the effect of raising the royalties received by the owners of most mineral rights in Alberta. Two fields in the province were excepted from these measures and the mineral rights of the plaintiffs were included in one of these fields.
[6]
On March 28, 1974, the Governor-in-Council amended the federal Indian Oil and Gas Regulations made under the Indian Act [see footnote 1] to empower the minister to increase the royalty rates to be paid for oil and natural gas produced from lands situated on Indian reserves across Canada. As will be seen, this general increase did not have the effect of producing as much revenue for the plaintiffs as was being realized by other Indian bands in Alberta. Those bands had the benefit of the Alberta Regulations because, as I understand it, production from their reserves was unitized within fields made subject to the provincial Regulations.
[7]
On December 20, 1974, assent was given to a new federal law, the Indian Oil and Gas Act [see footnote 2]. It was apparently adopted in part to overcome some perceived uncertainties as to the validity of the previous Oil and Gas Regulations made under the Indian Act. Among other regulation-making powers specifically given to the Governor-in-Council by this Act, he was authorized to make Regulations prescribing the royalties on oil and gas obtained from Indian lands. However, no such regulations were made under this Act until the adoption of the Indian Oil and Gas Regulations brought into force on April 22, 1977 [see footnote 3]. Section 21(7) of those Regulations empowered the Manager of Indian Minerals of the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs to notify a lessee of Indian minerals of the
"dollar value of the oil or gas that would be realized if it were sold in a business-like manner, at the time and place of production in an arm's length transaction ..."
and upon such notice the lessee would be thereafter obliged to calculate his royalty payments (normally fixed as a percentage of the value of the oil or gas produced) on the basis of the deemed value thus specified by the Manager. On May 2, 1977, the Manager sent such a notice to Norcen in respect of the gas produced from the Alexander reserve, the effect being to increase very substantially the unit value of that gas upon which royalties would have to be paid. On May 5, 1977, Norcen ceased gas production from this field, such cessation being, according to the agreed statement of facts,
"pending negotiations with its customers for payment at a 'fair market value'."
[8]
It is also agreed that in the period between the adoption of the Indian Oil and Gas Act in December, 1974, and the adoption of the Regulations thereunder in April 1977 there was extensive consultation with Indian bands with oil and gas production or potential production in Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, British Columbia, and Ontario. National meetings were held for this purpose. Representatives of the plaintiffs attended one of these national meetings, in October, 1975 but did not participate in a subsequent meeting also held for this purpose. It is agreed, however, that between December, 1975 and March, 1977 the plaintiffs contacted representatives of the defendant on several occasions and expressed their concern about their loss of revenue due to the failure to pass new regulations. Consistently with this, a group of members of their Band picketed the surface-lease site of Norcen on March 28, 1977, and prevented agents and employees of that company from gaining access to or operating the Alexander gas production and compression facilities. This demonstration was interrupted by an ex parte injunction and shortly thereafter the new federal Regulations were adopted under the Indian Oil and Gas Act.
[9]
The plaintiffs asserted in their statement of claim in effect that the defendant was under a duty to take timely action to raise the revenues realized from the extraction of gas from the Alexander reserve to a level equivalent to the royalty revenues realized by other Indian bands in Alberta during the period from 1973 to April 1977. The only evidence I have as to the extent of the alleged loss is set out in paragraph 17 of the agreed statement of facts which is as follows:
"It has been estimated by the defendant that the plaintiffs would have received approximately $1.056 Million more in royalties from 1973 through 1977 had the wellhead prices been similar to the fair market values prevailing during that period. Attached hereto and marked Exhibit 'N' is a copy of a letter dated June 22nd, 1977, with attachment."
The letter referred to, trial Exhibit 1-N (part of the agreed statement of facts) reads in part as follows:
"In reply to your recent request, a recalculation of the gas royalties from 1973 through 1977 until shut-in, has been made and indicates that the Band would have received approximately $1,056,000.00 more at prices received by other Bands in Alberta.
"It is next to impossible to be very precise in this calculation because the prices used for other gas production vary by Company, however the above value, which is based on another field supplying an Alberta utility, is felt to be a reasonable estimate."
It was agreed at trial by counsel that the correct figure representing the additional amount "that the plaintiffs would have received" is $994,415.82, this reflecting errors in addition in the letter from the Manager of Indian Minerals dated June 22, 1977 (Exhibit 1-N).
[10]
This action was commenced on August 25, 1978. No explanation was offered as to why there has been a delay of over twelve years in commencement of the trial.
Conclusions
[11]
As the parties have elected to proceed on the basis of an agreed statement of facts and an agreed formulation of the questions to be answered, I am obliged to draw the necessary inferences from a very limited evidentiary base and can answer only the precise questions put to the Court.
[12]
With that caveat in mind, I would conclude at the outset that the plaintiffs did not receive, during the period 1973-1977 covered by Exhibit 1-N, royalty revenues from gas produced from their reserve in an amount which they could and should have received. I have no basis for taking at other than its face value the statement by E.A. Moore, Manager, Indian Minerals, in his letter of June 22, 1977, Exhibit 1-N, that "the Band would have received ... [a larger amount, as now corrected] at prices received by other Bands in Alberta". Mr. Moore takes pains to say in his letter that he has made his calculation based on revenues from comparable fields. While at trial counsel for the defendant speculated on what might have happened to prevent these extra revenues from being realized, I must go on the basis of the agreed evidence which can only be reasonably interpreted as meaning that the plaintiffs would have received more money had they had the benefit of a regulatory scheme comparable to that imposed by the Province of Alberta which had the effect of raising the royalties received by all other Indian bands in Alberta with petroleum producing reserves. In short, a loss was suffered by the plaintiffs, a loss which prima facie could have been avoided by timely action by the defendant in the form of new regulations.
[13]
Having reached that conclusion, I must then consider whether the defendant had any duty to adopt the Oil and Gas Regulations adopted in April 1977 and if so, whether it met that duty by producing effective Regulations only some three and one-half years after more adequate royalties were being received by other Alberta bands pursuant to provincial regulations. This is the form in which the issues are put to me by the Special Case.
[14]
It now appears clear, since the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  towards each Indian band in respect of the reserve land of each band. Indian title predates and is independent of the Indian Act [see footnote 5] but is recognized by, inter alia, s. 18(1) of the Act which provides as follows:
"18(1) Subject to this Act, reserves are held by Her Majesty for the use and benefit of the respective bands for which they were set apart, and subject to this Act and to the terms of any treaty or surrender, the Governor-in-Council may determine whether any purpose for which lands in a reserve are used or are to be used is for the use and benefit of the band."
In the view of Dickson, J., writing on behalf of four judges of the Supreme Court, the fact that, ever since the Royal Proclamation of 1763 it has been recognized that Indian title can only be surrendered to the Crown, and only the Crown can alienate it thereafter, means that the Crown is interposed between the Indians and prospective purchasers or lessees "so as to prevent the Indians from being exploited". [See footnote 6]. While s. 18(1) appears to confer on the Government the discretionary power to determine what use of the reserve lands may be "for the use and benefit of the band", it was held  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that this did not have the effect of excluding the jurisdiction of the courts to review the Crown's exercise of its discretion. Instead, the grant of this discretion, by putting the Indians "at the mercy of the [Government's] discretion" imposes on the Government a fiduciary obligation which is the law's means for controlling the exercise of such discretion. A court through its equity jurisdiction can supervise such a relationship by holding the Government "to the fiduciary's strict standard of conduct". [See footnote 7]. The duty of a fiduciary "is that of utmost loyalty to his principal." [See footnote 8].
[15]
The facts of the Guerin case are, of course, distinguishable from the present case in at least two respects. First,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  members of the band had conveyed to the Government their views as to what the minimum acceptable terms for a lease of their surrendered land would be, and the Government ignore those views. Secondly, the Government was acting in essentially the same role as a private party in negotiating a lease of the land to a golf club. In the present case, there are no express or implied terms in the surrender of the plaintiffs' mineral rights as to the terms upon which they might be leased for exploitation. Further, as I understand it (and I specifically questioned counsel for the plaintiffs in this respect) the plaintiffs are not asserting that the Government here could have simply acted like a private party and renegotiated the mineral leases in the period of 1973-77 in order to obtain a suitable increase in the royalty being paid for extracted gas. Those leases provided, apparently, for a fixed royalty and a fixed deemed wellhead price which, according to normal rules of contract, would have remained stable and thus below the actual market price of gas during this period. In other words I must consider, in determining if the Guerin principles apply here, whether the Crown had a duty to use governmental powers to achieve unilaterally a revision of the mineral leases covering the plaintiffs' reserve in order to yield to them returns comparable to those being obtained by other Indian bands in Alberta and, even if so, did that duty include the earlier adoption of the precise Regulations finally adopted in 1977?
[16]
With respect to the first point, having regard to the historical relationship between the Crown and Indians, I believe the fiduciary's duty of "utmost loyalty to his principal" would in general oblige the Crown to seek to achieve as good a return from the property for the beneficiary of the fiduciary obligation as could reasonably and lawfully be achieved. [See footnote 9]. On the face of matters here, the Government of Canada did not do this. It is undisputed, and Exhibit 1-N (the letter from the Manager of Indian Minerals in the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs) confirms, that the Band represented by the plaintiffs would have received approximately one million dollars more at prices received by other bands in Alberta. It is further accepted that other bands in Alberta received the higher prices because of timely legislative action of the Government of Alberta, action of a type which the Government of Canada took in a very moderate way in 1974 but did not again take until the adoption of the Indian Oil and Gas Regulations in 1977. Subject to the next point to be discussed below, one could conclude that what it was thought proper and lawful to do in 1977 could have been done in 1973 or 1974 and that the delay, resulting in a loss of some million dollars to this Band was unreasonable.
[17]
The second issue to be addressed, however, is that of whether the Government can in any context be liable for a failure to legislate. The defendant relies mainly on the general principle that the failure to pass regulations cannot be the subject of an action and it is not open to a court to say that there should have been regulations and award damages for failure to adopt them. [See footnote 10]. The basis for this principle is, I take it, that legislatures and those having delegated legislative powers have the discretion to adopt or not adopt laws and that it is not for the courts to second-guess them. This excellent principle, while no doubt generally sound, may sometimes have to give way in light of the decision in the Guerin case. For the essence of that decision is that the Government of Canada, once it accepts a surrender of Indian title in respect of a particular reserve, undertakes a fiduciary obligation towards the Indian band in question to exercise its discretion with "utmost loyalty" to the band and its interests. Thus it was found  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that the seemingly unfettered discretion given to the Governor-in-Council by s. 18(1) of the Indian Act to decide how surrendered reserve lands might best be used for the benefit of the band was limited by the overriding fiduciary obligation of utmost loyalty. In the present case the defendant is arguing that the exercise of the discretion given to the Governor-in-Council to make regulations under either the Indian Act or the Indian Oil and Gas Act is completely unfettered and beyond review by a court. But as Dickson, J., said in the Guerin case
"It should be noted that fiduciary duties generally arise only with regard to obligations originating in a private law context. Public law duties, the performance of which requires the exercise of discretion, do not typically give rise to a fiduciary relationship. As the 'political trust' cases indicate, the Crown is not normally viewed as a fiduciary in the exercise of its legislative or administrative function. The mere fact, however, that it is the Crown which is obligated to act on the Indians' behalf does not of itself remove the Crown's obligation from the scope of the fiduciary principle. As was pointed out earlier, the Indians' interest in land is an independent legal interest. It is not a creation of either the legislative or executive branches of government. The Crown's obligation to the Indians with respect to that interest is therefore not a public law duty. While it is not a private law duty in the strict sense either, it is nonetheless in the nature of a private law duty. Therefore, in this sui generis relationship, it is not improper to regard the Crown as a fiduciary." [See footnote 11].
It will be noted that Dickson, J., regarded the government's obligation to the Indians in such circumstances not to be a mere "political trust" nor a "public law duty". Instead, it is "in the nature of a private law duty". Accepting, then, that normally neither Parliament nor those exercising delegated legislative powers have a legal obligation to legislate, here in this sui generis relationship, as the Supreme Court called it, the Governor-in-Council at least may be in a different position. One can deduce from the protective stance taken by the Crown ever since the Royal Proclamation, 1763 that the Crown kept to itself the exclusive right to acquire and dispose of Indian title because it had the unique power and responsibility to act as an appropriate protector of the interests of the people who inhabited this land before the arrival of Europeans. It is wholly consistent with this view that the Crown should exercise these governmental powers which only it has, where this may reasonably and lawfully be done to perform adequately the specific fiduciary obligation it owes to a given band whose Indian title has been surrendered to the Crown.
[18]
I am, however, constrained by the terms of the Special Case to determine only one question as to the defendant's duty, namely
"whether the defendant was under any duty to the plaintiffs to enact the Indian Oil and Gas Regulations at some date earlier than April 22, 1977."
Having regard to the principles to which I have referred earlier, I am unable to say that the defendant had any judicially enforceable duty to adopt at an earlier date the particular regulations obviously being referred to in this question in the Special Case, namely the regulations adopted on April 22, 1977. An examination of these Regulations reveals that they apply generally to all Indian lands in Canada in respect of mineral rights, and include provisions which cover a whole range of activities in relation to the management, disposition, and exploitation of mineral rights including exploration and production. As such they involve the exercise of a general legislative power granted to the Governor-in-Council which goes far beyond any possible fiduciary obligation owed by the defendant to these particular plaintiffs in the particular facts of this case. The enactment of the Regulations must be seen as primarily the performance of a political duty which is not enforceable in the courts. Because of the general nature of these Regulations, it must also be recognized that wide consultation among all Indian bands with mineral production was not only desirable but required by s. 7 of the enabling legislation. Thus it would not be appropriate for a court to assess the timeliness of their adoption.
[19]
In the circumstances, it is not open to me to determine whether the early adoption of a simple provision to increase the revenue of the plaintiffs from their particular minerals rights, so as to equate these returns to those of other Alberta bands, was a matter of fiduciary obligation. That question was not put to me by the Special Case.
[20]
Having so concluded, it is not necessary to consider the questions of quantum or of the prejudgment interest claimed by the plaintiffs.
[21]
The action is therefore dismissed with costs to the defendant.
Action dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slg
Footnotes
1. Then R.S.C. 1970, c. I-6.
2. S.C. 1974-75-76, c. 15.
3. C.R.C., 1978, c. 963.
4. [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335; 55 N.R. 161.
5. Now R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5; the relevant provision in the present case, s. 18(1), was part of R.S.C. 1970, I-6 and remains unchanged today.
6. Guerin case supra note 4 at 383 S.C.R. Only eight judges participated in this judgment. While Wilson, J., writing on behalf of three judges held that the Crown was in the role of trustee, she viewed this as a specialized form of fiduciary obligation owed by the Crown. The Federal Court of Appeal has regarded the judgment of Dickson, J., on behalf of four judges as being definitive, in Kruger v. the Queen, [1986] 1 F.C. 3. While the Royal Proclamation, 1763, did not apply in most respects to lands such as these formerly within the domain of the Hudson's Bay Company, it is not disputed in the present case that the same fiduciary obligation devolved on the Government of Canada in respect of Indian lands in Alberta.
7. Ibid. at 384 S.C.R.; see also the judgment of Wilson, J., at 349-351 S.C.R.
8. Ibid. at 389 S.C.R.
9. See Gautreau, Demystifying the Fiduciary Mystique (1989), 68 Can. Bar Rev. 1, at 18-20 where it is said that the scope of the fiduciary duty is in part defined by what the fiduciary has undertaken to do. In its historical role of protector, doing what the band is not itself empowered to do, the Crown can surely be seen to have assumed a responsibility to get the best price it can reasonably and lawfully achieve.
10. Kwong's Estate and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Alta. C.A.), affd. by [1979] 2 S.C.R. 1010; 29 N.R. 295; 18 A.R. 358.
11. Supra, note 4, at 385 S.C.R.
[End of document]