[1]
McNair, J.
: This is an application by the defendant, The College of Physicians and Surgeons of British Columbia, for an order that proceedings in the cause be stayed as against the said defendant, pending the determination of the defendant's appeal from an order of Madame Justice Reed made on April 14, 1987. By that order, the learned judge denied the defendant's motion for dismissal of the action against it on the ground of lack of jurisdiction. The application is made pursuant to s. 50(1)(b) of the Federal Court Act, which reads as follows:
"50.(1) The court may, in its discretion, stay proceedings in any cause or matter,
. . . . .
(b) where for any other reason it is in the interest of justice that the proceedings be stayed."
[2]
The College of Physicians and Surgeons has not filed a defence in response to the plaintiff's statement of claim. The other defendants filed their defence on December 4, 1986.
[3]
Defendant's counsel makes three main submissions in support of the motion for a stay. Firstly, he submits that the granting of a stay would not work any injustice on the plaintiff. It would simply preserve the present status quo between the plaintiff and the College, leaving the plaintiff free to prosecute his action against the other defendants. Furthermore, present indications are that the appeal is likely to be heard before the end of the calendar year 1987, and perhaps as early as September, 1987. Secondly, it is strenuously argued that it is in the interest of justice to grant a stay in the special circumstances of this case, where the subject matter of the appeal concerns the very jurisdiction of the court itself. Thirdly, it is submitted that the appeal could finally dispose of all outstanding issues between the plaintiff and the College.
[4]
Plaintiff's counsel contends that the granting of a stay would cause an injustice to the plaintiff by depriving him of the procedural advantages of discovery of documents and examination for discovery as between the plaintiff and the College. The result could only be inevitable delay. However, counsel for the plaintiff signified that he would be quite agreeable to delaying the actual trial of the action until the present appeal was heard and determined on the merits.
[5]
The stay is sought for the purpose of enabling the defendant to avoid the inconvenience and expense of defending an action in which there is a substantial question as to whether such defendant was properly joined in the first place. The appeal raises the issue of the very jurisdiction of the court itself. Is this a sufficient special circumstance to sway the exercise of discretion in favour of ordering a stay? In endeavouring to answer that question, I must consider the matter from the standpoint of both parties. Viewed from the plaintiff's perspective, the simple question would probably be this: is it fair that the plaintiff be compelled to stay his hand against the defendant, pending the disposition of the appeal?
[6]
Section 50 of the Federal Court Act is applicable to authorize a stay of proceedings in the Trial Division pending disposition of an appeal from an interlocutory order:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.).
[7]
A stay of proceedings is never granted as a matter of course. The matter is one calling for the exercise of a judicial discretion in determining whether a stay should be ordered in the particular circumstances of the case. The power to stay should be exercised sparingly and a stay will only be ordered in the clearest cases. In an order to justify a stay of proceedings two conditions must be met, one positive and the other negative: (a) the defendant must satisfy the court that the continuance of the action would work an injustice because it would be oppressive or vexatious to him or would be an abuse of the process of the court in some other way; and (b) the stay must not cause an injustice to the plaintiff. On both the burden of proof is on the defendant. Expense and inconvenience to a party or the prospect of the proceedings being abortive in the event of a successful appeal are not sufficient special circumstances in themselves for the granting of a stay:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).
[8]
In my opinion, the defendant has failed to demonstrate that the continuance of the action against it through the preliminary procedural stages of preparation for trial would be unjust or oppressive to the defendant and that the stay would not work an injustice on the plaintiff. In the event of the appeal being successful, the defendant will be struck from the action and probably compensated to some extent by costs. On the other hand, if a stay were granted and the defendant lost the appeal then the plaintiff would be left in the square one situation of having to delay the prosecution of the action, while backtracking through the preliminaries of discovery of that particular defendant. Moreover, the plaintiff by his counsel has agreed that the action should not proceed to trial pending the disposition of the appeal.
[9]
I am satisfied that the interests of justice tip the balance in favour of the plaintiff and against the granting of a stay. An order will be made in accordance with these reasons. Costs are to be in the cause.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]