[1]
Rothstein, J.
: The respondent applies for an order striking the applicant's originating notice of motion dated May 19, 1994 on the ground that it is filed out of time. The originating notice of motion seeks to quash the decision or decisions of a visa officer refusing the applicant's application for permanent residence in Canada.
[2]
In a letter dated February 8, 1994, the visa officer refused the applicant's application for permanent residence. On February 14, 1994, counsel for the applicant wrote to the visa officer requesting that she review her decision. On April 20, 1994 the visa officer wrote to counsel for the applicant advising:
"This refers to your letter of February 14 regarding the decision taken in Mr. Soimu's application for permanent residence in Canada. I must first extend my apologies for the delay in my reply. I have now completed the review of the case submitted and I am still of the opinion that this application must be refused."
[3]
On May 19, 1994 counsel for the applicant filed an originating notice of motion for writs of certiorari quashing the "decisions" of February 8, 1994 and April 20, 1994.
[4]
Counsel for the respondent submits that the April 20, 1994 letter is a "courtesy response" and not a decision as such. He says that the only decision made by the visa officer is the one of February 8, 1994 and that the applicant's originating notice of motion in respect of that decision is long out of time, i.e., it was due on or about March 10, 1994 and was over two months late. Counsel for the respondent refers to other decisions of the Trial Division which characterize correspondence subsequent to a decision of a visa officer as "courtesy responses" and not decisions themselves. He says the April 20, 1994 letter in this case is, as in those cases, a "courtesy response".
[5]
I have carefully reviewed the April 20, 1994 letter. It responds to a request that the February 8, 1994 decision be reviewed. In the April 20, 1994 letter, the visa officer says that she completed the requested review but was still of the opinion that the applicant's application must be refused. In this letter, the visa officer reviews some of the information originally dealt with in the February 8, 1994 letter but she also deals with new submissions made by applicant's counsel in his February 14, 1994 request for review. For example, she expressly deals with whether the applicant's wife should be assessed and with new arguments about the funds the applicant has available.
[6]
I must conclude on the facts of this particular case, that the April 20, 1994 letter constitutes a decision of the visa officer. She does not simply refer to her February 8, 1994 letter or the analysis made in coming to that earlier decision. She expressly refers to her review which must have taken place subsequent to the February 8, 1994 decision.
[7]
The review that she conducted might have, although it did not, result in her changing her mind and allowing the applicant's counsel's request for the review. Surely had she changed her mind it could not be said that the letter advising of her new opinion was not a decision. By the same reasoning, even though, on the review, she came to the same conclusion as before, that conclusion must also constitute a decision.
[8]
Counsel agreed that there is nothing in the
Immigration Act
that deals with whether a visa officer may review decisions already made. Therefore, it does not appear that the visa officer was "functus" after she made her February 8, 1994 decision such that the April 20, 1994 decision was made without jurisdiction.
[9]
In the circumstances of this case and based on the specific wording of the letter written by the visa officer on April 20, 1994, I conclude that the April 20, 1994 letter constituted a decision of a federal board and that the applicant had 30 days, pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, to seek judicial review of that decision. The originating notice of motion was filed on May 19, 1994, within 30 days. The respondent's motion in respect of this decision must be dismissed.
[10]
As to the fact that the applicant was late in seeking judicial review of the February 8, 1994 decision, applicant's counsel explained, was as clear from the material, that he first sought a review of that decision by the visa officer before engaging the jurisdiction of this court. There is no doubt that the applicant was attempting to pursue his cause during this time and while he awaited word from the visa officer. It is also apparent that the April 20, 1994 decision is substantially the same as the February 8, 1994 decision. While it might be sufficient for the applicant to seek judicial review of the April 20, 1994 decision only, I see no harm in permitting him the opportunity of a comprehensive judicial review covering both decisions. I would therefore also dismiss the respondent's motion in respect of the February 8, 1994, decision of the visa officer. A motion to extend the time for bringing the judicial review application in respect of this decision will be entertained by the court.
[11]
I should observe that the procedural difficulty occasioned in these proceedings might have been avoided if the applicant had sought judicial review of the February 8, 1994 decision is a timely manner. This would not have precluded him from also seeking a review by the visa officer. Admittedly, counsel for the applicant may have thought that bringing to the attention of the visa officer the existence of a judicial review application from her earlier decision might cause her to react negatively on the review. However applicants must be prudent and protect their rights to seek judicial review. Had the April 20, 1994 letter not resulted from a true review but was just a "courtesy response", the applicant might well have found himself out of time to seek judicial review of the February 8, 1994 decision with a court unwilling to extend time.
[12]
The applicant's May 19, 1994 notice of motion seeks judicial review of both decisions of the visa officer. Rule 1602(4) provides that a notice of motion shall be in respect of a single decision, order or other matter only. Rather than requiring the applicant to discontinue these proceedings, file two new separate notices of motion, seek an order for extension of time, and then consolidate them for purposes of the case proceedings in an orderly and efficient manner, I do not think the administration of justice will be impeded if the notice of motion is allowed to stand in its present form. I think the court has a discretion to permit deviation from the
Rules
as to form for purposes such as this.
[13]
The respondent's application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/saf
[End of document]