 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
Melvin Wanderingspirit, Delphine Beaulieu, Toni Heron, Raymond Beaver and Sonny McDonald in their capacity as Councillors of the Salt River First Nation 195, elected August 30, 2002 (applicants) v. Victor Marie uncontested Chief and Norman Starr uncontested duly elected Band Counsel Member, Nora Beaver, David Gowans, Connie Benwell, Michel Bjornson, Harvey Lepine and Don Tourangeau, purportedly elected Band Councillors at a meeting held November 3, 2002 and Jeannie Marie-Jewell, acting as Interim Band Manager (respondents)
(T-2007-02; 2005 FC 146)
Indexed As: Salt River First Nation 195 v. Marie et al.
Cite As: [2005] F.T.R. Uned. 493
Federal Court
Heneghan, J.
January 28, 2005.
Counsel:
Christopher Harvey, Q.C., for the applicants;
Respondents were self-represented.
Solicitors of Record:
MacKenzie ujisawa, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the applicants.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. This case was originally cited as [2005] F.T.R. TBEd. FE.060. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
Introduction
[1]
Heneghan, J.
: On September 19, 2003, an order was issued pursuant to the
Federal Court Rules, 1998
, SOR/98-106 (the "Rules"), upon the ex parte motion of Melvin Wanderingspirit, Delphine Beaulieu, Toni Heron, Raymond Beaver and Sonny McDonald (the "Applicants"), ordering that Victor Marie, Norman Starr, Nora Beaver, David Gowans, Connie Benwell, Michel Bjornson, Harvey Lepine, Don Tourangeau, Jeannie Marie-Jewell, Tanya Tourangeau and Bruce L. Barry (the "alleged contemnors" or "the persons interested") appear before a judge of the Federal Court sitting at Vancouver, British Columbia on the 27th day of November, 2003 at 9:30 a.m. to show cause why they should not be held in contempt of court by reason of the various acts particularized in eleven paragraphs of the Order. Further, the Order provided that the named individuals be prepared to present any defence that they may have.
[2]
The context for this Order is the application for judicial Review commenced by the Applicants on December 3, 2002. In this Notice of Application, the Applicants sought declaratory and other relief relative to certain activities that had occurred in November 2002, in connection with the affairs of the Salt River First Nation 195 (the "SRFN"). In a decision reported as
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , aff'd. (2003), 312 N.R. 385 (F.C.a.), the Court allowed the application.
[3]
The relevant facts can be stated briefly. In August 2002, an election was held by the SRFN for the election of chief and council. Victor Marie was elected chief. Norman Starr was elected a councillor. The Applicants were also elected councillors.
[4]
On November 3, 2002, an election was purportedly held. The Applicants were voted out of office. They were purportedly replaced by Nora Beaver, David Gowans, Connie Benwell, Norman Starr, Michel Bjornson, Harvey Lepine and Don Tourangeau.
[5]
Following the commencement of the application for judicial review, the Applicants sought the appointment of a Receiver Manager to look after the affairs of the SRFN. On January 10, 2003 an Order was issued in the following terms:
After discussing with parties and consent of all concerned with the interest of the Band and the handling of its affairs being of primary concern, the following was agreed and it is so ordered:
1. that the trust account of this Band presently being administered by the RBC Investments, Aboriginal Services in Winnipeg, Manitoba, remain frozen until further order of this Court or consent of all parties, save with respect to an amount owing for taxation, which sum may be paid by RBC Investments to the law firm of Dubouff & Edwards in trust, barristers and solicitors of Winnipeg, Manitoba.
2. that two (2) corporate bank accounts of 4491 NT Ltd. and 4992 NT Ltd. operating with the Bank of Montreal, Fort Smith, North West Territories, are hereby frozen until further order of this Court.
3. Various and other bank accounts which are being operated by the Band also at the Bank of Montreal, Fort Smith branch, North West Territories and being limited and are authorized to clear payments on the various accounts that pertain to payroll obligations and any and all other transactions should not be processed without the consent of counsel acting on behalf of the applicants and the respondents.
The matter is hereby adjourned to January 20, 2003, Vancouver Motions Day, at which time the Court shall determine whether or not it deems necessary to intervene with respect to appointing a Receiver Manager of the Band's affairs.
In the interim, counsel for both parties shall make their best efforts in order to assist in the payment of other ongoing requirements of the Band's business affairs. If unable to do so, the Court will entertain a further conference call.
[6]
A further Order was made on January 17, 2003 and authorized the Bank of Montreal in Fort Smith to allow the processing of cheques issued by the SRFN and payable to those persons identified in a list that was attached.
[7]
The purpose of these Orders was to protect the money of the SRFN. According to the decision of Justice Roleau  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  et al.
, supra, the SRFN had received more than $60,000,000.00 as part of the 2001 settlement of its Treaty Land Entitlement claim.
[8]
Following adjudication of the application for judicial review in April 2003 and delivery of judgment, the trial judge ordered that the Order of January 10, 2003 remain in effect for thirty days, that is until the expiry of the appeal period. At paragraph 50 of
Wanderingspirit et al.
, supra, the Court said the following:
On January 10, 2003, the Court ordered that a trust account being administered by RBC Investments, Aboriginal Services in Winnipeg, Manitoba be frozen until further order of this Court; it further ordered that two corporate bank accounts 4991NT Ltd. and 4992NT Ltd. Operating with the Bank of Montreal in Fort Smith, NT remain frozen until further order of this Court; it was also ordered that various other bank accounts operated by the Band also at the Bank of Montreal, Fort Smith Branch, NT be limited and authorized to clear payments that pertain to payroll and certain other transactions. This outstanding order is to remain in effect until the expiry of the appeal period, thirty days from the date of this order. Should any instructions of authorizations be required in this regard, the parties may apply to the Court and conference calls may be arranged in order that good governance of Band affairs can continue.
[9]
On June 20, 2003, a further Order was issued, providing as follows:
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT any party, and more particularly any member of the Salt River First Nation 195 office staff, who have in their possession documents, computer data, ledgers, bank statements or documents, books of minutes or anything in that nature rightfully belonging to the Salt River First Nation 195 return them forthwith; failure to comply with this Order, contempt proceedings may be initiated.
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ORDERED THAT the travelling and living expenses for counsel for the applicants authorized by this Court's Order of 21-JAN-2003 be paid forthwith;
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ORDERED THAT the Bank of Montreal at Fort Smith, NT, provide forthwith copies of all bank statements requested by the duly restored Band Council;
THOUGH unauthorized payments and cheques may have been honoured and paid without the authority of this Court, the Court must decline jurisdiction in these matters;
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ORDERED THAT from Monday, 23-JUN-2003, only the following individuals are authorized signing officers of the duly elected Band Council of the Salt River First Nation 195: Chief Victor Marie, Norman Starr, Melvin Wanderingspirit, Delphine Beaulieu, Toni Heron, Raymond Beaver, Sonny McDonald.
All negotiable instruments must be executed before being honoured by at least three of the above named individuals, one of which must always be Chief Victor Marie.
[10]
An appeal was taken from this Order and by a decision dated October 20, 2003 (A-286-03), the appeal, reported at (2003), 312 N.R. 395 (F.C.A.) was allowed. At paragraphs 16 to 18, the Federal Court of Appeal said the following:
16. Paragraph 50 purported to extend the interim order of January 10, 2003, until the expiry of the appeal period and allowed the parties to apply to the Court for any necessary instructions or authorizations. However, as discussed above, the motions judge did not have jurisdiction to extend an interim order once he had made a final order. Nor could he specify the signing authorities of the band as part of his final order. Once the motions judge had finally determined who were the rightful members of the Band Council, he had no jurisdiction to intervene in their exercise of the Council's powers, including the power to appoint signing officers.
17. As I have indicated, I fully appreciate that the motions judge was making a prudent attempt to have both sides in this acrimonious proceeding work together and, thereby, ensure that they only make the payments that should properly be made. However, I regret the motions judge lacked the jurisdiction to do so.
18. I would allow the appeal with costs. For greater certainty, the interim order of January 10, 2003, and the June 20, 2003, Order under appeal are no longer effective.
[11]
The hearing of the motion for contempt following the issuance of the order of September 19, 2003, was scheduled to begin on November 27, 2003, in Vancouver. It did not proceed at that time upon the request for an adjournment by some of the alleged contemnors. On December 4, 2003, the following order was issued:
UPON an order made by Gauthier, J., dated September 19, 2003, requiring certain individuals to show cause why they should not be held in contempt of court and to appear before a judge of the Federal Court in Vancouver on November 27, 2003;
AND UPON the Direction of Blais, J., dated November 24, 2003, stipulating that the parties be heard by telephone conference on November 27, 2003, in lieu of the show cause hearing, to discuss various matters;
AND UPON convening the telephone conference on November 27, 2003, in keeping with Blais, J.'s, Direction;
AND UPON receiving and considering the representations of those who participated in the telephone conference (see Annex);
THIS COURT ORDERS that:
1. The show cause hearing shall take place in Fort Smith, Northwest Territories, on a date to be fixed by the Judicial Administrator;
2. In the alternative, if the matter cannot be conveniently scheduled in Fort Smith, the hearing shall take place in Yellowknife, Northwest Territories, on a date to be fixed by the Judicial Administrator; and
3. The parties shall communicate with the Registry of the Federal Court, in writing, indicating their availability for the show cause hearing.
ANNEX
Chief Victor Marie
Cr. Norman Starr
Michele Bjornson
Harvey Lepine
Jeannie Marie Jewell
Tanya Tourangeau
Salt River First Nation #195
(on their own behalf)
David Gowans (on his own behalf)
Nora Beaver (on her own behalf)
Kenneth W. Fitz
(McLennan Ross)
counsel for Don Tourangeau
Christopher Harvey, Q.C.
MacKenzie Fujisawa)
counsel for Respondents in A-244-03
Appellants in A-286-03
Ian Blackstock
(Fasken Martineau DuMoulin)
counsel for Respondents in A-244-03
Jurgen Feldschmid
(Duboff Edwards)
counsel for Royal Trust/RBC Investments,
Aboriginal Services Winnipeg
[12]
Ultimately, the motion was scheduled for hearing in Fort Smith, Northwest Territories on July 6 and 7, 2004. Victor Marie, Norman Starr, David Gowans, Connie Benwell, Michel Bjornson, Harvey Tourangeau and Jeannie Marie-Jewell appeared on their own behalf. With leave of the Court and the consent of Norman Starr, David Gowans, Connie Benwell, Michel Bjornson and Harvey Lepine, Ms. Jewell acted as their representative. Pursuant to Rule 119 of the Rules, Ms. Jewell, Victor Marie and Don Tourangeau represented themselves.
[13]
Mr. Bruce L. Barry did not appear on July 6. He had sent a letter to the Registry of the Court in Edmonton advising that he would not attend in Forth Smith due to lack of funds to pay the airfare.
[14]
Ms. Nora Beaver also contacted the Registry of the Court in Edmonton and requested to participate by teleconference. That request was denied.
The Evidence
[15]
Five witnesses testified on behalf of the Applicants. They were Mr. Brad Marta, a liaison officer with the Bank of Montreal in Fort Smith, Ms. Natasha Tourangeau, a secretary with the SRFN Council in June and July 2003. Mr. Michael Beaver, a member of the SRFN, Ms. Barbara McArthur, finance officer with the SRFN in June and July 2004, and Mr. Ian Blackstock, a lawyer who had been involved in the litigation related to the underlying application for judicial review in this matter.
[16]
Mr. Marta testified briefly about the process involved with the processing of cheques written to a payee when the payor has not authorized the payment. In such a case, the money is withdrawn from the payee's account. In the present case, this occurred and when the payee's account lacked sufficient funds, the Bank of Montreal sought recovery from the payee, that is the SRFN.
[17]
Mr. Marta commenced his employment with the Bank of Montreal in Fort Smith in February 2003. He had some knowledge of the operations of the accounts of the SRFN. He produced, as Exhibit 1, copies of sixteen cheques drawn on the accounts of the SRFN. These cheques bore dates between April 19, 2003 and June 19, 2003.
[18]
He testified about the processing of the cheques and where they had been cashed. He also testified that all of these cheques were returned to the bank and were not honoured. He provided some explanations about the handling of returned cheques.
[19]
Ms. Tourangeau was questioned about her knowledge of events in the band council office on June 12 and June 24, 2003. On June 12, she was present in the office. She said that she does not remember if her sister Tanya was in the office nor did she remember that a computer was removed that day from the office of Jeannie-Marie Jewell. However, she did remember when the computer was returned.
[20]
Ms. Tourangeau did not remember the removal of files from the office of Ms. Jewell on June 12, 2003.
[21]
On June 24, Ms. Tourangeau was in the band council office when the door to Mr. McArthur's office was kicked in. However, she testified that she did not see who kicked in the door; she did hear the noise of that activity.
[22]
Mr. Michael Beaver, a member of the SRFN, was present in the band council office on June 12, 2003 for the purpose of "keeping an eye on things". On that day, Chief Victor Marie was in Edmonton.
[23]
Mr. Beaver testified that Ms. Tanya Tourangeau, a sister of Ms. Natasha Tourangeau, went into the finance office and came out with a Dell Computer. The finance office at that time was occupied by Ms. Jeannie Marie-Jewell. He said that Ms. Tanya Tourangeau was accompanied by a man who also went into this office and came out with a box of files. Mr. Beaver testified that he heard Ms. Tanya Tourangeau tell her sister Natasha that she was going for a drive.
[24]
Following this incident, Mr. Beaver went to see "Jim" and "Raymond", the latter a former Band Chief, to report what he had seen and heard. He also prepared a written report that he submitted to the local Royal Canadian Mounted Police (the "RCMP"). This report was entered as Exhibit 4. This report recounts the observations of Mr. Beaver.
[25]
Ms. Barbara McArthur, finance office with the SRFN, testified about her employment with the Band. She was initially hired in September 2002 and fired in mid-October of the same year. She was re-hired on June 18, 2003. Upon her return to work in June 2003, there was no finance computer in the band council office. The inventory process had to be undertaken manually. One of her first tasks was to re-establish order in the financial affairs of the band, including an inventory of cheques and accounts payable. In the course of conducting her inventory of the cheques, Ms. McArthur discovered that some cheques were missing.
[26]
Ms. McArthur testified about the usual process for issuing cheques by computer and a different process for issuing band-written cheques. In the absence of a computer upon her return to work on June 18, 2003, the cheques had to be issued by hand.
[27]
She testified that on June 24, 2003 she went to work at around 9 a.m. She went out at about 10 a.m. for coffee. At that time, she would have locked the door to her office. Upon her return, some few minutes later, she found that the door to her office had been kicked in and the door frame was damaged. She wrote a letter to Acting Chief Raymond Beaver about the damage.
[28]
Ms. McArthur also testified that she usually kept the door to her office, the finance office, locked at all times when she was absent, except when she went to the washroom. She acknowledged that, at various times, a number of people were present in the back office, adjacent to her own office.
[29]
Subsequently, she learned from reviewing the cheques that she kept in her desk, that certain cheques were missing, that is cheque numbers 2049 to 2066 for the general account, and cheques numbered 1550 to 1562 for the core account. The cheques for these accounts were numbered sequentially and were usually, but not always, issued in sequence.
[30]
Ms. McArthur reviewed Exhibit 1 and testified that all the cheques in this Exhibit were among the missing cheques, except cheque number 150 that had been written out in the name of Jeannie-Marie Jewell and cheque number 538 that had been issued in the name of Victor Marie.
[31]
Ms. McArthur contacted the RCMP to report that he office had been broken into. She also wrote to the Bank of Montreal concerning the missing cheques.
[32]
She testified that she was informed by the branch manager that some of the cheques had already been processed and that the bank would be consulting its lawyers to see what would be the consequences of that processing. Ms. McArthur testified that "we", that is the SRFN, would have to honour some of the cheques that had bene processed, or the band's accounts would be frozen and no assistance would be provided by the bank until the cheques were honoured. She testified that the SRFN did honour some of the cheques that had been processed by the Bank of Montreal at a cost in excess of $30,000.00.
[33]
Ms. McArthur also testified that on July 16, 2003, the Dell computer was returned, together with some personnel files. However, financial and accounting information had been deleted from the computer and other "paper" information relating to payroll, bank statements and cancelled cheques. Ms. McArthur testified that the computer was subsequently turned over to the RCMP and remained in their custody, to her knowledge, at the time of this trial. She, together with the employees of the band were able to reconstruct some of the financial information from copies of bank statements supplied by the bank. Copies of cancelled cheques were not provided by the bank.
[34]
In the course of her testimony, Ms. McArthur referred to and quoted from her affidavit sworn on August 9, 2003, in support of the ex parte motion for the issuance of a show cause order. A copy of the affidavit was not entered as an exhibit.
[35]
As well, Ms. McArthur referred to certain transcripts of cross-examination of Victor Marie and Tanya Tourangeau. These cross-examinations were conducted relative to the appeal undertaken by the Applicants from the Order of May 29, 2003, that is cause number A-286-03 in the Federal Court of Appeal.
[36]
The final witness for the Applicants was Mr. Ian Blackstock, a barrister and solicitor with the firm of Fasken, Martineau Dumoulin, practising in Whitehorse, Northwest Territories. Mr. Blackstock had been involved with the litigation relative to this application for judicial review since its commencement, on behalf of the Applicants.
[37]
Mr. Blackstock testified about the events leading up to the process for approval of issuance of cheques on behalf of the band, after the commencement of this application for judicial review, a step that was undertaken in response to the events of November 2002. The first Order, that is the Order of January 10, 2003, required that counsel for both the Applicants and the Respondents consent to expenditures. The initial Order was made upon consent of the parties. The process required the submission of a requisition for payment and if agreeable to the parties, the requisition would be signed by their respective lawyers.
[38]
Mr. Blackstock testified, briefly, as to the role of Mr. Bruce L. Barry in these proceedings. He said that he was an assistant or legal researcher to Mr. Robert Philip, former counsel for the Respondents in these proceedings. Mr. Blackstock said that Mr. Barry had been present at several of the hearings that had been conducted by teleconference and had also sent correspondence to his office on several matters. Mr. Blackstock had the opinion that Mr. Barry had a "very close involvement in the case".
[39]
Mr. Blackstock further testified that he had the "impression" that Mr. Barry was apparently aware of the Court Order relating to the processing of cheques.
[40]
Then Mr. Blackstock testified about correspondence that he had received concerning certain cheques that had been processed through the Bank of Montreal and other institutions without the signature of Toni Heron, an authorized signing officer. This letter was entered, with some other correspondence, as Exhibit 12.
[41]
Mr. Blackstock testified about further correspondence with the Bank of Montreal relating to the processing of certain cheques for which payment had not been authorized. In that regard he produced a copy of a letter dated July 10, 2003; it was entered as Exhibit 13.
[42]
A further letter, dated July 16, 2003 was produced by Mr. Blackstock. He testified that this was his file copy of a letter from Mr. Robert Philip, then counsel for the Respondents. This letter was entered as Exhibit 19. In this letter, Mr. Philip requested approval of certain payments, including payments to Jeannie Marie-Jewell and Victor Marie.
[43]
Mr. Blackstock testified as well that the Bank of Montreal sought an agreement from the SRFN that the monies that had been paid out by the Bank in connection with certain cheques identified in the letter of July 10, 2003 would be repaid by the band if the Bank was otherwise unable to recover the funds. He testified that ultimately the band repaid the Bank of Montreal approximately $31,000.00. In return, the Bank of Montreal assigned to the Band its claims against those individuals to whom payments had been made.
[44]
Further, Mr. Blackstock testified that approval had not been given in respect of those cheques that comprise Exhibit 1. He said that he first became aware of those cheques upon receipt of the letter dated July 10, 2003, that is the letter from the solicitors for the Bank of Montreal. He testified that he received no requisition from Mr. Philip in connection with these cheques.
[45]
The next area of questioning for Mr. Blackstock related to service of the "show cause" order issued by Justice Gauthier on September 19, 2003. A letter dated October 15, 2003, produced by Mr. Blackstock from his files, was entered as Exhibit 15. According to this letter, Mr. Blackstock forwarded Affidavits of Service to the Federal Court Registry in Vancouver for filing. These affidavits related to service of the Order of September 19, 2003 upon the eleven individuals named in that Order, that is the original Respondents to the application for judicial review, as well as Mr. Bruce L. Barry and Ms. Tanya Tourangeau. Mr. Blackstock produced copies of the affidavits of service from his office file for nine of the alleged contemnors, as well as a solicitor's certificate of service relative to Mr. Barry. He obtained a copy of the affidavit of service relative to Mr. Tourangeau for the Registry of the Court in Vancouver. These affidavits were entered, as a bundle, as Exhibit 16.
[46]
In response to the observation of the Court that in certain cases, the copies of the "show cause" orders that were attached as an exhibit to the affidavits of service were missing page 2 of that Order, Mr. Blackstock testified that he was satisfied that the documents that had been provided to the process servers were complete and in all respects complied with the requirements to serve the "show cause" order upon the individuals concerned. Mr. Blackstock then proceeded to testify about the steps undertaken in arranging service of the documents that were required to have been served in connection with the show cause order.
[47]
He also addressed the practice in his office of carefully checking the documents that were required to be served in this case. He said that insofar as preparation of the affidavit of service was concerned, there was a clerical error in preparing the copies of the show cause order when that document was copied for the purpose of being attached as an exhibit to the affidavits of service.
[48]
He testified that the document he was most concerned about was the copy of the order that was to be served and according to the practice in his office, this document would have been carefully checked to ensure that it was complete. However, he also testified that it was possible that page 2 of the show cause order was omitted from the documents to be served.
[49]
Mr. Blackstock testified that following service of the show cause order, he received some communication from Mr. Barry, advising that he would not attend for the show cause hearing scheduled for November 7, 2003. He also received some correspondence from a lawyer on behalf of Mr. Don Tourangeau. He did not hear from the other concerned individuals.
[50]
Mr. Blackstock was questioned by Ms. Jewel about his retainer by the Applicants and his fees. Upon objection from counsel for the Applicants to these questions, Mr. Blackstock asserted solicitor client privilege. The questions were ruled out as irrelevant.
Submissions
[51]
The Applicants argue that they have met the legal burden upon them to show that Victor Marie, Norman Starr, Nora Beaver, David Gowans, Connie Benwell, Michel Bjornson, Harvey Lepine, Don Tourangeau, Jeannie Marie-Jewell, Tanya Tourangeau and Bruce L. Barry have acted contrary to one or more of the orders of this Court made on January 10, January 17, May 29 and June 20, 2003.
[52]
Insofar as any question was raised about the sufficiency of service of the show cause order of September 19, 2003 upon Victor Marie, Norman Starr, David Gowans, Michel Bjornson, Harvey Lepine, Don Tourangeau, Jeannie Marie-Jewell and Tanya Tourangeau, the Applicants' submissions are simple.
[53]
They rely on the evidence of Mr. Blackstock about his usual practice in taking care to ensure that documents that must be served are proper and complete when presented to the process server. They also submit that the fact that the persons concerned participated in the conference call before the Court at Vancouver on November 27, 2003 shows that they were aware of the hearing that had originally ben scheduled for that date. In this regard, they argue that this Court can infer that page 2 of the show cause order must have been served upon the persons concerned because that page records the time and place of the hearing. According to the Applicants, the fact that the persons concerned were apparently aware of those details gives rise to the reasonable inference that they were served with a full copy of the show cause order made on September 19, 2003.
[54]
The Applicants argue that, on a balance of probabilities, they have established proper service of the show cause order.
[55]
Turning to the merits of the matter, that is breach of the orders, the Applicants argue that the evidence of Mr. Marta and Ms. McArthur establishes the fact that cheques were issued contrary to the Orders of January 10, January 17, May 29 and June 20, 2003 that is without the consent of counsel for the Applicants and for purposes other than those identified in one or more of these Orders.
[56]
The Applicants, relying on the evidence of Mr. Beaver, submit that they have shown that Victor Marie was involved in the removal of the computer and other records, from the finance office on June 12, 2003.
[57]
As well, the Applicants rely on the evidence in Exhibits 8 and 9, that is the transcripts of the cross-examinations of Tanya Tourangeau and Victor Marie, to establish commission of the alleged acts of contempt.
[58]
The alleged contemnors did not testify but exercised their right to make submissions in response to the arguments advanced on behalf of the Applicants. Ms. Jeannie Marie-Jewell spoke on behalf of Norman Starr, Connie Benwell, Harvey Lepine, Tanya Tourangeau and David Gowans, as well as on her own behalf. She complained, to begin with, about the ex parte application that had been made to the Court that led to the issuance of the show cause order of September 19. She argued that this manner of proceeding deprived the interested individuals of the opportunity of responding.
[59]
She then said that only Victor Marie was given notice of the hearing in Fort Smith on July 6 and 7, 2003 and that the other persons had attended only as a matter of respect towards him as the Chief. She argued that this lack of notice about the hearing in Fort Smith breached their rights to receive notice of a hearing.
[60]
Further, Ms. Jewell said that the alleged contemnors did not have time to respond to the evidence submitted by the Applicants. She also said that the commencement of contempt proceedings by the Applicants was, in itself, a contemptuous act. Ms. Jewell went on to say that the allegedly stolen cheques were not honoured by the bank.
[61]
She then argued that there was no evidence of service of the show cause order as required by Rule 467(4) of the Rules. She said that the transcripts of evidence from another proceeding could not be admitted as evidence in this proceeding.
[62]
Chief Victor Marie submitted that there was lack of evidence to show proper service.
[63]
Mr. Don Tourangeau asked for double costs in the event that the Applicants were unsuccessful.
[64]
Ms. Nora Beaver described the situation as a "quagmire of allegations with no evidence". She said that she had not been served to attend in Fort Smith.
[65]
Mr. Bruce Barry started by saying that he was not a party to this action. He then argued that this Court lacks jurisdiction to hear this motion for contempt due to lack of proper service of the show cause order, that certain counts in the show cause order were res judicata in light of the order of June 20, 2003, and that there was bias. In this regard he referred to rulings on the inadmissibility of an exhibit presented by Ms. Jewell to Ms. McArthur, the court's rulings that Mr. Blackstock did not have to answer any questions concerning payment of fees by the Applicants, and finally, systemic bias as demonstrated by the Court's decision to hold this hearing in Fort Smith.
[66]
Mr. Barry also argued that the Applicants had failed to discharge their burden of proof, that is to show what orders were in issue and that the alleged contemnors were in breach of those orders. He said that the Applicants could not rely on hearsay evidence. He, too, asked for costs.
[67]
In reply, counsel for these Applicants argued that these three alleged contemnors, with the exception of Mr. Barry, all participated in the conference call on November 27, 2003. all persons, except Mr. Barry, asked that the hearing be held in Fort Smith, as appears from the Order of December 4, 2003.
[68]
Counsel for the Applicants submitted that Exhibits 8 and 7, that is the transcripts of the cross-examination of Tanya Tourangeau and Victor Marie respectively, were admissible evidence because although filed in the Federal Court of Appeal, they are part and parcel of the contempt proceedings.
Discussion And Disposition
[69]
Two issues arise from this motion. Were the alleged contemnors properly served with the show cause order of September 19, 2003. If so, have the Applicants discharged their burden of showing, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the alleged contemnors are in contempt of the orders of this Court made on January 10, 2003, January 17, 2003, May 29, 2003 and June 20, 2003.
[70]
Rule 467(4) of the Rules requires personal service of a show cause order upon an alleged contemnor and provides as follows:
(4) An order under subsection (1) shall be personally served, together with any supporting documents, unless otherwise ordered by the Court.
(4) Sauf ordonnance contraire de la Cour, l'ordonnance visée au paragraphe (1) et les documents à l'appui sont signifiés à personne.
[71]
Personal service requires service of the complete order. In the present case, the affidavits of service that were entered as Exhibit 16, show a defect in that page 2 of the show cause order is not attached in the affidavits of service relating to all of the alleged contemnors, except the affidavits of service relative to Connie Benwell and Bruce L. Barry.
[72]
The opening paragraph in these affidavits of service relating to Victor Marie, Norman Starr, Nora Beaver, David Gowans, Michel Bjornson, Harvey Lepine, Don Tourangeau and Jeannie Marie-Jewell contains the following statement:
On ______, 2003 at ______ o'clock, I served ______ with the Applicants' Motion Record and a brief of Authorities with respect to a contempt application and the Order of the Honourable Madam Justice Gauthier dated September 19th, 2003 by leaving a copy with that person at ______,
Attached hereto and marked as Exhibit "A" to this my Affidavit
are copies of the first page of the Motion Record and the Brief of Authorities and
a copy of the Order of the Honourable Madam Justice Gauthier
. [Emphasis added]
[73]
The affidavits of service are incomplete. The purpose of these affidavits is to prove service of the documents referred to in the affidavits. The evidence of Mr. Blackstock concerning his usual practice in ensuring that the materials to be served are complete is not sufficient to establish that personal service was effected in this case. The fact that the alleged contemnors were available for a conference call on November 27, 2003 to request a postponement of the hearing scheduled for November 27, 2003 does not meet the obligation of proving personal service.
[74]
I do not accept the Applicants' submissions that they have shown, on a balance of probabilities, that proper service was effected. The defect in the affidavit of service and resolution of any doubt as to whether the complete order had, in fact, been served could have been answered if the process servers had testified. However, they did not testify.
[75]
Accordingly, the motion against Victor Marie, Norman Starr, Nora Beaver, David Gowans, Michel Bjornson, Harvey Lepine, Don Tourangeau and Jeannie Marie-Jewell is dismissed without prejudice.
[76]
I am satisfied that Connie Benwell and Bruce Barry were properly served. The show cause order alleges that Connie Benwell, and others, authorized the issuance of a cheque dated on or about June 6, 2003 to Tanya Tourangeau without the consent of counsel for the Applicants, in breach of the Orders of January 10 and 17, 2003 and May 29, 2003.
[77]
It is also alleged that Connie Benwell authorized and signed a cheque that was back dated from June 23, 2003 to April 23, 2003, contrary to the Order of June 20, 2003. Alternatively, in count 6 of the show cause order, it is alleged that Ms. Benwell issued a cheque to Victor Marie on April 25, 2003 without obtaining the consent of counsel for the Applicants, contrary to the Orders of January 10 and 17, 2003, and May 29, 2003.
[78]
As for Bruce Barry, it is alleged at count 10 that he knowingly accepted a cheque signed by Victor Marie and Norman Starr or by Don Tourangeau and Connie Benwell after June 23, 2003, contrary to the Order of June 20, 2003. Alternatively, as set out in count 11, it is alleged that he knowingly accepted a cheque signed by Victor Marie and Norman Starr or by Don Tourangeau and Connie Benwell dated April 25, 2003 on June 19, 2003, without the consent of counsel for the Applicants and contrary to the Orders of January 10 and 17, 2003 and May 29, 2003.
[79]
At this stage, it is necessary to ask if the Applicants have shown that their alleged contemnors had actual knowledge of the Orders in issue, that is the Orders of January 10 and 17, 2003, May 29, 2003 and June 20, 2003. In this regard, I refer to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[80]
Ms. Benwell is a party to this application for judicial review. The Applicants argue that she had knowledge of the underlying Orders because she was represented by counsel at the time the Orders were issued and the knowledge of counsel can be imputed to her.
[81]
Insofar as Mr. Barry is concerned, he is not a party to the application for judicial review. He is, however, a party to the contempt proceedings. In his case, the Applicants argue that due to his role as a research or other type of assistant to former counsel for the Respondents to the application for judicial review, Mr. Barry can be deemed to have knowledge of the Orders in issue. Mr. Blackstock, a witness for those Applicants, testified that he had the "impression" that Mr. Barry had knowledge of the Orders, as illustrated by a letter sent by Mr. Barry from the law office of former counsel for the Respondents on June 4, 2003, entered as part of Exhibit 12.
[82]
According to <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the party alleging contempt must prove actual knowledge of the order allegedly breached by the alleged contemnor. Further, the Rules permitting service of an order on a party's solicitor do not establish knowledge of the order, by that party, for the purpose of grounding a finding of contempt. In some cases, a finding of knowledge by the client may be inferred.
[83]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the Court found that knowledge of an order can be inferred from conduct, even if an alleged contemnor has not been served with the order. Such conduct includes the commencement of an appeal from an order since such a step could only have been taken on instructions from the alleged contemnor.
[84]
In this case, the Court file shows that on January 17, 2003, a motion was filed on behalf of the Respondents seeking an order to strike the application for judicial review and to vacate the Order of January 10, 2003. By Order dated January 20, 2003, that motion was dismissed.
[85]
As well, the Court file in this proceeding shows that a Notice of Appeal was filed on May 30, 2003 in respect of the order of the Court issued on May 29, 2003.
[86]
In these circumstances, I am satisfied that Ms. Connie Benwell had knowledge of the Orders of January 10, 2003 and of May 29, 2003. She was one of the Respondents who sought to vacate the January 10, 2003 Order and who initially sought to appeal the May 29, 2003 Order.
[87]
The next question is whether the Applicants have established breach of these Orders beyond a reasonable doubt. That burden is specifically identified in Rule 468 as follows:
468. In a case of urgency, a person may be found in contempt of Court for an act committed in the presence of a jude and condemned at once, if the person has been called on to justify his or her behaviour.
468. En cas d'urgence, une personne peut être reconnue coupable d'outrage au tribunal pour un acte commis en présence d'un juge et condamnée sur-le-champ, pourvu qu'on lui ait demandé de justifier son comportement.
[88]
In this regard, the Applicants rely on the evidence contained in the transcripts of the cross-examinations of Tanya Tourangeau and Victor Marie entered as Exhibits 8 and 9, respectively. The alleged contemnors object to reliance upon this evidence because it is evidence that was entered in another proceeding, that is an appeal before the Federal Court of Appeal.
[89]
Rule 470 governs the calling of evidence and further provides that an alleged contemnor is not obliged to testify, as follows:
470.(1) Unless the Court directs otherwise, evidence on a motion for a contempt order, other than an order under subsection 467(1), shall be oral.
(2) A person alleged to be in contempt may not be compelled to testify.
470.(1) Sauf directives contraires de la Cour, les témoignages dan le cadre d'une reequête pour une ordonnance d'outrage au tribunal, sauf celle visée au paragraphe 467(1), sont donnés oralement.
(2) La persone à qui l'outrage au tribunal est reproché ne peut être contrainte à témigner.
[90]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the Court found that an affidavit and cross-examination given by the alleged contemnor in another proceeding cannot be introduced at the show cause hearing where the alleged contemnor chose not to testify.
[91]
I conclude that the evidence contained in Exhibits 8 and 9 is irrelevant for the purpose of establishing breach of the Orders of January 10, 2003 and May 29, 2003 by Ms. Benwell. These documents are evidence in another proceeding, that is an appeal in the Federal Court of Appeal. Contrary to the arguments of the Applicants, that is a separate proceeding. This evidence will not be considered.
[92]
In these circumstances, what other evidence is before the Court that could show acts of contempt by Ms. Benwell? In my opinion, there is only Exhibit 1, that is copies of sixteen cheques totalling, by my calculations, $127,572.88. Ms. Benwell's signature appears to be on cheque number 538, dated April 25, 2003, payable to Victor Marie in the amount of $4,977.48.
[93]
There is no evidence that this cheque was signed by Ms. Benwell after the date on the cheque, that is April 25, 2003. The fact that the cheque was negotiated on July 7, 2003 in Edmonton, Alberta, does not mean that the cheque was written after April 25, 2003, and more particularly, that it was written on or after June 23, 2003, as alleged in count 5. In these circumstances, I find that the Order of May 29, 2003 was not breached by the issuance and signing of this cheque. I turn now to the Order of January 10, 2003.
[94]
I am satisfied that Ms. Benwell had personal knowledge of the Order of January 10, 2003. That Order limited access to accounts operated by the SRFN at the Bank of Montreal at Fort Smith and in particular, required the consent of counsel for both the Applicants and the Respondents.
[95]
The Applicants have tendered evidence, through Mr. Blackstock, concerning the manner in which consent of counsel was obtained. Mr. Blackstock also testified that the cheques identified in correspondence dated July 10, 2003, from the solicitor for the Bank of Montreal in Fort Smith, had not been approved by counsel for the Applicants. That letter, entered as Exhibit 13, refers to a cheque dated April 25, 2003, payable to Victor Marie in the amount of $4,977.48.
[96]
Count 6 of the show cause order relates to the Order of January 10, 2003, Ms. Benwell and a cheque dated April 25, 2003, and provides as follows:
6. In the alternative, if the cheque referred to in paragraph (5) was issued before June 23rd, 2003 Don tourangeau and Connie Benwell violated the orders of Mr. Justice Roleau dated January 10th and 17th, 2003 and May 29th, 2003 and are in contempt of court pursuant to subsection 466(b) by reason of issuing a cheque to Victor Marie dated April 25th, 2003 without obtaining the consent of counsel for the Applicants, contrary to the said orders.
[97]
Cheque number 538 is drawn from account No. 1007 401. According to Exhibit 2, Ms. Benwell is a signing officer for this account. Exhibit 2 contains copies of the signature cards for certain accounts maintained by the SRFN with the Bank of Montreal at Fort Smith. The signature card for account No. 1007 401 is dated November 6, 2002 and Ms. Benwell is identified as a Councillor.
[98]
I am satisfied that the signature "Connie Benwell" on cheque number 538 is the same as the signature appearing on the signature card for account number 1007 401 found in Exhibit 2.
[99]
I am satisfied that the Applicants have shown, beyond a reasonable doubt, that Ms. Benwell signed this cheque on or about April 25, 2003. Cheque number 538 is a computer generated cheque. According to the evidence of Ms. McArthur, this cheque was not one of those allegedly stolen from her office on June 24, 2003.
[100]
Mr. Barry's situation is somewhat different. There is evidence that he assisted former counsel for the Respondents throughout the hearing of the application for judicial review and that he wrote, on at least one occasion, a letter from the offices of former counsel for the Respondents.
[101]
Mr. Blackstock was the only witness who tendered evidence in relation to Mr. Barry. He testified that he had the "impression" that Mr. Barry was aware of the Orders in question.
[102]
I am not satisfied that this is sufficient to show personal knowledge of the Orders by Mr. Barry. Whatever the role of Mr. Barry in the law offices of former counsel for the Respondents, it is clear that he was neither a legal representative of the Respondents nor a party to the application for judicial review, where knowledge of the Orders may be imputed. In my opinion, the Applicants were required to show that Mr. Barry had personal knowledge of the Orders here in issue and they have not discharged that burden. The motion is dismissed against him, again without prejudice.
[103]
The alleged contemnors made submissions about insufficient service upon them of the notice of hearing in Fort Smith. They also, in the submissions of Ms. Jewell, said that they did not have time to defend their actions. Both matters require comment.
[104]
In the first place, the alleged contemnors either appeared in person at Fort Smith on July 6, 2003 or contacted the Registry of the Court about the hearing date. In my opinion, this shows that they were all aware of the hearing date. The Order of December 4, 2003 specifically ordered the parties to communicate with the Registry of the Court, in writing, to indicate their availability for the show cause hearing, to be held in Fort Smith, at a date to be set.
[105]
The alleged contemnors, with the exception of Mr. Barry, participated in the telephone conference on November 27, 2003 that led to the issuance of the Order of December 4, 2003.
[106]
I turn now to Ms. Jewell's submissions that the alleged contemnors did not have time to defend their actions. Her submissions are a misrepresentation of the advice given to the alleged contemnors by the Court at the close of the Applicant's case at Fort Smith on July 7, 2004, as recorded in the transcript of the hearing on that date. Attached as an appendix and forming part of these Reasons are pages 167 to 178 inclusive, Volume 2 of the transcript of the proceedings held at Fort Smith on July 7, 2004.
[107]
The alleged contemnors were informed that they were not obliged to testify, but could do so if they wished. They chose not to testify. Any facts that were raised in their closing submissions do not constitute evidence and have not been considered.
Conclusion
[108]
The motion for contempt against Victor Marie, Norman Starr, Nora Beaver, David Gowans, Michel Bjornson, Harvey Lepine, Don Tourangeau, Tanya Tourangeau, Jeannie Marie-Jewell and Bruce L. Barry is dismissed, without prejudice.
[109]
The action for contempt against Connie Benwell has been established in relation to the Order of January 10, 2003 and count 6 of the show cause order. I will hear submissions of the Applicants and Connie Benwell, on the matter of penalty, on March 2, 2005 at 2:00 p.m. Ottawa time, by videoconference. Counsel for the Applicants and Ms. Benwell are to confirm in writing to the Court by February 25, 2005, their availability on that date and provide contact numbers; the Registry of the Court will make the necessary arrangements for the videoconference.
Costs
[110]
Mr. Don Tourangeau and Mr. Bruce Barry sought costs. Mr. Tourangeau requested double costs on a solicitor client scale and Mr. Barry asked for double costs against the Applicants in their own right, not as Councillors for the SRFN.
[111]
I decline to make such orders. In the first place, Rule 400 of the Rules grants the Court full discretion in the matter of costs. Second, costs are generally not awarded to self-represented litigants and I see no reason to exercise my discretion otherwise.
[112]
I reserve the issue of costs in relation to the Applicants.
ORDER
[113]
The motion for contempt against Victor Marie, Norman Starr, Nora Beaver, David Gowans, Michel Bjornson, Harvey Lepine, Don Tourangeau, Tanya Tourangeau, Jeannie Marie-Jewell and Bruce L. Barry, is dismissed, without prejudice and no order as to costs.
[114]
The motion for contempt against Connie Benwell in relation to the Order of January 10, 2003 is granted. Submissions on penalty will be heard by videoconference on March 2, 2005 at 2:00 p.m. Ottawa time, the Applicants and Ms. Benwell to communicate in writing with the Court by February 25, 2005, their availability on that date and to provide contact numbers.
[115]
The issue of costs for the Applicants is reserved.
[End of document]