[1]
Denault, J.
[Translation]: The defendant company has presented at the reception stage a motion in revocation of judgment pursuant to art. 482 of the
Code of Civil Procedure
. The purpose of the motion is essentially to set aside a certificate filed in the Registry of this Court on February 6, 1995 in accordance with s. 316 of the
Excise Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. E-15, pursuant to a notice of assessment being issued in the amount of $175,549.70 as goods and services tax.
[2]
The Deputy Minister of Revenue of Quebec opposes this motion in revocation of judgment, arguing, in the first place, that it is out of time, having been made more than 15 days after the peremptory time limit imposed by art. 484
C.C.P.
, unless the applicant has been relieved from the consequences of its default.
[3]
It would be inappropriate to expatiate on the manoeuvres the Department of Revenue was put to in its futile effort to serve the president and sole shareholder of the defendant with the certificate in question. The date of service should however be noted for the purposes of calculating the delay in presenting the motion in revocation. Suffice it to say that according to counsel for the Deputy Minister of Revenue the certificate was served on April 10, 1995 at the business office of Marcel Grand Cirque Inc., by "speaking to a responsible person in charge of the office, Lise Fortier", after no less than 27 attempts, according to the process server's return. For his part, the president and sole shareholder of the defendant claims he did not learn of this certificate until April 28, 1995. Examined on this statement by counsel for the deputy minister, Marcel Boivin stated that on April 10, 1995 he was no longer living in his residence and company head office at 1300 Monère, Val-Bélair and that his wife Lise Fortier, which whom he was having some marital problems, was not authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the company and had delayed giving him the document.
[4]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Que.), the Quebec Court of Appeal held that "service of process on a corporation should be made only to those persons mandated to manage the activities thereof and who, ipso facto, in their official duties, are identified with it". In the case at bar, to the degree that the president and sole shareholder of the defendant company did not acquire knowledge of the certificate within the meaning of art. 484
C.C.P.
until April 28, 1995, I think that for the purposes of the motion in revocation of judgment filed with the Federal Court Registry on May 12, 1995, service was not made out of time.
[5]
In support of its motion in revocation of judgment, the applicant argues, first, that the amount claimed is not owing because in establishing the assessment no account was taken of its expenses in operating the business.
[6]
This court does not have jurisdiction to determine this issue. The
Excise Tax Act
, like the
Income Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1985 (5th Supp.), c. 2, contains in effect a complete code for the collection of taxes pursuant to which a taxpayer, after receiving a notice of assessment, may file a notice of opposition and possibly appeal to the Tax Court of Canada. Thus this court does not have jurisdiction to determine the amount of the assessment and the expenses to which a taxpayer may claim to be entitled.
[7]
As its second argument in support of its motion in revocation of judgment, the applicant objects to the method used by the Deputy Minister of Revenue to recover the assessment amount through s. 316 of the
Excise Tax Act
, namely, the production to the Federal Court of a certificate which is equivalent, within the meaning of this section, to a judgment of this court. Counsel for the applicant claims that this recovery mechanism is unconstitutional in that it does not allow the taxpayer to lead his defence, which, it is argued, is contrary to ss. 7 and 8 of the
Charter
and s. 96 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
. In this regard, pursuant to s. 57 of the
Federal Court Act
, the applicant's counsel served a notice of constitutional question on the attorneys general of Canada and the provinces in which he alleges that this procedure of registering a certificate under s. 316 of the
Excise Tax Act
contravenes in particular s. 7 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
since it infringes the fundamental right to a court hearing; he further alleges that s. 316 contravenes s. 8 of the
Charter
and the guarantee of judicial review of governmental action.
[8]
This challenge to the recovery process under s. 316 of the
Excise Tax Act
leads me to make an initial observation concerning the very framework of the
Excise Tax Act
. Under s. 315 of the
Act
, the Minister may take collection action in respect of an amount that is payable or remittable if the amount has been assessed. Any amount assessed then remaining unpaid is payable forthwith to the Receiver General. Under s. 316, any tax payable by a debtor, or any part of any such tax, that has not been paid or remitted as and when required under this Part may be certified by the Minister as an amount payable by the debtor. The production of a certificate to the Federal Court -- we will discuss this later -- then allows the Minister to recover against the debtor for this debt due to Her Majesty. In short, it is a measure aimed essentially at protecting the recovery of the debt since, under subs. 316(8), even if the taxpayer's property has been seized, no sale can take place without the written consent of the Minister.
[9]
A second observation is in order in relation to the procedure used by the applicant to argue the constitutional invalidity of s. 316, that is, a motion in revocation of judgment.
[10]
In this regard I think it is unnecessary, even at the level of the reception of a motion in revocation of judgment, to get into a prima facie analysis of the lawfulness of the process of registering in this court a certificate for the recovery of an amount listed in a notice of assessment, insofar as the very method chosen by the defendant as an attempt to get into it is without merit, in my opinion. Let me explain.
[11]
It is self-evident that a party can make a motion in revocation only in opposition to a judgment. In the instant case, no judge or prothonotary of this court has rendered any judgment the revocation of which may be requested. The recovery process set out in s. 316 of the
Excise Tax Act
is similar to the process set out in s. 223 of the
Income Tax Act
, which has been the subject of earlier constitutional challenges and analysed frequently by the courts. From the procedural standpoint in particular, s. 223 of the
Income Tax Act
was exhaustively examined by this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In the latter judgment, Cattanach, J., succinctly summarizing the thoughts of Thurlow, J. (as he then was), in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (supra), wrote:
"Succinctly put he said that a certificate is not a judgment nor does it become a judgment of the court when registered but it remains merely a certificate of the Minister even though such a certificate when registered has the same force and effect, and all proceedings may be taken thereon as if the certificate were a judgment obtained in the court."
And Cattanach, J., went on to state that rule 337(6), which the party was seeking to use in order to obtain the correction of a clerical or other drafting error or accidental omission, was inapplicable "since a certificate is not a judgment pronounced by the court". These decisions, which it is true were rendered in the context of an application under rule 337(6), are just as valid in the context of a motion in revocation of judgment made under art. 482 of the
Code of Civil Procedure
.
[12]
I think, therefore, that inasmuch as the certificate produced to the Federal Court is equivalent to but not a judgment of this court, the motion in revocation of judgment is not receivable. In this case the court issued a writ of fieri facias on April 19, 1995 at the request of the Deputy Minister. The record discloses that a seizure was effected on April 21, 1995 on the movable property of the applicant. However, discharge from this seizure was given on September 15, 1995. In my opinion, only this seizure could be the subject of a challenge or application to stay, in the first place under the
Rules
of this court (rule 2000 et seq.), failing which the provisions of the
Code of Civil Procedure
may be followed.
[13]
Independently of the issues discussed above, the claim in damages and exemplary damages made in the context of the motion in revocation of judgment is patently improper and hence without merit.
[14]
For these reasons, the court refuses to receive this motion in revocation of judgment.
Reception refused.
Editor: Jean Merlini/slm