[1] Rouleau, J.
: This is an appeal form a decision of the Registrar of Trademarks dated January 31, 1992, whereby the registered trademark No. 182,210, Arrowhead Puritas & Design, was ordered expunged. The mark was registered on March 30, 1972, and was renewed in March 1987. The products appearing on the registration are: drinking water, namely distilled water, spring water, fluoridated water, and pure spring water.
[2]
The trademark belongs to the appellant Arrowhead Water Corp., who recently acquired it from the previous owners.
[3]
On May 10, 1989, the respondent, Arrowhead Spring Water Ltd., requested that the Registrar forward a s. 45 notice to the appellant. In response to the Registrar's notice, the appellant submitted the statutory declaration of its Senior Vice President of Sales and Marketing. The declaration conceded that the trademark was not in use in Canada at the time, but that the absence of use was due to special circumstances, namely the recent purchase of the trademark by the appellant, new ownership and new management dealing with an unfamiliar business, and the distance between the appellant company and its parent company.
[4]
The declaration also expressed the appellant's intention to resume the use of the trademark in Canada. That is the extent of the evidence placed before the Registrar. No receipts, purchase orders or other form of evidence was submitted to substantiate any use whatsoever of the mark nor other support with respect to allegations submitted in the appellant's statement, as filed. No new evidence was introduced by the appellant before this court which could demonstrate that use of the trademark has been resumed or is about to be resumed.
[5]
On appeals from the Registrar, the jurisprudence clearly states that it is not the function of the court to set aside the Registrar's decision because the court may have come to a different conclusion. Before this court will interfere, the appellant has the burden of satisfying me that the Registrar failed to properly interpret or consider the facts submitted:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 473 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 488;
88766  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 260 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 267;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 74 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 77;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), at p. 298.
[7]
It is apparent from the Registrar's decision that she did not find any evidence of special circumstances justifying the total absence of use in this case. She applied the test in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 488 (F.C.A.), in order to determine whether or not the circumstances in this case were special. In
Harris
, Pratte, J., points out, at p. 493, the "special circumstances" cannot be precisely defined but should include:
1. the duration of the non-use of the trademark;
2. the probability of the prolongation of the non-use; and
3. whether the circumstances of the non-use are outside the control of the registrant as the absence of use must not be attributable to the owner's own resolve or decision.
[8]
In the present circumstances, the last date of use or any use whatsoever of the mark could not be substantiated before the Registrar. She was merely informed that since acquiring the trademark on August 6, 1987, the registrant had not used the mark in Canada. She properly concluded that at the date of the s. 45 notice, May 10, 1989, the trademark had not been used for a period of one year and nine months, the date of acquisition.
[9]
Considering the reasons of non-use, the Registrar found that the circumstances outlined by the appellant were insufficient to support "special circumstances" to justify the absence of use. Neither was there any evidence that the appellant took or is presently taking active steps which would demonstrate its serious intention to resume the use of the mark in Canada, so as not to prolong the duration of the non-use.
[10]
The Registrar, at p. 3 of her decision, found that:
"There are no facts set out in the statutory declaration of Mr. Jeffery from which it could be concluded that since August 1987 the registrant made considerable efforts in order to commence use of the trademark in Canada. We are not even informed of any active steps taken by the registrant since August 1987 in order to resume use of the present trademark in Canada nor of any difficulties that might have been encountered by the registrant or of the efforts made to resolve such difficulties, if any."
[11]
Although the appellant's statutory declaration submits that it and its parent company intend to resume use of the mark in Canada in the near future, the Registrar found this to be a mere unsubstantiated statement.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 62 (F.C.A.), at p. 43 N.R., p. 66 C.P.R., Thurlow, C.J., states that:
"The purpose is not merely to tell the Registrar that the registered owner does not want to give up the registration but to inform the Registrar in detail of the situation prevailing with respect to the use of the trademark so that he, and the court on appeal, can form an opinion and apply the substantive rule set out in s. 44(3). There is no room for a dog in the manger attitude on the part of the registered owners who may wish to hold on to a registration notwithstanding that the trademark is no longer in use at all ..."
[12]
It is therefore important, in cases where non-use has been conceded and the registrant pleads "special circumstances, that the evidence filed to support the further protection cannot be restricted to a bare statement but must provide detail to lend substance to the assertion. The Registrar concluded that the intention to resume use was a bare statement and that the appellants had not demonstrated a serious intention to resume use in Canada any time soon. Further details, such as a proposed date of resumption or a description of steps to be taken to effectively restore the mark to use were not included in the evidence. The appellant does not indicate with any degree of certainty its intention to resume use; this court is left in the dark as to how long the duration of the non-use will persist. As the Registrar puts it, "the statement that the trademark owner intends to use the trademark in Canada is not in itself sufficient to maintain the registration".
[13]
The appellant did not convince the Registrar that the reasons it gave to justify the absence of use of the mark were special circumstances. She agreed that new owners may need time to familiarize themselves with a new business, but that further details were needed before an absence of use of almost two years could be justified.
[14]
I also agree that sufficient details were not provided. There is no indication of the difficulties encountered by the appellant which would substantiate or justify non-use for such a lengthy period; details which the Registrar felt were necessary in order to corroborate special circumstances. The appellant submits that the Registrar was wrong in not being convinced of its intention to resume use. I am satisfied that based on what little facts she had before her, the Registrar was right in her analysis. The appellant has not succeeded in convincing the court that the Registrar failed to properly interpret or consider the matter before her.
[15]
I turn now to the cases upon which the appellant relies.
[16]
The appellant relies on
88766  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  intention to resume use, or that its decision was a reasonable business decision. In
George Weston Ltd.
, supra, there was an agreement between the buyer of the trademark and the seller that the buyer would not use the newly acquired mark for a period of five months in order to allow the seller to dispose of what was left of its inventory. Teitelbaum, J., felt that a period of nine months was not unreasonable, especially since five of those months were to allow the seller to dispose of its inventory. Therefore, what was really being dealt with was a period of four months. In this case, we are dealing with a period of 29 months. The court also stated, at p. 270:
"I am satisfied that the registrar considered all the facts before him ... I do not feel that he has erred in his appreciation of the facts before him so as to warrant my replacing his decision with my own."
[17]
The appellant further relies on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  included invoices dated prior to the s. 45 notice, showing some existence of commercial activity. Although there was no direct evidence of use by the registered owner or registered user, the trademark was in fact being used by one of the companies amalgamated to the registrant. Although there was no use by the registrant, the Registrar found that the circumstances were sufficiently special to warrant the maintaining of the registration. The court did not interfere.
[18]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 197 (F.C.T.D.), the court maintained the decision of the Registrar who found that there were "more than poor market conditions dictating non-use". The Registrar found that the plant or production facilities needed renovation and determined that ongoing renovations was a special circumstance beyond the control of the registrant. The court, at p. 204, stated:
"The court cannot merely substitute its opinion for that of the registrar. The appellant must persuade the court that the registrar 'has gone wrong'. That has not, to my mind, been shown in this case."
[19]
The appellant relied on other jurisprudence which dealt with non-use of the trademark because of lack of demand. I fail to see the relevance of these cases; the appellant has not submitted any evidence to the effect that there exists a lack of demand for their product.
[20]
The Registrar has not improperly interpreted or considered the facts before her, the Registrar's decision is upheld and the appeal is dismissed. Costs to the respondent.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Gary M. McLaughlin/saf
[End of document]