[1]
McKeown, J.
: The applicant, Mario Manuel Gomes, requested that this court stay a deportation order issued against him, to allow him to commence judicial review proceedings to set aside the decision of an immigration officer who determined that there were insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds to allow the applicant to remain in Canada. The applicant is a citizen of Portugal who has been in Canada since 1989. He has overstayed his visitor authorization in Canada by more than five years and he has, since coming to Canada, been convicted of assault causing bodily harm under s. 267(1)(b) of the
Criminal Code of Canada
, which resulted in a six-month jail sentence. The applicant served two months and was released.
[2]
The applicant received a deportation order, which was signed on April 6, 1994. On April 12, 1994, the applicant married his common law spouse, and in August 1994 their child was born. It was not until the deportation order was issued that the applicant made any attempt to regularize his status in Canada. At this time the applicant's spouse made an application on humanitarian and compassionate grounds under s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
to allow the applicant to be processed for permanent residence from within Canada. The immigration officer refused the applicant's claim on the basis of his prior criminal conviction, which placed him in an inadmissible class pursuant to s. 19(1)(c) of the
Immigration Act
.
[3]
The applicant has requested that I stay his deportation order so that he may commence proceedings for judicial review of the decision of the immigration officer. I am not convinced that this is a case in which such a stay should be granted.
[4]
I find, first of all, that this court does not have jurisdiction to entertain the request of the applicant. In this respect, I am in agreement with Strayer, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Counsel for the applicant argued that there are other decisions by this court which do not agree with the above cases. She also argued that s. 18.2 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, which came into force on February 1, 1992, permits this court to take interim jurisdiction. However, the above noted cases were both decided subsequent to the coming into force of s. 18.2 and I am still inclined to follow them.
[5]
Despite my ruling on jurisdiction, I will examine the merits of this case. On its merits, I would also deny a stay of the deportation order as there is no serious issue here. The immigration officer acted fairly and considered the issues before him. He considered the marriage of the applicant as well as s. 19(1)(c) of the
Immigration Act
. The decision of the immigration officer is a discretionary one, and humanitarian and compassionate grounds are an exception in that, in the absence of bad faith, there is nothing to warrant the intervention of this court. Thus, as I find that the immigration officer properly exercised his discretion, and there was no evidence of bad faith, I cannot find there is a serious issue to be tried. I also note that s. 9.14(2)(a) of the Employment and Immigration Canada
Guidelines on Examination and Enforcement
states:
"Notwithstanding the existence of a genuine marriage, officers are under no obligation to deal favourably with spouses who are inadmissible under A19 of the
Immigration Act
."
[6]
I find this relevant with respect to the decision of the immigration officer on the humanitarian and compassionate application, and find that the decision made by the officer was open to him.
[7]
With respect to the balance of convenience test, I am in agreement with the reasoning of Rothstein, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  case, Rothstein, J., stated that when the applicant is guilty of welfare fraud or has been convicted of a criminal offence in Canada, the balance of convenience weighs heavily in favour of the respondent. In this case the applicant was convicted of assault causing bodily harm, which I find to outweigh any consideration of the emotional devastation of the applicant's family. I therefore find that the balance of convenience in this case lies with the respondent.
[8]
Given my negative findings on the first two elements of the tripartite test, I do find it necessary to consider the issue of irreparable harm.
[9]
The application for a stay is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sg
[End of document]