[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This petition for a writ of certiorari to review, quash and set aside the decision of the respondent, ordering the petitioner's interdivisional transfer to a contract province, came on before me in Ottawa, Ontario, on April 3, 1986.
[2]
The facts leading to this application can be summarized as follows. The petitioner joined the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (R.C.M.P.) in 1968. Since January of 1985, he has acted as a supervisor in the Traffic Enforcement Section and is posted at Division "A" in Ottawa, Ontario.
[3]
On June 26, 1985, the petitioner was advised by the respondent, through his Commanding Officer, that he would be transferred interdivisionally to a contract province of his choice. On July 5, 1985, the petitioner requested that the respondent reconsider his decision.
[4]
On August 9, 1985, the respondent confirmed his earlier decision of transfer and, after due consideration for special circumstances, it was to become effective March 15, 1986. To this day, the petitioner is still posted in Ottawa. It is my understanding from counsel for the respondent that he is to remain in Ottawa until final disposition of this application. A cursory glance of these facts would normally reveal nothing exceptional. Transfers are admittedly a fact of life for members of the force.
[5]
It is however petitioner's contention that this transfer is not "routine", but comes as a disguised punitive measure or as a reprisal in the wake of a complaint initiated by himself. As disclosed by the evidence, the petitioner wrote directly to the Commissioner of the R.C.M.P. in February of 1984 alleging that some members of the R.C.M.P., and in particular some of his superior officers, had knowledge of unlawful activities but were not directing their efforts towards preventing them or strictly enforcing the law. The allegations, viewed as serious, implicating the petitioner's superiors including his Commanding Officer, were later the subject of an internal investigation ordered by the respondent and found to be unsubstantiated. As a result, the respondent took it upon himself to make certain decisions concerning petitioner's "career and personal situation". I now reproduce the June 26, 1985, decision of the respondent, which is Exhibit 2 of the petitioner's affidavit.
"CONFIDENTIAL
1985-06-26
C.O. 'A' - OTTAWA
Re: Reg. No. 24606, Cpl. Desjardins, J.N.J. Complaint of
Cpl. Desjardins of your command wrote directly to my office in early February, 1984, making certain allegations which were subject of an internal investigation by C/Supt. J.J.M. Court. Through the course of this investigation Cpl. Desjardins was interviewed and he was unable to provide any additional elaboration on the information provided in his letter.
On the basis of this investigation I must conclude that Cpl. Desjardins' allegations have not been substantiated. However, the nature of his allegation with respect to his Commanding Officer places both you and Cpl. Desjardins in an untenable situation. It is therefore my decision that Cpl. Desjardins is to be transferred interdivisionally to a contract division in order to provide him with the opportunity for a fresh start within another command structure.
While Cpl. Desjardins wrote directly to my office, I believe it is proper that my response be through proper channels. Therefore, I would ask that you provide Cpl. Desjardins with a copy of this memorandum so he will be aware of the resolution of his complaint and my decision with respect to his personal situation.
(signed)
R.H. SIMMONDS
COMMISSIONER"
[6]
Following this letter of decision, the petitioner wrote the respondent requesting reconsideration. Attached to his letter of request, and marked as Exhibit 5 to his affidavit, was the MEMORANDUM from the petitioner's Commanding Officer directed to the respondent. This also should be reproduced.
"DATE: 85.07.15
"TO: THE COMMISSIONER
FROM: A/C.O. 'A' DIVISION
RE: # 26406, Cpl. J.N.J. DESJARDINS Proposed Transfer
I am forwarding to you a letter from Cpl. DESJARDINS dated July 5, 1985, requesting that you reconsider your recent decision ordering him transferred to a contract division.
2. It is a fact that in January 1985, Cpl. DESJARDINS and I had come to an agreement that if he was prepared to serve in our Traffic Section, give us a good performance, and forget the past, I, in turn, would not request any interdivisional transfer for him and would treat him as any other member under my command.
3. Cpl. DESJARDINS has done this and I am pleased with his performance. I have discussed his recent evaluation with the NCO i/c Traffic Section and he feels that Cpl. DESJARDINS has gained a lot of credibility with members of his new section and that his conduct is beyond reproach. The NCO i/c Traffic Section also shared the comment made by Cpl. DESJARDINS' immediate supervisor, Sgt. BUTLER.
4. Since his return to the Division, Cpl. DESJARDINS has not caused any problems for me or for any other person in this Division. I hold no grudge toward Cpl. DESJARDINS and if he continued to work for me, he can be assured that he will be treated fairly.
5. My only regret is that Cpl. DESJARDINS did not have the same high opinion of me and other officers in February 1984 that he holds today. Evidently I was the same person in 1984; I was fair then, I had the same judgement and possessed a vast experience in the drug field. All this could have been avoided had Cpl. DESJARDINS seeked guidance from this Division instead of relying on other forces that had nothing to do with him from a supervision point of view or with the operation of 'A' Division.
6. I think that the allegations of February 1984 are serious and I was offended by them at the time but I also knew that none of my confrères or myself had done anything wrong. I realize today that they were written by a very desperate man who had been under a lot of stress after being suspended for almost two years. Under such conditions, I imagine that most men would try to get back at the organization as well as those he feels are responsible for his misfortunes. I suppose that this cannot justify any such conduct but, at least, it might explain some of the reasons. Having said that, I realize we are all responsible for the actions we take and accusing several senior officers of this Force of corruption, conspiracy to help the Lebanese traffickers in the importation of drugs, conspiracy to transfer all good policemen who could bring the Lebanese to court, etc. etc., are serious matters that you have to consider in such situations.
7. Your decision is not easy and I find myself in an awkward situation. On one side of the coin, I was one of the accused by Cpl. DESJARDINS and I am now his defendant before you because he is a member of 'A' Division and, as such, I have some responsibility toward him. I will not attempt to influence your decision one way or the other because I am part of this whole affair but it is my duty to let you know that I did have an agreement with Cpl. DESJARDINS, that I hold no grudge toward him, and that he has worked under my command during 1985 without any problem. If Cpl. DESJARDINS remains in the Division, my intention would be to use his services in the protective field after he has served well in Traffic.
8. I realize that my comments might complicate your task even more but I could not remain silent and abdicate my duty as Commanding Officer and as a man.
(Signed) J.R.Y. BOULANGER
for J.L.G. FAVREAU, C/Supt.
c.o. 'A' Division"
[7]
I now come to what was termed at the hearing as the "operative piece of evidence" in this application: the August 9, 1985, letter (Exhibit 6 of petitioner's affidavit) wherein the respondent-Commissioner confirms his earlier decision to transfer Corporal Desjardins. This, I also transcribe.
"August 9, 1985
"C.O. 'A' Division
RE: 26406, CPL. DESJARDINS, J.N.J.
Thank you for your memorandum dated July 15, 1985, with respect to the above named member.
Firstly, let me say how much I respect the attitude or understanding and forgiveness that you have displayed toward Cpl. DESJARDINS, particularly in view of the totally unfounded criticism of your personal conduct and integrity that he incorporated in his letter to me. This scurrilous comment reflected upon other Officers of the Force, including D/Commr. VENNER, who has a reputation of integrity and a record of accomplishment that few members will equal during their career. To think that Officers such as D/Commr. VENNER and yourself should be so maligned by a Junior N.C.O., who was in difficulty because of his own conduct, characterized by his inability to work within policies that are in place to guide our operations and a refusal to follow an established chain of command that is in place to ensure that our operations are conducted totally within the law, and within acceptable limits of ethical conduct, only to have that N.C.O. totally forgiven and not be called to account in any way amounts to a situation that is almost beyond belief.
However, due to a series of bizarre circumstances, that is what has taken place and, after his own misconduct, and his totally unfounded and scandalous comment about senior personnel, he remains a member of the Force. Such being the case, and, as far as I am aware, he not having made any acknowledgement of his own faults, nor on any way having apologized to those Officers whose reputations he so lightly brought into question, the question that now remains is how do we best employ him for the remainder of his career. Certainly those Officers that he wrote about should not be expected to have him as a member of their Command at any time. Furthermore, as he is to remain in the Force he should be totally removed from the area in which he committed his mischief in order that he be judged only on his future conduct, and that the past not influence those who have control of this career in any way. He has established to my satisfaction that he is not well suited for plain clothes investigative work and should be employed on uniformed duties. It is this combination of circumstances that caused me to direct that a transfer to a contract Division for uniformed duties be arranged for Cpl. DESJARDINS.
I must say that his present performance speaks well for his determination to prove himself and, if he continues to so conduct himself, he can overcome his past errors and have a rewarding career. His legal counsel, for whom I have a high degree of respect, recently told me that this young man had learned his lessons well and would now probably develop into a worthwhile team player. That is a good assessment and I hope it turns out to be accurate.
As you know, I would normally not be directly involved in staffing actions that effect Junior N.C.O.s, however, in this case I became involved as a result of Cpl. DESJARDINS corresponding directly with me. I had all his concerns and allegations carefully investigated and found them to be without foundation. His concerns, and readiness to believe the worst about his superior Officers, disclosed a man without trust for those he should have turned to for guidance, however, rather than that, he chose to act on his own and in the process ignored policy direction, caused concern to an agency of a foreign Government, and great concern within his own organization. He clearly demonstrated a need for close supervision and observation over a period of time. My direction with respect to a transfer was made to accomplish that objective and to give this member a 'fresh start' after a very negative period of service. Please proceed as directed. I wish Cpl. DESJARDINS well and I am providing him with an opportunity for such to occur.
(signed) R.H. SIMMONDS COMMISSIONER"
[8]
These three exhibits concisely set out and describe the surrounding circumstances of this application; it remains now for me to determine whether or not the decision of the respondent is ultra vires of his powers.
[9]
The gist of petitioner's argument suggests that the decision to transfer is abusive in that it came about as a reprisal for having submitted an unsubstantiated complaint directly to the respondent. The petitioner further argues that this decision blatantly disregards respondent's very own Standing Orders and particularly it is in defiance of Standing Order c. 3, chap. II.16 entitled "Staff Relations/Administration Manual", where it is stated that:
"C. 3 A member may bring problems or grievances concerning his well-being at work to the attention of his supervisor without fear of consequence or reprisal, and no member shall be penalized for exercising his right to present a grievance."
[10]
Counsel for the respondent contends that this court should refrain from "second guessing" the Commissioner's wisdom, in deciding purely administrative matters. He alleges that this transfer was warranted for sound management reasons, that it was not meant to be punitive but was in fact considered to be in the best interests of the petitioner.
[11]
It is clear that for the better administration and control of the R.C.M.P., the respondent possesses wide discretionary powers granted to him by the statute. My task is to determine whether or not the respondent's decision is abusive of his discretionary powers.
[12]
The notion of abuse of discretion is arguably the central and the most controversial part of judicial review of administrative action. It is generally admitted however that the repository of the administrative discretion must act, in such a manner as not to abuse of his discretionary powers; in other words, he must not transgress the exercise of that discretion for ulterior motives, or act in bad faith. What inferences are to be drawn from the evidence?
[13]
Before dealing exhaustively with the affidavit evidence, would like to make the following comments on certain issues that were raised at the hearing. First, the Commissioner suggests that the petitioner did not follow or adhere to the regulated procedure when filing a complaint, i.e. reporting his complaint to his immediate superior. Petitioner's counsel argues that he had no choice in reporting his suspicions directly to the Commissioner. This argument appears to be peripheral, but it cannot however be totally disregarded because of its practical implication; if strictly interpreted it would deter all police officers from initiating any complaint when their immediate superiors are involved and could lead to corruption and total lack of policing within the Force itself.
[14]
Second, both sides to this dispute argued at length on the concept of grievance and grievance procedures. As I see the facts, this notion has no bearing whatsoever in this application. Corporal Desjardins' report of suspicious activities was not a grievance; the internal investigation conducted by the Commissioner was in no way related to a grievance, but was in the nature of an inquiry to determine whether or not the complaint filed by the petitioner might in some way have disclosed improper conduct on the part of some officers including petitioner's own superiors. I see no provisions in the Regulations or Standing Orders wherein it can be found that Corporal Desjardins did something irregular. In fact, if there is anything that may be irregular, it would appear to be in the manner in which a decision to transfer was effected. This, in my opinion, is what I must decide: Can the Commissioner transfer an officer on the basis of the evidence and conform to the Regulations and his very own Standing Orders? I now turn to the affidavit evidence.
[15]
From a careful perusal of the affidavit evidence, I draw the following two inferences:
[16]
First, the evidence discloses that the respondent views the present situation as untenable since the petitioner is still serving under the very same Commanding Officer he accused, along with others, of inaction, corruption and conspiracy in February of 1984. The respondent is of the opinion that petitioner's Commanding Officer and the other officers so maligned by him should not be expected to have him as a member of their Command at any time. When this "reason" for the transfer is compared with the Commanding Officer's Memorandum (Exhibit 5 of petitioner's affidavit), one is left with the distinct impression that it is clearly unsubstantiated. Let me again quote the salient paragraphs of the Memorandum:
"2. It is a fact that in January 1985, Cpl. DESJARDINS and I had come to an agreement that if he was prepared to serve in our Traffic Section, give us a good performance, and forget the past, I, in turn, would not request any interdivisional transfer for him and would treat him as any other member under my command.
"3. Cpl. DESJARDINS has done this and I am pleased with his performance. I have discussed his recent evaluation with the NCO i/c Traffic Section and he feels that Cpl. DESJARDINS has gained a lot of credibility with members of his new section and that his conduct is beyond reproach. The NCO i/c Traffic Section also shared the comment made by Cpl. DESJARDINS' immediate supervisor, Sgt. BUTLER.
"4. Since his return to the Division, Cpl. DESJARDINS has not caused any problems for me or for any other person in this Division. I hold no grudge toward Cpl. DESJARDINS and if he continued to work for me, he can be assured that he will be treated fairly."
[17]
Secondly, the evidence also discloses that the respondent does not hold the petitioner in very high esteem as witnessed by the following passage of his letter to the petitioner. Indeed (see Exhibit 6 of petitioner's affidavit) the respondent wrote:
"... to think that Officers such as D/Commr. VENNER and yourself (petitioner's Commanding Officer) should be so maligned by a Junior N.C.O., who was in difficulty because of his own conduct,
characterized by his inability to work within policies
that are in place to guide our operations and a refusal to follow an established chain of command that is in place to ensure that our operations are conducted totally within in the law, and within acceptable limits of ethical conduct,
only to have that N.C.O. totally forgiven and not be called to account in any way amounts to a situation that is almost beyond belief.
"
(Emphasis added)
As I read this passage, it is clear to me that the Commissioner did not consider Corporal Desjardins' behaviour as one that should be swept under the rug. It should have attracted some form of discipline. May I also comment that there is no evidence of "difficulty because of his own conduct". As for the improper internal procedure alluded to, I have already disposed of it earlier in these reasons.
[18]
These inferences which I have taken from the text of the respondent's letters would not, by themselves, be sufficient for the court to find fault with the discretionary exercise of the Commissioner's powers. But these inferences and the decision to transfer the petitioner must be considered in light of the manner in which the Commissioner arrived at a decision and in light of the Regulations and Standing Orders which provide guidelines for the transfers of members within the Force. I shall now review those guidelines which, may I note in passing, are Regulations and Standing Orders drafter by the Commissioner and subsequently approved by the Governor in Council.
[19]
These Orders are contained in chap. II.10, entitled "Succession/Transfer Planning".
[20]
Standing Order c. 1 states the primary purpose of transfers and it reads:
"C. 1 The primary purpose of transfers is to enable the Force to meet its objectives."
This "purpose" is obviously set in broad language. What are the "objectives" of the Force? They are admittedly to maintain peace, good order and security and prevent crime. These objectives must however take into account the members' aspirations. This is expressly set out in Standing Order c. 2 which reads:
"C.2 While the needs of the Force are uppermost, the member's development, personal circumstances and aspirations shall also be considered."
I have considerable doubt as to whether the petitioner's development, personal circumstances and aspirations were ever taken into account by the Commissioner before he ordered the transfer. Standing Order c. 7 which reads:
"C. 7 A member shall be consulted/notified during the succession/transfer planning process."
seems to indicate that consultations only occur during the process of transfer. I think this applies when the member has indicated a prior willingness to be transferred; in such a case there is no need to consult in advance. It would not, in my view, apply to a situation, such as the present one, where the member had not earlier made known his willingness to be transferred. What is clear is that he had an opportunity to select his destination, but only after a decision had been reached by the respondent.
[21]
In any event, I now come to the key Standing Order which is c. 8. It reads:
"C. 8 A member may be permitted to remain at his present location provided:
a. his wish is known;
b. his performance remains satisfactory,
c. the position is not required for the placement/development of someone else, and
d. there is no operational requirement for the member's service elsewhere."
Undoubtedly by instituting the present judicial proceedings, the petitioner has clearly manifested his desire to remain at his present location. As for his performance, it has been termed as "satisfactory" by his Commanding Officer (see Exhibit 5 of petitioner's affidavit). Furthermore, a perusal of his "Performance Evaluation Profile" (filed at the hearing) reveals that his standards of performance range from "fully satisfactory" to "superior". He has therefore met the requirement of condition "b" of Standing Order s. 8. As for condition "c", there was no evidence to the effect that his present position was required for the placement or development of someone else. Finally, there was no operational requirement for the member's service elsewhere. This conclusion can be gleaned from the affidavit of one, Inspector Bergman, where he said in paragraph 16:
"... Corporal Desjardins is required at St. Paul Detachment to fill the vacancy
that was created to accommodate him.
"
(Emphasis added)
No such "operational" requirement existed at the time the transfer was ordered.
[22]
At the hearing, counsel for the respondent argued that the petitioner is now estopped from changing his mind since he had consented, albeit with reluctance, to the transfer after it was effected. In rebutting this contention, counsel for the petitioner submitted that as an 18-year veteran of the Force, married, and the father of two school age children, he had no choice but to accept the transfer. Past experience has shown that a refusal would probably have attracted disciplinary measures, even perhaps discharge [see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)]. I think this facet of the respondent's argument should be rejected.
[23]
To summarize, taking into account both the inferences from the Commissioner's letters, the Regulations and the Standing Orders, I come to the irresistible conclusion that the Commissioner abused of his discretionary powers. His total rejection of the petitioner's personal aspirations, the cursory treatment afforded to his "Performance Evaluation Profile", the obvious disregard of the superior officers' willingness to continue to associate with Corporal Desjardins and, finally, his blatant disregard for his own Standing Orders and Regulations governing transfers, leave me no choice but to find that there was in this case an abuse of the administrative process.
[24]
As I stated earlier, the administrative officer has wide discretionary powers, but the courts have through the years imposed some parameters to this unfettered discretion. The most oftenquoted decision in that respect is that of the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  where Rand, J., stated at p. 140 that:
"... there is no such thing as absolute and untrammelled 'discretion', that is that action can be taken on any ground or for any reason that can be suggested to the mind of the administrator; no legislative Act can, without express language, be taken to contemplate an unlimited arbitrary power exercisable for any purpose, however capricious or irrelevant, regardless of the nature or purpose of the statute."
And furthermore in the same paragraph at the same page, he went on to say that:
"'Discretion' necessarily implied good faith in discharging public duty; ..."
[25]
"Good faith" entails of course a genuine as opposed to a purported use of discretionary powers.
[26]
For the foregoing reasons, the application is allowed; certiorari is granted. The decision of the respondent is hereby quashed. Costs to the petitioner.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]