[1]
Pinard, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review of a decision by the Refugee Division dated May 10, 1995, declaring that the applicant had abandoned his claim.
[2]
It is important to reproduce the decision in question:
[Translation] "Claim to Convention refugee status by
Ahmed RESSAM (DOB: 09-05-67)
Your claim was referred to the Refugee Division on
May 27
, 19
95
[sic].
On
November 30
, 19
94
, you and your counsel were informed by the Refugee Division that
a hearing
would be held on
April 7
, 19
95
.
You did not attend the hearing.
On
April 7
, 19
95
, you and your counsel were informed by the Refugee Division that
a hearing
would be held on
May 10
, 19
95
so that you could state the reasons why the Refugee Division should not find that you have abandoned your claim.
You and your counsel attended the hearing, but you did not give any reasons why the Refugee Division should not find that you have abandoned your claim.
ACCORDINGLY, THE REFUGEE DIVISION FINDS THAT YOU HAVE ABANDONED YOUR CLAIM."
[3]
The issue here is the application of ss. 69.1(6) and 69.1(11) of the
Immigration Act
, which provide:
"Abandonment of claim
"(6) Where a person who claims to be a refugee
(a) fails to appear at the time and place set by the Refugee Division for the hearing into the claim,
. . . . .
the Refugee Division may, after giving the person a reasonable opportunity to be heard, declare the claim to have been abandoned and, where it does so, the Refugee Division shall send a written notice of its decision to the person and to the Minister.
"Written reasons
"(11) The Refugee Division may give written reasons for its decision on a claim, except that
(a) if the decision is against the person making the claim, the Division shall, with the written notice of the decision referred to in subsection (9), give written reasons with the decision; and
. . . . ."
[4]
In addition, s. 32(2) of the
Convention Refugee Determination Division Rules
reads as follows:
"(2) The notice to appear shall also inform the parties that where, at the end of a hearing concerning an abandonment, the Refugee Division does not declare the claim or application to have been abandoned, the Refugee Division will forthwith commence or resume the hearing into the claim."
[5]
First, counsel for the applicant pointed out that his client had attended at the hearing of the Board on May 10, 1995 and at that time stated that he was prepared to proceed, and argued that the Board erred when it said that the applicant had not provided reasons to explain his absence from the hearing scheduled for April 7, 1995, when in fact the record shows that the applicant explained that he had made a mistake about the date of that hearing.
[6]
I would first point out that when a claimant appears before the Board under s. 69.1(6) of the
Act
, he is appearing not for the hearing of his claim, but rather to make argument relating to the finding that he had abandoned his claim which he was subject to having made against him. On this point, I am entirely in agreement with the reasoning of my colleague Denault in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  stated:
"Counsel for the applicant considered that the Refugee Division had misunderstood the meaning and scope of s. 69.1(6) of the
Act
. He argued that according to the very essence of this provision the panel should ascertain whether the person concerned was prepared to proceed with his or her claim. He contended that so long as the person concerned is present and willing to proceed and the record is in order, it is simply not possible to conclude there has been abandonment.
"I do not share this view. ... When pursuant to s. 69.1(6)(b) of the
Act
the Refugee Division gives the person concerned an opportunity to be heard, it is the very purpose of that abandonment hearing to allow the person concerned to explain the reasons why he believes he did not abandon the claim. It is only when the Refugee Division has allowed the claimant to explain his reasons and concluded that they were valid that it may proceed to hear the claim."
[7]
In addition, unlike counsel for the applicant, I do not read in the Board's decision that the Board considered that the applicant had not given any reasons to try to justify his earlier absence. What the Board wrote is that the applicant had not given any reasons why the Refugee Division should not consider that he had abandoned his claim, which simply means that the applicant did not provide valid reasons to prevent the Board declaring the claim to be abandoned. This interpretation is confirmed, moreover, by the transcript of the hearing in which the presiding member stated, at page 8:
[translation] "We shall continue. This is our decision concerning the abandonment proceedings, that is, whether we declare that the claim has been abandoned or whether we terminate the proceedings.
"We have listened to you, the reasons why you missed your appointment on April 7, when, as you said, you did in fact attend on November 30, and you were given a notice of hearing for April 7, by hand.
"You had our notice to attend on April 7. As I told you earlier, claiming refugee status in a country is something extremely serious, extremely important, and that must be the most important thing to you when you are waiting for that meeting.
"That must be the most important thing. And so the excuse that I made a mistake about the date does not seem to me to be a sufficient factor. It is not a sufficient factor for us to terminate these abandonment proceedings."
[8]
Second, counsel for the applicant submitted that no reasons were given for the Board's decision and accordingly that it is in violation of the provisions of s. 69.1(11) of the
Act
.
[9]
Assuming that s. 69.1(11) applies to a decision other than a decision on the refugee claim, properly speaking, which the English version of the provision does not seem to suggest [see footnote 1], it appears to me that although the Board's decision is quite succinct, it states sufficient reasons.
[10]
The decision a quo explains that the applicant's claim was referred to the Refugee Division on May 27, 1995 [sic]; the decision then states that on November 30, 1994, the applicant and his counsel were advised that a hearing would be held on April 7, 1995 and that in fact the applicant did not attend; the decision then refers to the notice of hearing given to the applicant and his counsel so that they could state the reasons why the Refugee Division should not find that he had abandoned his claim; and lastly, before concluding, the decision sates that the applicant did not give any reasons why the Refugee Division should not find that he had not abandoned his claim. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, before finding the Board's written decision to be "quite short", nonetheless found that it met the requirements of s. 69.1(11) of the
Act
.
[11]
Accordingly, the application for judicial review must be dismissed.
[12]
In the circumstances, I find that there is no question here to be certified under s. 18(1) of the
Federal Court Immigration Rules, 1993
.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/slm
Footnotes
1.	Written reasons
"(11) The Refugee Division may give written reasons for its decision on a claim, except that
(a) if the decision is against the person making the claim, the Division shall,
with the written notice of the decision referred to in subsection (9), give written reasons
with the decision; and" (emphasis mine)
Subsection (9) reads as follows:
"Decision
(9) The Refugee Division shall determine whether or not the person referred to in subsection (1) is a Convention refugee and shall render its decision as soon as possible after completion of the hearing and send a written notice of the decision to the person and to the Minister."