[1]
Walsh, J.
: Applicant moves for:
(1) issuance of writs of certiorari and prohibition or orders in the nature thereof, against the Director of the Corporations Branch of the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, pursuant to s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
, quashing the decision of the Director to proceed with a proceeding pursuant to s. 12(2) of the
Canada Business Corporations Act
(
C.B.C.A.
) in respect of an allegation of confusion against the Brick Warehouse Corporation and prohibiting the Director from proceeding with the
C.B.C.A.
s. 12(2) proceeding until the issues in the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  alternative, an order pursuant to s. 50 of the
Federal Court Act
staying the
C.B.C.A.
s. 12(2) proceeding until the issues in the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the grounds of the motion it is argued that the
C.B.C.A.
s. 12(2) proceeding was commenced by, or at the instance of Brick's Fine Furniture Ltd. on July 19, 1991, the Brick's Fine Furniture Ltd. being also plaintiff by counterclaim in Federal Court Action T-83-88 commenced January 14, 1988, and the relief claimed in the present
C.B.C.A.
s. 12(2) proceeding is the same, or substantially the same, as that claimed in Federal Court Action T-83-88. It is submitted that the Director erred in law in deciding prior to instituting the
C.B.C.A.
proceeding that the Federal Court in Action T-83-88 has no jurisdiction to order relief in the nature of that sought in the
C.B.C.A.
s. 12(2) proceeding.
[3]
It is further argued that the Director's decision contained in a letter dated November 8, 1991, to confine the
C.B.C.A.
s. 12(2) proceeding to a determination of only the narrow issue of confusion between the parties' respective corporate names, and not the issue of ownership of such names, constitutes a refusal to take into account relevant considerations and a denial of natural justice and procedural fairness.
[4]
It is further alleged that as ownership and related issues including priority of use of the parties' respective trade names and the effect of trademark registration No. 296656 "The Brick Warehouse" owned by the Brick Warehouse Corporation, are also in issue in Federal Court Action T-83-88, and the Director has no jurisdiction to determine the validity of the registration, the Director's decision to proceed with the s. 12(2) proceeding without awaiting the outcome of the Federal Court Action constitutes an improper exercise of the Director's discretion.
[5]
It must be clearly stated that the court in the present proceedings must confine itself to the relief sought by the present motion and must not decide any issues which can only be dealt with in other proceedings already instituted in this court, or elsewhere, or in any other such proceedings which may be instituted in future between Brick's Fine Furniture Ltd., Brick's Limited and Brick Warehouse Corporation respecting confusing use of corporate names and/or trademarks. It will be necessary, however, to make some factual references to the history of the corporations, the trademark, and other litigation between them which is pending, including pertinent dates, in order to establish the background facts which the Director may wish to, or feel obliged to take into consideration in making his decision.
[6]
For purposes of brevity, Brick's Fine Furniture Ltd. will henceforth in these reasons be referred to simply as "Fine Furniture", Brick Warehouse Corporation simply as "Warehouse" and the Director of the Corporations Directorate of the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs simply as the "Director".
[7]
It will also be helpful to set forth herein the provisions of s. 12 of the
Act
:
"12(1) Prohibited Names - A corporation shall not be incorporated with, have, carry on business under or identify itself by a name
(a) that is, as prescribed, prohibited or deceptively misdescriptive; or
(b) that is reserved for another corporation or intended corporation under s. 11.
"(2) Directing Change Of Name - If, through inadvertence or otherwise, a corporation
(a) comes into existence or is continued with a name, or
(b) on an application to change its name, is granted a name
that contravenes this section, the Director may direct the corporation to change its name in accordance with s. 173.
"(3) Name Of Continued Corporation - Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2), a corporation that is continued under this Act is entitled to be continued with the name it had before such continuance unless that name is identical with or confusingly similar to the name of an existing body corporate.
"(4) Idem - If a corporation has a designating number as its name, the Director may direct the corporation to change its name to a name other than a designating number in accordance with s. 173.
"(5) Revoking Name - When a corporation has been directed under subsection (2) or (4) to change its name and has not within 60 days from the service of the directive to that effect changed its name to a name that complies with this Act, the Director may revoke the name of the corporation and assign to it a name and, until changed in accordance with s. 173, the name of the corporation is thereafter the name so assigned."
Factual Background
[8]
(1) In a certificate of continuance dated May 26, 1987, the Brick Warehouse Corporation listed as its previous owner Ted W. Fowler and Co. Ltd. This Warehouse name has since been changed to The Second Founder Holding Corporation.
[9]
(2) The company now known as the Brick Warehouse Corporation was incorporated federally on January 22, 1987, as 154129 Canada Ltd. Its name was changed on March 3, 1989, to The Brick Warehouse Corporation.
[10]
(3) By counterclaim in Federal Court Action T-83-88 filed on February 12, 1988, Brick's Fine Furniture Ltd. alleges passing off by virtue of the use of The Brick Warehouse Corporation of its name.
[11]
(4) As of March 3, 1989 - 154129 Canada Ltd. was the owner of Canadian trademark registration 269656 The Brick Warehouse, having acquired it by assignment dated February 28, 1989. The trademark had been registered as of May 28, 1982, by First Founder Holding Corporation. Accordingly, as of March 3, 1989, when The Brick Warehouse Corporation was granted its name, the trademark Brick Warehouse had been registered for more than five years.
[12]
(5) Brick's Fine Furniture Ltd. and its predecessor Brick's Limited have been carrying on business in Winnipeg as a retailer of high-class home furnishing products since August 1, 1969. Brick's Limited was incorporated as a Manitoba corporation on August 1, 1969, and operated the business until June 8, 1978, when Brick's Fine Furniture Ltd. was incorporated. In the Federal Court Action it is alleged that all assets and liabilities were assigned by Brick's Limited to Brick's Fine Furniture Ltd. - this is denied by Warehouse. Brick's Limited still owns the real estate on which the store is located. Ted Brick and his wife Cynthia have at all times managed and owned the businesses, whether operated under the name Brick's Limited, trade names Brick's Wholesale Furniture House (the original name before incorporation), Brick's Fine Furniture and Brick's Furniture and under the trademark and trade name Brick's.
[13]
(6) Warehouse began carrying on business as a retailer of home furnishing products in Edmonton, Alberta, under the name of Comrie's and in about July 1977 adopted the trademark/trade names The Brick and The Brick Warehouse doing business in Edmonton under these names. Fine Furniture contends Comrie was aware of the Brick's business in Manitoba.
[14]
(7) On about April 14, 1988, Warehouse opened a retail home furnishing products store in Winnipeg under the name The Brick and The Brick Limited at a retail plaza called The Brick Plaza and its extensive advertising emphasizes the word "Brick".
[15]
(8) On or about September 1, 1978, Fine furniture registered Brick's Warehouse as a business name under the provisions of the
Business Names Registration Act
of Manitoba (allegedly in anticipation of Warehouse's proposed opening business in Manitoba) and has since renewed the registration but has never used same save for installing a sign on September 3, 1987, which was removed on February 3, 1988, and the business registration was cancelled on April 7, 1988, allegedly before the Federal Court proceedings were served on it.
[16]
(9) On April 15, 1988, Justice Joyal issued an order in Federal Court Action T-83-88, on interlocutory injunctions brought by Warehouse to restrain Brick's Fine Furniture Limited, Brick's Fine Furniture or Brick's Warehouse from selling furniture under these names, and by Fine Furniture et al. to restrain Warehouse from selling furniture under any trade or corporate name including the word Brick, The Brick, The Brick Warehouse or the Brick Warehouse Corporation, dismissing both applications but requiring each to post signs at each customer entrance not less than one foot by two disclaiming any association between the contendants, to advertise this in Winnipeg newspapers and on television broadcasting on Winnipeg television.
[17]
(10) After filing its defence and counterclaim in Action T-83-88, Fine Furniture commenced an action against Warehouse in the Manitoba Court of Queen's Bench on February 23, 1988. Warehouse brought a Motion to stay the proceedings pending resolution of the Federal Court Action, which stay was granted March 14, 1988, and approved by the Manitoba Court of Appeal March 31, 1988, reported at 25 C.P.R.(3d) 89.
Intervention Of Province Of Manitoba
[18]
In the light of the foregoing it is not surprising that the Director, Corporations Branch, Department of Cooperative Consumer and Corporate Affairs, Province of Manitoba sought at the opening of the hearing to intervene as he has an interest in the outcome of these proceedings, although not a party therein, in that in matters involving two provincially-incorporated corporations doing business in Manitoba with confusingly similar names, the Director routinely exercises his statutory authority to direct that one corporation change its name. However, as the Province of Manitoba does not have jurisdiction to regulate the use of the corporate names of a Federally-incorporated company, he thus relies on the Federal authority to take timely measures to prevent such companies from using names confusingly similar to existing corporate names in Manitoba.
[19]
Sections 191(1) and 191(2) of the Manitoba statute [
Corporations Act
, R.S.M. 1987, c. C-225] roughly correspond with ss. 12(1) and 12(2) of the
Canada Business Corporations Act
. On April 5, 1990, the Province of Manitoba brought a reference to the Manitoba Court of Appeal asking inter alia whether s. 191 of the
Manitoba Corporations Act
is applicable to a body corporate incorporated under the laws of Canada. The Manitoba Court of Appeal decided by majority judgment on April 18, 1991 that s. 191 does not so apply. [See
Reference re the Corporations Act and the Business Names Registration Act (Man.)
(1991), 73 Man.R.(2d) 81; 3 W.A.C. 81.]
[20]
On June 4, 1991, the Manitoba Director wrote the Canadian Director expressing his concern that Warehouse's corporate name contravened s. 12(3) of the
Canada Business Corporations Act
in that its name was confusingly similar to that of both Brick's Limited and Brick's Fine Furniture Ltd. and asking that the Director direct Warehouse to change its name pursuant to s. 12(2) of the Canadian statute.
[21]
In argument, the Manitoba Director contended that if Warehouse is successful in the present motion to prohibit or stay the Federal Director's enquiry, two unrelated corporations, each company in the business of retail furniture sales in Winnipeg, Manitoba, having names which appear to Manitoba consumers to be confusingly similar, will be allowed to continue indefinitely, with the province having no jurisdiction to rectify the problem.
[22]
It is evident that the Manitoba Director has a legitimate interest in the outcome of the present proceedings. While it might have been better had the proceedings been brought in the first instance in the Manitoba courts, immediately when Warehouse commenced doing business in Winnipeg, that door has now been closed and extensive delays have ensued.
[23]
The intervention was not opposed by respondent herein, nor by Brick's Limited or Brick's Fine Furniture Ltd., nor by the Bricks, who were present but not represented. It was opposed, however, by applicant, The Brick Warehouse Corporation. In support of this opposition two cases were cited. In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice Teitelbaum in refusing to allow an intervention by Swiss Basin Development Authority, held that it is not sufficient to merely see if Swiss has an interest in the outcome or its rights could be seriously affected but also whether it would bring to the case a different point of view from that of the existing respondents, and that it is not enough to justify an intervention if the intervenor will merely make submissions to support those being made by the respondents.
[24]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice McNair in refusing to allow an intervention by the Atlantic Salmon Federation (Canada) and the New Brunswick Outfitters Association Inc., referred inter alia to the delays which might be caused were the intervention allowed. There is no such issue here. At page 153 he also states "there is really no justiciable issue at this stage of the action or between the plaintiff and the parties seeking to be added as intervenors and it is primarily on that ground that I dismiss the application".
[25]
Applicant relies on Federal Court Rule 5 (the Gap rule) and rules 13.01(1) and 13.01(2) of the Manitoba
Rules
, which read as follows:
"Motion For Leave
"13.01(1) Where a person who is not a party to a proceeding claims,
(a) an interest in the subject matter of the proceeding;
(b) that the person may be adversely affected by a judgment in the proceeding; or
(c) that there exists between the person and one or more of the parties to the proceeding a question of law or fact in common with a question in issue in the proceeding;
the person may move for leave to intervene as an added party.
"Order
"13.01(2) On the motion, the court shall consider whether the intervention will unduly delay or prejudice the determination of the parties to the proceeding and the court may add the person as a party to the proceeding and may make such order for pleadings and discovery as is just."
[26]
He refers to the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in which Justice Rouleau refused to allow the intervention of the Institute of Canadian Advertising but allowed the intervention of the Canadian Cancer Society in an action involving the constitutional validity of the
Tobacco Products Control Act
, the
Charter
being invoked. He refers to similar rules of the Ontario
Rules of Procedure
.
[27]
Reference was also made to the case of
Edmonton Friends of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a judgment of Madame Justice Reed, which allowed the adding as respondents of Daishawa Canada Co. Ltd., and the Queen in Right of the Province of Alberta in an action involving the continuation of a pulp mill by Daishawa Canada Ltd. on the banks of the Peace River, which plaintiffs alleged was being proceeded with without proper environmental studies. The interventions were allowed but only on strict terms that they would not delay the timetable for hearing of the issues, involving, inter alia, constitutional questions.
[28]
Correspondence between the Manitoba Director, the Federal Director, and between them and counsel for Fine Furniture and for Warehouse was produced and counsel for the Manitoba Director argued that there is nothing further he can do directly with respect to either of the contending corporations, but certainly has an interest in the outcome of the present application against the Federal Director and of the possible constitutional effects of a decision if the hearing is allowed to proceed, and is not satisfied that the Federal Director is in a position to fully protect the interests of Manitoba in such a decision. His intervention, although belated, will not delay the hearing, no written pleadings or evidence being involved.
[29]
Under the circumstances the intervention is allowed and the style of cause will be amended to add the Director of the Corporations Branch of the Department of Cooperative, Consumer and Corporate Affairs of the Province of Manitoba to be added as an intervenor.
Arguments And Conclusions On
Merits Of Motion
[30]
I now turn to consideration of the motion itself. Some of the arguments raised by applicants, Warehouse, in its motion can be dealt with readily. Warehouse submits that the relief claimed in the
C.B.C.A.
s. 12 proceeding is the same as that claimed in Federal Court Action T-83-88. While the end result might be the same with respect to use of the name in the event that a decision is rendered forcing Warehouse to desist from using the name Brick, the Federal Court proceedings also deal with trademark use, damages and other items which cannot be dealt with by the Director in the s. 12 proceedings.
[31]
It was also submitted that the Director erred in law in deciding (although on advice of Justice counsel) that the Federal Court in Action T-83-88 has no jurisdiction to order relief in the nature of that sought in the
C.B.C.A.
s. 12 proceedings. This is a finely balanced argument. The court cannot order Warehouse to change its name but could issue an injunction against the continuing use of it, at least in Winnipeg where the confusion exists, which for all practical purposes leads to the same end result, at least for Manitoba.
[32]
Applicant further argues that a statement contained in a letter dated November 8, 1991, by the Director that the
C.B.C.A.
s. 12(2) proceedings will be confined only to the narrow issue of confusion between the respective parties' corporate names constitutes a refusal to take into account relevant considerations and is a denial of natural justice and procedural fairness. This is based on a misapprehension of what was actually said in the letter and also without considering what is taken into consideration in determining "confusion" under the section.
[33]
The statement in the letter in question read:
"The Director does not preoccupy herself with the ownership to a name inasmuch as whether the coexistence of two names creates confusion. Consequently you may want to ensure that the reply contains all relevant information pertaining to the confusion issue."
[34]
"Confusion" for purposes of the
C.B.C.A.
proceedings goes much beyond what is normally understood by the word "confusion".
[35]
It is defined in ss. 13 and 20 of the
Regulations
as follows:
"13. A corporate name is confusing with
(a) a trademark if the use of both the corporate name and the trademark is likely to lead to the inference that the business carried on or intended to be carried on under the corporate name and the business connected with the trademark are one business, whether or not the nature of the business of each is generally the same; or
(b) a trade name if the use of both names is likely to lead to the inference that the business carried on or intended to be carried on under the corporate name and the business carried on under the trade name are one business, whether or not the nature of the business of each is generally the same.
"20. For the purpose of s. 12(1)(a) of the Act, a corporate name is prohibited where the name is confusing having regard to all the circumstances, including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the whole or any elements of any trademark or trade name and the extent to which it has become known;
(b) the length of time the trademark or trade name has been in use;
(c) the nature of the goods or services associated with a trademark or the nature of the business carried on under or associated with a trade name, including the likelihood of any competition among businesses using such a trademark or trade name;
(d) the nature of the trade with which a trademark or trade name is associated, including the nature of the products or services and the means by which they are offered or distributed;
(e) the degree of resemblance between the proposed corporate name and any trademark or trade name in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them; and
(f) the territorial area in Canada in which the proposed corporate name or an existing trade name is likely to be used."
[36]
Trademarks and trade names are constantly referred to in the
Regulations
, so can definitely be argued before the Director, even though he cannot determine the ownership of same.
[37]
Considerable argument was devoted to who caused the s. 12 proceedings to be initiated. Counsel for Fine Furniture wrote the Director on August 11, 1989, complaining about the Brick Warehouse Corporation name and after some exchanges of correspondence, the Director wrote on September 14, 1989, in reference to the pleadings in the Federal Court Action, copies of which had now been provided, stating:
"Since, at page 12 of the Amended Defence and Counterclaim, Brick's Fine Furniture Limited requests 'an order directing that the plaintiff change its corporate name to one that does not include the word "Brick"', I am of the view that the issue of whether the Brick Warehouse Corporation should be required to change its corporate name is already before the courts. Consequently, any decision I might make pursuant to s. 12(2) of the
Canada Business Corporations Act
will be deferred pending the outcome of the Federal Court Action."
[38]
This might have terminated the matter. However, it was revived, presumably when Fine Furniture communicated with the Manitoba Director, who wrote the Federal Director on June 4, 1991, submitting that Warehouse should be required to change its corporate name because of its being in contravention of s. 12(3) of the Federal
Act
and that s. 12(2) be invoked to enforce the change.
[39]
On July 19, 1991, the Director replied, referring to previous correspondence with Fine Furniture, and stated that he was inviting them to make further representations. That reopened the inquiry which Warehouse now seeks to stop. On August 8, 1991, Fine Furniture replied again requesting the s. 12(2) procedures.
[40]
It does not appear to be of any great significance who initiated the inquiry. The Director has an obligation to prevent the granting or continued use of confusing names and could decide to initiate an enquiry of his own accord, and most probably should do so when the confusion is called to his attention.
[41]
It must never be forgotten that the objections to confusion whether in corporate names, trade names or trademarks are primarily for the protection of the interests of the public who might be led astray as to whom they were dealing with or whose products they were buying by such confusion, and not solely for the protection of the commercial interests of the contending parties for the use of such corporate names, trademarks or trade names. In the present case it is not disputed that it is the use of the name Brick which clearly causes confusion which the addition of words such as Fine Furniture, Furniture, or Warehouse does not eliminate, when both corporations are dealing in furniture, albeit perhaps of a different quality, at the retail level.
[42]
While considerable argument took place and jurisprudence was referred to as to the duty to act fairly it is unnecessary to go into this, as it is conceded that this applies to the decision of the Director to initiate the inquiry. Applicant's argument that he has not done so is based on these contentions:
(1) That he changed his mind after first stating that no such inquiry should take place until resolution of the Federal Court proceedings, and then, when the Manitoba Director came into the picture, requesting an inquiry, changed his mind, and agreed to hold one. It is the second decision which is before the court on the present motion. I do not conclude that a change of mind (it may be noted by a different Director) constitutes a lack of fairness or results in any prejudice to applicant; although of course it would prefer that no such inquiry should take place. It might perhaps even be argued that the Director is obliged to hold an inquiry by virtue of the statute and
Regulations
under which he operates, when the involved facts in this case are called to his attention, and that it was the initial decision not to hold one on the basis that whatever his decision on the inquiry might be it would not definitely settle all the issues in dispute between the contending corporations, which should be settled elsewhere, which was wrong.
(2) The Director's statement in the letter already referred to that his decision would only be based on the issue of confusion which taken by itself is of course correct, but when interpreted in the light of what may be considered in determining "confusion" under the statute does not foreclose Warehouse from full presentation of its arguments. This statement does not indicate a lack of fairness.
(3) The fact that at the inquiry before the Director, there will be no witnesses, affidavits subjected to cross-examination, or oral argument. There is nothing in this to indicate a lack of fairness on the part of the Director in deciding to hold such an inquiry. This arises from the statute itself, and similar provisions are found in many administrative and other statutes. This does not breach the audi alteram partem rule, which has been extended by jurisprudence to encompass the duty to act fairly, nor is the procedure in breach of natural justice. By letter from the Director on September 18, 1991, Warehouse was advised of the letter from the solicitors from Brick's Fine Furniture and Brick's Limited requesting the change of Brick Warehouse Corporation's corporate name, and requested to provide information in reply. A full reply was made by the solicitors for Warehouse in two letters dated November 5 and 8, 1991, affidavits of William B. Comrie and Michael Crozier, sworn November 13, 1991, and lengthy written argument, dated November 15, 1991.
[43]
Certainly, the Director will have before him all the facts necessary to reach a decision and Warehouse has in no way been prevented from making all its arguments known. The mere fact that the outcome of such an inquiry would have very serious consequences for Warehouse, if unfavourable, does not support an argument that such an inquiry should not take place and that to even hold it is unfair or contrary to natural justice.
[44]
It should also be noted that the statute provides for an appeal from an adverse decision of the Director in s. 246. The appeal is to a "court" and by definition this is to a court of a province and not the Federal Court. Whether the appeal is made, if in Ontario to the Trial Division of the Supreme Court there, in Manitoba to the Court of Queen's Bench there, or to the court of some other province, this would bring the further complication of another court into the picture. However, it is not the inconvenience to one or the other of the contending corporations with respect to the continued use of their confusing corporate names which we are dealing with here in deciding whether certiorari or prohibition should issue here to prevent the inquiry from proceeding.
[45]
That leads us to another issue - whether the decision which is merely a preliminary one to hold an inquiry, and not a decision resulting from an inquiry, is subject to certiorari or prohibition. It does not determine the final rights of the parties with respect to the issue before the Director. The court has always been reluctant to encourage appeals from preliminary decisions during the course of proceedings which do not determine the final outcome.
[46]
I have already indicated that I find no lack of fairness or natural justice on the part of the Director in deciding to hold this inquiry. Neither do I find that he lacks the jurisdiction to do so because of the other proceedings pending elsewhere and the fact that his decision will not settle all the issues raised in them.
[47]
In dealing with certiorari the statement of Pratte, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), at page 544 F.C. referred to in the judgment of Justice Rouleau in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 7 F.T.R. 149, at p. 130 F.C., expresses the principle very clearly and succinctly:
"Violation of natural justice (in the case of judicial or quasi-judicial decisions) and lack of procedural fairness (in the case of administrative decisions) are merely grounds on which certiorari may issue; but it may also issue on other grounds, irrespective of the judicial or administrative character of the decision under attack, namely, lack of jurisdiction and error of law on the face of the record. Once it is accepted, as it must be since the decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Nicholson
(supra) and
Martineau
(supra), that purely administrative decisions are no longer immune from certiorari, it follows, in my view, that those decisions may be quashed by certiorari not only, in appropriate cases, for lack of procedural fairness but also for lack of jurisdiction and error of law on the face of the record."
[48]
Certiorari could issue, therefore, but it is not necessary to determine whether or not it would issue at this preliminary stage of proceedings since I have concluded that there has been no excess of jurisdiction on the part of the Director in deciding to initiate the inquiry.
[49]
Applicant argues that Fine Furniture is attempting to do indirectly by seeking in these proceedings what it should do directly by the pending proceedings in the Federal Court, and in support of this cites the Ontario case of
Re CC Chemicals Ltd.
, 63 D.L.R.(2d) 203 (O.C.A.), dealing with a similar section of the Ontario
Corporations Act
, in which Kelly, J.A., stated at p. 210:
"It was never intended that s. 12 should provide an alternative method of determining the rights of two parties where one of them, by the manner in which he is conducting his business, is seeking to draw custom away from his competitor. Adequate remedies have always been available to deal with such a situation - any attempt to broaden the scope of the administrative procedures under s. 12 to encompass what is 'passing off' are unwarranted and should be resisted."
[50]
That statement is more or less obiter in any event, since the court found that there was actually no confusion in the name which the Director had ordered changed.
[51]
In the present case, applicant argues that Fine Furniture should have pressed ahead with the Federal Court case to obtain a decision in it instead of initiating (or urging the Manitoba Director to initiate) the present proceedings. This argument is a double-edged one, since it was Warehouse which initiated the Federal Court proceedings, Fine Furniture being merely plaintiffs by cross-demand, but Warehouse has given no indication of wishing to proceed with them either, being apparently satisfied with the status quo, where it continues to compete in Winnipeg with Fine Furniture under the confusing names.
[52]
Certainly in the initial stages of Warehouse's competition in Winnipeg with it, Fine Furniture was not very diligent in taking steps to try to put a stop to it. Ted Brick was aware as early as 1978 of the use of the name The Brick and Brick's Warehouse in Edmonton and on solicitor's advice registered the name "The Brick Warehouse" under the
Business Names Registration Act
of Manitoba, renewing this in 1983 and 1986. Although he was aware of Warehouse's intention to open business using the name Brick in Winnipeg, he took no further steps and it was Warehouse which initiated the Federal Court proceedings on January 14, 1988, in Edmonton, Fine Furniture filing a counterclaim on February 12, 1988. It commenced an action in Manitoba on February 14, 1988, which was stayed.
[53]
Warehouse commenced business in Winnipeg in April 1988, but it was not until August 1989 that Fine Furniture attempted to have the Director initiate a s. 12 inquiry and when he refused to do so, because of the pending Federal Court Action, did nothing further until September 1991 when it made representations to the Manitoba Director.
[54]
Meanwhile in the Federal Court Action on April 15, 1988, Justice Joyal had refused to issue injunctions to either party, and in a Solomon-like judgment ordered each to put signs at the entrance to their businesses in Winnipeg indicating that they were not associated and to publish advertisements to the same effect. This has considerably lessened the confusion and is still in effect. While it was suggested that Warehouse may not be fully complying with it, its sign not being prominently displayed at the entrance, not being the required size, and the lettering being somewhat defaced, the injunction remains in effect and must be fully complied with, to retain the status quo.
[55]
If I have gone into these dates again in some detail, it is because of Warehouse's argument that Fine Furniture has not been diligent in protecting its alleged rights, and in ascribing improper motives to it in bringing the present proceedings.
[56]
It is neither motives, delays, or alternative steps which might have been taken, however, which must be considered in connection with the present motion for certiorari and prohibition. Certainly, Warehouse, which has expanded rapidly throughout Canada, would now suffer greater damage if forced to change its name than it would have if it had been stopped from using the name Brick in the first place as soon as it commenced doing so, the confusing use being "nipped in the bud" as one might say. However, this was not done and I do not consider it as grounds for issuing certiorari or prohibition to prevent the Director from continuing his inquiry.
[57]
Counsel for the Manitoba Director after having been allowed to intervene made some comments on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , which could be distinguished on their facts from the present case. These all dealt with motions in the Federal Court to stay proceedings in that court pending the outcome of proceedings elsewhere which could affect the Federal Court decision.
[58]
In the present motion the court is being asked as an alternative to stay proceedings before the Director pending the outcome of proceedings in this court. Surely that is a matter within the discretion of the Director who has by the decision now being attacked refused such a stay.
[59]
It was decided in the
Yri-York
case that this court has jurisdiction whether under s. 18 or s. 50 in appropriate circumstances to order a stay instead of imposing a permanent injunction or prohibition. Whether it was appropriate to apply the tripartite test of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1975] 1 All E.R. 504, was discussed at some length and affirmed.
[60]
The
Yri-York
case quotes extensively from the judgment of the late Justice Beetz in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241, in which he made a distinction between suspension cases and exemption cases (the present motion being in the latter category), the conclusion being that no injunction or stay should issue to prevent a law enforcement agency from performing its duties to the public unless the public interest is taken into consideration and given the weight it should carry.
[61]
If the tripartite test were to be applied, there is no doubt that a serious question is in dispute.
[62]
If irreparable harm were to be considered, there is of course no dispute that this is overwhelmingly in favour of Warehouse which carries on a very extensive business, much advertised throughout Canada, and has spent enormous sums of money in developing same, using the name Brick; whereas Fine Furniture only operates in Winnipeg, although some of its advertising may spill over provincial borders and some customers come from outside Manitoba, and it operates a specialty furniture business, so stands merely to lose some of its sales or perhaps reputation by Warehouse's competition.
[63]
On balance of convenience, however, and bearing in mind that it is the public interest which is of paramount importance, it appears that the present status quo should continue subject to strict enforcement of the conditions imposed by Justice Joyal in refusing the injunctions.
[64]
The stay must therefore also be refused.
[65]
The devastating consequences to Fine Furniture, if as a result of the Federal Court proceedings initiated by Warehouse it was deprived of the use of the word Brick in connection with its longstanding business of which Ted Brick and his wife are owners, using his own name as part of his corporate name, is not in issue in the present proceedings.
[66]
The application for certiorari and prohibition is therefore dismissed and a stay of the inquiry is refused, with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David C.R. Olmstead/sms
[End of document]