[1]
Pinard, J.
: This is an application, pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, for the purpose of obtaining an order setting aside the decision dated May 4, 1993, of an adjudicator appointed by the Public Service Staff Relations Board (the "Board"). The decision was made with respect to grievances referred to adjudication by the respondents alleging their right to be compensated for overtime worked.
Facts
[2]
The following facts are not in dispute. At the relevant time, the three respondents were employees of the Department of National Defence and were subject to a Collective Agreement between the Treasury Board and the Federal Government Dockyard Trades and Labour Council East, Ship Repair. The respondents worked the following hours in 1992:
From
Until
Total Hours
James Henneberry
8 p.m., Sunday,
June 21
11 a.m., Monday, June 22
15
Wade Harnish
8 p.m., Sunday,
June 21
11 a.m., Monday, June 22
15
William P. Elliott
8 p.m., Sunday,
June 7
11 a.m., Monday, June 8
15
The employees were paid at the following rates:
Hours
Rate of Pay
8 p.m. to midnight	double time
midnight to 2 a.m.	time and a half
2 a.m. to 7:45 a.m.	double time
7:45 a.m. to 11 a.m.	straight time
[3]
The respondents presented grievances alleging that they were not correctly compensated for overtime worked over several days in June 1992. The grievances were referred to adjudication pursuant to s. 92 [see footnote 1] of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
(the "
Act
") and heard by the adjudicator appointed by the Board on February 5, 1993. At issue before the adjudicator was the grievors' entitlement under the relevant Collective Agreement to be compensated at the double-time rate for the hours worked between midnight and 2 a.m. and between 7:45 a.m. and 11 a.m.
The Board's Decision
[4]
The adjudicator granted the grievances in part. She ruled that the employer was correct to pay the respondents time and a half for work performed between midnight and 2 a.m. because Article 15.09(a) of the Collective Agreement provides that "the first two hours of overtime worked" on a regular workday be paid at time and a half. As for the time worked between 7:45 a.m. and 11 a.m., the adjudicator ruled that the respondents were entitled under Article 15.09(b) to the double-time rate of compensation. Subject to clause 15.13, overtime shall be compensated at the following rates:
(a) time and one-half (1½) for the first two (2) hours of overtime worked on a regular workday;
(b) double (2) time for all hours worked in excess of ten (10) hours in a continuous period of work or in excess of ten (10) hours in a day to a maximum of sixteen (16) hours in a continuous period of work; and for all hours worked on a day of rest to a maximum of sixteen (16) hours.
The Positions Of The Parties
[5]
The applicant submits that the adjudicator ignored the definition of "overtime" [see footnote 2] in the Collective Agreement. He contends that Article 15.09(b) of the Collective Agreement applies only to compensation of overtime hours. Because the hours which the employees worked between 7:45 a.m. and 11 a.m. fell within their regularly scheduled hours, he argues that the rate of compensation should be straight time. Consequently, he submits that the adjudicator committed an error of law by concluding that the Collective Agreement provided for overtime compensation during regularly scheduled hours.
[6]
The respondents, for their part, argue that the presence of the privative clauses [see footnote 3] in the
Act
protects the decision of an adjudicator from judicial review, as long as the decision is within his or her jurisdiction. They submit, therefore, that a strict approach to judicial review should be taken.
Analysis
[7]
Section 101, the privative clause was repealed on June 1, 1993. However, since the facts of this case and the decision of the Board occurred while the privative clause was still in force, it will apply.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).
[8]
At the hearing before me, counsel for the applicant agreed that the standard of review to be applied, in the circumstances, is that of patent unreasonableness as explained by the Supreme Court of Canada, namely in the following cases:
a)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 170-171:
"As a general principle, a reviewing court, under s. 28 of the
Federal Court Act
or otherwise, must exercise its powers with caution and sensitivity in the context of grievance adjudication. As this court stated in
Heustis
, supra, [[1979] 2 S.C.R. 768], at p. 781:
'There is a very good policy reason for judicial restraint in fettering adjudicators in the exercise of remedial powers. The whole purpose in establishing a system of grievance adjudication under the
Act
is to secure prompt, final, and binding settlement of disputes arising out of interpretation or application of the collective agreement, or disciplinary action taken by the employer, all to the end that industrial peace may be maintained.'
"A restrained approach to disturbing the decisions of specialized administrative tribunals, particularly in the context of labour relations, is essential if the courts are to respect the intentions and policies of Parliament and the provincial legislatures in establishing such tribunals: see
Service Employees' International Union, Local Re 333 v. Nipawin District Staff Nurses Association et al.
, [1975] 1 S.C.R. 382, and
Canadian Union of Public Employees Local 963 v. New Brunswick Liquor Commission
, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 227; 26 N.R. 341; 25 N.B.R.(2d) 237; 51 A.P.R. 237; 97 D.L.R.(3d) 417; 79 C.L.L.C. 14,209."
b)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 437; 89 C.L.L.C. 14,050; [1989] 6 W.W.R. 673; 40 Admin. L.R. 181, at p. 453:
"Where, as here, an administrative tribunal is protected by a privative clause, this court has indicated that it will only review the decision of the board if that board has either made an error in interpreting the provisions conferring jurisdiction on it, or has exceeded its jurisdiction by making a patently unreasonable error of law in the performance of its function: see
C.U.P.E., Local 963 v. N.B. Liquor Corp.
(1979), 97 D.L.R.(3d) 417; [1979] 2 S.C.R. 227; 25 N.B.R.(2d) 237. The tribunal has the right to make errors, even serious ones, provided it does not act in a manner 'so patently unreasonable that its construction cannot be rationally supported by the relevant legislation and demands intervention by the court upon review' (p. 425). The test for review is a 'severe test': see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 84 C.L.L.C. 14,070. This restricted scope of review requires the courts to adopt a posture of deference to the decisions of the tribunal. Curial deference is more than just a fiction courts resort to when they are in agreement with the decisions of the tribunal. Mere disagreement with the result arrived at by the tribunal does not make that result 'patently unreasonable'. The courts must be careful to focus their inquiry on the existence of a rational basis for the decision of the tribunal, and not on their agreement with it. The emphasis should be not so much on what result the tribunal has arrived at, but on how the tribunal arrived at that result. Privative clauses, such as those contained in ss. 31-34 of the
Code
, are permissible exercises of legislative authority, and to the extent that they restrict the scope of curial review within their constitutional jurisdiction, the court should respect that limitation and defer to the board."
and at page 479:
"... Any adjudication upon the reasonableness of a decision must involve an evaluation of the merits. Reasonableness is not a quality that exists in isolation. When a court says that a decision under review is 'reasonable' or 'patently unreasonable' it is making a statement about the logical relationship between the grounds of the decision and premises thought by the court to be true. Without the reference point of an opinion (if not a conclusion) on the merits, such a relative statement cannot be made.
"I share La Forest, J.'s, opinion of the importance of curial deference in the review of specialist tribunals' decisions. But, in my view, curial deference does not enter the picture until the court finds itself in disagreement with the tribunal. Only then it is necessary to consider whether the error (so found) is within or outside the boundaries of reasonableness. The test is, as La Forest, J., points out, citing
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 84 C.L.L.C. 14,070, a 'severe test'. But even here an appreciation of the merits is not irrelevant. Lamer, J., speaking for himself and McIntyre, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , stated at pp. 303-304:
'... though all errors do not lead to unreasonable findings, every unreasonable finding results from an error (whether of law, fact, or a combination of the two), which is unreasonable.'
So long as the court is satisfied with the correctness of the tribunals' decision, any reference to reasonableness is superfluous."
and
c)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 963-964:
"It is said that it is difficult to know what 'patently unreasonable' means. What is patently unreasonable to one judge may be eminently reasonable to another. Yet any test can only be defined by words, the building blocks of all reasons. Obviously, the patently unreasonable test sets a high standard of review. In the
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
'patently', an adverb, is defined as 'openly, evidently, clearly'. 'Unreasonable' is defined as '[n]ot having the faculty of reason; irrational. ... Not acting in accordance with reason or good sense'. Thus, based on the dictionary definition of the words 'patently unreasonable', it is apparent that if the decision the Board reached, acting within its jurisdiction, is not clearly irrational, that is to say evidently not in accordance with reason, then it cannot be said that there was a loss of jurisdiction. This is clearly a very strict test."
[9]
The most recent case from the Supreme Court of Canada on the standard of review for a decision of an administrative tribunal is
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 75 W.A.C. 1. In determining the appropriate standard of judicial review, the court, has developed a spectrum ranging from the standard of reasonableness to that of correctness in conjunction with judicial deference:
"... At the reasonableness end of the spectrum, where deference is at its highest, are those cases where a tribunal protected by a true privative clause, is deciding a matter within its jurisdiction and where there is no statutory right of appeal. ...
"At the correctness end of the spectrum, where deference in terms of legal questions is at its lowest, are those cases where the issues concern the interpretation of a provision limiting the tribunal's jurisdiction (jurisdictional error) or where there is a statutory right of appeal which allows the reviewing court to substitute its opinion for that of the tribunal and where the tribunal has no greater expertise than the court on the issue in question, as for example in the area of human rights." (pp. 354-355 (N.R.))
[10]
In the present case, the
Act
contains a privative clause, the adjudicator is determining a matter within her jurisdiction since it involves an issue of the interpretation of a Collective Agreement, and there is no statutory right of appeal. Furthermore, it is a case in the labour relations context, where the courts have typically showed considerable deference. More specifically, in
United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local 579 v. Bradco Construction Ltd.
, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 316; 153 N.R. 81; 106 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 140; 334 A.P.R. 140, the Supreme Court considered the standard of review to be applied to decisions of an adjudicator interpreting a Collective Agreement, and in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 6 (F.C.T.D.), "[b]oth of these decisions indicate that significant deference should be accorded to decisions of the PSSRB, and, in particular, to Adjudicators interpreting a Collective Agreement."
[11]
In that context, even though I agree with the applicant that the adjudicator erred in ignoring the definition of "overtime" contained in clause 2.01(o) of the Collective Agreement, I am of the opinion that her decision cannot be said to be patently unreasonable.
[12]
The adjudicator arrived at her conclusion after serious consideration of the relevant facts. On pages 7 through 11 of her decision, she outlined in detail the arguments of counsel for the applicant and the respondents. She resolved the question of the proper payment for the respondents by examining the overtime pay provisions found in Article 15.09 of the Collective Agreement and determined that they were entitled to double pay for the hours worked between 7:45 a.m. and 11 a.m. notwithstanding that these were regularly scheduled hours. Her reasoning was based on the wording of Article 15.09(b) in that the respondents worked more than ten hours in a continuous period of work. It is implicit in the decision of the adjudicator that she rejected the submissions of the applicant and accepted those of the respondents. She obviously focused on the use of the words "continuous period of work" to determine that the respondents were entitled to the rate of pay set by Article 15.09(b) for those hours between 6 a.m. and 11 a.m. She concluded that even if the continuous ten-hour period of work "overlapped" otherwise regularly scheduled work, the respondents were entitled to the beneficial provisions of Article 15.09.
[13]
In view of the foregoing, even though I consider the adjudicator wrongly applied Article 15.09, when she ignored the definition of "overtime" in Article 2.01(o), I find that the decision she reached, acting within her jurisdiction, was not clearly irrational (that is to say, evidently not in accordance with reason) and therefore it cannot be said that there was loss of jurisdiction (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  will be dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/blk
Footnotes
1.	The relevant part of s. 92 reads as follows:
"92(1) Where an employee has presented a grievance, up to and including the final level in the grievance process, with respect to
(a) the interpretation or application in respect of the employee of a provision of a collective agreement or an arbitral award, or
and the grievance has not been dealt with to the satisfaction of the employee, the employee may, subject to subs. (2), refer the grievance to adjudication."
2.	Article 2.01(o) defines "overtime", for the purposes of this Agreement, as "time worked by an employee outside of the employee's regularly scheduled hours;"
3.	Section 101 of the Act reads as follows:
"101(1) Except as provided in this Act, every order, award, direction, decision, declaration or ruling of the Board, an arbitrator appointed under s. 63, or an adjudicator is final and shall not be questioned or reviewed in any court.
"101(2) No order shall be made or process entered, or proceedings taken in any court, whether by way of injunction, certiorari, prohibition, quo warranto or otherwise, to question, review, prohibit or restrain the Board, an arbitrator appointed under s. 63 or an adjudicator in any of the proceedings of the Board, arbitrator, or adjudicator."
[End of document]