 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Parent, Assessment Officer
August 30, 2011.
Counsel:
Martin G. Masse, for the applicant;
Alex Kaufman, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
McMillan, LLP, Ottawa, Ontario, for the applicant;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Parent, Assessment Officer
: On February 18, 2011, the Court dismissed the application for judicial review with costs. Further to the filing of the respondent's Bill of Costs, directions were issued and sent to the parties informing them that the assessment of the Bill of Costs would proceed in writing and setting the timeframe to file representations.
[2]
The respondent's submissions on costs provide a detailed account of the proceedings before the Court. Referring to Rule 409 of the
Federal Courts Rules
where it states that the assessment officer may consider the factors referred to in subsection 400(3), counsel for the respondent argues that three factors should be taken into consideration to increase entitlement to costs i.e. 400(3)(c) complexity of the issues, 400(3)(e) offers to settle and 400(3)(i) conduct of a party that tended to unnecessary lengthen the duration of the proceeding.
[3]
For Rule 400(3)(e), the respondent contends that Rule 420(2)(b) should find application considering that the application was dismissed with costs and that the applicant obtained a judgment less favourable than the terms of the offer to settle made in writing on December 21, 2009 by which the applicant could have discontinued its application while in exchange the respondent would have foregone its entitlement to costs. Said letter of offer did not contain an expiration date, was never revoked and never accepted. In view of that, it is the respondent's position that the doubling of costs should be allowed from the date of the offer to settle to the date of the judgment.
[4]
On the argument advanced by the respondent regarding Rule 400(3), the applicant contends that the issue of the scale of costs is res judicata and that "there is no basis for any enhanced costs payable to the respondent pursuant to Rule 400" as no request was made by the applicant to depart from Tariff B and the general default parameters of Column III. Particularly, the applicant argues that the respondent cannot obtain the doubling of counsel fees in a costs assessment relying on the discretionary factors of Rule 400(3)(e). The applicant relies on the decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Fed.C.A.)  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in which the Court established that "the scale of costs is res judicata and cannot be modified by an assessment officer or even the Court of Appeal or an appeal of costs." The applicant argues that the respondent, having failed to raise the offer to settle before the Application's judge and to seek a variance of the costs pursuant to Rule 403, cannot now utilize the assessment process to double the scale of costs. Counsel further argued the considerations that would have had to be argued before the Application judge with regards to the legitimacy of the respondent's letter of offer and if the judgment of the Court met or exceeded said offer.
[5]
In rebuttal, the respondent contends that it did not seek to vary the order on costs: all costs claimed in the Bill of Costs having been calculated under Column III. As per counsel, the assessment officer has jurisdiction to determine the number of units for each Item under Column III considering the wording of Rule 409 that provides for the assessment officer to consider the factors in subsection 400(3). It is further argued that the doubling of costs is the result of a mandatory direction in Rule 420 "unless otherwise ordered by the Court". Considering that the Court made no such order, the doubling effect of Rule 420 should ensue.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (A.O.) [Peerless], Assessment Officer Stinson concluded that an assessment officer "cannot negate or vary the application of Rule 420". As per the respondent, the offer was never withdrawn and the offer made was more favourable than the results obtained by the applicant on the Application: the applicant having obtained no relief and was ordered to pay costs.
[6]
Rule 420 reads:
420. (1) Unless otherwise ordered by the Court and subject to subsection (3), where a plaintiff makes a written offer to settle and obtains a judgment as favourable or more favourable than the terms of the offer to settle, the plaintiff is entitled to party-and-party costs to the date of service of the offer and costs calculated at double that rate, but not double disbursements, after that date.
Consequences of failure to accept defendant's offer
(2) Unless otherwise ordered by the Court and subject to subsection
(3), where a defendant makes a written offer to settle,
(a) if the plaintiff obtains a judgment less favourable than the terms of the offer to settle, the plaintiff is entitled to party-and-party costs to the date of service of the offer and the defendant shall be entitled to costs calculated at double that rate, but not double disbursements, from that date to the date of judgment; or
(b) if the plaintiff fails to obtain judgment, the defendant is entitled to party-and-party costs to the date of the service of the offer and to costs calculated at double that rate, but not double disbursements, from that date to the date of judgment.
Conditions
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply unless the offer to settle
(a) is made at least 14 days before the commencement of the hearing or trial; and
(b) is not withdrawn and does not expire before the commencement of the hearing or trial.
[7]
As mentioned by the applicant, the Federal Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at paragraph 15 clearly stated that without a modifier varying the general default parameters of Column III, party-and-party costs shall be assessed in accordance with column III of the table to Tariff B (Rule 407 of
Federal Courts Rules
).
15 By virtue of Rule 407, an award of costs, without stipulation as to scale or quantum, is to be assessed in accordance with Column III. Awards such as costs in the cause,' while leaving the matter of the recipient of costs to be determined by the ultimate result of the case, do not defer to a trial judge the decision as to their scale. Once a motion judge issues an order for costs or costs in the cause without a modifier varying the general default parameters of Column III, the issue of scale is res judicata, subject to a motion brought pursuant to Rule 403 to vary the scale (see Consorzio del Prosciutto di  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  2002 FCA 417 at paragraphs 8 and 9 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  2004 FC 892 (T.D.) at paragraph 8; Aird Country Park Village Properties (Mainland) Ltd., [2005] F.C.J. No. 1426, 2005 FC 1170 at paragraph 10).
[8]
As contended by the respondent and as stated by Assessment Officer Stinson in
Peerless
, assessment officer cannot negate or vary the application of Rule 420(2):
18
I am not the "Court" as that term is used in Rule 420(2): see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (A.O.) and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (A.O.). Therefore, I cannot exercise the otherwise jurisdiction of the Court in Rule 420(2) to negate or vary its application.
[9]
Reaching a decision with respect to the offer made by the respondent was difficult due to the fact that the arguments provided by the parties lacked concrete linkages to the test to determine whether or not the offer was valid. However, although the applicant did not present specific arguments on the validity of the letter of offer in its representations, the test that the Application judge would have needed to use to consider the validity of said letter of offer was touched upon in the res judicata arguments.
[10]
While the test is not specifically referred to by the parties, it is found in the decision of the Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) at paragraph 39:
39 In order to trigger the double costs rule, an offer must be clear and unequivocal in that the opposite party need only decide whether to accept or reject the offer ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2001] F.C.J. No. 727 (QL), at para. 10). The offer must also contain an element of compromise (or incentive to accept) ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL), at para. 10). The offer must also be presented in a timely fashion such that the benefit would still be derived from the opposite party if accepted ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL), at paras. 30 and 31). Finally, if accepted, the offer must bring the dispute between the parties to and end (TRW, supra, at p. 456).
[11]
I am satisfied that the respondent's letter of offer was clear and unequivocal, that it was made in a timely fashion and, if accepted, would have brought the dispute to an end. However, considering the manner in which the letter of offer was drafted and the Court's decision of December 10, 2009, I am not convinced that said offer contained an element of compromise or incentive to accept. In the decision of Madam Prothonotary Tabib of December 10, 2009, she dismisses the respondent's motion for an order to strike the Application, specifically mentioning: "As compelling as the Respondent's argument may be, I need only be satisfied that the Applicant's case has a scintilla of a chance of success in order to be compelled to dismiss this motion. That scintilla is present here." Considering the offer made eleven days after that decision of the Court, I fail to see the element of compromise by the respondent when it offers to forego its entitlement to costs shall the applicant discontinue its application. However, I am mindful of the decision rendered by the Court on a very similar matter on January 22, 2010 in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) (upheld by the Court of Appeal on October 12, 2010)  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and which the Court relied upon in his final decision here. From my reading of the file, I think that the applicant should have been aware of the binding implications of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision and its implications relative to the outstanding letter of offer. In consideration of the latter and the fact that the letter of offer had never been formally revoked or rejected by the date the Court of Appeal decision was delivered in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> matter on October 12, 2010, I am of the opinion that said offer was at that date a good compromise and will allow the doubling of costs for the respondent's counsel fees from October 12, 2010 to the date of the judgment.
[12]
It is the respondent's position that in assessing the Bill of Costs, the assessment officer should further consider the complexity of the issues (Rule 400(3)(c)) and the conduct of the applicant that unnecessary lengthened the proceeding (Rule 400(3)(i)). On the complexity of the issue, the respondent, referring to the decision of the Court of December 10, 2009 whereas the respondent's motion to strike the application was dismissed with costs to the applicant at the high end of Column III of Tariff B, contends that the main application, although decided on the basis of the same arguments as the motion to strike, involved much more complex issues. The respondent further argues that the Record was voluminous and contained novel arguments. Considering the complexity of the legal and procedural issues involved, the respondent claims costs at the high end of Column III.
[13]
Under Rule 400(3)(i) of the
Federal Courts Rules
, it is the respondent's position that the applicant's conduct had "unnecessarily lengthened the proceeding through positions that were completely unmeritorious and by continuing the application once it became evident that the application had become moot ..." It is the respondent's position that the applicant continued the proceeding notwithstanding a decision of the Federal Court of Appeal that established that its argument had no chance of success putting the respondent in a position to respond to a 17 volume application record. The respondent contends that it had to go through unnecessary expenses to respond to an application likely to fail, more specifically through its request under Rule 317 for materials "that were completely unrelated to the decision under review", cross-examining the respondent's witness for over three hours unnecessarily and delaying the application for months.
[14]
In response, the applicant contends that the respondent has "failed entirely to show why costs should be assessed at the high end of Column III". It is argued that this was a fairly standard judicial review application and the respondent has failed to demonstrate how this matter was more complex than other judicial review applications before the Federal Court. With regards to Rule 400(3)(i), the applicant argues that the respondent did not point to any specific steps or actions that "extended the proceeding beyond the steps normally taken in a judicial review application and specified under the Rules". It is further alleged that it is the respondent, in bringing three interlocutory motions, unduly lengthened the proceeding.
[15]
In rebuttal, the respondent argued that this was not a "standard" matter as contended by the applicant, i.e. the motion to strike said application "was complex enough to warrant costs at the higher end of Column III". As put by the respondent, the application was won on the same complex issues presented to the Court on the motion to strike.
[16]
I do consider the complexity of this matter to be significant as I also understand that the arguments on the hearing of the Application were quite similar to the arguments made on the respondent's motion to dismiss same Application. However, I do not consider having sufficient evidence before me to conclude that one party more that the other caused this matter to have been significantly lengthened. As in
Peerless
, where Assessment Officer Stinson stated at paragraph 14:
I concluded in paragraph 7 of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (A.O.) that the same point in the ranges throughout the Tariff need not be used as each fee item for the services of counsel is discrete and must be considered in its own circumstances. As well, broad distinctions may be required between an upper versus lower allowance from available ranges.
I will assess each service claimed in the Bill of Costs taking into consideration the above and the specific circumstances of each fee Item.
[17]
All assessable services were claimed under Column III of Tariff B of the
Federal Courts Rules
. The services claimed for the preparation and filing of the Notice of Appearance (Item 27) and for the preparation of the case management conferences (Item 10) of May 11, 2009 and September 10, 2009 are not contested and will be allowed as claimed. The applicant did not take issue of the services claimed for preparation for case management (Item 10) and attendance (Item 11) on May 11, 2009, September 10, 2009 and May 10, 2010. Said services will be allowed but not at double costs because they fall outside the timeframe provided by Rule 420(2) of the
Federal Courts Rules
.
[18]
Under Item 4 of Tariff B, the respondent claims costs for the preparation and filing of numerous motions. Further to the applicant's arguments that no costs award was made for any of these motions, the respondent in his submissions in reply agrees that "where contested motions result in an Order that is silent as to costs, there is no power to award costs as part of an assessment." The respondent further adds:
"...but uncontested Orders don't ever result in an award of costs. The Tariff nonetheless provides for the "preparation and filing of an uncontested motion, including all materials", albeit at a reduced scale. There are many reported cases where assessment officers award costs to the successful party under Item 4, for uncontested motions."
Unfortunately, the respondent did not provide any jurisprudence to that effect and I do not know of any. As put by the respondent, it is recognized that "litigants are sometime forced to bring uncontested motions as part of a proceeding." Nevertheless, it is not for the assessment officer while assessing the Bill of Costs to award costs. As mentioned by parties, the jurisprudence is consistent that for costs to be allowed on any motions, they must have been awarded by the Court. Considering the principle that there is no award of costs on motions where the orders disposing of the motions are silent as to costs, I will, therefore, disallow the claims for the services and disbursements in relation to the preparation and filing of the motions of April 17, 2009 and June 24, 2009 plus the claims for the preparation and filing of the Rule 317 motion (Item 5) as well as for the appearance in Court on said motion (Item 6). I note that in the course of his submissions, the respondent withdrew his claim for the preparation and filing of the special management motion (June 9, 2009).
[19]
The respondent claims in his Bill of Costs for services under Item 8 (Preparation for cross-examination of Robert Wright) and Item 9 (Attendance on examination) with no further justification. In response, the Applicant contends that this claim should be disallowed since it is in relation with the Rule 317 Motion for which no costs were allowed by the Court and therefore costs attached to the document filed further to that motion, should also be disallowed.
[20]
On the topic of the Rule 317 Motion, the decision of the Court dated June 30, 2009 makes no mention of costs. However, the application of Items 8 and 9 of Tariff B does not require any leave from the Court and I am satisfied that said cross-examination took place. I am also of the view that although it was the cross-examination of the respondent's client, it did necessitate preparation and an active role on behalf of counsel to help clarify questions, to decide to refuse to answer questions etc. However, I am not satisfied that the maximum number of units claimed is warranted. I allow four units for Item 8 and two units per hour for Item 9.
[21]
The respondent claims the maximum number of units under Item 13 (counsel fee for preparation of hearing) and 14 (Counsel fee at hearing). In response, the applicant contends that the amount claimed should be reduced as a "portion of these fees are attributable to the preparation and argument of the two motions to strike, not the argument of the application itself". Upon my review of the Court file, I note that the hearing that took place on November 15 and 16, 2010 lasted nine hours in total. As submitted by the applicant, the judicial review along with the respondent's motion for striking the application and the applicant's motion to strike certain paragraphs of the respondent's memorandum of fact and law were heard together. I further note that the Court in the decision of February 18, 2011 makes no mention of costs for the last two motions. The respondent made no further submissions following the applicant's proposal in their submissions to reduce the amount claimed to four units for Item 13 and 18 units for Item 14. In light of the file, I consider the applicant's proposal satisfactory and I allow a total of 8 units for Item 13 and 36 units for Item 14, which includes the doubling of costs.
[22]
Seven units are claimed by the respondent under Item 27 (such other services as may be allowed by the assessment officer or ordered by the Court) for the work performed in the preparation of the Rule 317 Record. It is the respondent's position that the applicant unnecessarily requested over 1 million pages of documents. While that issue was later resolved in the respondent's favour and limited the record to 8,514 pages, it is argued that a significant amount of work was involved as the respondent had started preparing in the event its objection was unsuccessful. In addition, the respondent relies on the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (A.O.) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] at paragraph 11 in which two units were allowed under similar circumstances. In response, the applicant relies on the fact that no award of costs was made by the Court in relation to the motion or the subsequent preparation of the Rule 317 record. On the case cited by the respondent, it is argued that it does not apply to the circumstances as that case arose in the context of a discontinuance, where there was no court order on costs. The applicant further argues that if these costs were recoverable, they could not be recovered by the respondent since the "tribunal" whose decision is under review is the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA). Accordingly, under Rule 318 of the
Federal Courts Rules
, it is the CBSA who is responsible for transmitting the Record. Pursuant to Rule 304(1)(b), the CBSA is to be treated as distinct from the Attorney General of Canada. In rebuttal, the respondent contends that the costs for the preparation of the Rule 317 Record did not arise from the Court Order of June 30, 2009 but arose independently of this Order as per the provision of Rule 317. Regarding the applicant's argument that the Attorney General of Canada is not entitled to these costs but the CBSA, it is argued that:
"this application was taken against a decision of the Canada Border Services Agency's division of the executive branch of the government. While proceedings may be taken in the name of the Attorney General of Canada, it does not take away from the fact that the respondent is the government. The Attorney General of Canada is not a separate party."
On the jurisprudence cited, it is argued that "costs entitlement should not turn on who the applicant chooses to name as respondent".
[23]
The pertinent rules of the
Federal Courts Rules
read:
317. (1) A party may request material relevant to an application that is in the possession of a tribunal whose order is the subject of the application and not in the possession of the party by serving on the tribunal and filing a written request, identifying the material requested.
(2) An applicant may include a request under subsection (1) in its notice of application.
(3) If an applicant does not include a request under subsection (1) in its notice of application, the applicant shall serve the request on the other parties.
318. (1) Within 20 days after service of a request under rule 317, the tribunal shall transmit
(a) a certified copy of the requested material to the Registry and to the party making the request; or
(b) where the material cannot be reproduced, the original material to the Registry.
(2) Where a tribunal or party objects to a request under rule 317, the tribunal or the party shall inform all parties and the Administrator, in writing, of the reasons for the objection.
(3) The Court may give directions to the parties and to a tribunal as to the procedure for making submissions with respect to an objection under subsection (2).
(4) The Court may, after hearing submissions with respect to an objection under subsection (2), order that a certified copy, or the original, of all or part of the material requested be forwarded to the Registry.
319. Unless the Court directs otherwise, after an application has been heard, the Administrator shall return to a tribunal any original material received from it under rule 318.
[24]
Rule 317 is intended to secure production of material that was before the tribunal upon making its decision. Under that same rule, a party may request the tribunal to transmit the material in its possession that is relevant to the judicial review application. It is for the tribunal an obligation to produce its record unless a party or the tribunal objects to the request. That is what the respondent did upon filing its motion pursuant to Rule 317 for which no costs were allowed. Nevertheless, I am of the opinion upon reading the pertinent Rules that the tribunal should not be confused with the Attorney General of Canada and it was the CBSA, the decision maker, who had the obligation to produce the material, not the respondent. With regards to the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision cited by the respondent to support his position, the facts were different than what is raised here. The costs assessment there took place further to the filing of a notice of discontinuance and "
comparable materials"
to Rule 317 were prepared by the party in the interest of time. The respondent's claim under Item 27 is disallowed.
[25]
The respondent claims the maximum number of units under Item 26 (assessment of costs). The applicant contends that no costs should be allowed under this Item considering that it would not have been necessary had the respondent complied with the established principals relating to assessment of costs, as per the applicant's objection. In consideration for the documents and representations submitted in the context of this costs assessment, I acknowledge that a certain amount of work was performed in the preparation of the documentation in support of the Bill of Costs in order to provide background information to the assessment officer and as such four units are allowed.
[26]
The services after judgment are allowed at one unit considering that the doubling of costs as per Rule 420 ends at the date of the judgment.
[27]
I have examined the disbursements demanded along with the supporting material. In line with my decision, all disbursements claimed for photocopies of motions for which costs were not awarded are disallowed as well as the photocopies claimed for the tribunal or administrative record. The respondent further claimed for the internal photocopying of some applicant's material. As submitted by the applicant, this claim relates to the internal administration of the respondent and should be disallowed. I agree. In light of the above, I have reduced the amount for photocopy expenses to $785.25.
[28]
The applicant contends that the disbursement claimed for courier services include the service of motions for which costs were not awarded. I have reviewed the invoices and in line with my decision regarding the costs on these motions, I disallow the amount claimed. The applicant did not take issue with the other disbursements claimed and they will be allowed as demanded.
[29]
The Bill of Costs is allowed for a total amount of $10,537.33
[End of document]