[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: These reasons arise out of the defendant's application for security for costs, heard June 10, 1996. The plaintiff, presently unrepresented by Canadian counsel, did not participate, although properly served and given ample opportunity. (The plaintiff's solicitors had themselves removed from the record on April 29, 1996, remaining as an address for service until the plaintiff instructed new solicitors: the present motion was served on May 27, 1996.)
[2]
The plaintiff, on his own material, falls clearly within rule 446, the rule providing for security for costs, as ordinarily resident out of the jurisdiction. (The plaintiff's affidavit, filed July 13, 1994, sets out an address at Newport News, Virginia, U.S.A.) While rule 446 sets out several different tests that a party seeking security for costs must satisfy, they are alternates: the party seeking security for costs need establish that the other party meets any one of the criteria (see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 299). Having regard to all of the circumstances, it is appropriate that the defendant's costs of the action be secured.
[3]
The action has been set for trial on November 18, 1996. The defendant has completed discoveries, except as to discovery of and by the third party, Panama Canal Commission. I am advised there also remains a pretrial conference set for mid-July and the usual preparation for trial.
[4]
Counsel for the defendant provided a skeleton Bill of Costs, showing costs and disbursements incurred and which also projects costs and disbursements through to completion of trial, a total of $71,379. The units claimed, under Column III of Tariff "B", and disbursements are for the most part reasonable. Were I taxing the Bill of Costs, at the conclusion of the action, assuming the action proceeded as forecast by the defendant and taking into account the nature of the proceedings to date, I might well allow the Bill of Costs to the extent of $65,000, more or less. In effect, if the defendant was successful and the proceedings unfolded as the defendant projects, costs might well be taxed at about 90 percent of the draft bill.
[5]
I set out an analysis for security for costs in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 186 (T.D. Protho.), at pp. 189-190. Applying the analysis in the present instance the question is whether Arctic Transportation Ltd., in the event of a successful defence, will be able to collect costs from an American resident, for it must have at least a tangible opportunity of recovering costs. There is nothing in any of the material filed to date which indicates that the plaintiff has any roots or assets in Canada.
[6]
In the
Tough Traveler
reasons, I referred to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 123 A.P.R. 351; 35 C.P.C. 327 (T.D.), at pp. 329-330, a decision of the Nova Scotia Supreme Court, which deals with the appropriate amount of security for costs:
"The amount should be the amount that the defendant would incur as probable costs in successfully defending the action. I think the court should fix a reasonable amount considering all the circumstances and it should be sufficient to pay the defendant's taxed costs if successful in defence because that is what the defendant could collect ..."
[7]
In
Tough Traveler
, I also pointed out that security for costs is an indemnity, referring to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a decision of the Court of Appeal, in which Lord Justice Cumming-Bruce, who wrote a judgment concurred in by the other members of the court, noted at p. 568:
"... There will, of course, be a discount as the judge made, having regard to his expectation that the fees which were particularised before him, would be reduced by the taxing master - that is a quite different matter - but when that discount has been made, if the judge is satisfied that the solicitors have honestly attempted to make, and have made, an actual estimated calculation of their costs and disbursements, then, when the judge has arrived at what he thinks is the actual figure, he should order that figure to be the figure incorporated into his order for security."
There should be an "allowance ... for the unquenchable fire of human optimism and the likelihood that the figure of taxed costs put forward would not emerge unscathed after taxation". (Lord Justice Griffiths, in short concurring reasons in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, supra, at p. 571).
[8]
The Court of Appeal, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , indicated the trial judge was fully entitled to award costs on an indemnity basis, in that instance 60 percent of the skeleton Bill of Costs, some six million pounds.
[9]
In the
Tough Traveler
case (supra), at p. 190 C.P.R., I went on to say "... that every case, this included, will not necessarily be fought through to a finish and therefore security for costs might be somewhat less; that security for costs ought not to be illusory, but at the same time ought not to be oppressive so as to hamper the plaintiff in bringing a legitimate lawsuit; and that if the security proves inadequate, the defendant can always apply for security at a later date".
[10]
In the present instance, there is yet another consideration. By inspection of the Bill of Costs, the defendant has already incurred, in claimed taxable costs and disbursements, about $40,000, with some $30,000 as projected taxable costs and disbursements. As I observed above, a similar generally conservative bill of costs, at the conclusion of a trial, might well be taxed in the order of $65,000, that is at about 90 percent of the amount claimed. Thus the defendant would, at this point in the action, have allowable paid taxable costs and disbursements of say $36,000 and projected allowable taxable costs and disbursements of about $27,000.
[11]
Bearing in mind the various factors set out above, including the possibility of settlement before trial and that the defendant may, as set out in my order, apply for a further instalment of costs, security for costs at this point is set at $50,000, payable within 45 days. Until security for costs, either satisfactory to the court, or as may be agreed by counsel, is provided, the plaintiff's proceedings are stayed, but without prejudice to any pretrial conferences or settlement conferences, undertakings given by the plaintiff and any proceedings which either the defendant or the third party may wish to take. The costs of this motion shall be in the cause.
Application allowed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/saf
[End of document]