[1]
Dubé, J.
: This motion by the defendants is for an order dismissing the action for want of prosecution.
[2]
The action arises out of the alleged negligent treatment received by  the plaintiff from the defendant Dr. M. Medora on September 19, 1978. The plaintiff alleges that the defendant Dr. Lyle Brennan (Deputy Regional Director, Medical and Health Care Services for the Ontario Region of the Canadian Corrections Service), referred the plaintiff, at the time an inmate at Millhaven Institution, to Dr. Medora, who performed surgery upon him, causing personal injuries. He claims general damages in the amount of $15,000.00. The action was launched on June 22, 1979.
[3]
No steps have been taken in the prosecution of the action since March 13, 1980 and all requests for action by the defendants have remained unheeded.
[4]
In his affidavit filed in reply to this motion, Mr. Allan Manson declares he is still the solicitor of record for the plaintiff. Since 1981, he has been a full-time law teacher at Queen's University. His client, the plaintiff, was transferred from the Ontario Region to a Saskatchewan Penitentiary in early 1979 and has been imprisoned in various penitentiaries in Western Canada since that time. Mr. Manson has neither seen his client nor spoken to him since his transfer to the west, although he received correspondence from him in 1980 and 1981. He admits that "entirely through my own responsibility, I lost track of Mr. Nichols' file at that time and it remained in a file box of old files until I was contacted by Mr. David Sgayias, of the Department of Justice, in 1987".
[5]
By order of this court dated September 28, 1979, and affirmed by the Court of Appeal on March 13, 1980, proceedings in this action were stayed pending the filing of a statement of claim amended so as to reflect the lack of jurisdiction of this court as against the two defendants Dr. Brennan and Dr. Medora. No steps were taken by the plaintiff in this regard.
[6]
Since that time, Mr. Manson had corresponded with the Department of Justice and had written to his client. On May 15, 1990, he received a letter from Mr. Don Mark indicating that the latter had received instructions from the plaintiff to take over his file from Mr. Manson. No notice of change of solicitor has yet been filed at the registry.
[7]
The issue to be resolved is whether, under the circumstances, it is still possible to have a fair trial after such a long delay. The classic test to be applied in these matters is threefold: first, whether there has been an inordinate delay; secondly, is the delay inexcusable; and thirdly, whether the defendants are likely to be seriously prejudiced by the delay (See Salmon, L.J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 268).
[8]
In the case at bar, the ten year delay is clearly inordinate. As to the delay being inexcusable, counsel himself admits that he lost track of the file "through his own responsibility". Thus, it only remains to be determined whether or not the Crown is likely to be seriously prejudiced by the delay.
[9]
In the judgment above-quoted, Salmon, L.J., said (at pp. 268 and 269) that "as a rule, the longer the delay, the greater the likelihood of serious prejudice at the trial". Obviously, the passage of time weakens the recollection of events on the part of witnesses: more particularly so in matters of alleged negligence where the evidence of witnesses is of critical significance. In the present case, it is fair to assume that the two physicians involved would have been the key witnesses (apart from the plaintiff himself), and Dr. Lyle Brennan died in 1988.
[10]
Although each case must be adjudged on its own merits, the jurisprudence in the matter may be of some assistance. In the aforementioned McAlpine case, three actions were dismissed for want of prosecution six and seven years after the issuance of the writs. In each case the fault had not been with the parties concerned but with their legal advisers.
[11]
Closer to home, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  followed the McAlpine decision and dismissed an action after a delay of six years because the cargo officer and the office manager of the defendants were no longer in their employ and they had no idea as to their whereabouts.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C.), the High Court of Justice of Ontario confirmed the dismissal of an action for want of prosecution following an unexplained delay of four years after discovery, and a cumulative delay of 13 years after the event giving rise to the action. The court held that a presumption of prejudice arose once the limitation period had expired (six years in Ontario, as in the instant case). There was no evidence to rebut that presumption.
[12]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  defendant was badly prejudiced because of a 10 to 12 year delay, as employees and officers of the defendant Board had left its service and were dispersed into retirement. The learned judge said as follows (at page 190):
"... But justice implies some balance or some equalizing. The plaintiff did itself an essential injustice, by its solicitor, in letting essential time run against itself and against the defendant. The equitable rule which comes to mind is that 'Equity aids the vigilant'. Here the plaintiff slept on whatever rights it had for almost all of the past five years."
[13]
Consequently, I find that this is a clear case of inordinate and inexcusable delay which is likely to prejudice the defendants seriously. The action, therefore, is dismissed with costs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]