[1]
Joyal, J.
: The plaintiff, the owner of five design registrations under the Industrial Design Act, applies for an interlocutory injunction, pending the resolution of his infringement action against the defendant, restraining the latter from importing and selling a certain line of plastic tableware called "Spotlights" manufactured by Novelty Crystal Corporation in the United States and distributed in Canada by the defendant.
[2]
In his concurrent statement of claim, the plaintiff alleges that the various items of Spotlights tableware infringe the following registered designs:
(1) Registration No. 59208 "Tumbler" dated August 25, 1987;
(2) Registration No. 59534 "Bowl" dated October 20, 1987;
(3) Registration No. 59561 "Pitchers and Lid" dated October 27, 1987;
(4) Registration No. 59651 "Combined Ice Bucket & Cover" dated November 10, 1987;
(5) Registration No. 59672 "Serving Tray" dated November 17, 1987.
[3]
The plaintiff, through his company Zivco Inc., manufactures in the United States and sells in Canada the abovenoted items of tableware through an exclusive distributor called Innovations whose head office is in North Vancouver, B.C. The plaintiff alleges that the continuing sale of the Spotlights line of tableware would cause him irreparable harm, the kind of harm that could not be compensable in damages should his infringement action ultimately succeed.
[4]
Plaintiff's counsel is aware that in urging the court to grant such interlocutory relief, the well-known tests laid down by the House of Lords in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  clear prima facie case or that there is a serious issue to be tried;
2. that permitting the defendant to continue its activities pending trial would cause the plaintiff irreparable harm; and
3. assuming the foregoing tests are met and, on a balance of convenience, the situation favours the court's intervention on the plaintiff's behalf.
1. THE CASE FOR THE PLAINTIFF
[5]
The case for the plaintiff, ably put by his counsel, may be summarized as follows:
(1) The registered designs secured by the plaintiff are the result of much research undertaken by him to recapture, perhaps in a more contemporary style, the aesthetic fashion of the Art Deco period of some fifty years ago. This research, as well as the plaintiff's eye for line and form, enabled him at first to design a set of acrylic tumblers of various sizes, all featuring sharply-etched horizontal rings or striations around the body of the tumbler.
(2) From there, the plaintiff proceeded to develop complementary designs for trays, ice buckets, bowls and pitchers so as to create a distinctive line of tableware marketed under the name Images.
(3) The promotion and marketing policy of the plaintiff was to sell these wares in upscale shops and boutiques and to make of them top-of-the-line articles.
(4) In the concept, design, development, production and promotion efforts required of this new line, the plaintiff necessarily had to expend hundreds of thousands of dollars.
(5) Once the plaintiff's full line of tableware was publicized at trade shows and offered for sale, the positive reaction in the market was such that he could hardly meet U.S. demands for the products, let alone penetrate in a meaningful way the Canadian market.
(6) It was on November 19, 1987 that he first delivered to Innovations, his newly-appointed distributor in Canada, some 48 double old-fashioned and 48 highball tumblers together with some 24 photographs of Images wares. It was in early January 1988 that first production runs of the complementary wares began. It was on January 21, 1988 that the plaintiff was informed of the entry into the Canadian market of the competing Spotlights wares offered by the defendant.
(7) The plaintiff states in his evidence that the two lines of tableware are so similar in appearance and design that the Spotlights line is obviously a knock-off of his own line and evidently constitutes an infringement of the industrial designs he had previously registered in Canada.
(8) Of equal concern to the plaintiff is that the competing products are of lower quality. Some of them are made of styrene instead of acrylic. Their density is lower. There is grave risk that the integrity of the plaintiff's "Images" line would be seriously prejudiced by the entry into the field of these lower-priced, lower-quality products.
(9) And the plaintiff to conclude that what the defendant is effectively doing is piggy-backing on the goodwill, reputation and obvious appeal which his innovative skills have so laboriously created.
2. THE CASE FOR THE DEFENDANT
[6]
The case for the defendant is as ably put by its own counsel. As is usually the case in resisting an interlocutory injunction in infringement actions, counsel bases its defence on several grounds, many of them of course going to the merits of the suit in order to establish that the plaintiff has not made out a strong prima facie case. Defendant's counsel's principal points may be summarized as follows:
(1) The plaintiff's design is not new. Some fifty years earlier, a company called Anchor Hocking had designed its "Manhattan" line of glassware and it was specifically from this old design that the plaintiff has copied its own. The two designs are substantially similar. The Anchor Hocking line had been sold in Canada through Empire Trading Company which had published the line in its own catalogue in 1938.
(2) Furthermore, there is evidence that in about 1987, Anchor Hocking had itself reproduced its earlier 1938 design by fusing what it called its classic line into a more contemporary, revitalized look.
(3) Serious doubts are raised with respect to some if not all of the impugned designs as to whether their registration complies with s. 14(1) of the Industrial Design Act which provides that protection under the statute is only available when the registration is effected within one year of the publication of the design in Canada. Counsel argues that according to the chronology of events leading to the registrations, the various items of tableware designed by the plaintiff had been published at a much earlier date.
(4) Counsel raises other technical defences with respect to the ownership of designs and to the failure of the wares themselves to identify the proprietor and the year of registration, all issues going to the validity of the registrations.
(5) Finally, counsel contends that notwithstanding the assertions of the plaintiff as to product integrity and quality, i.e. elements relevant to a claim of irreparable injury, the evidence in support is singularly lacking.
3. THE LAW
[7]
Any interlocutory injunction order is by its very nature an exceptional remedy which is why the tests in the American Cyanamid case (supra) have been formulated and why these tests are most often difficult to meet. Especially in matters of patent infringement is there a reluctance on the part of the court to issue such an order. This principle is stated in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the Chief Justice of this court says as follows at page 55:
"In this court the grant of an interlocutory injunction in a patent infringement action is not a common occurrence in most instances, the result of an application for an interlocutory injunction, where infringement and validity are in issue, is that the defendant gives a satisfactory undertaking to keep an account and upon that being done the application is dismissed with costs in the cause ..."
[8]
And further, the Chief Justice says:
"... The principal reason for this practice is, in my opinion, the fact that in most instances the nature of the patent rights involved is such that damages (provided there is some reasonably accurate way of measuring them) will be an adequate remedy for such infringement of the rights as may occur pending the trial ..."
[9]
That view is also the one adopted by the Ontario Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[10]
I will concede that the rule might not be as stringently applied when dealing with other fields of intellectual property as in copyright and industrial design. The subject matter in these instances has often an ephemeral lifespan where market saturation is quickly reached and where the winds of fashion which favour an owner's venture into hopefully exceptional gains will have an equally exceptional fickleness about them. If at the same time, the competing product appears in the eye of the court to be an obvious knock-off and where piggy-back conclusions may be more easily reached, the court will not hesitate for the sake of pure equity, to grant injunctive relief. It means in effect that the plaintiff has not only established a strong prima facie case but has also met the test of irreparable injury of a kind which may not be compensated in damages. It would also follow in such instances that the balance of convenience would tilt in favour of the plaintiff.
4. FINDINGS
[11]
In the case at bar, I could perhaps find that the plaintiff has made out a strong prima facie case, a finding consonant with the presumed validity of his industrial design registrations and with an obvious resemblance between the two competing lines of tableware. I might concurrently hesitate to make findings on the numerous challenges as to both validity and infringement raised by the defendant, these being issues which should not be determined in summary proceedings and which should be left to the trial judge.
[12]
If I were to assume that this first test imposed on the plaintiff has been met, I should find that he has unfortunately not made out a case for irreparable injury which could not be compensated in damages. With all respect for the plaintiff and for his assertions relating to the integrity of his product, to its top-of-the-line niche in his stable of tableware and to his marketing of it through up-scale shops and boutiques, I fail to find any objective and corroborative evidence of an irreparable harm situation.
[13]
I should recall in this respect that there is conflict in the evidence as to the inferior quality of the defendant's product or as to the marketing policies actually carried out by the plaintiff to make of it a more chichi product. There is also evidence that the plaintiff's product is also competing with other products which admittedly owe their own stylistic legitimacy to the same Art Deco period of some fifty years ago. This is similar to the situation facing Rouleau, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where in circumstances where the market already experiences more than two competing products, an injunction against one might be of little benefit to the plaintiff.
CONCLUSION
[14]
In the event, I must conclude that the case falls squarely within accepted doctrine where the rights of the plaintiff may be ultimately confirmed at trial and where monetary compensation for damages sustained may be assessed. In such circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to deal with the matter of balance of convenience.
[15]
The application by the plaintiff for an interlocutory injunction is dismissed. The defendant is ordered to keep and maintain full accounting records of his importations, sales and inventory of his complete line of "Spotlights" tableware allegedly infringing on the plaintiff's design registrations which have been cited. Costs shall be in the cause.
[16]
I express my thanks to both counsel for the assistance and guidance their well-prepared and well-documented briefs provided to me.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]