[1]
Wetston, J.
: The principal applicant and his family seek to set aside a decision of the visa officer who refused their application for permanent residence in Canada. The applicant submits a number of grounds of error on the part of the visa officer, essentially involving issues of fairness, law, and fact. The applicant and his family are citizens of Russia, and have applied for a visa under the independent category.
[2]
The applicant advanced six reasons why the visa officer erred in the exercise of her discretion in this matter. During the argument, I indicated to counsel for the applicant that I did not accept two of those arguments, but that I would further consider the other four.
[3]
According to the
Immigration Act
(the "
Act
"), R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended, and s. 8(1)(a) and Schedule I of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978 (the "
Regulations
"), a visa officer must assess the following nine factors, or selection standards, in order to determine whether an independent applicant will be able to successfully establish himself or herself in Canada: education, specific vocational preparation, experience, occupational demand, arranged employment or designated occupation, demographic factor, age, knowledge of English and French languages, and personal suitability. With regard to the ninth factor -- personal suitability -- Schedule I of the
Regulations
states that units of assessment shall be awarded on the basis of the suitability of the immigrant and his dependents to become successfully established in Canada, having regard to the qualities, inter alia, of adaptability, motivation, initiative, and resourcefulness. Column III of Schedule I sets out the maximum units of assessment which may be awarded for each factor. Generally, in the case of an independent immigrant, a total award of 70 units may result in the issuance of a visa, provided that the requirements of the
Act
, and the standards enumerated in Schedule I of the
Regulations
, are met.
[4]
The applicant in this case has the onus of demonstrating that the visa officer exercised her discretion in such a manner as to have erred in law or fact, or breached a duty of procedural fairness. In this regard, it should be noted that the visa officer was of the opinion that the applicant had embellished his affidavit regarding his work experience. Moreover, it is also clear that the applicant's language ability in English or French was overstated in his application for permanent residence. In his application, the applicant indicated that he could read English well; yet, at his interview, it was clear that his language ability in English was minimal.
[5]
According to the applicant, the visa officer's first error resulted from her failure to assess the applicant under both the occupations of numerical control tool programmer and mechanical engineer. The applicant argues that the visa officer assessed him solely under the category of mechanical engineer, but that she should have also considered him under the alternative occupation. In this regard, the applicant relies upon the decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 185 (F.C.A.), wherein Mahoney, J.A., noted, at p. 189 [Imm. L.R.], that "a visa officer has the duty to assess an application with reference to the occupation represented by the applicant (or his or her spouse) as the one for which he or she is qualified and prepared to pursue in Canada. That duty, in my view, extends to each such occupation". The applicant asserts that he had previous experience as a numerical control tool programmer in Russia, from 1982 to 1989, and that the visa officer disregarded this experience by focussing only on his current job experience.
[6]
While the applicant argues that an examination of the courses which he took in university reveals programming experience, I am not satisfied that the evidence before the visa officer was sufficient to justify such a finding. Furthermore, I do not accept the applicant's argument that the visa officer did not specifically consider the applicant under the occupation of numerical control tool programmer. Although the applicant appeared to have some knowledge of computer information systems, the visa officer concluded that his actual training and work experience did not meet the qualifications of numerical control tool programmer, as set out in the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations (the "CCDO"). In my view, the visa officer reasonably determined, from the responses which the applicant provided to her questions regarding his actual training and work experience, that he did not fit the definition of numerical control tool programmer in the CCDO. In fact, the visa officer informed the applicant of this at his interview. I also do not agree that the visa officer simply focussed on the applicant's current job position. The visa officer had regard to the applicant's employment history, in its entirety, in determining whether or not he should be considered under the category of numerical control tool programmer. In addition, as noted earlier, it also appears that the applicant had embellished his experience as a numerical control tool programmer. I therefore agree with the respondent's submissions that the visa officer did not inappropriately consider the applicant's work experience or education.
[7]
The applicant also asserts that he had indicated to the visa officer that he had sufficient funds to successfully establish himself in Canada. The respondent argues that it was the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate, at his interview, proof of assets in Canadian funds. The applicant had advance notice of this requirement; however, according to the respondent, the applicant failed to provide any tangible evidence of his alleged assets. In my opinion, the visa officer did not commit any error in her assessment of the applicant's ability to successfully establish himself in Canada when she took into account the dearth of evidence respecting the applicant's Canadian funds.
[8]
The applicant further argues that the visa officer misinterpreted s. 8(1)(a) and Schedule I of the
Regulations
. Section 8(1)(a) requires the visa officer to assess the immigrant on the basis of each of the factors listed in Column I of Schedule I. With regard to the eighth factor -- knowledge of English and French languages -- the visa officer wrote the following in her refusal letter of April 19, 1995: "At interview you displayed a limited working knowledge of the English language which was a barrier to your selection". The applicant asserts that a limitation in one of Canada's official languages is not, in and of itself, a barrier to selection under the independent selection criteria; rather, knowledge of English and French is one of a number of different factors which is taken into consideration in assessing an applicant's suitability to become successfully established in Canada. Thus, the applicant argues that the visa officer introduced into her decision a requirement not authorized by the language of the
Regulations
. In addition, the visa officer awarded the applicant two units of assessment for the factor of knowledge of Canada's official languages. While the applicant concedes that his ability to speak English is modest, he argues that the visa officer failed to test thoroughly his reading and writing skills in the English language.
[9]
The respondent contends that the visa officer's use of the word "barrier" was simply an unfortunate choice of language. Furthermore, the respondent strenuously argues that there is no merit to the argument that this term introduced a requirement not authorized by the language of the
Regulations
. I agree with the respondent that, when considered in the context of the affidavit and the record before the court, the visa officer clearly did not misinterpret the application of s. 8(1)(a) and Schedule I of the
Regulations
.
[10]
Finally, the applicant argues that the visa officer misapplied the personal suitability factor in Schedule I of the
Regulations
. The applicant contends that the visa officer had already considered, under factors 1 to 8, issues of whether or not the applicant had an appropriate job offer, or extremely limited English skills. In her affidavit, the visa officer indicated that she specifically expressed her concerns to the applicant, at the interview, regarding "the likelihood of him being able to successfully establish himself in Canada in view of his extremely limited knowledge of English, the lack of any job offer, the lack of any contacts or relatives in Canada, and his general lack of knowledge of the Canadian job market and way of life". In response, the applicant indicated that he would learn English once he arrived in Canada. The visa officer also informed the applicant that she would be prepared to continue processing his application for permanent residence in Canada, if he could provide her with proof of an offer of employment from a Canadian employer, validated through a Canadian Employment Centre (a "CEC"). While the applicant did have a job offer, it had not been validated through a CEC.
[11]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , reving. [1994] 1 F.C. 639; 164 N.R. 257 (F.C.A.), reving. [1991] 3 F.C. 350; 45 F.T.R. 96 (T.D.), the Supreme Court of Canada confirmed the decisions of Justice Strayer (as he then was) in the Federal Court, Trial Division, and Justice Robertson, who dissented in the Federal Court of Appeal. In his dissent, at page 650 [F.C.], Robertson, J.A., stated the following with respect to the application of s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
: "[W]hen deciding persons' ability to successfully establish themselves in Canada the determination criteria must be restricted to matters relating to their ability to make a living". The Supreme Court of Canada confirmed Justice Robertson's view that the determination criteria are essentially economic factors. While s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
is not at issue in the present case, the applicant's counsel suggested that a consideration of personal suitability similarly involves a consideration of economic criteria, such as upgrading work skills and accepting new job responsibilities.
[12]
In my view, the visa officer in this case did not inappropriately assess the applicant's personal suitability when she considered his limited knowledge of the English language, and his lack of contacts and relatives in Canada; rather, she examined these factors solely in the context of the way in which the applicant and his family could become successfully established in Canada.
[13]
Accordingly, I am of the opinion that the visa officer made no reviewable errors and, as such, this application is dismissed. No question for certification was proposed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/slm
[End of document]