 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 549)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Mactavish, J.
May 24, 2013.
Counsel:
Anthony Navaneelan, J.D., for the applicant;
Leila Jawando, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Mamann, Sandaluk & Kingwell, LLP, Migration Law Chambers, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Mactavish, J.
: Raoul Andre Burton seeks judicial review of the negative decision of a Senior Immigration Officer in relation to his application for a Pre-Removal Risk Assessment [PRRA]. Mr. Burton claimed to be at risk in Jamaica because of his former membership in the Malvern Crew gang in Toronto. He also asserted that he was at risk because he had cooperated with a police investigation involving a fellow gang member and had testified at that individual's trial.
[2]
For the reasons that follow, I have concluded that the PRRA decision was unreasonable as it did not properly assess the risks faced by Mr. Burton in Jamaica in light of his personal profile as a former gang member, police informant and Crown witness. I am further satisfied that material evidence was overlooked by the PRRA Officer. As a consequence, the application for judicial review will be granted.
Background
[3]
Mr. Burton came to Canada as a permanent resident in 1993 when he was 10 years old. He eventually became involved with the Malvern Crew, a criminal gang operating in Toronto.
[4]
In 2004, a gang member named Warren Abbey shot and killed a member of a rival gang known as the Galloway Boys. Abbey subsequently confessed to the killing to Mr. Burton, warning him of the "unwritten code" against snitching or collaborating with the police.
[5]
After his arrest for his own gang-related offences in 2004, Mr. Burton agreed to cooperate with the police and prosecutors and to plead guilty to participation in a criminal organization. Mr. Burton states that in the period leading up to the trial in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  against Mr. Abbey. As a result, Mr. Burton says that he began to receive death threats.
[6]
Mr. Burton testified at the Abbey trial in 2007. Mr. Abbey was acquitted at trial, but his acquittal was subsequently overturned on appeal. A new trial was scheduled for February of 2011. Mr. Burton states that he was reluctant to testify at the second trial, but that he was eventually compelled to do so under subpoena.
[7]
In the weeks before the 2011 trial, the Toronto Star published an article naming Mr. Burton as a witness for the prosecution. Mr. Burton states that he once again began receiving threats, in part because Mr. Abbey's acquittal had made him something of a "legend" in his community.
[8]
Mr. Burton testified at Mr. Abbey's second trial and Mr. Abbey was eventually convicted of murder. Mr. Burton states that he continued to receive threats after the conviction and that he was forced to leave his community in an effort to secure his safety.
[9]
In November of 2011, the Toronto Sun published an article about Mr. Burton, which discussed his precarious immigration status. Mr. Burton stresses that many Malvern Crew members who knew about his testimony at the Abbey trial have been deported back to Jamaica and would know that he could soon be there too, beyond the protection of Canadian law enforcement. Members of the rival Galloway Boys gang have also been returned to Jamaica, where they allegedly pose a threat to Mr. Burton as a former member of the Malvern Crew.
The PRRA Officer's Decision
[10]
The Senior Immigration Officer rejected Mr. Burton's PRRA application on the basis of section 97 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act,
S.C. 2001, c. 27, concluding that he would not be subject to a personal risk of persecution, danger of torture, risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if he were returned to Jamaica.
[11]
Because Mr. Burton was found to be inadmissible for organized crime and serious criminality, he was ineligible for refugee protection pursuant to paragraphs 112(3)(a) and (b) of the Act. Thus, no consideration was given to section 96 grounds.
[12]
Insofar as the risk to Mr. Burton arising from his participation in the Abbey trial were concerned, the Officer found that Mr. Burton had provided little evidence that he had recently been threatened by gang members, either in Canada or in Jamaica. The Officer further noted that Mr. Burton's affidavit did not indicate that the Jamaican police would be unable or unwilling to protect him "should he encounter difficulties" with gang members in Jamaica.
[13]
The Officer acknowledged that a Google search and newspaper articles publicly identified Mr. Burton as a former member of the Malvern Crew. These articles also noted that Mr. Burton had cooperated with the police, and that information had been included in the articles regarding his immigration status.
[14]
The Officer accepted that documentary evidence regarding country conditions in Jamaica produced by Mr. Burton indicated that "violent crime as well as corruption and impunity within the Jamaican security forces are serious ongoing issues". The Officer further accepted that "individuals who are known to be police informers in Jamaica are frequently the targets of violence from members of criminal organizations".
[15]
From this the Officer concluded that Mr. Burton "may face a risk of harm from gang members in Jamaica". The Officer nevertheless concluded, based upon the information provided by Mr. Burton, that while state protection in Jamaica may be "imperfect", he had not demonstrated that it would not be available to him.
[16]
The Officer then went on to review other country condition information identified in the course of the Officer's own research. The Officer observed that Jamaica is a constitutional parliamentary democracy with a "defined system of law and order". The existence of various security forces was noted and the Officer acknowledged that "corruption and impunity [...] are serious ongoing concerns".
[17]
Nevertheless, the Officer found that "serious efforts have been made to address this issue", including the creation of independent commissions, anti-corruption measures, oversight mechanisms, increased training for police officers and other reforms, and that major crime and murder rates have recently decreased in Jamaica.
[18]
The Officer concluded that Jamaica is not in a state of complete breakdown and that the availability of state protection is presumed. While reiterating that there are high rates of violent crime in Jamaica, and that protection is not perfect, the Officer nevertheless held that Mr. Burton had not rebutted the presumption of state protection with clear and convincing evidence.
The Issue
[19]
The only issue for determination is whether the Officer's risk assessment was reasonable, in light of Mr. Burton's personal profile.
Analysis
[20]
The availability of state protection in a particular country cannot be assessed in a vacuum. Regard must be had to the individual's own personal situation or circumstances, and an analysis must then be carried out as to the willingness and ability of the state to respond to those specific circumstances:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] F.C.J. No. 895;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] F.C.J. No. 708.
[21]
In this case, the PRRA Officer accepted that Mr. Burton faced a risk of harm from gang members in Jamaica. However, the state protection analysis carried out by the Officer appears to be essentially a generic examination of the ability of Jamaican authorities to protect ordinary Jamaican citizens from gang violence and the efforts that are being made by the Jamaican authorities to combat gang violence. Nowhere in the analysis does the Officer engage in any meaningful way with the risks faced personally by Mr. Burton as someone who has been publicly identified as a convicted criminal and a member of the Malvern Crew gang. Nor does the PRRA officer ever consider the willingness of the Jamaican police to protect gang members from inter- or intra-gang violence.
[22]
Similarly, no consideration appears to have been given to the ability of the Jamaican police to protect those who have cooperated with the police in the prosecution of gang members. These omissions are of real concern in light of the country condition information that was before the Officer.
[23]
Insofar as the willingness of the Jamaican police to protect gang members from inter- or intra-gang violence was concerned, the record before the Officer contained statistical evidence showing that few gang-related murders were investigated or had a suspect identified and referred for prosecution.
[24]
More troubling is the Amnesty International report that was before the Officer entitled "
Let Them Kill each Other
", which quoted a Superintendent of the Jamaican police as saying that "[n]o police, no army, no government can solve murders like this one [referring to a gang killing] because it is cronies killing cronies and we know it is almost like dogs killing dogs". This report goes on to state that many social workers report being advised by Jamaican police and politicians that their work with gang members was useless, and that they should just "let them kill each other".
[25]
This was potentially highly probative evidence going directly to the willingness of the Jamaican authorities to protect individuals with gang ties such as Mr. Burton from inter- or intra-gang violence. Not only was this evidence never addressed by the Officer, no other evidence directly on point was cited to support the Officer's conclusion that adequate state protection would be available in Jamaica for a former gang member such as Mr. Burton. As such it is impossible to ascertain from the Officer's reasons how the Officer came to his or her conclusion on this issue, with the result that the reasons lack the transparency, intelligibility and justification required of a reasonable decision:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 47.
[26]
Equally problematic is the Officer's failure to consider the evidence with respect to the ability of the Jamaican police to protect those who have cooperated with the police in the prosecution of gang members. The evidence before the Officer in this regard raises real concerns about the ability of the Jamaican police to protect individuals such as Mr. Burton, who have assisted the police.
[27]
For example, the
United Kingdom Border Agency's Operational Guidance Note: Jamaica
states that the Jamaican police are unable to assure the protection of witnesses, and that those who face a threat from a criminal gang because of their cooperation with the police will not normally be able to access state protection.
[28]
The Officer obviously considered this to be a reliable document, given that reference was made in the decision to a portion of the document which indicated that strides were being made in sensitizing the police and the public to issues relating to corruption and ethics - issues that were only marginally relevant to the situation confronting Mr. Burton. However, no reference was made to the portions of the report that were most germane to Mr. Burton's own situation, leading to the inescapable inference that this evidence was overlooked:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  157 F.T.R. 35 at paras.14-17.
Conclusion
[29]
To be reasonable, a PRRA Officer's analysis of risk must be informed by the applicant's own personal situation or circumstances: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above. An assessment that fails to engage with the specific risks faced by an applicant is not reasonable and must be set aside. This is just such a case.
[30]
For these reasons, the application for judicial review is allowed. I agree with the parties that the case does not raise a question for certification.
JUDGMENT
[31]
THIS COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES
that
:
1. This application for judicial review is allowed, and the matter is remitted to a different immigration officer for re-determination in accordance with these reasons.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Raoul Andre Burton sollicite le contrôle judiciaire de la décision défavorable d'un agent principal d'immigration concernant sa demande d'examen des risques avant renvoi [ERAR]. M. Burton a affirmé être exposé à des risques s'il retournait en Jamaïque en tant qu'ancien membre du gang Malvern Crew à Toronto. Il a aussi affirmé courir des risques parce qu'il avait coopéré avec la police dans le cadre d'une enquête sur un autre membre du gang et qu'il avait témoigné lors du procès de cette personne.
[2]
Pour les motifs qui suivent, je conclus que la décision relative à l'ERAR était déraisonnable parce que les risques auxquels M. Burton serait exposé en Jamaïque en raison de son profil personnel - en tant qu'ancien membre d'un gang, indicateur de police et témoin de la Couronne - n'ont pas été évalués correctement. Je suis en outre d'avis que l'agent d'ERAR a omis de prendre en compte d'importants éléments de preuve. Par conséquent, la demande de contrôle judiciaire sera accueillie.
Le contexte
[3]
M. Burton est arrivé au Canada en tant que résident permanent en 1993, à l'âge de 10 ans. Par la suite, il est devenu membre de la Malvern Crew, un gang criminel de Toronto.
[4]
En 2004, Warren Abbey, un membre d'un gang, a abattu par balle un membre d'un gang rival appelé les Galloway Boys. M. Abbey a plus tard avoué à M. Burton qu'il avait commis le meurtre, tout en lui rappelant l'existence du « code de conduite non écrit » contre le mouchardage et la collaboration avec la police.
[5]
Après avoir été arrêté en 2004 pour avoir commis des infractions liées à ses propres activités au sein d'un gang, M. Burton a accepté de collaborer avec les policiers et les procureurs et de plaider coupable à l'infraction de participation aux activités d'une organisation criminelle. M. Burton affirme que pendant la période qui a précédé la tenue du procès dans l'affaire
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  commencé à courir dans sa collectivité, à la suite de quoi il dit avoir commencé à recevoir des menaces de mort.
[6]
M. Burton a témoigné lors du procès de M. Abbey en 2007. M. Abbey a été acquitté, mais ce verdict a été infirmé en appel et la tenue du nouveau prévue pour le mois de février 2011. M. Burton dit qu'il était réticent à témoigner au second procès, mais qu'il a été assigné formellement.
[7]
Dans les semaines ayant précédé le procès de 2011, le Toronto Star a publié un article dans lequel il était mentionné que M. Burton était un témoin de la Couronne. M. Burton dit qu'il a par la suite recommencé à recevoir des menaces, notamment parce que l'acquittement de M. Abbey avait fait de lui une « légende » dans sa collectivité.
[8]
M. Burton a témoigné lors du second procès de M. Abbey, à l'issue duquel ce dernier a été reconnu coupable de meurtre. M. Burton affirme avoir continué à recevoir des menaces après la déclaration de culpabilité et qu'il a été contraint de quitter sa collectivité pour assurer sa sécurité.
[9]
En novembre 2011, le Toronto Sun a publié un article au sujet de M. Burton dans lequel il était question de la précarité de son statut d'immigrant. M. Burton souligne que plusieurs des membres de la Malvern Crew qui étaient au courant de son témoignage au procès de M. Abbey avaient été renvoyés en Jamaïque et qu'ils sauraient qu'il était possible que lui aussi s'y trouve bientôt, sans protection de la part des autorités policières canadiennes. Des membres du gang rival les Galloway Boys avaient aussi été renvoyés en Jamaïque qui, alléguait-il, représentaient une menace pour lui parce qu'il était un ancien membre de la Malvern Crew.
La décision de l'agent d'ERAR
[10]
L'agent d'immigration principal a rejeté la demande d'ERAR de M. Burton sur le fondement de l'article 97 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés,
L.C. 2001, ch. 27, après avoir conclu que ce dernier n'était pas personnellement exposé à un risque de persécution ou au risque d'être torturé, tué ou de subir des traitements ou peines cruels et inusités s'il devait retourner en Jamaïque.
[11]
Étant donné que M. Burton a été déclaré interdit de territoire pour criminalité organisée et pour grande criminalité, l'asile ne pouvait en raison des alinéas 112(3)
a
) et
b
) lui être accordé. Les motifs énoncés à l'article 96 n'ont donc pas été pris en compte.
[12]
En ce qui concerne la question du risque que courrait M. Burton du fait de sa participation au procès de M. Abbey, l'agent a conclu que M. Burton avait fourni peu d'éléments de preuve visant à établir qu'il avait reçu des menaces de la part de membres de gangs, au Canada ou en Jamaïque. L'agent a de plus relevé que M. Burton n'indiquait pas dans son affidavit que la police jamaïcaine n'était pas en mesure ou refuserait de le protéger s'il [traduction] « éprouvait des problèmes » avec des membres d'un gang en Jamaïque.
[13]
L'agent a reconnu que dans Google et dans des articles de journaux M. Burton était publiquement identifié comme membre de la Malvern Crew. On disait également dans ces articles que M. Burton avait collaboré avec la police, et des renseignements concernant son statut d'immigrant y figuraient.
[14]
L'agent a reconnu que selon la preuve documentaire produite par M. Burton concernant la situation actuelle en Jamaïque [traduction] « les crimes violents commis par les forces de sécurité jamaïcaines, ainsi que la corruption et l'impunité au sein de celles-ci, demeurent un grave problème ». L'agent a de plus reconnu que les [traduction] « personnes connues comme étant des indicateurs de police en Jamaïque sont souvent victimes de violence de la part des organisations criminelles ».
[15]
Pour ces motifs, l'agent a conclu que [traduction] « les membres de certains gangs pouvaient constituer une menace pour [M. Burton] en Jamaïque ». L'agent a néanmoins conclu, sur la foi de renseignements fournis par M. Burton, que bien que la protection de l'État en Jamaïque puisse être « imparfaite », il n'avait pas établi qu'il ne pourrait pas s'en prévaloir.
[16]
L'agent a ensuite examiné d'autres renseignements sur la situation en Jamaïque qu'il avait obtenus en faisant ses propres recherches. L'agent a relevé que la Jamaïque est une démocratie parlementaire constitutionnelle dotée d'un [traduction] « système défini du maintien de l'ordre public ». Il a outre relevé l'existence de divers organismes de sécurité et il a reconnu que la [traduction] « corruption et l'impunité [...] demeurent un grave problème ».
[17]
Quoi qu'il en soit, l'agent a conclu que [traduction] « des efforts sérieux avaient été faits pour corriger la situation », notamment en créant des commissions indépendantes, en prenant des mesures anticorruption, en mettant en place des mécanismes de surveillance, en augmentant le nombre de policiers et en effectuant d'autres réformes, et que le taux de crimes graves et de meurtres avaient récemment diminué en Jamaïque.
[18]
L'agent a conclu que la Jamaïque n'est pas dans un état d'effondrement complet et que la protection de l'État est présumée être assurée. Après avoir répété qu'il y a un haut taux de crimes violents en Jamaïque, et que la protection offerte n'est pas parfaite, l'agent a néanmoins conclu que M. Burton n'avait pas réfuté par une preuve claire et convaincante la présomption de protection de l'État.
La question en litige
[19]
La seule question qui se pose est celle de savoir si l'évaluation des risques effectuée par l'agent était raisonnable compte tenu du profil personnel de M. Burton.
Analyse
[20]
La question de la disponibilité de la protection de l'État dans un pays ne peut être examinée dans l'abstrait. Il faut tenir compte de la situation personnelle de la personne concernée ou des circonstances, et par la suite procéder à une analyse portant sur la volonté et la capacité de l'État d'intervenir dans ces circonstances particulières:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] A.C.F. no 895;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] A.C.F. no 708.
[21]
En l'espèce, l'agent d'ERAR a reconnu que les membres de certains gangs pouvaient constituer une menace pour M. Burton en Jamaïque. Cependant, pour ce qui est de la protection de l'État, l'agent semble s'en être tenu à une analyse générale concernant la capacité des autorités jamaïcaines de protéger les citoyens jamaïcains ordinaires contre la violence des gangs et des efforts faits par les autorités jamaïcaines pour lutter contre celle-ci. Nulle part dans son analyse, l'agent ne tient compte des risques auxquels M. Burton est personnellement exposé en tant que personne ayant été publiquement reconnue comme un criminel ayant fait l'objet d'une condamnation et un membre du gang Malvern Crew. Il n'examine pas non plus la question de la question de la volonté de la police jamaïcaine de protéger les membres des gangs contre les violences internes ou entre gangs.
[22]
De même, il ne semble pas avoir examiné la capacité de la police jamaïcaine de protéger ceux qui ont coopéré avec la police en vue de traduire en justice des membres d'un gang. Ces omissions soulèvent de réelles préoccupations compte tenu des renseignements sur la situation au pays qui figuraient au dossier de l'agent.
[23]
Pour ce qui est de la volonté de la police jamaïcaine de protéger les membres des gangs contre les violences internes ou entre gangs, le dossier de l'agent contenait des données statistiques montrant que peu de meurtres liés aux activités des gangs faisaient l'objet d'enquêtes ou menaient à l'identification d'un suspect ou à des poursuites.
[24]
Ce qui est plus préoccupant encore, c'est le rapport d'Amnistie Internationale intitulé
Let Them Kill each Other
, au dossier devant l'agent, et qui citait les propos suivants d'un chef de police jamaïcain [traduction] « [a] ucun corps policier, ni gouvernement ou armée ne peut résoudre des meurtres comme celui-là [un meurtre entre gangs], parce qu'il s'agit de copains qui tuent d'autres copains et que comme on le sait c'est comme des chiens qui tuent d'autres chiens ». Ce rapport indique également que plusieurs travailleurs sociaux affirment avoir été informés par la police jamaïcaine et des politiciens que leur travail auprès des membres des gangs est inutile, et qu'ils devraient simplement les [traduction] « laisser s'entretuer ».
[25]
Il s'agissait potentiellement d'une preuve très convaincante portant directement sur la volonté des autorités jamaïcaines de protéger les individus liés aux activités des gangs comme M. Burton contre les violences internes ou entre gangs. Or, l'agent a non seulement omis de la prendre compte, mais il ne s'appuie sur aucun autre élément de preuve portant directement sur ce point pour étayer sa conclusion qu'un ancien membre d'un gang comme M. Burton bénéficierait d'une protection adéquate de l'État jamaïcain. Il est donc impossible, à partir des motifs de l'agent, de déterminer comment il est arrivé à sa conclusion sur cet aspect, de sorte que ses motifs ne répondent pas aux exigences de transparence, d'intelligibilité et de justification, établies dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , par. 47.
[26]
L'omission de l'agent de prendre en compte la preuve relative à la capacité de la police jamaïcaine de protéger ceux qui l'ont aidé à ce que des poursuites soient engagées contre des membres des gangs est tout aussi problématique. La preuve devant l'agent sur cette question soulève de réels doutes sur la capacité de la police jamaïcaine de protéger des individus qui, comme M. Burton, ont collaboré avec les policiers.
[27]
Par exemple, le document intitulé
United Kingdom Border Agency's Operational Guidance Note: Jamaica
indique que la police jamaïcaine n'est pas en mesure d'assurer la protection des témoins, et que ceux qui reçoivent des menaces de la part de gangs criminels parce qu'ils ont collaboré avec la police ne peuvent généralement pas bénéficier de la protection de l'État.
[28]
L'agent a de toute évidence estimé que le document susmentionné était fiable étant donné que dans sa décision il se réfère à un passage où il est indiqué que des efforts sont faits pour sensibiliser la police et le public aux problèmes de corruption et aux questions éthiques - des aspects peu pertinents dans la situation dans laquelle se trouve M. Burton. Toutefois, il n'est nullement fait mention des passages du rapport les plus pertinents dans les circonstances, de sorte qu'on ne peut qu'inférer que cette preuve n'a pas été prise en compte:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  157 F.T.R. 35, aux par. 14-17.
La conclusion
[29]
Pour être raisonnable, l'analyse du risque de l'agent d'ERAR doit tenir compte de la situation personnelle du demandeur: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée. Une analyse qui ne tient pas compte des risques particuliers auxquels un demandeur est exposé n'est pas raisonnable et doit être rejetée. Tel est justement le cas en l'espèce.
[30]
Pour ces motifs, il est fait droit à la demande de contrôle judiciaire. Je conviens avec les parties que l'affaire ne soulève aucune question à certifier.
JUGEMENT
[31]
LA COUR STATUE
:
1. Que la demande de contrôle judiciaire est accueillie et l'affaire est renvoyée à un autre agent d'immigration pour nouvel examen, conforme aux présents motifs.
[End of document]