[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: The defendant brings an application under rule 336(5) to set aside the order of Lefebvre, Senior Prothonotary, dated July 7, 1987, by which he dismissed an application to strike the statement of claim. The plaintiffs have brought suit against the defendant for patent infringement. By an application under rule 419(1)(a) and (f), the defendant sought to have the claim struck as disclosing no reasonable cause of action or constituting an abuse of process. The Senior Prothonotary, after reserving his decision, dismissed the application without reasons. The defendant now seeks to have that decision set aside.
[2]
The statutory provision which is relevant to this application is rule 419(1):
"Rule 419(1) The court may at any stage of an action order any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that
(a) it discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, as the case may be,
(b) it is immaterial or redundant,
(c) it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious,
(d) it may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action,
(e) it constitutes a departure from a previous pleading, or
(f) it is otherwise an abuse of the process of the court,
and may order the action to be stayed or dismissed or judgment to be entered accordingly."
[3]
The pleading which is being challenged in this case is the amended statement of claim filed December 10, 1986. The first three paragraphs identify the plaintiffs and defendant, the next four describe the plaintiffs' patent which is alleged to have been infringed. The core of the statement, which sets out the cause of action, is paragraph 8:
"8. The defendant has offered for sale, sold, used and knowingly induced others to sell and use sailboards in infringement of the rights of the plaintiffs under Canadian Letters Patent No. 912,921 and intends to continue to do so. The full extent of the infringement of said plaintiffs' rights by the aforementioned defendant is presently unknown to the plaintiffs but is known to the defendant and said plaintiffs claim in respect of all such infringement."
The remaining paragraphs describe the sailboards allegedly sold by the defendant and the damage the plaintiffs claim to have suffered as a result. The prayer for relief follows.
[4]
The argument to strike centres around paragraph 8, which the defendant claims reveals no reasonable cause of action and constitutes an abuse of the court's process. Particulars of the infringements alleged in this paragraph have been requested by the defendant. The plaintiffs responded as follows:
"
In relation to paragraph 8 of the statement of claim
"Full particulars of the infringing activities of the defendant are not within the knowledge of the plaintiffs but plaintiffs claim in respect of all such activities.
"That the defendant threatens to continue its infringing activities unless restrained is supported by the following facts.
'On March 19, 1986, a letter was dispatched to the defendant by the solicitors for the plaintiffs demanding that the defendant cease and desist from its infringing activities. In subsequent correspondence between the solicitors for the plaintiffs and the solicitors for the defendant dated April 10, 1986, April 14, 1986, and April 21, 1986 the defendant denied that its activities were infringing and did not indicate that it would cease and desist therefrom.'"
[5]
The requirements for pleadings in industrial property cases were set out by Jackett, P., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . On page 11 of the judgment he wrote:
"In general, under our system of pleading, a statement of claim for an infringement of a right should clearly show
(a) facts by virtue of which the law recognizes a defined right as belonging to the plaintiff, and
(b) facts that constitute an encroachment by the defendant on that defined right of the plaintiff.
"If the statement of claim does not disclose those two elements of the plaintiff's cause of action, it does not disclose a cause of action and may be disposed of summarily."
He elaborated on that holding earlier in the judgment, (pp. 4-5):
"Generally speaking, I think it is correct to say that an action under our judicial system is a device to settle disputes where the plaintiff asserts certain facts which the defendant denies, or where the plaintiff asserts that on undisputed facts the law entitles him to relief that the defendant says the law does not entitle him to, or where there is some combination of such disputes between the plaintiff and the defendant. The assumption is that, at the time that the proceedings are instituted, the plaintiff has grounds on which his professional advisors are of the view that he can assert certain facts. (For a useful discussion of the difference between facts constituting the cause of action and facts that are relevant as evidence to prove such facts, see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Rules of this court for the general requirement, and rule 20, supra, re actions such as the present.
"It may well be, of course, that the plaintiff, at the time that an action is instituted, has grounds for asserting that the defendant has done certain things although he is not in a position to say precisely when or where or how the defendant did such things. These details in the circumstances of a particular case may be entirely within the knowledge of the defendant. For example, the plaintiff may be in a position to show that a manufacturer sold a certain class of goods that had been manufactured by his patented process. Only the defendant can know, however, when and where they were so manufactured. In such a case, it obviously would not be necessary for the plaintiff to give such particulars, at least before discovery had taken place. There may also be circumstances in which the plaintiff's knowledge is sufficient to warrant commencing proceedings but it is appropriate to give him an order for inspection of the subject-matter of the action under rule 148A before he is required to settle his particulars of breaches.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
"If, however, the plaintiff has no ground for asserting that the defendant had done any particular act that, according to him, constituted an infringement of his rights, I should have thought that he has no basis for institution of proceedings for such an infringement. If the plaintiff does not know what his claim is, 'he has no right to make a statement of claim at all':  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  an allegation of facts constituting a cause of action and a statement of claim in which that is the only assertion of infringement could be struck out as being an abuse of the process of the court.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , per Buckley, L.J., at pp. 788-789. The facts must be alleged in such a way that the court can be satisfied that, assuming the truth of what is alleged, the plaintiff has an arguable cause of action:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  plaintiffs have pleaded sufficient facts to show they have a basis for proceeding against the defendant for infringement. The issue of this appeal is whether he addressed that question properly. I have said elsewhere that, on an appeal from a Prothonotary under rule 336(5), it is not appropriate for a judge merely to substitute his own evaluation of the facts for that of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  reasonable consideration to relevant evidence and arguments and reached a conclusion supported by them. I should emphasize that my analysis would be greatly assisted by written reasons. I do not suggest that formal reasons are necessary or even desirable in a great number of instances in which the Prothonotary is able to decide the matter at the conclusion of argument. Hopefully, most of the work of our Prothonotaries can be discharged in that way and without written reasons. In a case such as this, however, where the substantive rights of a litigant are under review, it is understandable that the matter might be taken under reserve for a brief period of time. Obviously the delay must be kept to a minimum, but when a matter is taken under reserve, brief written reasons would seem appropriate.
[7]
What the Senior Prothonotary said in this case was that it was not appropriate in the circumstances to dismiss the action on the grounds specified in the motion to strike. Indeed, if one party has a legitimate cause of action against another, it should not be barred on procedural grounds, but that principle cannot save inadequate pleading. The plaintiffs have made it clear that they have no knowledge of the particulars of the alleged infringing activities. The statements contained in paragraph 8 do not amount to an allegation of facts constituting a cause of action. There has been no indication of when, where and how the defendant is supposed to have used, sold or induced others to use and sell the subject of the plaintiffs' patent. I must therefore find that in dismissing the defendant's motion, the Senior Prothonotary erred in law and failed to properly consider the evidence before him. The appeal must be allowed.
[8]
That said, however, I am not prepared to order the striking of the entire statement of claim. The remaining allegations, while not as precise as could be hoped, would nonetheless be sufficient grounds for allowing the action to proceed to discovery if the infringing activities on which they are based were properly described. I therefore propose to strike out only paragraph 8. The plaintiffs will be allowed thirty days in which to file an amended version of that paragraph. The defendant will then have a further thirty days in which to file a defence.
[9]
The appeal is allowed. Paragraph 8 of the statement of claim is struck out, with leave to amend as specified. Costs in the cause.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]