[1]
Dubé, J
: The applicant seeks an order setting aside the decision of Mr. Barry Turner, an Adjudicator under the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-35 ("the
Act
") and a member of the Public Service Staff Relations Board, rendered July 10, 1995. The Adjudicator held that the respondent had made every reasonable effort, as required under the terms of the collective agreement covering the applicant, to grant the applicant's leave request for the specific date of September 2, 1993.
[2]
The applicant is an air traffic controller with the respondent and his terms and conditions of employment are governed by a collective agreement between the Canadian Air Traffic Control Association (the "Association") and the respondent. In the fall of 1993, the applicant filed a grievance over the respondent's failure to approve his leave request for September 2, 1993.
[3]
It appears that the applicant originally had planned a camping trip during the period between August 31 and September 4, 1993. However, in July his family agreed to try to visit his friend's cottage in the Muskoka region during that period. On August 13, 1993, when the September schedule was posted, Mr. Barry discovered that he was required to work on September 2 (in the middle of his requested leave period). He immediately requested leave for September 2, 1993.
[4]
His request was denied by the employer on the ground that paragraph 10.3.3 of its Leave Policy states that spares cannot be used to accommodate ad hoc leave until immediately prior to the shifting period. Thus, the applicant would have had to come in to work from his friend's cottage on September 2 in time to see if he could be accommodated that day or not. So, he decided to stay home during the period in question. Paragraph 10.3.3 reads as follows:
"10.3.3 Within three (3) months and after the schedule is posted, ad hoc leave will be considered on a first-come, first-serve basis, subject to a leave slot being available. Any spares that may exist after all leave slots have been utilized will not be eligible for ad hoc leave until immediately prior to the shift. Requests for ad hoc leave on day shift must be directed to the Shift Manager after 06:00lcl. Similarly, evening shift requests for ad hoc leave will not be considered until after 13:00lcl. The Shift Manager has the responsibility to approve/disapprove ad hoc leave requests after the schedule is posted."
[5]
Subclause 16.04 (c) of the collective agreement reads as follows:
"(c) Consistent with operational requirements of the service and subject to adequate notice,
the Employer shall make every reasonable effort
to schedule lieu days at times desired by the employee." (my emphasis)
[6]
Thus, the question to be resolved is whether the Adjudicator erred in concluding that the applicant failed to establish that the respondent had not made every reasonable effort to accommodate the applicant's September 2, 1993 leave request.
[7]
Before reviewing the decision of an adjudicator, it is essential to determine the appropriate standard of review. On June 1, 1993, the privative clause contained in the
Act
governing the review of an adjudicator's decision was repealed. (
Public Service Reform Act
, S.C. 1992, c. 54, s. 73, effective June 1, 1993.) Although the test for review is no longer whether the adjudicator rendered a patently unreasonable decision, the Federal Court has subsequently indicated that adjudicators should still be accorded curial deference. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) and
Canada (Procureur général) v. Seguin
(1995), 101 F.T.R. 64 (T.D.).) Both parties agree that the curial deference must still be supportable by the evidence.
[8]
Both parties do not agree that the question of whether the respondent has made every reasonable effort to accommodate the applicant's leave request is a question of law or of fact. The applicant submits that it is a question of law. The respondent claims it is a question of fact. In my view, it is a mixed question of law and fact in the sense that the relevant facts must be established before the legal principles are applied to them. (
Moreno and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal held that a finding of fact will not be interfered with "unless there was a complete absence of evidence to support it or a wrong principle was applied in making it".  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal has set out three conditions precedent that must be met to justify judicial intervention when dealing with a finding of fact:
(a) the finding must be truly erroneous;
(b) the finding must be made capriciously or without regard to the evidence; and
(c) the decision must be based on the erroneous finding.
[9]
In his reasons for determining that the respondent made every reasonable effort to accommodate the applicant's request, the Adjudicator made three basic findings of fact (Decision, Applicant's Application Record, Tab 2.A, pp. 22-23.):
(1) There was no spare for the September 2 swing shift. All leave slots were filled by the master leave planner in February 1993. The grievor's request for September 2 was not entered in the leave request book as ad hoc leave defined by s. 10.3.1 of the leave policy. He simply ran out of options for September 2;
(2) There is also no evidence that the grievor tried to exchange his shift with another controller. Such an initiative was his responsibility and not his employer's;
(3) It is also worth noting that the lack of overtime resources due to fiscal restraints has made the obligation for early and thorough vacation planning even more important for the employer.
[10]
These three findings led the Adjudicator to the conclusion that he had not been persuaded that the employer did not make every reasonable effort to accommodate the applicant. After careful consideration of the able submissions of counsel, I cannot find fault with these three findings and the resulting conclusion. There was clearly sufficient evidence to support such a decision and I cannot see where the decision would be truly erroneous or made capriciously or without regard to the evidence, or where the Adjudicator erred in law.
[11]
Consequently, this application for judicial review must be dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/saf
[End of document]