[1]
Reed, J.
: The applicant seeks an order quashing a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division (the "Board") which found him not to be a Convention refugee. The Board's decision is challenged on two main grounds: it made several significant errors in its construction of the evidence and in its findings of implausibilities; it applied an incorrect burden of proof.
[2]
The applicant based his claim for refugee status on the assertion that he was being sought by the military in Honduras because his brother, Juan, had deserted the army and was perceived as being a guerilla. He states that his parents had told him that members of the military were looking for him and his brother. The military's intention, if they could not locate Juan, was allegedly to hold the applicant as hostage.
[3]
The Board did make a significant error in its treatment of the factual evidence. One of the reasons why it disbelieved the applicant's story was because "if the army had wanted to obtain a hostage to force Juan to return, they presumably could have taken the claimant's brother Giovani or one of his three sisters. No evidence was introduced that Giovani or his sisters had been threatened".
[4]
There was no mention in the evidence of the applicant's brother Giovani or his three sisters. The applicant was not asked whether they existed, where they lived or how they were related to him. The applicant's personal information form (dated July 27, 1992) listed two siblings, a brother Juan and a brother José. No other siblings were identified.
[5]
At the hearing, the personal data form of the applicant's brother, José, who had been granted refugee status sometime after he fled Honduras in the mid 1980's, was submitted, as part of the record. José listed as his siblings, four sisters, a brother Juan, a brother Giovani and the applicant. This form was completed on November 18, 1987.
[6]
When the personal data form of the brother was introduced before the Board, as an attachment to the applicant's personal information form, counsel for the applicant indicated that he did not consider the refugee claim of the brother José or the documentation relating thereto to be relevant to the applicant's claim and therefore he would not be "eliciting any further [... [?]]". The presiding Board member indicated acquiescence to the irrelevant nature of that document:
"Yeah, okay, I, we'll ... if the others are irrelevant, the best thing to do to avoid confusion is to enter the copy of the birth certificate for the claimant as Exhibit C-3, just so we know what we're referring to, if the need arises to refer to anything else we can deal with it at that time."
[7]
No further reference was made to José's personal data form, yet the Board relied on information contained therein as significant reason for drawing the negative inference that the applicant's story was implausible.
[8]
With respect to whether or not the army was looking for the applicant, the Board based its finding, that it considered this to be implausible, on what it understood to be the applicant's evidence as to when and in what manner the army was watching his parents' home and the communication which he received from his parents in this regard. The Board's reason for finding that it was implausible that the army was watching the parents' home is expressed as follows:
"according to the claimant, no one was watching his home when he returned half an hour after the second visit from the army in January 1990 [when the army visited his parents to warn them that the applicant would be taken hostage if Juan did not return]. If the army had not found it useful to watch the house until he returned from a visit on 'January evening in 1990, the panel finds it implausible that they would be watching the parents' house more than two years later'."
[9]
The applicant's evidence concerning the surveillance of his parents' house on the January evening in 1990 was that he did not know whether the military were or were not engaged in surveillance. He assumed that they were not because they had not apprehended him. With respect to the military's watching of the house during the succeeding two years, his evidence was:
"CLAIMANT ... They continuously go by the area or like I said they have someone in the town who watches.
"RHO But they're not sitting watching the house 24 hours?
"CLAIMANT No, I don't think so."
[10]
It is not immediately obvious how the conclusion which the Board drew follows from the evidence.
[11]
The Board also seems to have assumed that there was only one communication between the applicant and his parents respecting the alleged watching for him by the army and that that was a telephone call to him in New York. There were other communications, one a letter, when he was in Mexico, and at least one communication since he arrived in Canada.
[12]
With respect to the argument that the Board applied the wrong burden of proof, this is based on a concluding paragraph of the decision in which the Board says:
"The panel agrees with counsel that documentary evidence establishes that aspects of the human rights situation in Honduras are deplorable.
This does not mean, however,
that all Hondurans are victims of persecution, or
that there is a good chance that the claimant would be persecuted
if he were to return. For the reasons set out above, and after consideration of all the evidence, the panel concludes that
there is not a reasonable chance that the claimant would be persecuted
, if he were returned to Honduras, by reason of any of the grounds set out in the Convention refugee definition." (underlining added)
[13]
This paragraph does raise a question as to whether the Board applied the correct burden of proof.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  following:
"We required counsel for the respondent Minister to respond on one ground only, namely, whether in reaching its conclusion the Board applied the correct standard of proof.
"The error alleged appears in the reasons of the Board at Appeal Book page 106 where, after conducting a thorough and detailed review of the evidence in the case, the Board concluded that it had serious reservations about the appellant's credibility and stated as follows:
'We are unable, therefore,
to give him the benefit of the doubt
. There is room for expression of his anti-communist opinions in contemporary Sofia and while the changes are not fundamental we are not
convinced
that the claimant faces a reasonable chance that he
would be
persecuted for his political opinions should he return to Bulgaria.' (Emphasis added)
"We are all of the view that by using the words that I have underlined, the Board appears to have placed upon the appellant a burden of proof that was too high, having regard to the jurisprudence of the court ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 753;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In doing so, the Board committed an error which, in our view was fatal to the validity of its decision. Consequently, the appeal is allowed, the decision of the Board is set aside and the matter is remitted to a panel of the Board differently constituted for rehearing and redetermination in a manner not inconsistent with these reasons."
[14]
Unlike the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, the Board in this case did not
expressly
state that it was unable to give the applicant the benefit of the doubt. Also, there are several phrasings of the test, early on in the decision, where the Board stated the test correctly. One of these is, however, what I consider to be the "boiler plate" opening that one finds at the beginning of most Board decisions and which is not very persuasive as a reflection of the Board's actual analysis. While, I agree with counsel for the respondent that it is not appropriate to pull one expression of the burden of proof from the context of the decision as a whole and that it is important not to excessively pick apart a Board's decision, at the same time, in the context of this case, I find I am left with a doubt as to whether or not the Board applied the correct test. That taken together with the Board's treatment of the evidence, particularly that relating to the applicant's siblings, has convinced me that the prudent course of action is to quash the Board's decision and return the matter for rehearing by a different panel.
Application allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sms
[End of document]