[1]
Dubé, J.
[Translation]: This is a motion to strike certain paragraphs from the statement of claim of the plaintiff ("Ludco") on the ground that these parts of the pleading disclose no reasonable cause of action (rule 419(1)(a)), they are immaterial or redundant (419(1)(b)) and they may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action (419(1)(d)). This motion is directed against not only the Ludco statement of claim, but also those of the other plaintiffs, the three Ludmer children, so that this order will apply mutatis mutandis to the paragraphs in question of the four statements of claim.
[2]
During the period from 1977 to 1979, the plaintiffs purchased shares in overseas companies. In order to do this, they borrowed money and paid interest. They also reported certain dividends, disposed of the shares in question and reported a capital gain. The plaintiffs claimed a deduction for the interest paid on the loans. By reassessments covering the 1981 to 1985 taxation years, the Minister of National Revenue ("the Minister") determined that this interest expense was not deductible within the meaning of s. 20(1)(c) of the Canadian
Income Tax Act
in force at that time (S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 63, as amended) ("the
Act
"), the relevant portion of which reads as follows:
"20(1) Notwithstanding paragraphs 18(1)(a), (b) and (h), in computing a taxpayer's income for a taxation year from a business or property, there may be deducted such of the following amounts as are wholly applicable to that source or such part of the following amounts as may reasonably be regarded as applicable thereto:
. . . . .
(c) an amount paid in the year or payable in respect of the year (depending upon the method regularly followed by the taxpayer in computing his income), pursuant to a legal obligation to pay interest on
(i) borrowed money used for the purpose of earning income from a business or property (other than borrowed money used to acquire property the income from which would be exempt or to a acquire a life insurance policy),"
[3]
The reassessments in question were appealed to the Tax Court of Canada, which affirmed them. The four taxpayers then filed the present appeals to this court.
[4]
In their statements of claim the taxpayers allege, inter alia, that an out of court statement and representations made by the Minister at the time of an audit in respect of the 1979 to 1982 taxation years led them into error as to the deductibility of the interest expenses, so that they took out further loans of the same nature during the subsequent taxation years; that their cases were treated differently from those of other shareholders involved in similar investments; and that the assessment is arbitrary in that the Minister did not follow his own policy which was known and in force during the period in question. The plaintiffs do not limit their claim to the remedies specifically set out in s. 177 of the
Act
, but further seek a declaratory judgment holding that the reassessments in question are void, on the ground that the Minister did not have the authority to make them, in view of the fact that they were arbitrary and discriminatory and that they were made contrary to the duty of the Minister to act fairly. It is these points in the statements of claim that are the subject of this motion to strike.
[5]
It is well known in motions to strike that the court must take the allegations of fact set out in the pleading or pleadings in question as proven. Moreover, the applicant must establish that it is plain and obvious that the pleading in question does not disclose any reasonable cause of action. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.R. 287; 18 D.L.R.(4th) 481; 12 Admin. L.R. 16.)
[6]
In this case, it is not immediately plain and obvious that this is so, given that counsel had to argue the matter for an entire day. On the other hand, this is a complex case and, while I do not propose to take the time to reiterate all the arguments and all the case law argued during the hearing of this motion, an overview of the parties' arguments will be useful.
[7]
The applicant asserts that in principle an interest expense is not deductible in computing a taxpayer's income if it was incurred in respect of a claim or a debt that is capital in nature. Since an interest expense is essentially capital in nature, deduction of such an expense is theoretically not allowed under s. 18(1)(b) of the
Act
. (See the reasons of Chief Justice Dickson in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 5059.) The statutory exception set out in s. 20(1)(c)(i), cited supra, provides that the money borrowed must be used for the purpose of earning income in order for the interest paid on it to be deductible. In the present case, the plaintiffs contend that they in fact borrowed for this purpose, and that is what the judge hearing the case on the merits will have to determine.
[8]
According to the applicant, in order to make this determination the court will not have the power to go against the
Act
and vacate the reassessments for other reasons that are not provided in the
Act
, such as the reasons argued by the plaintiffs, with which this motion to strike is concerned. The applicant relies on the principle laid down by the Exchequer Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 1050 which holds that in considering an appeal of an assessment the court must examine the validity of the assessment and not the correctness of the reasons relied on by the Minister in making the assessment: an assessment may be valid even if the reasons relied on by the Minister are incorrect. This principle was reiterated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 5416, at 5417, in which the Federal Court of Appeal noted that the Minister's reasoning in making an assessment cannot affect a taxpayer's liability to pay the tax imposed by the
Act
itself.
[9]
The applicant asserts that neither the audit for the earlier taxation years, not the Minister's confirmation of the assessments made for those taxation years, nor the fact that the plaintiffs relied on that last point in continuing to incur interest expenses for 1981 to 1985 constitutes a reasonable cause of action. According to the applicant, these arguments are bad in law: under s. 152(4) of the
Act
, the Minister has the statutory power to make a reassessment at any time within the limitations imposed by the
Act
(i.e., three or four years, depending on the years in issue), which establishes that he is not bound by the earlier assessments.
[10]
The applicant cites the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) in which the Minister issued an assessment three times for the same taxation year. The taxpayer argued that he had been subject to unfair and inequitable treatment, but the court dismissed this argument on the ground that the Minister could and had to correct incorrect assessments within the time allowed by the
Act
. Similarly, the courts have on several occasions affirmed the principle that the Minister is not bound by assessments issued for other years. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 5121 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 1539 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 5243 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 6261-6262 (F.C.T.D.), affirmed at (1993), 73 D.T.C. 5304 (F.C.A.)).
[11]
With respect to the acts and representations of agents of the Minister alleged in the plaintiff's statements of claim, the applicant contends that these grounds of appeal cannot be raised if they are contrary to the application of the
Act
. She cites the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 523, in which Pigeon, J., held with respect to the earlier approval of a pension plan by the Minister for registration purposes: "... it seems clear to me that the Minister cannot be bound by an approval given when the conditions prescribed by the law were not met". The applicant points out that citing principles of administrative law will not result in the Minister being bound by representations made by his agents, if the representations in question are inconsistent with the applicant
Act
: what counts is not the interpretation given by the Minister, but the application of the
Act
as it stands.
[12]
With respect to discrimination against the plaintiffs, the applicant alleges that even if the plaintiffs were treated differently from other investors in similar cases, that is not sufficient to vacate an assessment. According to the applicant, this principle derives from the decisions in
First Torland Investments Ltd. and Wallace R. Carter
, supra. Moreover, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), affirmed at [1980] C.T.C. 1; 31 N.R. 426 (F.C.A.) the appellants argued that the manner in which the Minister treated other communities of the same church was more favourable than the manner in which he treated their community, and that the assessment he made in their regard was therefore invalid. The Federal Court dismissed the appeal on the ground that even if the arrangements with the other communities were illegal, that was not a ground to declare the Minister's assessment of their community invalid.
[13]
The applicant refers to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 3305, which applies the comments of the Assistant Chief Justice of this court under the
Excise Act
, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  it was held that the fact that the activities of other businesses of the same nature are similar to those of a plaintiff is of no relevance, because otherwise the result would be an administrative upheavel. The applicant asserts that the
Act
is identical for everyone, even if the administration cannot correct all incorrect returns. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  allegations of fact in respect of the supposedly discriminatory treatment imposed on the plaintiffs may require such voluminous evidence that to introduce it might embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action, by prolonging it unreasonably by a parade of witnesses and investors. Moreover, the Canadian taxation system is based on the principle of self-assessment, that is, that it is up to each taxpayer to compute his or her own income tax. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 385.) The
Act
does not provide that each taxpayer must submit all his or her documents to the Minister's officials in order for them to determine his or her taxable income. The Minister relies on taxpayers, and occasional examination or a system of random audits may be the only methods of preserving the integrity of the self-assessment system.
[15]
With respect to the plaintiffs' allegations concerning a policy within the Department of allowing an interest deduction even with respect to shares which do not produce dividends, the applicant asserts that the Minister is not bound by his own opinions or the policies of his Department when that opinion or those policies are contrary to the
Act
. She points out that in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), at 6184-6185, this court held that the fact that the Minister did not assess in accordance with his own representations, as published in an interpretation bulletin, cannot be set up against the Minister. Moreover, the Department's policies cannot constitute estoppel or a ground of nullity because they cannot go against the
Act
. According to the applicant, representations relating to the Minister's own legal opinion cannot be set up against the Minister as an argument in law for vacating an assessment. (See
No. 358 v. Minister of National Revenue
, 56 D.T.C. 466 at 468 (Appeal Bd.).)
[16]
Finally, with respect to the jurisdiction of the court over the remedies sought by the plaintiffs in this case, the applicant contends that the plaintiffs are not entitled to a declaratory judgment and that the court cannot award any other remedy than those provided by the
Act
. The remedies provided in s. 177 are as follows:
"177 The Federal Court may dispose of an appeal, other than an appeal to which s. 180 applies, by
(a) dismissing it; or
(b) allowing it and
(i) vacating the assessment,
(ii) varying the assessment,
(iii) restoring the assessment, or
(iv) referring the assessment back to the Minister for reconsideration and reassessment."
[17]
The applicant relies on the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 6345 (F.C.A.), at 6346 concerning a taxpayer who challenged the validity of the Minister's assessment by applying for certiorari under s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
. The trial judge found for the taxpayer. The Federal Court of Appeal reversed that decision on the ground that the only way for the taxpayer to challenge the Minister's assessments was to proceed under the provisions of the
Act
. That court reiterated the same principle in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 6647, at 6652. Accordingly, the plaintiffs may make their challenge only by appealing under the
Act
and not by way of declaratory judgment.
[18]
Of course, the plaintiffs see the merits of their cause of action from a different perspective. First, they assert that the allegations of fact in their statements of claim, which are taken as true, disclose an at least arguable cause of action. In their view, they involve questions of evidence that the trial judge will have to weigh. The plaintiffs point out, with case law in support (see, inter alia,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 1270 (F.C.A.)) that if the court is not persuaded that it is plain and obvious that the action is futile and has no chance of success, they must not be deprived of their right to be heard. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 346 (F.C.T.D.).) The court must hesitate to strike the pleadings in question unless they are clearly immaterial or unimportant (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  appear, as in this case, to be closely related to the merits of the action. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 228 (F.C.A.).)
[19]
The plaintiffs contend that under the provisions of the
Civil Code of Lower Canada
and the principles of estoppel, it is at least arguable that the defendant is bound by the Minister's admission (aveu) and by his representations of fact, on which they relied, to their prejudice. First, an admission (aveu) is a judicial admission that cannot be retracted without leave of the court. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 231 (C.C.A.)) the Minister is foreclosed from alleging as a fact that the interest expenses in question were not incurred for the purpose of earning income.
[20]
The plaintiffs assert that the courts have frequently had recourse to the interpretation of administrative policies in their own determinations of federal taxation provisions (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)), and that the validity of this approach has been confirmed by the Supreme Court of Canada. (See, for example,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .) It follows that it is at least arguable that the Minister's policies are an important tool for the judicial interpretation of the effect of s. 20(1)(c).
[21]
The plaintiffs also advance arguments based on fairness. In their view, it is at least arguable that in administering the
Act
, the Minister is bound to act fairly. In light of his own policy, the Minister breached his duty to the plaintiffs when he disallowed, retroactively and without prior notice, deduction of their interest expenses. In fact, the courts have ruled against the retroactive application of changes in administrative policies, including tax policies. (See, for example,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 159 (Que.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 505-506 (Que. C.A.).) It follows that it is at least arguable that the Minister could not simply ignore or reverse, retroactively, his own policies in respect of the application of s. 20(1)(c) of the
Act
.
[22]
In reply to the argument that considerations of fairness do not permit a court not to apply the
Act
as it stands, the plaintiffs contend that this question is far from settled ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.)): the law of fairness, like other areas of the law, is in a state of change, and the liability of the Crown for the consequences of errors attributable to its own representations is in the process of being expanded. (See, for example,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1985] 1 C.N.L.R. 120.) Moreover, because of its inherent complexity, more flexible application of the doctrine of fairness is required in the tax law context.
[23]
The plaintiffs dispute the applicant's argument that the court has no power to enforce the Minister's policies in an appeal under the
Act
. In view of the selective application of these current policies, this amounts, in their opinion, to giving the Minister complete freedom to target taxpayers as he sees fit by means of assessments that are contrary to his own policies. The plaintiffs contend that it is at least arguable that the court is not without any power in such circumstances.
[24]
In the plaintiffs' view, it was essentially contrary to fairness to make the reassessments in question. According to them, the Minister had expressly stated that the taxpayers would not be subject to reassessments in the taxation years following a satisfactory audit. They refer to s. 3(c) of the Information Circular 75-7R3, which provides:
"3. All pertinent aspects are studied to determine whether a return is to be reassessed within the four year limit. The Department will normally
. . . . .
(c) not reassess where the understatement of tax in the return for the year should have been apparent to the Department, considering the degree of examination and audit that the return received;"
[25]
With respect to their allegations of discriminatory treatment, the plaintiffs assert that it is at least arguable that the Minister sought not to have applied the
Act
arbitrarily or on the basis of irrelevant considerations. (See, for example,
Pioneer Laundry and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (P.C.).) Thus he could not target the plaintiffs in a discriminatory manner and disallow the deduction of interest expenses, when other taxpayers who had purchased similar shares could deduct those expenses, regardless of whether income was produced.
[26]
Finally, the plaintiffs emphasize that their appeal does not raise any question of jurisdiction. First, there is no doubt that the court has jurisdiction over admissions (aveu), estoppel and statutory interpretation. Moreover, in the absence of statutory procedures that are specific to the arguments raised by the plaintiffs, this court is the only forum with jurisdiction to dispose of the appeal under ss. 175 and 177.
[27]
They further assert that the arguments that the court may consider in an appeal under the
Act
are not limited to the quantum of tax, but include any matter relating to the validity of the impugned assessment. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 6647 at 321 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.T.C. 5098 at 5099 (F.C.A.).) The court's duty to consider the remedies in this case is particularly apparent in that there is no right without an appropriate remedy. The plaintiffs point out that the courts have generally rebuffed attempts to reject the statutory procedures available, (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 81; 45 W.A.C. 81; at 115-116.) including in tax cases. (See inter alia,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  appeal provided by the
Act
is the only procedure for challenging an assessment, and that in such an appeal the taxpayer may raise any argument that is relevant to the validity of the assessment.
[28]
In the alternative, the plaintiffs contend that even if the court has no jurisdiction under s. 177 of the
Act
to consider the arguments they have raised, it nonetheless has jurisdiction to do so under the supervisory powers conferred by the
Federal Court Act
.
[29]
In my view, the plaintiffs' arguments cannot be accepted. Although their counsel's arguments are imaginative and attractive, nonetheless, as noted earlier, the case law has clearly established that the Minister is not bound by his earlier assessments, or by his earlier policies, or by his representations or the representations of his agents, or by the treatment he gives or has given to other taxpayers. The Minister's duty is to apply the
Act
as it stands. The
Act
authorizes the Minister to amend his assessments and requires that he make assessments in accordance with the provisions of the
Act
. Moreover, in an appeal from an assessment, the court is limited to the remedies provided by the
Act
and cannot give a declaratory judgment.
[30]
Accordingly, the motion is allowed and the impugned paragraphs are struck from the plaintiffs' statements of claim, with costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/slm