[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is an appeal pursuant to s. 56 of the Trade Marks Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. T-10, as am., from a decision of the Registrar of Trade Marks dated November 30, 1984, wherein the appellant's application to register the trademark LEAF and design pursuant to s. 37(8) of the Trade Marks Act was refused.
[2]
The decision of the Registrar, quoted in its entirety, states as follows:
"On January 28, 1980, the applicant, Leaf Confections Limited, filed an application to register the trademark LEAF & Design (shown below) based upon proposed use in association with bubble gum.
[Diagram omitted. See printed volume]
"On October 6, 1980, the opponent, Maple Leaf Gardens Limited, filed a statement of opposition alleging that the applicant's trademark is not registrable and is not distinctive and that the applicant is not the person entitled to registration because the applicant's trademark is confusing with the opponent's trademark TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS & Design. The applicant filed a counter statement denying the allegations of the opponent. The opponent filed as its evidence an affidavit of Donald Crump. The applicant did not file any evidence. Only the opponent filed a written argument and neither party requested an oral hearing.
"The opponent is the owner of the Toronto Maple Leafs hockey club, one of the member clubs of the National Hockey League and operates the Maple Leaf Gardens area in Toronto. In his affidavit, Crump describes the substantial use the opponent has made of the following TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS design mark in association with various snack foods, beverages and souvenir items sold by it at Maple Leaf Gardens. For example, for the period September 1, 1978, to August 9, 1981, the opponent sold over 3,000,000 drinks and cups bearing the mark TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS design and over 500,000 packages of peanuts bearing the mark TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS design. The total attendance of persons attending Maple Leaf Gardens every year is in the order of 2,000,000 people and the TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS design mark is on prominent display in the Gardens whether or not the Toronto Maple Leafs hockey team happen to be playing. Having regard to the substantial use the opponent has made of the TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS design mark, the fact that it has used this mark in association with snack foods closely related to the wares covered by the applicant's application, i.e., bubble gum, and in view of the considerable degree of resemblance between the opponent's TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS design mark and the applicant's trademark LEAF & Design, I am not satisfied that the applicant has discharged the onus upon it to establish that its trademark is distinctive.
[Diagram omitted. See printed volume]
"In view of the above, and having been duly authorized by the Registrar of Trade Marks under s. 63(4) of the Trade Marks Act to act in opposition proceedings, I refuse the applicant's application pursuant to s. 37(8) of the Act."
[3]
Leaf Confections Limited is appealing the decision on the grounds that the Registrar erred in law in finding that the applied for trademark was confusing with the respondent trademark TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS and design; that the Registrar erred in finding that the respondent's trademark had become distinctive in relation to snack foods and that the Registrar erred in holding that there was an onus on the appellant to establish that its trademark is distinctive.
[4]
The appellant argues that LEAF has been used as a registered trademark and trade name in Canada since at least 1963 in association with confections and has been used in Canada since at least 1978 in association with bubble gum. The appellant maintains that during this time no instance of confusion with TORONTO MAPLE LEAF trademarks or trade names has been brought to its attention.
[5]
According to the appellant, the fact that LEAF and design and TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS and design have co-existed for a considerable period of time without any evidence of confusion is significant in that if no confusion has occurred in the past, it is reasonable to assume that there will be no confusion in the future.
[6]
Further, the appellant argues that no one, with the exception of the Canadian government, can claim exclusivity in the maple leaf design and that the maple leaf design and the words "maple leaf" and "leaf" are in common use. In support of this argument, the appellant submitted in evidence an Order-in-Council dated September 2, 1965, bearing Privy Council Number 1965-1623, concerning the use by the public of the maple leaf. The Order-in-Council provides that any person may use a design or trademark incorporating the eleven point maple leaf that forms part of the National Flag. These facts, according to the appellant, limit the scope of protection available to marks incorporating the maple leaf, so that neither the appellant's nor the respondent's mark would be entitled to much protection beyond the specific wares or services with which they are associated and the specific form in which they are displayed.
[7]
The appellant concedes that the respondent's TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS and design are known throughout Canada. Nevertheless, the mark is only known in association with hockey and the respondent's reputation exceeds no further than that; it is not a mark which is associated with snack foods; that the respondent's business is limited to the hockey entertainment and associated services it provides at the Maple Leaf Gardens. Any food items sold by the respondent are dispensed entirely within the Maple Leaf Gardens and not in other retail outlets. The appellant maintains that its LEAF and design have also become well known across Canada in association with confection items which are sold in numerous retail outlets.
[8]
Finally, the appellant maintains that its mark and design consists of two elements: LEAF, which has been in use in Canada since 1963 without any evidence of confusion together with the design element, the maple leaf, to which no one can claim exclusivity. Therefore, although the marks in question do bear some resemblance, that resemblance rests in a design used by consent under the aforementioned Order-in-Council.
[9]
The respondent's first submission is that the appellant's application for registration should be refused because it does not comply with the provisions of s. 29(b) of the Trade Marks Act. It argues that the application, based upon proposed use in Canada, does not comply with the provisions of s. 29(b) since the applicant (the appellant herein) admitted to its use of the applied-for mark in Canada in association with wares listed in the application prior to the filing date of its application.
[10]
Further the respondent alleges that the applicant's mark is not distinctive and is so similar to the respondent's mark that it would cause confusion in the manner and circumstances described in s. 6 of the Trade Marks Act. It is the respondent's position that a very well known or famous trademark, such as its own, is entitled to a broad ambit of protection which can extend to different classes of wares or services; a famous trademark is entitled to broad protection notwithstanding that it may be of prima facie low inherent distinctiveness because the mark has in fact attained a secondary meaning distinctive of the wares or services of a single source in Canada (i.e. hockey entertainment).
[11]
Section 12(1)(d) of the Trade Marks Act provides that a trademark is not registrable if it is confusing with a registered mark. The Act defines the word "confusing" as a mark "the use of which would cause confusion in the manner and circumstances described in s. 6 of the Act". The primary determination to be made in relation to the issue of confusion is the degree of similarity between the two trademarks in terms of their appearance, sound or the idea conveyed by them.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  for registration, the holder of a trademark that is already registered is not required to show that the applied for mark is the same or nearly the same as the registered mark. It is sufficient if the respondent can establish that the use of the appellant's mark would likely lead to the inference that the wares associated with it and those associated with the registered mark were produced by the same person.
[12]
Accordingly, the basic issue before me is whether the applicant's proposed trademark LEAF and design is confusing with the respondent's trademark MAPLE LEAF and design. Section 6(5) of the Trade Marks Act contains the legislative guidelines upon which the court is to rely in its determination of whether trademarks are confusing. That section provides as follows:
"6.(5) In determining whether trademarks or trade names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time and trademarks or trade names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
[13]
Although each of the factors enumerated above are to be given consideration, it is not the intention of the legislation to require the court to indulge in a microscopic examination of the two marks in its ascertainment of whether the marks are so similar as to be confusing.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Dubé, J., stated at p. 159:
"In considering the similarity of trade names or trademarks it is not necessarily the best approach to set the words side by side and to examine them letter by letter, or sound by sound, but it has been, I think, the general practice to look at them in a broad, general way and to assess the first impression on the eyes and ears. It seems obvious that a careful observer will quickly find points of dissimilarity between different words, otherwise the words are not different or the observer not careful. We must assess what would be the recollection from these words of a person who has no special cause for examining them very attentively: see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ."
[14]
With that principle in mind, I turn now to a consideration of the factors enumerated in s. 6(5) of the Trade Marks Act.
(a)
The inherent distinctiveness of the marks
and the extent to which they have become known
[15]
There is no question that the respondent's trademark is extremely well known in Canada. The Registrar of Trade Marks so finds in his reasons, based on the evidence before him relying particularly on the affidavit of Donald Crump, Treasurer of Maple Leaf Gardens Limited. It is established that the respondent has for several decades made available to persons attending home games of the Toronto Maple Leafs hockey club, various confections, souvenirs and other items. For example the respondent has sold in the Maple Leaf Gardens such items as T-shirts, key tags, pucks, bumper stickers, mugs, hats, calendars, crests and hockey sticks as well as such food items as hot dogs, popcorn, potato chips and soft drinks all bearing the TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS mark and design.
[16]
In addition, the evidence establishes that the total attendance of persons attending Maple Leaf Gardens every year is in the order 2,000,000 people and that the TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS design mark is on prominent display in the Maple Leaf Gardens at all times. The Toronto Maple Leafs hockey club is supported through the sales of television rights pertaining to the telecasting of the club's hockey games and the activities of the hockey club are widely reported in the press throughout Canada.
[17]
On the other hand there is evidence that the appellant's mark LEAF has been used as a trademark and trade name in Canada since 1963 in association with bubble gum, candy and frozen confections. However, the LEAF and design which the appellant wishes to register has only been in use in association with bubble gum since 1978. There is no question that the trademark and trade name LEAF appear on the packages of many of the appellant's products. In fact, the maple leaf symbol generally is used on the packaging of all types of products by a variety of manufacturers as a means of identifying the product as one of Canadian origin. These facts are established by the exhibits.
[18]
Nevertheless the appellant's mark LEAF has not been used as a principal identifying mark in a manner which would give it the same level of distinctiveness as the respondent's mark and design or which would have rendered it as well known in Canada as the respondent's TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS mark and design.
[19]
I am satisfied therefore that the evidence establishes that the respondent's trademark and design are very well known in Canada and have acquired a considerable degree of distinctiveness in fact over a period of many years. The appellant's mark and design have not become known in Canada to the same extent as has the mark and design of the respondent.
(b)
The length of time the trademarks have been in use
[20]
The second factor which the court must examine in determining whether a proposed trademark is confusing with one already registered is the length of time the trademarks involved have been in use.
[21]
The evidence is clear that the respondent's mark and design have been in use in Canada for several decades. Prior to 1967 the style of pictorial representation of a maple leaf used by the respondent and displayed as a trademark on items sold to the public at Maple Leaf Gardens was a conventional maple leaf with a multiplicity of points. In 1967 the respondent changed the design of the TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS emblem to a more clean-cut and modern design and registered this new design as a trademark under Registration Numbers 168,399 and 168,401.
[22]
As previously stated the appellant's mark LEAF has been used since approximately 1963 in association with bubble gum, candy and frozen confections. However, the LEAF and design mark which the appellant now desires to register has only been in use in Canada since 1978 in association with bubble gum. In my opinion, the appellant's use of its mark and design for approximately eight years simply does not compare to the decades of use which the respondent's trademark has enjoyed.
[23]
Where a trademark has been in use for a considerable length of time, as has the trademark of the respondent, it will have acquired the sort of reputation and goodwill that the Trade Marks Act is designed to protect. There is no question that the respondent's long and extensive use of its distinctive trademark TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS and design entitles that mark to a broad protection.
(c)
The Nature of the Wares
[24]
The court must consider the nature of the respective wares or services of the parties. Where a mark is alleged to be calculated to deceive by reason of similarity to another mark, consideration must be given to the nature of the goods or services in association with which the marks are used and the class of customers who purchase such goods or services must also be considered.
[25]
The appellant argues that it proposes to use its LEAF and design in association with bubble gum and that the respondent is not in the business of selling food items independent of the hockey entertainment services which it offers. Any food items which the respondent does sell are sold entirely within Maple Leaf Gardens and not in normal retail outlets.
[26]
Although I am in general agreement with the appellant on this matter, there does exist some degree of similarity between the wares offered by both parties. As previously stated, the respondent sells such items as peanuts, potato chips, popcorn, soft drinks, hot chocolate and coffee which are in containers bearing the TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS mark and design. While it may be true that the respondent does not sell bubble gum, there is no requirement for a strict affinity or analogy between the wares of the appellant now before the court and those of the respondent in order for me to conclude that the marks are confusing. Trademarks may in fact be confusing whether or not the wares in association with which they are used are of the same general class.
[27]
When this factor is considered in conjunction with the others set out in s. 6(5) of the Act, I am satisfied that the class of customers who would be the most avid consumers of the appellant's bubble gum, i.e. young children, would conclude that the wares associated with the two trademarks are the wares of the same party even though those wares may not be of the same general class.
(d)
Nature of the trade.
[28]
The nature of the trade and the manner in which the trademarks are used in the trade are factors to be considered in determining whether trademarks are confusing.
[29]
Under this heading I must agree with the appellant that there is little evidence of similarity in the channels of trade between the appellant's and respondent's products. The appellant offers its wares for sale throughout general retail stores across Canada, while food and souvenir items sold by the respondent are confined to sales within the Maple Leaf Gardens.
[30]
Nevertheless, it is clear that in considering the elements of s. 6(5) of the Trade Marks Act, each element need not be interpreted as having equal weight. A particular case might justify greater significance being given to one criterion over others. As previously stated, I find the respondent's mark and design to be a strong one, well known throughout Canada. In such cases the courts have held that the distinction between the wares and the nature of the trade of the two competing marks becomes less important. Certainly those factors are not conclusive of the issue of confusion; they are only incidental criteria to be regarded in ascertaining whether trademarks are confusing in the sense that they resemble each other so as to be likely to mislead the public. Accordingly, while the nature of the wares or the channels of trade in which the appellant and respondent are engaged are material and relevant to the issue of confusion they are not, in balance, determinative.
[31]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Proudfoot, J., stated at pp. 115-6:
"The defendants argue that the plaintiff's trademarks and the defendants' trademarks are used in different channels of trade. However, it is significant that a trademark causes confusion 'whether or not such wares or services are of the same general class'.
As long as the inference of common origin is likely, the criteria of confusion are satisfied
." (Emphasis added)
(e)
The degree of resemblance between the trademarks
[32]
Finally, the degree of resemblance between the trademarks in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them is a relevant circumstance to be regarded by the court. The principle invoked by the provisions of the Trade Marks Act is that a mark offered for registration must not be confusing with a registered trademark; in order to be distinctive and capable of registration a trademark must not so resemble an earlier mark as to be calculated to deceive. Nevertheless, it is not necessary to show an intent on the part of the appellant to deceive. The court is entitled to consider all the surrounding circumstances and to decide whether or not the marks are so similar as to be likely to deceive and confuse.
[33]
For the purpose of deciding whether there is a likelihood of deception the whole mark should be looked at. A trademark does not lie in each of its particular parts but in the combination of them all so that it is the impression created by the mark as a whole which must be considered. It is the combination of the elements that constitutes a trademark and gives it distinctiveness and it is the effect of the trademark as a whole, rather than any particular feature that must be considered.
[34]
In my opinion the Registrar was correct in his finding that there is a sufficient degree of resemblance between the two marks as would be likely to cause confusion. The appellant's LEAF and design and the respondent's TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS and design both have as their principal feature a pictorial representation of a maple leaf. It is true, as the appellant argues, that no one can claim exclusivity in the maple leaf design. Nevertheless, the image of the appellant's maple leaf with LEAF printed across it is so similar to the respondent's maple leaf with TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS printed across it that I am convinced that the inference of common origin is clear. This is especially true in light of the respondent's evidence that the TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS hockey team is commonly referred to by the media and the general population as the LEAFS. Accordingly, it is likely that consumers, who may have an imprecise recollection of the respondent's trademark would, upon seeing bubble gum sold in a package which bears as its principle identifying mark a maple leaf with the word LEAF printed across it, be misled as to the origin of the wares.
[35]
Jurisprudence has established that it is only the persons who are likely to become purchasers who are to be considered and the test is not that a particular class of purchaser, for example, the highly educated, would not be deceived. I am convinced that a young person seeing bubble gum packaged in a wrapper which bore as its principal identifying mark the appellant's LEAF and design would be misled into thinking that the product was associated with the Toronto Maple Leafs hockey club and would confuse the appellant's mark and design with those of the respondent.
[36]
Not only is there a close resemblance between the two marks in appearance and sound but also in the impressions conveyed. The word portions LEAF and TORONTO MAPLE LEAFS and the placement of those words across a pictorial representation of a maple leaf are strong factors leading to the inference that the wares associated with the trademarks are manufactured by the same person.
[37]
All these elements of similarity are, in my view, elements in a "first impression" test and I am satisfied that the conclusion reached by the Registrar of Trade Marks, that the marks are so similar as to be confusing, is correct.
[38]
In light of the foregoing it is not necessary for me to deal with the respondent's argument that registration should be refused because the appellant's application for registration failed to comply with s. 29(b) of the Trade Marks Act. In this regard I would comment that it is an established principle that new grounds of opposition can be raised in an appeal from a decision of the Registrar of Trade Marks. However, since my finding is that the appellant's mark and design is not registrable because it is confusing with the respondent's already registered trademark, I do not see any purpose to be gained in making a determination as to the appellant's alleged failure to comply with the application requirements of the Act.
[39]
For the above reasons, the appellant's appeal is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]