Introduction
[1]
Rothstein, J.
[orally]: There are four issues in this extension application by the applicants (Merck) under s. 7(5) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, SOR/93-133 which is brought at the commencement of the hearing of the merits of Merck's prohibition application under s. 6(1) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
(1) What is the status of a prohibition application brought by a patentee under s. 6(1) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> after expiry of the statutory stay [see footnote 1] provided under s. 7(1)(e) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ? Closely connected to this issue is the question of whether the court may extend time under s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> after expiry of the statutory stay.
(2) If the court may extend time under s. 7(5) after expiry of the statutory stay, is the extension application res judicata?
(3) If the extension application is res judicata are there special circumstances justifying the court exercising its discretion to allow the same issue to be raised and decided again?
(4) If the matter is not res judicata, should an extension order be made and for what period?
[2]
The <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> provide a scheme under which a generic drug company (and others) (referred to in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> as a second person) may apply to the Minister of National Health and Welfare for a Notice of Compliance (NOC) [see footnote 2] for among other things, a process of producing a pharmaceutical product that is the subject of a patent. Under the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the patentee, (referred to in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> as a first person), upon receiving a notice of allegation by the generic competitor that its process will not infringe the patentee's patent, may apply to the court for an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a NOC to the generic competitor. Upon the patentee filing a prohibition application, the Minister is automatically prohibited from issuing a NOC for up to 30 months, (which period may be shortened or extended if a party has failed to reasonably cooperate in expediting the application), during which the patentee is given an opportunity to prove that the generic competitor's allegation of noninfringement is not justified. In the event the court finds the allegation of noninfringement is not justified the court shall issue a prohibition order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a NOC to the generic competitor until expiry of the patentee's relevant patent.
[3]
In the main application in this matter, Merck seeks an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance to Apotex Inc. (Apotex) in respect of the medicine lovastatin (an anti-cholesterol drug) until the expiration of Merck's relevant patent for this medicine. Sections 6(1) and 6(2) provide:
"6(1) A first person may, within 45 days after being served with a notice of an allegation pursuant to paragraph 5(3)(b), apply to a court for an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance until after the expiration of one or more of the patents that are the subject of an allegation.
"(2) The court shall make an order pursuant to subs. (1) in respect of a patent that is the subject of one or more allegations if it finds that none of those allegations is justified."
[4]
Section 7 of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> establishes a series of successive time limits within which the Minister is enjoined from issuing a NOC to a generic competitor. The time limits of relevance here are set out in ss. 7(1)(b), 7(1)(d), 7(1)(e) and 7(1)(f) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"7(1) The Minister shall not issue a notice of compliance to a second person before the latest of
. . . . .
(b) the day on which the second person complies with s. 5,
. . . . .
(d) subject to subs. (3), the expiration of 45 days after the receipt of proof of service of a notice of any allegation pursuant to paragraph 5(3)(b) in respect of any patent on the patent list,
(e) subject to subss. (2), (3) and (4), the expiration of 30 months after the receipt of proof of the making of any application referred to in s. 6(1), and
(f) the expiration of any patent that is the subject of an order pursuant to s. 6(1)."
Also relevant is s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"7(5) A court may shorten or extend the time limit referred to in paragraph (1)(e) in respect of an application where the court has not yet made an order pursuant to s. 6(1) in respect of that application and where the court finds that a party to the application failed to reasonably cooperate in expediting the application."
Chronology Of Events
[5]
In this case the statutory stay expired on December 1, 1996. When Merck applied to the court on February 13, 1997 to extend time under s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Muldoon, J., formulated a preliminary question which I paraphrase — what is the status of a prohibition application after expiry of a statutory stay? The chronology of events will indicate how the preliminary question arose:
(1) April 17, 1993 — Merck filed patent lists pursuant to the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> for lovastatin.
(2) April 19, 1993 — Apotex forwarded a notice of allegations claiming noninfringement of Merck's relevant patent.
(3) June 1, 1993 — Merck commenced prohibition proceedings pursuant to s. 6(1) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
(4) September 6, 1995 — Richard, J., extended the 30 month statutory stay to December 1st, 1996 from December 1st, 1995.
(5) October 23, 1996 — Dubé, J., extended the statutory stay "until such time as a judgment is rendered on the merits of the application for prohibition herein."
(6) February 10, 1997 — Federal Court of Appeal allowed an appeal from the order of Dubé, J., and quashed his order extending time. As a result, the statutory stay expired on December 1st, 1996, and as of that date, the Minister was no longer prohibited from issuing a notice of compliance to Apotex. However, the notice of compliance has not yet been issued by the Minister. [see footnote 3]
(7) February 13, 1997 — Merck applied to this court for an extension order pursuant to s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Arising from this application, Muldoon, J., ordered that the parties address the preliminary question.
Analysis On Preliminary Question
.
[6]
I find it convenient to deal with the preliminary question together with the question of whether the court has jurisdiction to extend time under s. 7(5) after expiry of the statutory stay. Nothing in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> expressly provides that the court loses jurisdiction to extend the statutory stay or to decide the prohibition application upon the expiry of the statutory stay. The only express time constraint is in s. 7(5) with respect to the issuance of an extension order. The extension order may be made "where the court has not yet made an order pursuant to s. 6(1)".
[7]
While the court may not read words into a statute or regulation, a statute or regulation cannot be considered in the abstract. Regard must be had to the context and scheme of the provisions at issue.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], court file A-843-96, February 10, 1997, Strayer, J.A., discussed the background and provided some explanation of the nature of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Among other things, he observed at p. 5 that the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> provide an extraordinary means of protection for pharmaceutical patentees in respect of infringement beyond an infringement action, which remains for the patentees to invoke. Except for the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the fact that a generic competitor may be infringing a patent would not confer on the patentee the right to prevent the Minister from issuing a NOC, because a NOC is simply a ministerial approval for the purposes of the
Food and Drug Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-27. In the absence of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the question of whether a competitor is entitled to a NOC is one solely between the competitor and the Minister. Thus, it is only the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that create a patentee's right to a prohibition order against the Minister from issuing a NOC to a competitor.
[8]
The scheme under the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is to impose an automatic prohibition on the Minister from issuing a NOC to a generic competitor upon the competitor filing an allegation of noninfringement with the Minister, and continuing with the patentee filing a prohibition application in the court for up to 30 months unless extended or shortened. Ultimately, if the court finds that the competitor's allegation is not justified, the court issues a prohibition order continuing to enjoin the Minister from issuing a NOC until expiry of the patentee's relevant patent. It would thus appear that the scheme is to provide for a continuous injunction on the Minister.
[9]
It is noteworthy that while the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> provide for automatic and then court ordered prohibition on the Minister from issuing a NOC, there is nothing in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that confers on the court jurisdiction to order certiorari to quash a NOC that may have been issued after expiry of the statutory stay but which the court ultimately finds is based on an allegation of noninfringement that is found not to be justified. The implication of the silence of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> as to a remedy for a patentee if a NOC issues after expiry of the statutory stay based on a nonjustified allegation is that once the statutory stay expires, the court is without jurisdiction to grant any remedy under the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[10]
This view is supported by the purpose of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , which is to provide a summary mechanism for determining whether a generic competitor may compete with a patentee. The 30 month period specified in s. 7(1)(e) was prescribed for a purpose. This was the time frame within which the Governor-in-Council considered it would be possible to complete the prohibition proceedings in the absence of failure to reasonably cooperate in expediting the prohibition application by a party.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  pace likely to allow a hearing of the application before the expiration of a (not unreasonable) period of 30 months." In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 302 (F.C.A.), Hugessen, J.A., states at p. 315:
"Section 7(5), in providing for judicial discretion to extend or shorten the 30 month period of prohibition, makes it plain that the proceedings are to be dealt with expeditiously."
It would be inconsistent with the expeditious way in which proceedings under <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> are to be carried out to construe the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> as continuing the right to prohibition indefinitely irrespective of the expiry of the statutory stay.
[11]
As I have indicated, if the right to prohibition remains after the expiration of the statutory stay, one would have expected that the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> would also have provided for a remedy if the Minister issued a NOC before the court ordered prohibition, i.e. certiorari to quash the NOC. No such rights or remedies exist in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In view of the prescribed statutory stay, it is difficult to think that the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> envisage a race between the Minister and the court after expiry of the statutory stay with no remedy to the patentee in the event that the Minister issued a NOC for an infringing process before the court issues a prohibition order.
[12]
Finally, s. 7(5) allows for the granting of an extension of time for failing to reasonably cooperate to expedite the prohibition application. If the generic competitor is not cooperating, the patentee will become aware of this during the course of the 30 month period and will bring the application in that time period. Conversely, if the patentee is not cooperating, the generic competitor may apply to shorten the 30 month period. However, after expiry of the 30 month period, there exists no time limit left to shorten. I do not think the Governor-in-Council intended to deal unevenly as between patentees and generic competitors. The necessary implication is that the extension or shortening application must be made within the period of the statutory stay. This view is consistent with the intent of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that matters proceed under them expeditiously.
[13]
Lest the impression be left that this is a draconian reading of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , two things should be noted. One is that a patent infringement action is still open to Merck. In such action the court has jurisdiction to order an interlocutory injunction, a permanent injunction and/or damages. Thus Merck is not left without a remedy. Second, the circumstances in this case are unusual. They arise because of the decision by the Federal Court of Appeal which overturned the decision by Dubé, J., of the Trial Division that extended time. While I cannot rule out other situations arising, I have no doubt in view of the Federal Court of Appeal's decision, that applicants litigating under the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> will ensure, if necessary by seeking an expedited hearing under rule 327.1 of the
Federal Court Rules
, that cases are decided before expiry of the statutory stay and that when extensions are necessary under s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , they will be applied for well before expiry of the statutory stay.
[14]
Nor am I concerned there is prejudice in the particular circumstances of this case. On the motion by Merck for extended time before Dubé, J., Apotex took the position that s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> governed. Thus, Merck was on notice that failure to reasonably cooperate to expedite by Apotex was at issue. For some reason Merck did not plead s. 7(5) and adduce evidence of failure to reasonably cooperate by Apotex. This was Merck's decision and Merck must now live with it.
[15]
In the circumstances, I am satisfied that upon expiry of the statutory stay the court no longer has jurisdiction to issue a prohibition order under s. 6(2) and an extension order under s. 7(5).
Res Judicata
[16]
In the event that I am in error in my conclusion on the jurisdiction of the court to grant a prohibition order and an extension after expiry of the statutory stay, I now turn to a second preliminary motion by Apotex with respect to Merck's application to extend time. Apotex says the extension application is res judicata. It is convenient to recite the facts pertinent to this issue here.
(1) September 18, 1996 — Merck files motion for an order "extending the 30 month delay pursuant to s. 7(1)(e) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (as extended by Richard, J.) until such time as a judgment is rendered on the merits of the application for prohibition herein". Merck expressly relies on s. 7(1)(e) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and rules 3, 6 and 1614 of the
Federal Court Rules
. Significantly, it does not rely on s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In setting out its grounds, it does not refer to unreasonable delay by Apotex. It simply indicates that as the 30 month period (as extended by Richard, J.) was to expire on December 1, 1996 and the registry of the court has advised that the first available date for hearing of the merits of the prohibition application is January 8, 1997, a further extension is necessary. Apotex opposes the application on the grounds the court does not have jurisdiction to grant an extension. Apotex says only s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> authorizes an extension where the court finds failure to reasonably cooperate by a party in expediting the application and there is no such allegation or evidence put forward by Merck.
(2) October 23, 1996 — Dubé, J., grants Merck's extension application in the form requested.
(3) February 10, 1997 — Federal Court of Appeal allows appeal from order of Dubé, J., on the grounds that the only basis for altering the 30 month statutory stay is failure to reasonably cooperate by a party in expediting the application under s. 7(5) and no such evidence was put before Dubé, J.
(4) February 13, 1997 — Merck brings on an application to extend time based on s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> alleging failure to reasonably cooperate to expedite by Apotex. It is this motion that is now before the court for the determination.
[17]
The February 13, 1997 extension application was occasioned solely because of the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal of February 10, 1997. There are no new facts relating to the failure to reasonably cooperate by Apotex that were not known at the time of the extension application decided by Dubé, J., and reversed by the Federal Court of Appeal.
[18]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 2 N.R. 397, at p. 254, Dickson, J. (as he then was), identified two species of res judicata. The first is cause of action estoppel, which "precludes a person from bringing an action against another when that same cause of action has been determined in earlier proceedings by a court of competent jurisdiction". The second is issue estoppel where the cause of action may be different but some point or issue of fact has already been decided. The requirements for issue estoppel are that the same question was decided by the court, that the decision was final and that the parties in both proceedings were the same. It is issue estoppel that is relevant here.
[19]
In the present case Merck argued for an extension of time before Dubé, J., without arguing that Apotex failed to reasonably cooperate. The extension granted by Dubé, J., was overturned by the Federal Court of Appeal because the requirement for an extension, viz. a failure to reasonably cooperate to expedite was not before him. The motion presently before me is essentially the same motion between the same parties for an extension of time (which has already been denied) except that Merck is now arguing that Apotex failed to reasonably cooperate to expedite.
[20]
An attempt to introduce a new element into a previously adjudicated issue is repugnant to the general principle of res judicata.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the court correctly when I say that, where a given matter becomes the subject of litigation in, and of adjudication by,
a court of competent jurisdiction the court requires the parties to that litigation to bring forward their whole case, and will not (except under special circumstances) permit the same parties to open the same subject of litigation in respect of matter which might have been brought forward as part of the subject in contest, but which was not brought forward, only because they have, from negligence, inadvertence, or even accident, omitted part of their case.
The plea of res judicata applies, except in special cases, not only to points upon which the court was actually required by the parties to form an opinion and pronounce a judgment, but to every point which properly belonged to the subject of litigation, and which the parties, exercising reasonable diligence, might have brought forward at the time." (emphasis added)
This passage has been cited by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 458. In
Town of Grandview
, Ritchie, J., for the majority, cited other dicta which is of some relevance to the present case.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 437-438, the Supreme Court of Nova Scotia states:
"The doctrine of res judicata is founded on public policy so that there may be an end of litigation, and also to prevent the hardship to the individual of being twice vexed for the same cause. The rule which I deduce from the authorities is that a judgment between the same parties is final and conclusive, not only as to the matters dealt with,
but also as to questions which the parties had an opportunity of raising.
It is clear that the plaintiff must go forward in the first suit with his evidence; he will not be permitted in the event of failure to proceed with a second suit on the ground that he has additional evidence. In order to be at liberty to proceed with a second suit he must be prepared to say: 'I will shew you that this is a fact which entirely changes the aspect of the case, and I will shew you further that it was not, and could not by reasonable diligence have been ascertained by me before.'" (emphasis added)
And in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  action, there may be several issues raised which are necessary for the determination of the whole case. The rule then is that, once an issue has been raised and distinctly determined between the parties, then, as a general rule, neither party can be allowed to fight that issue all over again. The same issue cannot be raised by either of them against the same or subsequent proceedings except in special circumstances."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Lord Shaw expresses himself at p. 165 as follows:
"In the opinion of their Lordships it is settled, first, that the admission of a fact fundamental to the decision arrived at cannot be withdrawn and a fresh litigation started, with a view of obtaining another judgment upon a different assumption of fact; secondly, the same principle applies not only to an erroneous admission of a fundamental fact, but to an erroneous assumption as to the legal quality of that fact. Parties are not permitted to begin fresh litigations because of new views they may entertain of the law of the case, or new versions which they present as to what should be a proper apprehension by the court of the legislation. If this were permitted litigation would have no end, except when legal ingenuity is exhausted. It is a principle of law that this cannot be permitted, and there is abundant authority reiterating that principle. Thirdly, the same principle — namely, that of setting to rest rights of litigants, applies to the case where a point, fundamental to the decision, taken or assumed by the plaintiff and traversable by the defendant, has not been traversed. In that case also a defendant is bound by the judgment, although it may be true enough that subsequent light or ingenuity might suggest some traverse which had not been taken. The same principle of setting parties' rights to rest applies and estoppel occurs."
[21]
The principle enunciated in these cases is that a party, having received a final decision, is prevented from relitigating the matter notwithstanding that the party has found supplementary arguments that were available at the time of the original litigation. Here, Merck has brought the same motion for an extension of time that was rejected by the Court of Appeal. Merck's new argument of failure to reasonably cooperate to expedite by Apotex does not legitimize the new motion. The Court of Appeal's decision was final and the parties are the same. Merck is estopped from requesting the extension a second time. The extension issue is res judicata.
[22]
However, the principle of res judicata allows the court to consider special circumstances and I go on to do that now.
[23]
The special circumstances relied on by Merck are:
(1) In 1995, Richard, J., granted an extension application in this matter based on consent.
(2) In this case and others, parties and the court have not rigorously applied the failure to reasonably cooperate to expedite criteria of s. 7(5) thereby leading Merck astray in these proceedings.
(3) The court was not able to give the parties a date for hearing of the prohibition application on its merits prior to the expiry of the statutory stay.
[24]
The fact that the order of Richard, J., granting an extension of time was made on consent does not constitute special circumstances. The motion brought before Richard, J., was based on failure to reasonably cooperate by Apotex. The consent of Apotex merely indicated that Apotex acknowledged responsibility for failure to reasonably cooperate and that the one year extension that was ordered was acceptable to the court and to Apotex as appropriate in the circumstances. It is not grounds to relitigate the later extension application made before Dubé, J., and appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal.
[25]
The application before Dubé, J., was contested with Apotex taking the position that the court was without jurisdiction to grant an extension application except by reason of s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and evidence of failure to reasonably cooperate to expedite. Whatever Merck may have thought as a result of prior consent applications and orders to extend time, and even the court's willingness in other cases to ignore s. 7(5) and act under its own rules, it was not led astray before Dubé, J., It knew that Apotex was arguing that s. 7(5) and evidence of failure to reasonably cooperate to expedite were the necessary foundations for an extension application. Accordingly, these are not special circumstances.
[26]
As to the court not being able to set the matter down for hearing prior to expiry of the statutory stay, clearly the court must cooperate to meet the statutory deadlines especially when, as in the case here, it is without power to alleviate the prejudice to a party affected by the court's own scheduling commitments. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  circumstances in this case. It is true that Merck made strong representations to the court administrator to obtain an early hearing date. Counsel for Merck indicated the administrator's response that a date could not be fixed prior to the expiry of the statutory stay was apparently with the informal authority of the Associate Chief Justice. However, when Merck indicated to the court that if a date could not be fixed prior to the expiry of the statutory stay that the parties would make an application to extend time, Apotex unequivocally opposed the latter suggestion. With this position known, Merck has not satisfactorily explained why, when it made its extension application before Dubé, J., it did not argue s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and bring forward evidence of failure to reasonably cooperate by Apotex. That is what has given rise to Merck's difficulty. The fact that the court could not accommodate an early hearing date is not relevant to the extension issue that is now res judicata, and therefore does not constitute special circumstances.
[27]
I therefore must conclude that the extension issue is res judicata and no special circumstances have been demonstrated to justify the court redeciding the issue.
The Merits Of The Extension
Application
[28]
Because I heard the parties on the merits of the extension application, I will provide some brief observations on their arguments. If I were to consider the question of failure to reasonably cooperate to expedite by Apotex, I would first agree with Apotex that I cannot go behind the extension order of Richard, J., As has been pointed out, his order was made on consent, the implication being that the parties and the court agreed that the one year extension allowed by him appropriately compensated for the failure to reasonably cooperate by Apotex up to that time.
[29]
After that order, there is a period of some three months from mid-December, 1995 to March 15, 1996 during which failure to reasonably cooperate by Apotex is asserted by Merck. On November 29, 1995, Trembly-Lamer, J., ordered that certain affidavits be filed and examinations on affidavits be completed by December 29, 1995. Although Merck attempted to meet this deadline, the record before me indicates that at least for part of this time Apotex failed to reasonably cooperate. Apotex did not respond promptly to Merck's request to set examination dates and ultimately unilaterally decided that the deadline set by Tremblay-Lamer, J., could not be met. Examinations did take place in January and were concluded by February 9, 1996 according to subsequent orders extending the deadline originally set by Tremblay-Lamer, J., It appears the parties agreed on the schedule. While agreement to the schedule suggests reasonable cooperation between the parties, the schedule was occasioned by Apotex initially failing to reasonably cooperate. It is difficult to be precise but on consideration of the evidence before me I would attribute approximately one and a half months delay (December 30, 1995 to February 9, 1996) to Apotex's failure to reasonably cooperate to expedite.
[30]
Merck then sought to bring on a motion for answers to question which Apotex refused on examination. The motion was originally brought on short notice on February 22, 1996. The matter was adjourned until mid-March due to the unavailability of counsel for Apotex, but by then, it became apparent to parties that a special date would be required as they did not think the matter could be argued in two hours or less on a regular motions day. While the delay between February 22 and mid-March might be attributable to failure to reasonably cooperate by Apotex, the matter could not proceed on a regular motions date in any event and delay may more properly be attributable to counsel not realizing, when the motion was first brought, that a special date was necessary. Even if failure to reasonably cooperate to expedite by Apotex was the reason for the delay, it would at most amount to about two weeks.
[31]
Thus, on the merits of the extension application, I estimate a delay of, at most, 1½ to two months attributable to Apotex's failure to reasonably cooperate. Be that as it may, even if the court had jurisdiction, which I have found it does not, the difficulty with a retroactive extension application after expiry of the statutory stay in this case is that it is impossible to provide a remedy to Merck. If an application for extension is made before expiry of the statutory stay, the time attributable to a party's failure to reasonably cooperate is added to the end of the statutory stay. In the case of a retroactive extension application after expiry of the statutory stay as here, Apotex's failure to reasonably cooperate would add at most two months to the statutory stay extending it to the beginning of February 1997. However the prohibition application has not yet been heard and decided.
[32]
To provide a remedy to Merck, it would be necessary to grant a much longer extension, i.e. from December 1, 1996 to say April or May, 1997 until the hearing on the merits is concluded and a decision rendered. In other words, by reason of Apotex not reasonably cooperating for two months, at least a five month extension would be required to provide a remedy to Merck. Merck says that the court should not deal with extension applications microscopically but rather qualitatively. However, Strayer, J.A., has directed that extensions be refused unless the criteria of s. 7(5) are strictly met after a careful assessment of the conduct of the parties (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  remedy to Merck over and above the period attributable to Apotex's failure is not authorized by s. 7(5) because it is due to Merck's failure to bring the extension application under s. 7(5) before expiry of the statutory stay. I think this dilemma is a further illustration of why the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> do not authorize the court to grant an extension after expiry of the statutory stay.
Conclusion
1. The court is without jurisdiction to issue a prohibition order under s. 6(2) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> after expiry of the statutory stay.
2. The court is without jurisdiction to extend time under s. 7(5) after expiry of the statutory stay.
3. The extension issue is res judicata and there are no special circumstances that would justify the court in redeciding the issue.
4. The extension application must be dismissed.
5. The prohibition application is dismissed.
6. Should either party wish to apply for an order for costs it may do so within thirty (30) days of the date of the order.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Jocelyne M. Caissie/saf
Footnotes
1.	The term "statutory stay" was used to describe the period referred to in s. 7(1)(e) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> as it may be extended under s. 7(5) of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> by Cory, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  sought by Merck.
2.	The Minister shall issue a Notice of Compliance pursuant to section C.08.004 of the
Food and Drug Regulations
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 870-9 if a new drug meets the requirements of those <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
3.	The Minister has indicated he will not issue the notice of compliance during the period of prohibition proceedings respecting another notice of allegations issued by Apotex (now withdrawn) in court file T-1695-95. It is not necessary to deal with the implication of the Minister's position or the withdrawal of the allegation by Apotex in this decision.
[End of document]