[1]
Pinard, J.
: This is an application by the plaintiffs, Monarch Marketing Systems, Inc. (Monarch (U.S.)) and Monarch Marking Systems Limited (Monarch (Can.)), for an interlocutory injunction restraining the defendant, Glenwood Label & Box Mfg. Ltd. (Glenwood) from manufacturing, using or vending ink rollers and label rolls for the plaintiffs' label guns and from selling, offering for sale or advertising such ink rollers and label rolls under the trademarks "Monarch" and "Monarch Style".
[2]
The plaintiffs' label guns are hand held devices which are used to print and apply small adhesive labels used for example to price canned and packaged goods in supermarkets. The plaintiffs' label guns are of principally two types, those which print a single line of information on the label, called single line label guns, and those which print two lines of information on the label, called double line label guns. Both types of guns dispense the labels from rolls of labels called label rolls. The label rolls adapted to fit the single line label guns are called single line label rolls and the label rolls adapted to fit the double line label guns are called double line label rolls. In both types of guns the printing mechanism is inked by inkimpregnated cylinders called ink rollers which must be replaced as the ink is used up. The ink rollers designed to fit the single line label gun are called single line ink rollers and the ink rollers adapted to fit the double line label gun are called double line ink rollers.
[3]
Monarch (U.S.) manufactures single line and double line label guns which are assembled in Canada by Monarch (Can.). In addition Monarch (Can.) manufactures single line and double line label rolls and distributes single line and double line ink rollers. These label guns, label rolls and ink rollers are sold under the trademark "Monarch".
[4]
Monarch (U.S.) owns a number of Canadian patents covering the single line and double line label guns, the single line and double line label rolls and the single line and double line ink rollers including, inter alia, Canadian patents Nos. 1,071,468, 1,072,327, 1,080,671, 1,088,032 and 1,097,273.
[5]
Monarch (U.S.) also owns Canadian Trademark Registration No. U.C.A. 13542 dated June 17, 1939 for the trademark "Monarch" for use in association with price marking tickets sold in roll form and printed and applied to merchandise by automatic machinery and such automatic machinery, and Canadian Trademark Registration No. 193,716 dated February 10, 1969 for the trademark "Monarch" for use in association with ticket and tag marking and attaching machines. Monarch (Can.) is a registered user of both registered trademarks.
[6]
Recently, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pages 9 and 10 S.C.R., the Supreme Court of Canada reviewed the applicable principles concerning interlocutory injunctions:
"The rule as to the availability of an interlocutory injunction generally has been variously stated but, in my view, it is convenient to refer to the succinct description of that order as found in Chesapeake and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  where McRuer, C.J.H.C., stated, at pp. 854-855:
'The granting of an interlocutory injunction is a matter of judicial discretion, but it is a discretion to be exercised on judicial principles. I have dealt with this matter at length because I wish to emphasize how important it is that parties should not be restrained by interlocutory injunctions unless some irreparable injury is likely to accrue to the plaintiff, and the Court should be particularly cautious where there is a serious question as to whether the plaintiff would ever succeed in the action. I may put it in a different way: If on one hand a fair prima facie case is made out and there will be irreparable damage if the injunction is not granted, it should be granted, but in deciding whether an interlocutory injunction should be granted the defendant's interests must receive the same consideration as the plaintiff's.'
"Reconsideration of the requirements that the plaintiff must show a 'strong prima facie case' has come in the wake of the decision of the House of Lords in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . However, the other principles enunciated by McRuer, C.J.H.C., remain unimpaired. As a general proposition, it can be fairly stated that in the scheme of litigation in this country, orders other than purely procedural ones are difficult to obtain from the Court prior to trial. Where the injunction maintains the status quo in a way which is fair to both sides, the order is attainable; but, simply because the order would not injure the defendant is not sufficient reason to move the Court to grant what is generally regarded as an extraordinary intervention.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Rose, C.J. H.C., stated at p. 551:
'I have always understood the rule to be that the question is not whether the injunction will harm the defendant, but whether it is probable that unless the defendant is restrained, wrongful acts will be done which will do the plaintiff irreparable injury.'"
[7]
With regard to the opportuneness of still requiring on occasion a "strong prima facie case", Dube, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  1975, the first hurdle that an applicant for an interlocutory injunction had to surmount was the traditional test of prima facie case. Since the decision of the House of Lords in American Cyanamid (see footnote 2), the applicant needs now only to show that there is a 'serious issue' to be tried. The new threshold test is therefore more lenient. However, post American Cyanamid English jurisprudence (see footnote 3) has created several exceptions where it was found that the serious issue test was not sufficient or was otherwise inappropriate. For example, where the case turned substantially on the construction of a document (see footnote 4), or on undisputed facts (see footnote 5), or where an interlocutory injunction for all purposes would determine the final issue as a matter of law (see footnote 6), or as a matter of fact (see footnote 7). Ontario courts have excluded certain types of case: where the applicant sought to enforce a restrictive covenant or a mandatory injunction, or to obtain a Mareva injunction, and opted for a return to the earlier, more stringent test.
2.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Article The Status of American Cyanamid in Ontario: A Practical Analysis, David Stockwood, Q.C., Canadian Bar Association, Ontario Continuing Legal Education, May 3, 1985
4.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[8]
In cases of allegations of patent infringement, as opposed to other types of intellectual and industrial property litigation, and especially in cases respecting recent or untested patents, a number of decisions have also required a higher standard with respect to the strength of the case that the plaintiff is required to show in order to obtain an interlocutory injunction (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[9]
In any event, since this is a case where it has not yet been clearly established that the defendant has deliberately infringed the plaintiffs' rights, the additional burden of proving irreparable injury was upon the plaintiffs. In that respect, the plaintiffs argue that the cost of past development and provision for future development work relating to their labeling guns and the label rolls for those guns forces them to price their label rolls higher than those of the defendant. They contend, therefore, that if the latter is permitted to continue its "infringing activities", their customers in Canada will perceive that they are attempting to charge excessive prices for their label rolls and that such perception will continue to cause them harm which cannot be estimated in monetary terms. In addition, the plaintiffs submit that since the use of label rolls manufactured by the defendant in label guns manufactured by the plaintiffs voids the warranty on such guns, the plaintiffs' reputation is further damaged when warranty service is refused pursuant to the written terms of the warranty agreement. This again, according to the plaintiffs, further damages their reputation in a manner that cannot be compensated in monetary terms. I do not agree.
[10]
What the plaintiffs are in essence attempting to obtain here is an order enjoining the defendant from manufacturing, using or vending in Canada specific ink rollers and label rolls. Now, the plaintiffs' estimated share of the Canadian market for their hand held pricing guns, in 1987, has reached and even exceeded 70% for the "one line" type of guns and 55% for the "two line" guns. The total dollar sale in Canada of Monarch label rolls for the same years are in excess of $2,500,000 for each of the two types of guns. The label rolls are normally sold in packages of multiple rolls wrapped in plastic film (shrink wrapped) with a replacement ink roller included in the unit price. The figures concerning the plaintiffs' advertising expenditures are also well established. The plaintiffs' estimated share of the Canadian market, total dollar sales in Canada, and expenditures are also known for each of the previous years from 1981.
[11]
If the defendant, whose solvency is not in issue, is ultimately ordered to cease its competition with the plaintiffs, then such information as that described above in combination with the account of sales and profits that the defendant has undertaken to keep, will, in my view, make it very feasible for the court to estimate in monetary terms the prejudice that will be suffered by the plaintiffs.
[12]
As I find from the evidence that damages would be a sufficient compensation in the event that the plaintiffs are ultimately successful, the latter have therefore failed to establish irreparable injury, and there is no necessity to deal further with the tests concerning the seriousness of the question and the strength of the case to be tried.
[13]
This conclusion, in my view, is in total accordance with the following comments made by the then Chief Justice of this court in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  injunction in a patent infringement action is not a common occurrence in most instances, the result of an application for an interlocutory injunction, where infringement and validity are in issue, is that the defendant gives a satisfactory undertaking to keep an account and upon that being done the application is dismissed with costs in the cause. ... The principal reason for this practice is, in my opinion, the fact that in most instances the nature of the patent rights involved is such that damages (provided there is some reasonably accurate way of measuring them) will be an adequate remedy for such infringement of the rights as may occur pending the trial ..."
[14]
Considering, therefore, that the defendant in this case has undertaken to keep an account of its sales and profits in respect of ink rollers and label rolls until final disposition of this matter.
[15]
Considering also that the parties have agreed to a specific order in respect of the trademark infringement issue in the event that this court is not prepared to grant, as it is not, an interlocutory injunction in respect of the patent infringement issue.
[16]
An interlocutory injunction will be ordered only as agreed to by the parties in respect of the trademark infringement issue. The costs of this motion shall be in the event of the cause.
[17]
This order will remain subject to review by this court upon application by one party in case the other party fails to proceed diligently and so delays the trial of the main action.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]