Reasons For Order
[1]
Rouleau, J.
: The applicant is seeking a writ of certiorari quashing the decision of the respondent C. Christopher Collier, an adjudicator appointed under the
Canada Labour Code
, R.S.C. 1985, c. L-2 as amended, (the
Code
). He determined that he had jurisdiction under section 242 to adjudi­cate a complaint of unjust dismissal filed by the respondent Licia Gomes. In the alterna­tive, the applicant seeks relief in the nature of a writ of prohibition, an interlocutory injunction or a stay of proceedings prohibit­ing the adjudicator from proceeding to hear the aforementioned unjust dismissal com­plaint.
[2]
Mrs. Gomes had been employed by Midland Courier since January, 1988 and for the last three years of her employ, she was the manager of the Moncton branch. The record indicates that management was not satisfied with her performance and she had been so informed on a number of occasions. In fact, by interoffice communication dated December 10, 1991, she was advised that:
"This morning is the fourth time I have spoken to you about the effort which is required in the branch manager's position. If you are not prepared to invest the necessary time and effort to remain in the manager's position then we must discuss other options which may include transfer­ring you into an operations supervision position if you had the proper interest and attitude."
[3]
There was no reply to the memo and over the next few weeks management did not see any improvement in her perfor­­m­ance. A meeting was held on February 21, 1992 at which time she was informed that a decision had been made to replace her as branch manager. A severance package was offered and she was given the weekend to think it over. The record indicates that had she not agreed to the severance package, she would have been dismissed for cause.
[4]
After only a few hours studying the offer, Mrs. Gomes decided to accept it and she met with her superiors later that day to sign a release which provided as follows:
"
Release And Undertaking
"Know All Men By These Presents that, I, Licia Gomes of the city of Moncton, Westmorland County, New Brunswick, (hereinafter called the 'Releasor'), in con­sideration of the sum of $4,606.68 (less deductions required by law), the receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, does hereby remise, release and forever dis­charge Midland Courier, A Division Of Midland Transportation Limited and all of its affiliated companies, and their successors and assigns & their employees (hereinafter called the 'Release') of and from all manner of actions, causes of action, costs, claims and demands whatso­ever, which the said Releasor has had, now has or may ever have for or by reason of any cause, matter or thing whatsoever existing up to the present time and par­ticularly, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, for or by reason of the termination of employment of the Releasor by Midland Courier, A Division Of Mid­land Transport Limited on or about the date hereof.
"It Is Understood And Agreed by the said Releasor that the payment of the aforesaid sum is made in compromise of a disputed claim and is provided to the Releasor as full and final settlement of any claim for such termination of employment and the Releasor hereby releases any and all claims or rights [while sic] which he has or may have to be reinstated into the em­ployment of the Releasee and
the Releasor undertakes not to commence any proceed­ings or complaints whatsoever in respect of such termination of employment
.
"And it is hereby declared that the terms of this settlement are fully understood, that the amount stated herein is the sole con­sideration of this Release and that the said sum is accepted voluntarily for the purpose of making a full and final compromise, adjustment and settlement of all claims for damages resulting from the said termina­tion of employment." (emphasis added)
[5]
In return for signing the release, she was given a cheque in the amount of $4,606.68 which represents the following sums:
Vacation Pay	$ 836.88 8 days
Pay in lieu of notice	1,046.10 10 days
Severance pay	836.88 8 days
Term pay	1,255.32 12 days
Current pay	1,046.10
LESS
March car allowance 	-325.00
% of Feb car allowance
-89.60
TOTAL	$4,606.68
[6]
It should be noted that, had she been dismissed for cause, she would not have been entitled to severance pay or pay in lieu of notice under sections 230 and 235 of the
Code
. The release she signed gave no rea­sons for her termination; this would be advantageous to her in her efforts to seek other employment or even in claiming un­employment insurance benefits.
[7]
Notwithstanding the fact that she had signed the release, on March 26, 1992, Mrs. Gomes filed a complaint with Labour Canada under section 240 of the
Code
alleging that her dismissal was unjust and without cause or prior notification. On August 20, 1992, the respondent, Mr. Col­lier, was appointed pursuant to section 242 of the
Code
, to hear and adjudicate the complaint. By letter dated September 21, 1992, counsel on behalf of the applicant employer raised two preliminary objections as to the jurisdiction of the adjudicator to entertain this complaint; firstly, that Mrs. Gomes held a "managerial position" during the course of her employ, and secondly, that according to the terms of the release she signed, she was precluded from filing a complaint.
[8]
Arguments were heard with respect to these objections. By an Interim Award dated February 8, 1993, the adjudicator determined that Mrs. Gomes was not a "manager" within the meaning of Division XIV of the
Code
and was therefore not precluded from filing a complaint.
[9]
The adjudicator then dealt with the issue of the validity of the release. Her counsel's argument that the release was null and void as it had been signed under duress was rejected for the following reasons:
"In my opinion this release was signed by this Complainant in circumstances which are very similar to those in which employees tender their resignation at the request of their employer. There is nat­urally anger and frustration and emotion but there must be proof that these were demonstrated to such an extent that the Complainant did not have the capacity to properly consent to the signing of the release. There is no such proof in this case."
[10]
He went on to conclude that the release was valid and binding on the parties and that Mrs. Gomes was, in fact, dismissed for cause. At pages 24 and 25 the adjudicator states:
"All of these provisions of the release are qualified by the use of the phrase 'termi­nation of employment'. The evidence establishes quite clearly that this Employer terminated the employment of the Com­plainant because it felt that it had just cause for initiating the dismissal. In my opinion this is the context of the release and it must be read in that regard. The release is valid as signed by the Com­plainant and, in my opinion, binds her in the event that the dismissal was for just cause.
"The Complainant was not advised that she was being dismissed without cause and therefore, in my opinion, it is open to her to file a complaint and have the matter of just cause dealt with by an adjudicator.
"In my opinion this release was explained to the Complainant as representing her obligations in return for a financial settle­ment based on dismissal with cause. If after the evidence has been presented, there was indeed cause for the dismissal of this complainant, then the release which she signed will be binding on her and, in my opinion, she will be deemed to have received full and final settlement for her dismissal.
"On the other hand, if there was insuffi­cient cause for the dismissal of this Com­plainant then, under the provisions of the
Code
, she is entitled to file a complaint and an adjudicator is vested with jurisdic­tion to rule on whether this was an unjust dismissal. If it is found that it was an unjust dismissal then an adjudicator also has jurisdiction to award the Complainant compensation not exceeding the amount of money that is equivalent to the remuner­ation that would, but for the dismissal, have been paid to the Complainant.
"This Complainant has waived any claim for reinstatement to employment in keeping with the undertaking which she gave in the release."
[11]
The applicant employer submits that having found the release valid and binding upon the parties, the adjudicator incorrectly interpreted its effect and exceeded his juris­diction. The release limited the jurisdiction; it refers to "termination"; obviously the adjudicator chose to interpret the release to read "termination for cause" in order to clothe himself with the necessary statutory authority to entertain the matter.
[12]
At the outset it was suggested by coun­sel on behalf of the respondent, that the applicant is not entitled to the relief being sought by virtue of subsection 243 of the
Code
which reads:
"243(1) Every order of an adjudicator appointed under subsection 242(1) is final and shall not be questioned or reviewed in any court.
"(2) No order shall be made, process entered or proceeding taken in any court, whether by way of injunction, certiorari, prohibition, quo warranto, or otherwise, to question, review, prohibit or restrain an adjudicator in any proceedings of the adjudicator under section 232. 1977-78, c. 27, s. 21."
[13]
The applicant, however, relies on the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as authority for the Court's intervention where the adjudi­cator has exceeded his jurisdiction or otherwise com­mitted an error in jurisdic­tion. The principle is succinctly stated at page 985 of the S.C.R. headnote:
"Where as here, an administrative tribu­nal is protected by a privative clause, its deci­sions should only be reviewed if that Board has either made an error in inter­preting the provisions conferring juris­dic­tion on it, or has exceeded its juris­diction by making a patently unreason­able error of law in the performance of its function. The tribunal has the right to make errors, even serious ones, provided it does not act in a manner so patently unreasonable that its construction cannot be rationally supported by the relevant legislation and demands intervention by the court upon review."
[14]
I am satisfied that the error alleged to have been made in the present case is one that requires intervention by this Court. The facts in the present case are very similar to those in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  As stated by the arbitrator in that case, whether the termi­nation is called a "resignation" or "a dis­guised dismissal" an employer and an employee can come to an arrangement concerning the conditions and con­sequences under which the contract of employment that has bound them up to that point is to be ruptured. That is precisely what happened in the present case.
[15]
It appears that the adjudicator based his conclusion that the agreement was valid in the context of a dismissal for cause, and on a finding that the employment relation­ship had been terminated prior to the sign­ing of the release. This finding is not sup­ported by the evidence and indeed conflicts with the adjudicator's observation that the release was signed in "circumstances which are very similar to those in which employees tender their resignations at the request of their employer". What is clear is that on February 21, 1992 a decision had been taken that Mrs. Gomes' services were no longer required. The employer gave her an alternative; sign the release or be fired for cause. Having considered her options, she elected to sign the document and it was at this point that the employment relationship was terminated. By executing, Mrs. Gomes avoided the possibility of being terminated for cause. The employer in return was avoiding any claims for rein­statement or damages result­ing from the termination.
[16]
This application is allowed and costs are awarded to the applicant.
Application allowed.
Editor: Donna E. Mitchell/sg
[End of document]