[1]
Reed, J.
: The applicant seeks to quash a decision of an immigration officer dated February 1, 1994, finding that there were insufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds to allow her application for landing to be processed from within Canada.
[2]
I do not find it necessary to address Ms. Jackman's very interesting arguments concerning the influence of international conventions, which refer to family unification as a human rights value, as buttressed by the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. As I understand her argument it is that when these values are in play, they raise the content of the duty of fairness to a higher level than might otherwise be required. It has been established since
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , that the content of the duty of fairness varies with the particular circumstances of the case. In this context, the consequences to the individual, of the decision being made, are very important factors.
[3]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), it was held that the duty of fairness requirements for a decision under s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
are minimal. At the same time, I understand Mr. Justice Hugessen's comments in that case to include reviewability of such decisions on the ground that the decision-maker ignored relevant evidence or took into account irrelevant considerations. He indicated that in order to succeed the applicant must show "that the decision-maker erred in law [or], proceeded on some wrong or improper principle ...". The ignoring of significant relevant evidence has always been considered to be an error of law or as demonstrating that the decision-maker proceeded on the basis of a wrong principle. Thus, I do not need to enter into a consideration of whether there is an increased level of duty of fairness required in this case because the consequences of the decision for the applicant are separation from her family. I am persuaded that the attack on the decision falls within the area of reviewability described in
Shah
.
[4]
The applicant came to Canada in 1984 with her sister Elisa. They entered Canada on student visas. The applicant attended high school and then university, obtaining a degree in statistics in 1989. Before her graduation she married a Mr. Leung; this occurred on January 7, 1988. Her family, who at the time were located in Hong Kong, were opposed to this relationship and "disowned" her. Mr. Leung became a permanent resident of Canada in April of 1989 and filed a sponsorship application on behalf of his wife, the applicant. Before this application was processed, however, the marriage broke down and Mr. Leung withdrew his sponsorship application. The applicant's visitor's visa ran out in March 1990. She did not renew it because she was not continuing her studies. She remained illegally in this country. She was arrested in April 1991 as an illegal alien. She tried to pass herself off as someone else who was a landed immigrant.
[5]
The applicant's sister Elisa, became a permanent resident of Canada on September 27, 1991. The applicant's father, mother, sister and brother were landed on October 1, 1992. None of her immediate family remain in Hong Kong. With the break up of her marriage to Mr. Leung, she became reconciled to her family. She lives with them in Willowdale. The written submissions sent, in support of her request to make an inland application for landing, describe the situation:
"She has no immediate family members in Hong Kong. She has a few aunts and uncles, but is not really close to them and has not had contact with them for years. She has virtually no ties to Hong Kong anymore. Ms. Chan arrived in Canada eight years ago and although she grew up in Hong Kong, she does not know it any more and has no friends remaining in Hong Kong. Her entire adult life has been spent in Canada. She has attended university here, worked here and established a life for herself. She is more at home in Canada after eight years [now ten] than she would be in Hong Kong. All of her close family ties are here in Canada."
Her siblings and parents wrote letters in support of her application. Her sister, Elisa, filed an Undertaking of Assistance on the applicant's behalf.
[6]
The application for consideration on humanitarian and compassionate grounds was submitted in November 1992. Nothing was heard in response and counsel for the applicant, in June of 1993, requested an update with respect to the file. In September 1993 counsel for the applicant was contacted and asked to submit a $450 processing fee and an AFL kit. This was done. When submitting this material counsel asked, as she had also done earlier in November of 1992, that if the immigration officer had any concerns the applicant be contacted and given an opportunity to address them. No such contact was made. A negative decision was received by the applicant in February 1994.
[7]
As is well known, there is no obligation to provide formal reasons for negative s. 114(2) decisions. An indication of the process of the decision-making can however be obtained from the notes of the immigration officer who initially reviews the application. I agree with the argument, made by counsel for the respondent, that these notes should not be elevated to the status of formal reasons. At the same time, they are relevant in assessing whether there has been a serious misconstruction or an ignoring of highly relevant evidence.
[8]
In the present case, the immigration officer made notes concerning the applicant's case history, referring extensively to notes which had been made by the arresting officer in April 1991. These were never produced to the applicant. She was given no opportunity to comment on them. They describe her, among other things, as having no relatives in Canada, being highly mobile, single, having no ties to the community. They refer to her as having been in the country since 1987 (instead of 1984). The arresting officer's notes are quoted as describing her as uncooperative and untruthful. A section of the immigration officer's notes then describes the "PC's [person concerned] Counsel's Submissions". While the notations made by the officer with respect to those submissions indicate that the applicant's immediate family is now in Canada, there is no reference to the fact that the submissions also describe her reconciliation to her family after her divorce from Mr. Leung. The notes state that she was disowned by her family in 1987, when she developed the relationship with Mr. Leung.
[9]
The immigration officer's notes then contain a section entitled "Officer's Recommendation". This must be read as giving an indication of the salient factors on which the officer relied in coming to his recommendation. It is significant that an immigration officer's recommendation is reviewed by a more senior official before being approved and communicated to the applicant. Thus the notes serve to explain to that more senior officer why the particular recommendation is being made. This, in my view, gives credence to the conclusion that the factors set out in the recommendation are significant.
[10]
In this case the recommendation section of the immigration officer's notes lists the following factual considerations: the applicant overstayed and remained illegally in this country; the arresting officer described her as uncooperative and noted that she had attempted to misrepresent herself; it was commendable that she had been able to upgrade herself and obtain employment but these factors alone did not warrant a positive decision; the applicant has some family in Hong Kong; there was no risk of severe sanctions or inhumane treatment if she was returned to Hong Kong.
[11]
Counsel argues that reliance on the arresting officer's comments without giving the applicant an opportunity to respond thereto is, by itself, a reviewable error in terms of the
Shah
decision [see footnote 1]. That may be so, but more importantly, in the present case, no reference was made, either in the recommendation section of the notes or in the preceding text, to the applicant's present relationship with her family, her reconciliation with its members. The notes leave the impression that she is still estranged from her family. The length of time she has lived in this country (during most of her adult life), her immediate family's presence here, her re-integration as part of that family unit are not referred to in the recommendation section of the notes. I must conclude that the recommending officer based his decision on a misunderstanding of the evidence - the present relationship of the applicant with her family was overlooked.
[12]
I do not think I am in any way differing in principle from the decision of Madame Justice Simpson in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  immigration officer's notes "were prepared at a time when there was no obligation on an officer conducting an H & C review to prepare notes" and the attack on the decision was based on an alleged lack of analysis in the notes. Madame Justice Simpson expressly stated, however, "
In the absence of a concrete indication in the Notes that relevant matters were overlooked
or intentionally ignored, I am not prepared to find the Officer failed to undertake an exhaustive H & C review
merely because the Notes
are silent on the issue of undue hardship". In the notes which have been filed in this case I have been persuaded that there is a concrete indication that relevant matters were overlooked.
[13]
For the reasons given the application will be allowed and the decision of February 1, 1994 quashed.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/blk
Footnotes
1.	"... if she [the immigration officer] is going to
rely on extrinsic evidence, not brought forward by the applicant
, she
must give him a chance to respond to such evidence
."
[End of document]