[1]
Strayer, J.
: This was an application for an interlocutory injunction to prevent the defendants and their retailer customers from marketing the "Rotawash" and "Auto Pal" brushes by use of packaging like that of the plaintiff's or in such way as to cause confusion between those brushes and the plaintiff's brush or to pass off the defendants' brushes as the plaintiff's. An interim injunction was issued ex parte by Dubé, J., on May 14, 1987. I issued a further interim injunction on May 22, 1987 which was modified by consent on June 9, 1987.
[2]
Since the hearing of this matter by me on May 21st, further affidavits have been filed by all parties and there has been extensive cross-examination on several of the affidavits. I have heard two more days of argument in respect of the present application. I issued an order on July 6, 1987 dismissing the application on certain conditions, and, as indicated at the end of the hearing, am subsequently issuing these reasons.
[3]
The statement of claim includes allegations of patent infringement, copyright infringement, and passing off based on the statutory rights of action under ss. 7(b) and 7(c) of the Trade Marks Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. T-10. I concluded when hearing the application for an interim injunction, and still believe, that the plaintiff has raised a serious question within the meaning of the American Cyanamid [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.)] case with respect to the copyright and passing off claims. Its evidence and argument in respect of the patent claim may raise a serious question, but in my view this is a case where a more rigorous standard should be applied for the grant of an interlocutory injunction to prevent alleged patent infringement. The patent is relatively new, having been issued on April 24, 1984 and no one has suggested that its validity has been previously tested in the courts. It would be more appropriate to require that the plaintiff make out a prima facie case in respect of patent infringement. (See e.g. Procter & Gamble Company and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 53 (F.C.A.)). I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has done so here having regard to the uncertainties as to its right to sue to enforce the patent. Further, the patent only relates to a coupler which is sold with these brushes to connect them to an ordinary garden hose. It is at best incidental to the main issue of the packaging of the brush, and on equitable grounds it is doubtful if an injunction should be issued in respect of it alone. I declined to make any order in the interim injunction with respect to the patent and for the same and other reasons which follow concerning the adequacy of damages and the balance of convenience I have declined to issue an interlocutory injunction in respect of the patent.
[4]
While I have concluded in respect of the alleged breach of copyright and the alleged passing off that serious questions have been raised by the plaintiff, I am persuaded after learning more about the financial affairs of the defendants, and of the rather small portion of the business of both the plaintiff and the defendants which the sale of these brushes represents, that damages will provide an adequate remedy for the plaintiff if it should succeed in this action. This conclusion has been considerably aided by the fact that the defendants, in the affidavit of Louisa Au and in submissions by counsel, have indicated that they have not accepted any brushes from their Hong Kong supplier since those shipped on February 28, 1987 and do not intend to accept or order any more. All they wish is to sell those which they have on hand and to enable the retailers whom they have supplied with their brushes to sell the stocks they have on hand. My order allows them to do this while prohibiting further importation pending the outcome of the action. I was inclined to think initially that the plaintiff might still be entitled to an injunction to prevent even the sale of the defendants' brushes already in this country because the latter might be of inferior quality. While the plaintiff has produced some evidence on this point I do not find it persuasive, it mainly consisting of the test of one sample of the defendants' product. The harm which the plaintiff initially alleged would ensue from a failure to stop the defendants' sales seems largely speculative. The further evidence adduced, and the cross-examination of the plaintiff's principal witness, does not indicate to me a strong probability of harm beyond that which any vendor of a product may encounter when confronted with a competitor who sells a similar product for less. The plaintiff had been in the market for two years or more prior to the advent of the defendants' brushes and should be able to demonstrate fairly accurately what sales, if any, it has lost to the defendants should the plaintiff win at trial. It is worthy of note that the defendants' sales have been only a fraction of the plaintiff's during the current year. It is also worth noting that within the last few months the plaintiff has put on the market an improved model of its brush which appears to have proved popular and may well eclipse both its own original "Turbo Jet" brush, the subject of its complaint in this action, as well as the brushes of the defendants.
[5]
Turning to the balance of convenience, it is permissible to consider at least in a general way the probabilities of success of the plaintiff in the action. It appears to me that there are serious difficulties in its way with respect to proving both the breach of copyright and the passing off. With respect to breach of copyright in the pictures on the front of the package, the evidence now indicates that only one of those pictures was its own, the remainder being produced by G.F., the manufacturer in Italy. The legal consequence of that could be seriously debated. As for the instructions it is of course apparent that the defendants have copied the instructions which appear on the back of plaintiff's package. There now appears to be some doubt as to the authorship of those instructions. Further there could be a serious legal dispute as to whether such instructions, simple and brief as they are, can be the subject of copyright. I am somewhat persuaded by the reasoning in an American decision,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (U.S.C.A., 1st Circ.), in which it was said that there could not be copyright in a set of instructions for a mail-in contest. As the subject itself is not the subject of copyright and is very narrow in its nature so that only one or a very limited number of ways exist to describe it, such description or instructions cannot be the subject of copyright or this would preclude others from using or engaging in the subject itself. I would distinguish cases such as that relied on by the plaintiff,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  plaintiff involved a large measure of labour, skill, and judgment. Such is not the case here. While of course I need not, and do not, decide the validity of the copyright claim, it is relevant to observe that the legal position is far from clear which militates against the plaintiff obtaining an interlocutory injunction.
[6]
With respect to the claim for passing off pursuant to ss. 7(b) and 7(c) of the Trade Marks Act, there are also difficult legal issues to be considered. I do not necessarily accept the argument of the defendants that the plaintiff must show, not only that its brush as packaged had acquired a secondary meaning, but also that this meaning identified the brush and package with the plaintiff rather than with its Italian manufacturer, G.F.: it appears to me that in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Supreme Court of Canada quoted with approval statements in other courts supporting the view that it is only necessary that the products have acquired a reputation with the public as coming from one source even if that source is not known by members of the public. I am not satisfied from the evidence thus far, however, that the plaintiff has demonstrated a probable case that its brush has achieved that kind of recognition or identification by the relevant portion of the public.
[7]
In respect of the passing off action based on ss. 7(b) and (c) of the Trade Marks Act, counsel for the defendants did not raise any constitutional objection based on the possible invalidity of these sections. It appears to me, however, that this is a serious issue which should be addressed. It appears to me that in its recent decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Appeal, while upholding the validity of s. 7(b) of that Act, did so on the basis that in that case the section was invoked in further support and protection of a trademark. This was a possible valid use off some of the paragraphs of s. 7 such as was contemplated by the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 7 N.R. 477, at the same time as it held s. 7(e) to be invalid. By the same reasoning, it may be possible to argue here that ss. 7(b) and (c) are being used to reinforce the plaintiff's copyright and patent rights. But those rights are themselves open to serious dispute and it might be found by the trial judge upon further evidence and argument that ss. 7(b) and (c) of the Trade Marks Act could not be validly invoked here unless those other rights are first established.
[8]
Having regard to all these factors, I have concluded that I should exercise my discretion at this time against granting an interlocutory injunction.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms