[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an application for an order to set aside an order made by me on February 17, 1994, denying the applicants' notice of motion of February 7, 1994, requesting an extension of time to perfect an application for leave to seek judicial review under the
Immigration Act
.
[2]
The gist of the application is that I rendered a decision before the applicants had had an opportunity to reply to the submissions of the respondent in opposition to their application for an extension of time. Those submissions of the respondent were received by the applicants on February 9, 1994. Eight days later, before any reply had been filed, I rendered my decision dismissing the application for an extension of time.
[3]
The application for an extension was made in writing pursuant to rule 324. Rule 324 contemplates submissions being made on behalf of the applicant and served pursuant to rule 324(2). Rule 324(3) contemplates representations being made in writing by the respondent. There is no reference to a right of reply by an applicant under that rule. Rule 324(4) simply provides that:
"324(4) No motion under paragraph (1) shall be disposed of until the court is satisfied that all interested parties have had a reasonable opportunity to make representations either in writing or orally."
As there was no right of reply and as both the applicants and the respondent had filed representations by February 9, 1994, I proceeded to dispose of the matter as I was satisfied that all relevant parties had been heard from. It appears, however, that counsel for the applicants understood from a conversation with an officer of the Federal Court Registry on February 10, 1994, and he had ten days to respond to the representations of the respondent and further that his response had to be filed no later than February 21, 1994. I assume that there was some misunderstanding and that the registry officer was referring to the time limits for filing a reply to the respondent's memorandum of argument on the application for leave itself, all as prescribed by rule 13 of the
Immigration Rules
, 1993. It is of course for counsel to satisfy himself on the requirements of the
Rules
. As there was some misunderstanding, however, I have reopened the matter to determine whether my order of February 17th should be set aside on the basis of the new representations now filed in this application by the applicants and the representations thereon by the respondent (counsel for the applicants having advised that he will not be filing any reply thereto).
[4]
I have decided that my original order should stand. In the first place the materials now filed as a belated reply to the submissions of the respondent on the original application for an extension of time are not, for the most part, the proper subject of a reply. They purport to make the arguments which the applicants should have made in the original application. Further they do not convince me that an extension of time should be granted. In particular I am not satisfied that sufficient diligence was shown in seeking authorization from the Ontario Legal Aid Plan, nor can the problems in obtaining such authorization hold up the due processing of leave applications.
[5]
The application to set aside by order of February 17, 1994, is therefore dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/nmg
[End of document]