[1]
Muldoon, J.
: What is brought before the court on this proceeding is a motion dated November 9, 1995 and filed November 22, 1995, for an extension of time within which to serve an application for leave and for judicial review sought to be made pursuant to s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
. Precisely, this motion is brought pursuant to s. 82.1(5) which permits a judge to allow an extended time for filing and serving a leave application "for special reasons". Such must mean reasons other than the party just forgot, or started too late to meet the criterion, expressed in s. 82.1(3), of filing and serving the application within fifteen days after the day on which the applicant is notified of the decision or order sought to be quashed.
[2]
In support of this motion for extended time is the affidavit of Leslie H. Morley, the applicant's solicitor herein. This is a bad practice, as noted in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 542 (Collier, J.) and in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 723 et seq. (Addy, J.). The present motion is a procedural not a substantive one. Otherwise the solicitor's affidavit would be just ignored, or itself, struck from the record. As stated by Mr. Justice Addy in the
Lex Tex
case:
"... An affidavit of the solicitor for the defendant was filed in support of this part of the motion. The affidavit is not limited to merely identifying certain documents or correspondence but deals with substantive matters on which this part of the motion is founded.
. . . . .
"Counsel for the plaintiff cross-examined the solicitor for the defendant on this affidavit and the latter repeatedly refused to answer many of the questions put to him on the grounds of solicitor-and-client privilege.
. . . . .
"The present case illustrates clearly and dramatically the impropriety of having the solicitor of any party to a legal proceeding take an affidavit or testify orally on behalf of his client regarding any cause of issue as to which he has been consulted. The rule has long been recognized by common law courts, but of late seems to have fallen into disuse to some extent, in interlocutory matters in any event, largely because it is so much more convenient for the solicitor to take such affidavits.
"Whatever might be the motive for doing so, it is completely improper and unacceptable for a solicitor to take an affidavit even in an interlocutory matter where he attests to matters of substance and might therefore expose himself to being cross-examined on matters covered by solicitor-and-client privilege. In the case at bar, counsel for the defendant quite candidly stated that it was precisely in order to avoid answering questions on certain aspects of the case as to which any other representative of the defendant might be cross-examined, that a decision was made to have the affidavit taken by the solicitor. This, of course, brings into focus all the more clearly the fundamental injustice which might result from the practice."
[3]
Thus the rule is stated and the reason for it given - as long ago as 1978. But the rule endures, even if the opposite party, as it might happen has no intention of cross-examining. Indeed, in the present case, that is the one matter upon which the respondent's counsel comments in her letter of December 6, 1995. That submission notes nonconformity "with rule 10 of the
Rules of Professional Conduct for the Law Society of Upper Canada
...". It might well be the same for various other provincial governing bodies.
[4]
This is a procedural matter not the substantive core of this litigation. Because of that factor the applicant personally has no personal knowledge of the doings on his solicitor's part, and the applicant would have to resort to hearsay and thus run afoul of rule 332(1) in its principal expression of principle. However, since this is an interlocutory motion, even here, out of necessity, the applicant could have been enlisted to make the deposition on information and belief pursuant to the servient principle of rule 332 - in order to avoid a solicitor's affidavit. A higher degree of organization than usual would be needed, since the applicant's motion for extension of time avers that the applicant, an inmate of a medium-security federal correctional institution, is incarcerated 135 km distant from his counsel's office, and he has only limited telephone access.
[5]
Here, the solicitor's affidavit, in all but paragraph 2, deposes on the basis of personal knowledge telling of the solicitor's misfortunes in effecting service on the respondent within the 15 day limitation period. Not to be taken as a precedent, acceptance of paragraphs (1) and (3) through (7) ought to be granted.
[6]
Now, when filing within statutory time limits, an applicant's chances of success are not usually scrutinized as part of the exercise of the right to proceed. But, as the applicant's counsel submits and acknowledges, when seeking an exceptional extension beyond the prescribed time limit a salient consideration in moving the court to grant such extension is "whether or not there is a good case on the merits see [jurisprudence cited]".
[7]
On this record there is just no means of determining what the applicant's case is, or how good it might be on the merits.
[8]
For example, the applicant's originating notice of motion gives no particulars about the respondent's alleged opinion to the effect that the applicant is a danger to the Canadian public, what it alleges and upon what characteristics or circumstances of the applicant it purports to be based. The originating notice alleges that such Minister's opinion or determination exists but how can one conclude that the applicant has a good, or any, case on his allegation:
"(4) that the Minister erred in fact and law in its [sic] interpretation of the meaning of the term 'danger to the Canadian public' as found in s. [sic] 70(5) of the
Immigration Act
;"
Maybe he did err and maybe he did not err, but the applicant is awfully coy about stating the offence of which he was convicted, if so, for which he is serving a term of imprisonment in a medium-security correctional institution, if that be so. Such particulars would be a good start on determining whether the applicant has an arguable case - "a good case on the merits" as the applicant states.
[9]
The applicant alleges:
"(7) that the Minister failed to provide reasons for its [sic] decision."
Giving the applicant the benefit of the gratuitous assumption that allegation (7) is true, should the applicant not level with the court by providing a true copy of what he earlier alleges was "communicated to the Applicant on the 18th day of 1995" [sic]?
[10]
Section 70(5) of the
Immigration Act
provides:
"(5) No appeal may be made to the Appeal Division by a person described in s. (1) or paragraph (2)(a) or (b) against whom a deportation order or conditional deportation order is made where the Minister is of the opinion that the person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada and the person has been determined by an adjudicator to be
(a) a member of an inadmissible class described in paragraph 19(1)(c), (c.1), (c.2) or (d);
(b) a person described in paragraph 27(1)(a.1); or
(c) a person described in paragraph 27(1)(d) who has been convicted of an offence under any Act of Parliament for which a term of imprisonment of ten years or more may be imposed."
[11]
Section 13(4) of an
Act to Amend the Immigration Act and the Citizenship Act and to make a consequential Amendment to the Customs Act
, S.C. 1995, c. 15, runs as follows:
"(4) Section 70(5) of the [Immigration] Act as enacted by subs. (3) [hereof] applies to an appeal that has been made on or before the coming into force of that subsection and in respect of which the hearing has not been commenced, but a person who has made such an appeal may, within fifteen days after the person has been notified that, in the opinion of the Minister, the person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada, make an application for judicial review under s. 82.1 of the Act with respect to the deportation order or conditional deportation order referred to in s. 70(5)."
Allegations of grounds (1) and (2) in the originating notice of motion assert that each of those two statutory provisions "is of no force and effect as it violates ss. 7 and 12 of the
Charter
..., both generally and particularly as respects the applicant". How? What are the particulars? How can it be determined whether or not "the applicant has a good case on the merits" without knowing what it is? No special reasons are evinced here.
[12]
To leave the applicant's case, such as it is, in the same unexplained plight as it stood before the time limit was missed, has not advanced the applicant's cause in seeking an extension of time as an exception to the general rule which applies to all others. A much better affidavit was required to fill out the assertion of "a good case on the merits". However that is the state of the cause as it is, and the court obviously cannot supply by fantasy that which is not on the file before the court.
[13]
For the foregoing reasons, the applicant's motion herein for an extension of time is dismissed, and by corollary, along with it, his originating motion for leave and judicial review, too.
Motion dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sms
[End of document]