 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 159)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Russell, J.
February 6, 2012.
Counsel:
Preevanda K. Sapru, for the applicant;
Catherine Vasilaros, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Preevanda K. Sapru, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
INTRODUCTION
[1]
Russell, J.
: This is an application pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001 c. 27 (Act) for judicial review of the decision of the Refugee Protection Division (RPD) of the Immigration and Refugee RPD, dated 8 February 2011 (Decision). In the Decision, the RPD refused the Applicant's claim for protection under section 96 and subsection 97(1) of the Act.
BACKGROUND
[2]
The Applicant is a 63-year-old citizen of Bangladesh. She is a widow and has seven children, three of whom live in the UK.
[3]
In her PIF, the Applicant says that from 2005 to June 2006, she lived in Canada on a visitor's visa. On 11 April 2006, she was issued a visitor's visa for the UK in Ottawa which was valid until October 2006. Her passport was stamped on 22 May 2006 at Heathrow Airport, in London, UK. The record does not show how or when she travelled from the UK to Bangladesh. On 20 June 2006 she says that terrorist leaders Montu and Shiraz Mia (Terrorists) came to her house in Bangladesh with several other people. They threatened the Applicant, demanding money or they would interfere with the marriage of her daughter, which was scheduled for early August 2006. At the hearing into her claim, the Applicant said the Terrorists ransacked her house, but she did not mention this in her PIF narrative. The Applicant gave the Terrorists some money she had received from the sale of land her husband had left her when he died. Though she initially wanted to pursue a complaint with the police, her children told her to not pursue the matter so that the wedding could proceed.
[4]
On 15 January 2007, the Terrorists returned and demanded that she give them some of her properties. They gave her six months to comply. The Applicant went to the police, but they refused to enter a complaint because the terrorist leaders were powerful. The police advised her to contact her Member of Parliament (MP), which she did on 26 January 2007. He said he could not help her because the Terrorists were powerful.
[5]
On 12 June 2007, the Terrorists came to her house again and demanded she sell them some of her properties. When she refused, they threatened her. She became anxious and saw a doctor. On 20 April 2008, the Terrorists came back to her house with weapons and asked her to sign documents transferring her land to them. She fainted and, when she came to, they said they would return in a month. After this incident, the Applicant went to the police again, but they would not help her. Because she was afraid, she went to Dhaka, Bangladesh on 3 May 2008, to hide at her daughter's house. On 25 May 2008, the Terrorists came to her son's house in Dhaka. The next day the family decided the Applicant should leave Bangladesh, so they obtained visas for her to travel to Canada and the UK. She went to the U.K. on 16 July 2008. There, her children (who are UK citizens) did not encourage her to seek asylum, and she did not know how to do this herself. She stayed in the UK for five months without claiming asylum until she left the UK in December 2008.
[6]
The Applicant arrived in Canada on December 15, 2008 and claimed protection on 23 December 2008. Before the hearing, the Applicant attended an interview with Dr. J. Pilowsky, a clinical and rehabilitation psychologist. Dr. Pilowsky produced a report (Pilowsky Report) which indicated that the Applicant had a number of psychological issues arising from her experiences in Bangladesh. Dr. Pilowsky's interview was conducted with the aid of the Applicant's daughter as an interpreter and the Applicant submitted the Pilowsky Report to the RPD to support her claim.
[7]
The Applicant also submitted a letter from Harun Al-Rashid, an advocate and president of the Brahmanbaria District branch of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party in Brahmanbaria District, Bangladesh (Rashid Letter). This letter purports to confirm that the Applicant was harassed by terrorists.
[8]
The RPD heard the Applicant's claim on 13 January 2011. At the hearing, the Applicant, her counsel, the RPD and an interpreter were present. After a break in the hearing, the Applicant complained about the quality of the interpretation. The RPD continued with the hearing, using the same interpreter, but suggested to the Applicant's counsel that she have an audit done of the translation.
[9]
At the end of the hearing, the RPD asked Applicant's counsel if she intended to have a translation audit done. She replied that she did, so the RPD gave her three weeks to obtain a recording of the hearing, have the audit done, and provide written submissions. The Applicant did not have an audit done but provided written submissions on 2 February 2011. In her written submissions, the Applicant requested an extension of time to have the audit completed. The RPD denied this request. The RPD considered the evidence before it and made its Decision on 8 February 2011. The RPD notified the Applicant of its decision by letter dated 2 March 2011.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
[10]
The RPD first set out the Applicant's allegations and found she had established her identity based on her Bangladeshi passport and Canadian visa. The RPD said that the determinative issues in her claim were credibility and state protection. The RPD said that it had considered all of the evidence and submissions, the Applicant's post-hearing submissions, and the IRB Chairperson's Guidelines, entitled
Women Refugee Claimants Fearing Gender-Related Persecution: Update
(Guidelines).
Interpretation
[11]
The RPD noted that after the afternoon break at the hearing, Applicant's counsel had indicated that the quality of interpretation was inadequate. The Applicant's daughter, who was attending the hearing, had told counsel that there were errors in the translation. No one had raised any issue with the translation up to that point. The Applicant had said at the beginning of the hearing that she understood the interpreter and the interpreter had confirmed that she understood the Applicant.
[12]
During the hearing, counsel requested a translation audit. The RPD agreed to give the Applicant three weeks to have the audit done and submit it with her post-hearing submissions but she did not provide the audit in those submissions. With the post-hearing submissions, she asked for additional time to provide the audit, but the RPD denied the request. The RPD noted this request was made in counsel's post-hearing submissions on the afternoon of the due date set at the hearing.
[13]
The RPD noted the specific problems counsel asserted with the interpretation: the interpreter used the third person instead of the first person; she apparently confused "2006" with "2007" on one point; and there was an issue concerning the Pilowsky Report. The RPD said that counsel had agreed that the third person issue was stylistic and not significant. It also said that it did not use the confused date in any credibility assessment it made. With respect to the Pilowsky Report, the RPD said that if an error did occur, it was of no significance because the RPD made no negative inference from the discussion of this report in its analysis of the Applicant's credibility.
[14]
The RPD found that it was satisfied that any interpretation difficulties, if there were any, did not hinder its ability to properly gauge the Applicant's credibility.
Credibility
Inconsistencies in Testimony
[15]
The RPD noted that during the hearing, the Applicant provided unreliable testimony and blamed this on her poor memory. The RPD noted that the Pilowsky Report said she suffered from a wide array of psychological and mental problems, including problems with her memory.
[16]
The RPD found that the Applicant was able to testify adequately, although she appeared to tire later on in the afternoon. The RPD also noted that she may have had some minor memory issues, so it could ascribe some of the problems in her testimony to memory problems. However, the RPD noted that the Applicant had prepared her PIF with the assistance of counsel and had affirmed that her PIF was complete, true and correct. The RPD said the Applicant had to take responsibility for her evidence as a whole.
[17]
The RPD found the Applicant's evidence, including her oral testimony, was not credible. It noted several major concerns.
Oral Testimony and PIF
[18]
The Applicant was asked to provide a copy of her husband's death certificate and will, but at the hearing, she said her home had been ransacked by the Terrorists and the documents lost. She had not mentioned the ransacking of her home in her PIF narrative. Because she did not mention this until the hearing, the RPD found this was an embellishment. She also wrote in her PIF that Harun Al-Rashid was her MP when she sought his assistance after the January 2007 incident. At the hearing, she said he stopped being an MP before January 2007. When asked why she wrote to him if he was not her MP, she said that she could not remember and it might have been an error between her and counsel. Her counsel had nothing to say on this point.
Oral Testimony and IMM 5611 Form
[19]
In the form filled out when she initially made her claim (IMM 5611), the Applicant said that the Terrorists were from the JMB terrorist organization. At the hearing, she said they were not aligned with any group and were simply extortionists.
Obtaining the Rashid Letter
[20]
The Applicant testified that her son had sent her the Rashid Letter. She also provided a courier envelope at the hearing in which she said the Rashid Letter had been sent to her. That envelope indicated that Mr. Rashid was the sender.
PIF and the Rashid Letter
[21]
The Rashid Letter said the Applicant's properties were captured by terrorists. Her PIF narrative, however, said there were threats to take her property and she was forced to sell some of it.
Conclusions on Credibility
[22]
The RPD found the Applicant had not adequately explained the inconsistencies it had noted in her testimony. These defects led the RPD to draw negative inferences as to her credibility. Further, because her testimony as to how she received the Rashid Letter was inconsistent, because her PIF and the Rashid Letter were inconsistent, and because she could not establish that Mr. Rashid was who he said he was, the RPD found the Rashid Letter was not genuine. The RPD noted documentary evidence before it, IRB Response to Information Request BGD1035323.E, which said that fraudulent documents are readily available in Bangladesh. It found that she had submitted a fraudulent document which led the RPD to draw a serious negative inference as to credibility.
[23]
The RPD also said that a medical report the Applicant had provided to support her claim - from Dr. Faraya Alamgir, a physician in Dhaka, Bangladesh (Alamgir Report) - did not mention the threats she faced. When asked why, the Applicant blamed the omission on Dr. Alamgir's memory loss. The RPD did not accept her explanation, found that the note was not genuine, and drew a serious negative inference as to the Applicant's credibility.
[24]
The RPD drew a further negative inference from her failure to claim asylum in the UK, noting that the UK is a signatory to the 1951
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
and the 1967
Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees
. The Applicant had testified that she was busy with her family and that she did not ask about asylum when she was in the UK. She also said that people told her she was old and could not claim by herself. Though she was not any younger when she came to Canada, she said that her family and the Bengali community had helped with her claim. The RPD said claimants are expected to claim at the earliest opportunity, rejected the Applicant's explanation, and found that she did not truly fear persecution in Bangladesh. It said that she chose Canada because she preferred to be near her daughter here, rather than with her children in the UK.
[25]
The RPD also gave examples of evidence from which it had not drawn negative inferences. First, the RPD said that, at the end of the hearing, it had asked the Applicant if she had previously applied for immigration to Canada and she said she did not remember. The RPD accepted that she may have been tired, frustrated, and discouraged at the end of the hearing and may have been in such a poor mental state that she could not answer a simple question.
[26]
The RPD also did not make a negative inference from the discrepancy between her PIF and the Pilowsky Report. The Applicant told Dr. Pilowsky that her servants were harassed by the Terrorists but had not mentioned this in her PIF. She was unable to explain this discrepancy, but had said she could not remember. This was one area where counsel had said at the hearing that poor interpretation skewed the Applicant's responses. The RPD said it did not make a negative inference on this point; it said that it was giving the Applicant the benefit of the doubt after these final questions by the RPD even though the Applicant appeared able to properly answer questions from her counsel.
No Corroborating Evidence
[27]
The RPD pointed out that it is entitled to make negative inferences as to credibility from the lack of corroborating evidence and drew three negative inferences as to credibility from the Applicant's inability to produce documents which would corroborate her story.
[28]
First, the Applicant could not provide documentary evidence of the sale of her home. She claimed she was forced to sell some of her property to pay the Terrorists. Though she said it was possible to get documents from a land registry which would document the sale, the Applicant had not provided this evidence in post-hearing submissions.
[29]
Second, the RPD asked the Applicant to confirm her assertion that the Terrorists were well known in her area. She said there were lots of news reports about them in her area but she was unable to provide any supporting evidence to the RPD at the hearing or in her post-hearing submissions.
[30]
Third, the RPD asked if the Applicant could provide independent documentary evidence that Harun Al-Rashid was actually a former MP. She could not, but the RPD noted that it would not have expected her to have that information available at the hearing. Even so, the Applicant did not submit documents corroborating this allegation with her post-hearing submissions, even though the RPD identified this issue at the hearing.
[31]
On the whole, the RPD found the Applicant's evidence was not credible and was insufficient to support her claim for protection.
State Protection
[32]
The RPD noted that
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , establishes that refugee protection is a surrogate for the home state's protection and can only be properly sought after a claimant has first sought the protection of her home state.
Ward
also teaches that there is an underlying presumption that a state can protect its citizens which can only be rebutted by clear and convincing proof to the contrary.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  establishes that the evidence a claimant offers to rebut the presumption must be relevant, reliable and convincing and must satisfy the decision-maker, on a balance of probabilities, that state protection is inadequate.
[33]
The RPD found that, after she was first threatened by the Terrorists, the Applicant did not complain to the police. She said she thought that if she gave the Terrorists money that they would leave her alone. She admitted that this was her mistake and that she should have reported the incident to the police.
[34]
The RPD found that the Applicant had not attempted to access the protection of her state at the most critical point in her narrative. The reason she gave for not doing so - to keep the Terrorists from stopping her daughter's wedding - was insufficient justification for failing to notify the police of the threats she faced.
[35]
The Applicant claimed she had reported the January 2007 incident to the police, but the RPD found she could not document this. She also claimed the police did nothing, issued no report, and told her to go to her MP. Because the RPD found the Rashid Letter was not genuine, it found she did not go to the MP as she said she did.
[36]
The Applicant also said she went to the police after the June 2007 incident and, at the hearing, the RPD pointed out that she had not indicated this in her PIF. She then said she was confused, but that she remembered going to the police twice. The RPD accepted that the Applicant may have been confused about this and did not draw any negative inferences as to credibility from her late addition of the story about going to the police in June 2007. However, the RPD found that the result was that she did not go to the police, which was evidence she did not seek state protection.
[37]
Finally, the RPD noted the Applicant said she went to the police after the April 2008 incident, but her son did not report the May 2008 incident to the police. The Applicant could not provide documentation of the April 2008 visit to the police because they did nothing and gave her nothing. When the RPD asked why she went to the police after they failed to protect her before, she said she hoped things would change. The RPD found this was a reasonable response (see paragraph 38 of the Decision.)
[38]
Given the other concerns in regard to credibility and the Applicant's failure to document any of her two alleged reports to the police, the RPD found she had not reported anything to the police. It also noted the Applicant did not provide or specifically identify any documentary evidence that would indicate that the police in Bangladesh would not be willing and able to adequately protect someone like her from extortionists.
[39]
The RPD found that the claimant had not made efforts to engage the protection of her own state before coming to Canada and that she had failed to provide clear and convincing evidence that state protection would not have been adequate if she had pursued it. Since state protection was available to her, the Applicant could not have a well-founded fear of persecution, nor could she be a person in need of protection.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
[40]
The following provisions of the Act are applicable in this proceeding:
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
...
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them Personally
(a) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(b) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a) soit se trouve hors de tout pays don't elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
...
97. (1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
ISSUES
[41]
The Applicant raises four issues in this case:
1. Whether the RPD denied her procedural fairness by providing inadequate interpretation;
2. Whether the RPD's reasons were adequate;
3. Whether the RPD' credibility finding was reasonable;
4. Whether the RPD's state protection finding was reasonable.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
[42]
The Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  held that a standard of review analysis need not be conducted in every instance. Instead, where the standard of review applicable to a particular question before the court is well-settled by past jurisprudence, the reviewing court may adopt that standard of review. Only where this search proves fruitless must the reviewing court undertake a consideration of the four factors comprising the standard of review analysis.
[43]
On the first issue, the Federal Court of Appeal, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Justice François Lemieux summarized the factors as follows:
a. The interpretation must be precise, continuous, competent, impartial and contemporaneous.
b. No proof of actual prejudice is required as a condition of obtaining relief.
c. The right is to adequate translation not perfect translation. The fundamental value is linguistic understanding.
d. Waiver of the right results if an objection to the quality of the translation is not raised by a claimant at the first opportunity in those cases where it is reasonable to expect that a complaint be made.
e. It is a question of fact in each case whether it is reasonable to expect that a complaint be made about the inadequacy of interpretation.
f. If the interpreter is having difficulty speaking an applicant's language and being understood by him is a matter which should be raised at the earliest opportunity.
[44]
The adequacy of translation is an issue of procedural fairness. As the Supreme Court of Canada held in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paragraph 43, issues of procedural fairness are evaluated on a standard of review of correctness. The standard of review on the first issue is correctness.
[45]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FCA) the Federal Court of Appeal held that the standard of review on a credibility finding is reasonableness. Further, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Justice Max Teitelbaum held that findings of credibility are central to the RPD's finding of fact and are therefore to be evaluated on a standard of review of reasonableness.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Michael Kelen held at paragraph 17 that the standard of review on a credibility determination is reasonableness. The standard of review on the third issue is reasonableness.
[46]
In
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Supreme Court of Canada held at paragraph 14 that the adequacy of reasons is not an independent ground for quashing a decision. Rather, the reasons given are to be evaluated along with the outcome in an organic process designed to determine if the result is within the range of acceptable outcomes. So long as the reasons, supplemented by the record, show that the outcome was reasonable, they will be adequate.
[47]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, the Federal Court of Appeal held at paragraph 36 that the standard of review on a state protection finding is reasonableness. This approach was followed by Justice Leonard Mandamin in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Further, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Danièle Tremblay-Lamer held at paragraph 11 that the standard of review on a state protection finding is reasonableness. The standard of review on the fourth issue is reasonableness.
[48]
When reviewing a decision on the standard of reasonableness, the analysis will be concerned with "the existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process [and also with] whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law." See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paragraph 47, and
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Put another way, the Court should intervene only if the Decision was unreasonable in the sense that it falls outside the "range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law."
ARGUMENTS
The Applicant
The RPD Provided Inadequate Interpretation
[49]
The Applicant says that she could not understand all the questions she was asked at the hearing and that she told the RPD about the problem. Prior to the hearing, the Applicant was assessed by Dr. Pilowsky who identified a myriad of mental health and memory issues. The Applicant says that the inadequate interpretation added to her confusion, memory loss and feeling of anxiousness.
[50]
The Applicant's counsel brought the translation problem to the RPD's attention after she told him that she was having trouble understanding the interpreter. Though she objected to the proceedings taking place and requested the services of a proficient interpreter, the RPD refused her request and completed the hearing with the same interpreter it had started the hearing with. She says she has not waived her right to adequate interpretation and that she was denied her right under section 14 of the Charter to continuous, precise, competent, impartial and contemporaneous interpretation.
[51]
The errors in interpretation went to the very essence of the RPD's rejection of the Applicant's claim. The RPD relied, at least in part, on the translation errors to support its conclusion that she was not credible. As the main reason the RPD rejected her claim was its finding that she was not credible, her right to procedural fairness was breached, so the Decision must be reconsidered.
The RPD's Credibility Finding was Unreasonable
[52]
The RPD failed to take the Applicant's psychological state into account when it assessed her credibility. The Applicant says that the Pilowsky Report indicated that she suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder and requires treatment by a mental health professional. That report includes evidence which was relevant to the RPD's credibility determination and which it did not consider:
a. She suffers from depression, cognitive difficulties, nightmares, anxiety and other health issues;
b. She suffers from psychological distress marked by post-traumatic anxiety and depression, and is unable to relax even though she uses medication;
c. She uses Novolin, Hyzaar, PMS-Clonazepam, Novofine, Teva-Raberprazole, and Apo-Metformin to treat her psychological conditions;
d. Her symptoms adversely impact her immediate cognitive functioning and she has problems with memory and concentration.
[53]
The Applicant argues that, because the RPD accepted that she suffered from chronic post-traumatic stress disorder, it was obligated to consider the impact of this condition on the quality of her evidence.
[54]
The Applicant relies on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  for the proposition that where there is medical evidence before the RPD that might explain shortcomings in a claimant's testimony, the RPD must consider and give appropriate weight to that evidence. She says
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Singh
1] teaches that it is an error for the RPD to base its decision on a discrepancy between information given at the port of entry and information given later in the process without taking into account the evidence of her psychological state.
[55]
Simply referring in the Decision to the Pilowsky Report was not sufficient. The RPD was required to consider whether the Applicant's psychological circumstance might help explain any omissions, lack of details, or confusion about events. These were the exact cognitive errors referred to in the Pilowsky Report. The Applicant points to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  to support this position.
[56]
In this case, the RPD's treatment of the Pilowsky Report was unreasonable. The RPD accepted she had difficulty testifying on some points because she could not remember some things, but also found she was not credible with respect to other testimony and because she could not remember. This inconsistent treatment of her condition was unreasonable. The RPD failed to consider whether the Applicant's documented and accepted medical state may have led to reluctance on her part to reveal all of the details of the torture and persecution referred to in her PIF. This failure renders the Decision unreasonable.
[57]
The Applicant also points to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  where Justice Konrad von Finckenstein had this to say at paragraph 12:
In this case, credibility was also the "linchpin" to the RPD's Decision. Nonetheless, the RPD failed to indicate, how, if at all, the psychological report was considered when making its credibility finding. The RPD was obliged to do more than merely state that it had "considered" the report. It was obliged to provide some meaningful discussion as to how it had taken account of the applicant's serious medical condition before it made its negative credibility finding. The failure to do so in this case constitutes a reviewable error and justifies the matter being returned to a newly appointed RPD.
[58]
The Applicant says that the principle Justice von Finkenstein enunciated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> applies in her case. The RPD's negative credibility finding was central to its Decision and it did not adequately consider how her medical condition affected her behaviour when it made its credibility finding. This error means that the Decision must be returned for reconsideration.
The RPD's State Protection Finding was Unreasonable
[59]
The Applicant further says that the RPD's finding that she did not rebut the presumption of state protection cannot stand because it was based upon an unreasonable credibility finding. The RPD did not make any connection between the grounds she advanced to support her claim and the evidence that had been recited or the conclusion that it reached. The RPD only provided a summary of country conditions regarding the availability of state protection in Bangladesh, but provided no analysis in support of the conclusion it ultimately reached. She notes that in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Carolyn Layden-Stevenson said at paragraphs 21 and 22 that
Merely stating the evidence of the parties and stating a conclusion does not constitute adequate reasons. A decision maker must set out the findings of fact and the principal evidence upon which these findings were based. The reasoning process followed must be delineated:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) at para. 22.
The applicants are entitled to the benefit of the officer's reasons as to why they failed to rebut the presumption of state protection on the evidence they adduced (which was apparently accepted by the officer). ... [T] he application for judicial review will be allowed.
[60]
Here, the RPD erred when it made only a cursory reference to the risk in this application and did not consider the totality of the evidence, particularly the evidence going to the Applicant's mental state. She says there is no indication the RPD considered the persecution that she suffered or looked at her particular situation. Based on the evidence set before the RPD, this oversight amounts to an error in law.
The Respondent
Interpretation
[61]
The Respondent says the Decision clearly shows that the Applicant was given the opportunity to have an audit of the hearing done and have that audit considered before the RPD made its final decision. The Applicant failed to take advantage of this opportunity and has failed to provide a reasonable explanation for this failure, so there is no procedural fairness issue in this case.
Assessment of the Evidence
[62]
The RPD considered the Pilowsky Report and applied the Guidelines when it heard and determined this case. While the Guidelines are important to assist the RPD in understanding the effects of persecution on women, they cannot cure major credibility problems in a witness's evidence. Further, the RPD was not obligated to excuse inconsistencies and other problems with the Applicant's evidence simply because she has a psychological condition. A psychological report cannot act as a cure-all for all the deficiencies in a claimant's evidence. The Court should defer to the RPD, since the appropriate weight to be given evidence is within the RPD's jurisdiction.
[63]
The Supreme Court of Canada has clearly said that deference is to be afforded to credibility findings made by the trier of fact who has had the opportunity to hear oral evidence first-hand. In
R v Gagnon
2006 SCC 17, the Supreme Court of Canada held at paragraph 20 that
Assessing credibility is not a science. It is very difficult for a trial judge to articulate with precision the complex intermingling of impressions that emerge after watching and listening to witnesses and attempting to reconcile the various versions of events. That is why this Court decided, most recently in
H.L.
, that in the absence of a palpable and overriding error by the trial judge, his or her perceptions should be respected.
[64]
In this case, the RPD gave reasons for finding that the Applicant's evidence lacked credibility and its conclusions were open to it on the evidence. None of the Applicant's arguments show a palpable and overriding error and the Applicant has not shown any reason for this Court to interfere with the RPD's Decision in this case.
ANALYSIS
[65]
The Applicant makes a series of allegations of reviewable error that are not borne out by an objective reading of the Decision. Indeed, some of the Applicant's argument contains serious inaccuracies about what the record shows. For the reasons that follow, I conclude the RPD afforded sufficient procedural fairness to the Applicant and that the RPD's credibility findings and findings regarding state protection are reasonable.
Fairness with Respect to Interpretation
[66]
The Applicant is correct in stating that questions of adequate interpretation raise issues of procedural fairness. This means that the appropriate standard of review on this issue is correctness.
[67]
The Applicant submits that she was not afforded the appropriate level of procedural fairness. She says she did not receive adequate interpretation but it seems to me that the RPD thoroughly and fairly addressed this issue in its Decision. It noted that, after the afternoon break, counsel indicated that the Applicant's daughter spoke to him and indicated that the quality of interpretation was inadequate. The RPD also noted in the Decision that neither the RPD, counsel, the interpreter or the Applicant brought up any issue regarding the interpretation until that point in the proceedings.
[68]
The Applicant now submits that "[e]ven though the counsel objected to the proceedings taking place - he continued with the hearing." The Applicant also submits that "[t]he applicant's counsel brought to the attention of the RPD member that there were problems with the interpretation and requested services of a proficient interpreter." From these submissions it appears she is alleging that her counsel requested both that the hearing stop and that a new interpreter be assigned. After reviewing the transcript, I do not think this is the case.
[69]
The following passage from the transcript is rather lengthy (see page 261 of the CTR). However, much, if not all of it, is relevant to the issue at hand: whether the RPD adequately addressed the Applicant's concerns about the adequacy of the interpretation and afforded her appropriate procedural fairness on this issue.
COUNSEL FOR CLAIMANT [CC]:
I just have a preliminary issue to deal with. I have some concerns about the quality of interpretation, with all due respect to the interpreter ---
MEMBER [M]:
Okay.
CC:
--- that has been provided. The Claimant's daughter who speaks English brought to my attention two, although she said there were others but she couldn't remember them because she wasn't documenting them.
M:
M'hm.
CC:
She said in a couple of occasions, the years were not translated correctly. For example, 2006 was said instead of 2007. The other one had to do with what was being asked by the Member just before -- just before we broke and that had to deal with the question concerning Dr. Pilowski's report apparently was translated as did the servants harass her, meaning the Claimant and that's obviously not what's written -- I know that's not what the Member said and it's not what's written in the PIF and that is a fairly serious error.
The other concern I had which I didn't state, although it was apparent during the course of the translation, is that the interpreter was talking in the third person pretty much the whole time.
M:
M'hm.
CC:
And I don't think that's -- maybe I ought to have brought that. I was letting that slide but I don't think that that's appropriate because interpretation, as I'm sure the Member knows, according to the Federal Court should be contemporaneous and ---
M:
Adequate.
CC:
--- adequate.
M:
It's the test.
CC:
Yes. And I have concerns whether or not there may have been other errors which we're not aware of.
M:
Are you making a formal motion?
CC:
Yes.
M:
Okay. Nothing was indicated in the first part of the hearing as to any issue with the interpretation. The two issues that you mentioned I understand that there's some confusion from time to time and I can certainly, you know, separate just what may be a slight confusion or temporary confusion over a year from any potential serious credibility issue.
I'm confident that -- I mean it's my impression so far that the interpretation has been adequate. So at this point I would have to say no to -- to your -- well, you haven't asked for anything in particular but for any ---
CC:
Well, I would ask that the -- that -- I would ask that the recording that the -- that the proceedings be audited by another interpreter to ensure that ---
M:
Well, then you're free to request the tape and to ---
CC:
Okay. Well, I'm just -- okay.
M:
Yeah, you're free to request the tape and then if you want, I guess you might as well do post-hearing submissions in writing rather than orally. So at that point perhaps you can, you know, listen to the tape or have an audit done and if you think that there's a -- if it reveals some other issues, then put it in your submissions and I will evaluate it at that time.
CC:
Okay. Well, ---
M:
But right now my impression is so far that interpretation has been adequate.
CC:
The interpreter should not be speaking in the third person. That's not -- I think that's inappropriate.
M:
Okay. How would that -- what do you mean by that?
CC:
Well she says she went to her son, not like my son. I asked my son. Her son asked.
M:
Okay. I don't think that leads to any misunderstanding by me as to the gist of the testimony. I think that's stylistic and I don't think that derogates from the adequacy at least apparently for me so far of the quality of interpretation.
CC:
Okay. So I just want to make it clear that I'm, you know, formally putting the objection on the record to the quality of interpretation because I'm sure as the Member is aware I'm obligated to put that objection on the record as soon as I'm aware of it. Otherwise, I may be precluded from raising it in later proceedings if that's necessary.
M:
Okay. Does that indicate you were not aware of it until -- during the first part of the hearing?
CC:
I wasn't aware that there were those translation errors until the daughter spoke to me in the break.
M:
Yeah, okay.
CC:
I was willing to let the third person slide because, as the Member says, it may not necessarily affect your understanding of what Ms. Khatun is saying.
M:
All right.
CC:
But I mention that only because I think that's part of the bigger picture. I mean if that's going on and there are other errors going on, then I think that I'm obligated to bring that -- I'm obligated to raise that.
M:
So you have done. And you have done so now. You complied with your obligations.
CC:
Thank you.
M:
You're welcome.
[70]
In my view, after reading the transcript, Applicant's counsel did not request that the hearing be stopped or that a new interpreter be provided. What is apparent from the transcript is that the Applicant raised an objection to the interpretation and made a request for an audit of the translation.
[71]
It is clear that the RPD considered counsel's request. The RPD stated that the Applicant could order a tape of the hearing and decide whether or not to have an audit done. The RPD stated that counsel could then put any concerns regarding the translation into written post-hearing submissions.
[72]
The following exchange further demonstrates that the RPD was alive to the interpretation issue by providing the Applicant with the requested amount of time in order to conduct the audit and make submissions:
CC:
I don't have any further questions.
M:
Okay. So are you going to actually do that interpreter audit as you suggested?
CC:
I am, yes.
M:
All right. So I would suggest that you do any submissions at that time, okay?
CC:
That's fine.
M:
All right. How long do you need?
CC:
Three weeks because I have to do the audit.
M:
Three weeks, all right.
CC:
Well, yeah ---
M:
I have a calendar. So today is January 13. So 13 and 21 is 33 (
sic
). That makes it -- there's only 31 -- that means February 2nd.
CC:
That's fine.
[...]
M:
[...] All right. So ma'am, when I receive your lawyer's submissions and various motions and such, I will consider it and then I will make a decision. [...]
[73]
It is clear that Applicant's counsel requested three weeks in order to have the audit done and to make post-hearing submissions. The RPD granted an extended period of three weeks and even noted in its Decision that such time period is longer than the typical period of one or two weeks to provide post-hearing submissions.
[74]
The RPD gave the Applicant an opportunity to raise any further concerns regarding the adequacy of the interpretation but she failed to do so. Although counsel requested an extension of time to perform and provide the audit, the RPD reasonably denied that request.
[75]
I note that the CTR indicates that Applicant's counsel requested a recording of the hearing the day after the hearing. There is no indication that any delays occurred in sending that recording to the Applicant.
[76]
The Decision also indicates that the RPD took into consideration the specific translation issues raised by counsel at the hearing. There is no reason to believe that, had the Applicant put forward any further concerns regarding the adequacy of the interpretation, the RPD would not have considered those submissions before rendering its Decision. It is also telling, I think, that the Applicant has placed no evidence before me concerning the inadequacy of the translation that was not specifically dealt with in the Decision. She had every opportunity to do this, but has declined to provide an audit or any other evidence to show specific inaccuracies material to the Decision. Consequently, the Court has no evidence before it to demonstrate that the translation was not adequate.
[77]
I conclude that the RPD was alert to the issues and concerns raised by the Applicant regarding the translation. It was unreasonable for the Applicant (represented by counsel) to fail to take advantage of an opportunity afforded to her and then claim that the RPD did not provide adequate procedural fairness. The RPD provided an adequate level of procedural fairness in the circumstances and I concluded that no breach occurred.
[78]
It is my view that the Applicant understands this perspective very well because, at the oral hearing before me she raised a new point that was not in her written submissions. She now says that it was procedurally unfair for the RPD not to grant the extension of time that counsel requested to complete the audit on the grounds that
Unfortunately, the timeframe that I had indicated at the conclusion of the proceedings on January 13, 2011 is not enough time to complete the audit process as I have not been able to obtain the complete report from the interpreter as of this date due to other obligations that the interpreter had when I contacted the interpreter.
[79]
Counsel for the Applicant only raised this issue at the hearing, so that Respondent's counsel was taken entirely by surprise and indicated that she was not in a position to deal with it.
[80]
The RPD gave reasons in the Decision for refusing the request for an extension of time:
The Panel indicated, and counsel agreed, that interpretation needs to be adequate, and is not necessarily expected to be perfect. In that regard, counsel was given an extensive period, three weeks after the hearing, to provide such audit. Such audit was not provided with the submissions, and counsel therein requested additional time to provide said audit. Such request was denied. Counsel was given an extended period of three weeks to provide the submission and audit, if he chose to provide same, and indicated at the hearing that such time frame would be satisfactory. The Panel notes that such time period is longer than the typical period of a week or two to provide post-hearing transmittals. Further, counsel only requested an extension of time for performing and providing said audit within his submissions, which were only provided on the afternoon of the due date of his post-hearing submissions.
[81]
Applicant's counsel before me could easily have alerted Respondent's counsel to this new issue prior to the hearing, and could have given some indication that she intended to raise it. The fact that she did not, placed the Respondent at a severe procedural disadvantage. As Justice Dawson said in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ...the new issues have nothing in common with the issues upon which the Court granted leave. It is an entirely new case. Given that Parliament has provided that an application for judicial review may only be brought with leave under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, in my view caution must be exercised when allowing new issues to be raised that were not the subject of the leave application.
See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[82]
In addition, there is simply not enough evidence before me to decide whether the RPD's refusal of an extension of time was reasonable in terms of the criteria enumerated in section 37 of the
Refugee Protection Division Rules
SOR/2002-228:
37. (1) A party who wants to provide a document as evidence after a hearing must make an application to the Division.
Written application
(2) The party must attach a copy of the document to the application. The application must be made under rule 44, but the party is not required to give evidence in an affidavit or statutory declaration.
Factors
(3) In deciding the application, the Division must consider any relevant factors, including:
(a) the document's relevance and probative value;
(b) any new evidence it brings to the proceedings; and
(c) whether the party, with reasonable effort, could have provided the document as required by rule 29.
37. (1) Pour transmettre, après l'audience, un document à la Section pour qu'elle l'admette en preuve, la partie en fait la demande à la Section.
Forme de la demande
(2) La partie fait sa demande selon la règle 44 et y joint une copie du document, mais elle n'a pas à y joindre d'affidavit ou de déclaration solennelle.
Éléments à considérer
(3) Pour statuer sur la demande, la Section prend en considération tout élément pertinent. Elle examine notamment:
a) la pertinence et la valeur probante du document;
b) toute preuve nouvelle qu'il apporte;
c) si la partie aurait pu, en faisant des efforts raisonnables, le transmettre selon la règle 29.
See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> to 17.
[83]
The Applicant provided the RPD with very little by way of explanation for the interpreter's delay and what efforts counsel had made to meet the initial deadline. In view of the explanation that was placed before the RPD, I cannot say that the refusal to grant an extension was unreasonable or, consequently, that a breach of procedural fairness occurred as a result.
Treatment of the Pilowsky Report and the Applicant's Psychological Condition
[84]
The Applicant submits that the RPD failed to take her psychological state, as shown by Dr. Pilowsky's report, into account when it assessed her credibility. I disagree.
[85]
Early in its analysis regarding the Applicant's credibility, the RPD discusses her psychological state and the Pilowsky Report specifically:
The Panel at this point will note that the claimant frequently during the hearing provided unreliable testimony, and blamed it on her poor memory. The Panel does note the psychological report in Exhibit C-2, which does mention that the claimant suffers from an extremely wide array of psychological and mental problems, one of which was problems with memory. The Panel will first note that the claimant on the whole, in the Panel's observation, was able to testify adequately, although she appeared to tire later on in the afternoon. It appeared to the Panel, who is not a doctor or psychologist, that the claimant may have had some minor memory issues.
Thus the Panel on certain occasions herein can ascribe some issues to memory problems. However, the claimant did prepare her PIF with the assistance of counsel, affirmed that her PIF was complete, true and correct, and does have to take responsibility for her evidence, on the whole.
[Emphasis added].
[86]
The RPD clearly acknowledged the Pilowsky Report and the Applicant's specific psychological state. The RPD also noted that the PIF was prepared by the Applicant with the aid of counsel and that the Applicant affirmed that her PIF was complete, true and correct. Just because the Applicant may suffer from cognitive and psychological problems does not mean that credibility is not an issue or that all inconsistencies can be attributed to those problems. The RPD must still assess credibility, and provided it takes into account the evidence of cognitive or emotional impairment, the Court must be loath to interfere because the Court does not have the advantage of seeing and hearing the witness testify.
[87]
Several of the RPD's many negative credibility findings were a result of inconsistencies between the Applicant's testimony and her PIF. In one case, the RPD found that the inconsistencies were a result of an embellishment at the hearing and not due to any memory loss. However, in another case, the RPD accepted that the Applicant may have been confused and did not remember, and the RPD did not draw a negative inference as to credibility.
[88]
Reading the Decision as a whole, it is clear that the RPD examined each inconsistency and made a determination as to the Applicant's credibility. The RPD clearly took into account all the circumstances, including the Applicant's medical and emotional issues, the preparation of her PIF with counsel's assistance, and the pressures and stress of the hearing.
[89]
In my view, all the cases the Applicant relies on are distinguishable from the facts before me.
[90]
The Applicant relies on
Min
, above, for the proposition that where there is medical evidence before the RPD that might explain shortcomings in an applicant's testimony, the RPD must consider and give appropriate weight to that evidence. In this case, as mentioned above, the RPD clearly acknowledged and considered the medical evidence provided. Indeed, the RPD even refused to draw a negative inference as to credibility at one point because of the Applicant's memory problems as set out on the Pilowsky Report. This was not a case like
Min
, where the RPD did not even refer to the report at all.
[91]
The Applicant also relies on
Singh
1, above, for the proposition that it is an error for the RPD to base a decision on a discrepancy between information given at the port of entry and information given later in the process without taking into account the evidence of the Applicant's psychological state. Again, the case at bar is distinguishable. In
Singh
, the RPD neglected to refer to a psychiatric evaluation which stated that at the time the notes were made by the immigration officer, the claimant was suffering form post-traumatic syndrome. In this case, the RPD not only mentioned the Pilowsky Report, but clearly kept the report in mind when making its credibility determinations.
[92]
Finally, with regards to the quoted passage from <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> above, it must be noted once again that the facts of this case are distinguishable. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice von Finckenstein stated that the RPD was obligated to provide some meaningful discussion as to how it had taken account of the applicant's serious medical condition before it made its negative credibility finding. The RPD failed to do so in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and judicial review was granted.
[93]
In the present case, the RPD meaningfully discussed how it took into account the Applicant's medical problems. The RPD addressed the issue early in its credibility analysis and kept it in mind at each individual negative credibility finding.
[94]
In this case, the Applicant tries to rely on the Pilowsky Report and the RPD's alleged ignorance of it to explain away all of the negative credibility findings. However, as stated by the Respondent, no psychological report could act as a cure-all for deficiencies in the Applicant's evidence.
State Protection and Credibility
[95]
The Applicant submits that the RPD's finding that she did not rebut the presumption of state protection cannot stand because the RPD based this finding on an unreasonable credibility finding. This argument must fail because I have concluded above that the RPD did not err in finding that the Applicant was not credible.
[96]
The Applicant also submits that the RPD only provided a summary of country conditions regarding the availability of state protection in Bangladesh but provided no analysis in support of its ultimate conclusion. She relies on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  to argue that the RPD erred in this regard. This argument is not tenable for two reasons.
[97]
First, the onus was on the Applicant to rebut the presumption of adequate state protection by adducing "relevant, reliable and convincing evidence which satisfies the trier of fact on a balance of probabilities that the state protection is inadequate." See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paragraph 30. The Applicant did not discharge this burden and the RPD was free to conclude that state protection was available in this case.
[98]
Second, the paragraph in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the Applicant relies on is clearly distinguishable from the facts in this case. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice Layden-Stevenson held at paragraph 22:
The applicants are entitled to the benefit of the officer's reasons as to why they failed to rebut the presumption of state protection on the evidence they adduced (which was apparently accepted by the officer). ...[T] he application for judicial review will be allowed.
[99]
Unlike <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , here the RPD did not accept any of the evidence the Applicant adduced. The RPD was clear that the reason the Applicant failed to rebut the presumption of state protection was her failure to provide corroborating evidence, such as police reports, to substantiate her attempts to seek state protection. She also did not provide or specifically identify any documentary evidence that would indicate the police in Bangladesh would not be willing or able to adequately protect a widow such as her from alleged extortionists.
CONCLUSION
[100]
In my view, the Applicant was provided with adequate procedural fairness and failed to take advantage of the opportunity provided to support allegations of inadequate interpretation.
[101]
It also seems clear that the RPD took into account the Applicant's particular mental and psychological state when assessing inconsistencies between her testimony and her PIF. The RPD's determinations on credibility, which are findings of fact and deserving of deference, are all reasonable based on the evidence before it.
[102]
Finally, the RPD's determination that the Applicant failed to adduce clear and persuasive evidence to rebut the presumption of adequate state protection was also reasonable based on the RPD's reasonable negative inferences as to her credibility.
[103]
For all these reasons, this application for judicial review must be denied.
[104]
Counsel agree there is no question for certification and the Court concurs.
JUDGMENT
[105]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
1. The application is dismissed.
2. There is no question for certification.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Russell
[Traduction]: Il s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire visée au paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001 c 27 (la Loi), concernant la décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés (la SPR) de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié, rendue en date du 8 février 2011, de rejeter la demande d'asile de la demanderesse fondée sur l'article 96 et le paragraphe 97(1) de la Loi (la décision).
LE CONTEXTE
[2]
La demanderesse, une citoyenne du Bangladesh âgée de 63 ans, est veuve et a sept enfants, dont trois vivent au Royaume-Uni.
[3]
Dans son FRP, la demanderesse déclare qu'elle a vécu au Canada de 2005 à juin 2006 en vertu d'un visa de visiteur. Le 11 avril 2006, elle a obtenu à Ottawa un visa de visiteur pour le Royaume-Uni qui était valide jusqu'en octobre 2006. Son passeport a été estampillé à l'Aéroport d'Heathrow, à Londres, au Royaume-Uni, le 22 mai 2006. Le dossier n'indique pas comment et quand elle a voyagé du Royaume-Uni au Bangladesh. Elle dit que les chefs terroristes Montu et Shiraz Mia (les terroristes) sont allés chez elle au Bangladesh avec plusieurs autres personnes le 20 juin 2006. Ils l'ont menacée en lui disant qu'ils perturberaient le mariage de sa fille, qui devait avoir lieu au début du mois d'août suivant, si elle refusait de leur donner de l'argent. Lors de l'audition de sa demande d'asile, la demanderesse a déclaré que les terroristes avaient saccagé sa maison, mais elle n'a rien dit de cet incident dans l'exposé circonstancié de son FRP. La demanderesse a donné aux terroristes de l'argent qu'elle avait tiré de la vente d'un terrain dont elle avait hérité de son mari. Elle a d'abord pensé porter plainte à la police, mais ses enfants le lui ont déconseillé afin que le mariage puisse avoir lieu.
[4]
Le 15 janvier 2007, les terroristes sont retournés chez la demanderesse et ont exigé qu'elle leur donne certains de ses biens. Ils lui ont laissé six mois pour le faire. La demanderesse est allée voir la police, mais celle-ci a refusé sa plainte parce que les chefs terroristes étaient puissants. Les policiers lui ont conseillé de communiquer avec son député, ce qu'elle a fait le 26 janvier 2007. Ce dernier lui a dit qu'il ne pouvait pas l'aider parce que les terroristes étaient puissants.
[5]
Le 12 juin 2007, les terroristes sont à nouveau retournés chez la demanderesse et lui ont demandé de leur vendre certains de ses biens. Lorsqu'elle a refusé, ils l'ont menacée. Elle est devenue anxieuse et a consulté un médecin. Le 20 avril 2008, les terroristes se sont présentés chez elle avec des armes et lui ont demandé de signer des documents par lesquels elle leur cédait son terrain. Elle s'est évanouie. Lorsqu'elle a repris conscience, les terroristes lui ont dit qu'ils reviendraient un mois plus tard. La demanderesse s'est ensuite rendue au poste de police. Les policiers lui ont dit qu'ils n'allaient pas l'aider. Comme elle avait peur, elle est allée chez sa fille à Dhaka, au Bangladesh, le 3 mai 2008, pour se cacher. Le 25 mai 2008, les terroristes se sont rendus chez son fils à Dhaka. Le lendemain, la famille a décidé que la demanderesse devait quitter le Bangladesh. Elle a ensuite obtenu les visas dont la demanderesse avait besoin pour aller au Canada et au Royaume-Uni. La demanderesse est allée au Royaume-Uni le 16 juillet 2008. Ses enfants vivant dans ce pays (des citoyens du Royaume-Uni) ne l'ont pas encouragée à demander l'asile et elle ne savait pas comment le faire. Elle est restée au Royaume-Uni pendant cinq mois, soit jusqu'en décembre 2008, sans demander l'asile.
[6]
La demanderesse est arrivée au Canada le 15 décembre 2008 et a demandé l'asile le 23 décembre suivant. Avant l'audience, elle a rencontré J. Pilowsky, un psychologue clinicien spécialiste de la réadaptation, qui a produit un rapport (le rapport Pilowsky) selon lequel la demanderesse avait un certain nombre de problèmes psychologiques découlant des expériences qu'elle avait vécues au Bangladesh. La fille de la demanderesse a servi d'interprète lors de l'entrevue avec M. Pilowsky. La demanderesse a déposé le rapport Pilowsky auprès de la SPR au soutien de sa demande d'asile.
[7]
La demanderesse a produit également une lettre d'Harun Al-Rashid, un défenseur des droits et le président de la section du district de Brahmanbaria du Parti nationaliste du Bangladesh dans le district de Brahmanbaria, au Bangladesh (la lettre de M. Rashid). Cette lettre a pour but de confirmer que la demanderesse a été harcelée par des terroristes.
[8]
La SPR a instruit la demande d'asile de la demanderesse le 13 janvier 2011. La demanderesse, son conseil, la SPR et une interprète étaient présents à l'audience. Après une pause, la demanderesse s'est plainte du travail de l'interprète. L'audience s'est néanmoins poursuivie avec la même interprète, mais la SPR a suggéré au conseil de la demanderesse de faire vérifier la traduction.
[9]
À la fin de l'audience, la SPR a demandé au conseil de la demanderesse s'il avait l'intention de faire vérifier la traduction. Le conseil ayant répondu par l'affirmative, la SPR lui a donné trois semaines pour obtenir l'enregistrement de l'audience, faire vérifier la traduction et présenter des observations écrites. La demanderesse n'a pas fait vérifier la traduction, mais elle a déposé des observations écrites le 2 février 2011. Dans ses observations, elle demandait une prorogation de délai afin de pouvoir faire vérifier la traduction. La SPR a rejeté cette demande. Elle a pris en considération la preuve dont elle disposait et a rendu la décision faisant l'objet du présent contrôle le 8 février 2011. Elle a notifié la décision à la demanderesse par une lettre datée du 2 mars 2011.
LA DÉCISION FAISANT L'OBJET DU CONTRÔLE
[10]
La SPR a d'abord exposé les allégations de la demanderesse et a indiqué que celle-ci avait établi son identité grâce à son passeport bangladais et à son visa canadien. Elle a dit que les questions déterminantes soulevées par la demande d'asile étaient la crédibilité et la protection de l'État. La SPR a souligné qu'elle avait pris en considération tous les éléments de preuve et observations, les observations formulées par la demanderesse après l'audience et les Directives de la présidente de la CISR intitulées
Revendicatrices du statut de réfugié craignant d'être persécutées en raison de leur sexe
(les Directives).
L'interprétation
[11]
La SPR a mentionné que, après la pause de l'après-midi, le conseil de la demanderesse avait indiqué que la qualité de l'interprétation était inadéquate. La fille de la demanderesse, qui assistait à l'audience, avait dit au conseil que l'interprète avait commis des erreurs. Personne n'avait soulevé un problème concernant l'interprétation jusque-là. La demanderesse avait dit, au début de l'audience, qu'elle comprenait l'interprète et celle-ci avait confirmé qu'elle comprenait la demanderesse.
[12]
Le conseil a demandé une vérification de la traduction à l'audience. La SPR a accepté de donner trois semaines à la demanderesse pour obtenir la vérification et pour la lui transmettre avec ses observations postérieures à l'audience, mais la demanderesse n'a pas produit la vérification avec ces observations. Elle a plutôt, lorsqu'elle a déposé ses observations postérieures à l'audience, demandé un délai additionnel pour fournir la vérification. La SPR a rejeté cette demande. Elle a indiqué que celle-ci avait été faite dans les observations postérieures à l'audience du conseil au cours de l'après-midi du jour où la vérification devait être produite.
[13]
La SPR a mentionné les problèmes particuliers concernant l'interprétation qui avaient été relevés par le conseil: l'interprète parlait à la troisième personne plutôt qu'à la première; elle avait manifestement confondu « 2006 » avec « 2007 » à un moment donné; il y avait un problème concernant le rapport Pilowsky. La SPR a dit que le conseil avait convenu que le premier problème était de nature stylistique et n'était pas important. En ce qui concerne le deuxième problème, la SPR a précisé qu'elle ne s'était pas servie de cette date pour évaluer la crédibilité. Enfin, elle a dit, au sujet du troisième problème, que, si une erreur avait été commise, elle était sans importance puisqu'elle n'avait tiré aucune conclusion défavorable de l'examen du rapport Pilowsky dans le cadre de son analyse de la crédibilité de la demanderesse.
[14]
La SPR a conclu qu'elle était convaincue que, s'il y avait eu des problèmes d'interprétation, ils ne l'avaient pas empêchée de bien évaluer la crédibilité de la demanderesse.
La crédibilité
Les incohérences dans le témoignage
[15]
La SPR a mentionné que le témoignage de la demanderesse à l'audience n'était pas digne de foi; selon la demanderesse, cela était attribuable à sa mémoire défaillante. La SPR a souligné également que le rapport Pilowsky révélait que la demanderesse souffrait de différents problèmes psychologiques et mentaux, notamment des problèmes de mémoire.
[16]
Selon la SPR, la demanderesse avait été capable de témoigner de manière adéquate, même si elle avait semblé fatiguée un peu plus tard en après-midi. Elle a mentionné que la demanderesse avait peut-être eu des problèmes mineurs de mémoire auxquels elle pouvait imputer certains des problèmes touchant son témoignage. Elle a toutefois indiqué que la demanderesse avait rempli son FRP avec l'aide d'un conseil et qu'elle avait déclaré que son FRP était complet, véridique et exact. La SPR a dit que la demanderesse devait assumer la responsabilité de l'ensemble de sa preuve.
[17]
La SPR a conclu que la preuve de la demanderesse, y compris son témoignage, n'était pas crédible. Elle a relevé plusieurs problèmes majeurs.
Le témoignage et le FRP
[18]
On a demandé à la demanderesse de produire une copie du certificat de décès et du testament de son mari, mais elle a dit à l'audience que sa maison avait été saccagée par les terroristes et que les documents avaient été perdus. Or, elle n'avait pas fait état du saccage de sa maison dans l'exposé circonstancié de son FRP. La SPR a conclu que, comme la demanderesse n'avait jamais mentionné cet incident avant l'audience, il s'agissait d'un embellissement. La demanderesse a également écrit dans son FRP qu'Harun Al-Rashid était son député lorsqu'elle avait sollicité son aide après l'incident de janvier 2007. À l'audience, elle a dit qu'il avait cessé d'être député avant janvier 2007. Lorsqu'on lui a demandé pourquoi elle lui avait écrit s'il n'était plus son député, la demanderesse a répondu qu'elle ne s'en rappelait pas et qu'il y avait peut-être eu un malentendu entre elle et son conseil. Ce dernier n'avait rien à dire à ce sujet.
Le témoignage et le formulaire IMM 5611
[19]
Dans le formulaire qu'elle a rempli lorsqu'elle a demandé l'asile (IMM 5611), la demanderesse a écrit que les terroristes appartenaient à l'organisation terroriste JMB. À l'audience, elle a dit qu'ils n'étaient alignés sur aucun groupe et qu'ils étaient simplement des extorqueurs.
L'obtention de la lettre de M. Rashid
[20]
La demanderesse a déclaré dans son témoignage que son fils lui avait envoyé la lettre de M. Rashid. À l'audience, elle a produit une enveloppe d'un service de messageries dans laquelle elle aurait reçu la lettre. Cette enveloppe indiquait que M. Rashid était l'expéditeur.
Le FRP et la lettre de M. Rashid
[21]
La lettre de M. Rashid indiquait que des terroristes s'étaient emparé des biens de la demanderesse, alors que, selon l'exposé circonstancié du FRP de celle-ci, on l'avait menacée de prendre ses biens et elle avait été contrainte d'en vendre certains.
Les conclusions concernant la crédibilité
[22]
La SPR a conclu que la demanderesse n'avait pas suffisamment expliqué les incohérences relevées dans son témoignage. Ces incohérences avaient amené la SPR a tiré des conclusions défavorables concernant sa crédibilité. En outre, comme son témoignage sur la façon dont elle avait reçu la lettre de M. Rashid était incohérent, que son FRP et la lettre de M. Rashid étaient contradictoires et qu'elle ne pouvait pas établir que M. Rashid était bien celui qu'il disait être, la SPR a conclu que la lettre de celui-ci n'était pas authentique. Elle a fait référence à la preuve documentaire dont elle disposait, la Réponse à une demande d'information BGD103532.EF de la CISR, selon laquelle il est facile d'obtenir des documents frauduleux au Bangladesh. Elle a conclu que la demanderesse avait produit un document frauduleux qui l'avait amenée à tirer une conclusion défavorable grave au sujet de la crédibilité.
[23]
La SPR a dit également qu'un rapport médical déposé par la demanderesse à l'appui de sa demande d'asile -du docteur Faraya Alamgir, un médecin de Dhaka, au Bangladesh (le rapport Alamgir)- ne mentionnait pas les menaces qui auraient été proférées à son endroit. Lorsqu'on lui a demandé pourquoi, la demanderesse a attribué l'omission à la mémoire défaillante du docteur Alamgir. La SPR n'a pas accepté cette explication, a conclu que la note n'était pas authentique et a tiré une conclusion défavorable grave au sujet de la crédibilité de la demanderesse.
[24]
La SPR a tiré une autre conclusion défavorable du fait que la demanderesse n'avait pas demandé l'asile au Royaume-Uni, rappelant que ce pays est un signataire de la Convention de 1952 relative au statut des réfugiés et du Protocole de 1967 relatif au statut des réfugiés. La demanderesse avait déclaré dans son témoignage qu'elle était occupée avec sa famille et qu'elle ne s'était pas informée au sujet de l'asile pendant qu'elle était au Royaume-Uni. De plus, des gens lui auraient dit qu'elle était âgée et qu'elle ne pourrait pas demander l'asile elle-même. Même si elle n'était pas moins âgée quand elle est venue au Canada, la demanderesse a dit que sa famille et la communauté bangladaise l'avaient aidée à présenter sa demande d'asile dans ce pays. La SPR a fait remarquer qu'on attend des demandeurs d'asile qu'ils présentent leur demande à la première occasion. Elle a rejeté l'explication de la demanderesse et conclu que celle-ci ne craignait pas réellement d'être persécutée au Bangladesh. Selon elle, la demanderesse avait choisi le Canada parce qu'elle préférait être près de sa fille habitant ici plutôt que de ses autres enfants vivant au Royaume-Uni.
[25]
La SPR a donné des exemples d'éléments de preuve desquels elle n'avait pas tiré de conclusions défavorables. Elle a dit d'abord que, à la fin de l'audience, elle avait demandé à la demanderesse si elle avait déjà présenté une demande d'immigration au Canada et la demanderesse avait répondu qu'elle ne s'en rappelait pas. La SPR a convenu que la demanderesse pouvait être fatiguée, contrariée et découragée à la fin de l'audience et qu'elle pouvait se trouver dans un mauvais état mental au point de ne pas pouvoir répondre à une question simple.
[26]
La SPR n'a pas non plus tiré une conclusion défavorable de la divergence entre le FRP de la demanderesse et le rapport Pilowsky. La demanderesse avait dit au docteur Pilowsky que ses domestiques avaient été harcelés par les terroristes, mais elle n'en avait pas fait mention dans son FRP. Elle a été incapable d'expliquer cette divergence, mais elle a dit qu'elle n'avait aucun souvenir des faits. C'est l'un des points à l'égard desquels le conseil avait dit à l'audience que la mauvaise interprétation avait eu pour effet de déformer les réponses de la demanderesse. La SPR a dit qu'elle ne tirait pas une conclusion défavorable sur ce point; après avoir posé ses dernières questions, elle a indiqué qu'elle laissait le bénéfice du doute à la demanderesse, même si celle-ci semblait en mesure de répondre de manière appropriée aux questions de son conseil.
L'absence de preuve corroborante
[27]
La SPR a souligné qu'elle pouvait tirer des conclusions défavorables concernant la crédibilité de l'absence de preuve corroborante, et elle a effectivement tiré trois conclusions défavorables au sujet de la crédibilité de l'incapacité de la demanderesse de produire des documents corroborant son récit.
[28]
Premièrement, la demanderesse ne pouvait pas produire de documents attestant la vente de sa maison. Elle prétendait qu'elle avait été forcée de vendre certains de ses biens pour payer les terroristes. Même si elle a dit qu'il était possible de trouver dans un registre foncier des documents attestant la vente, elle n'a pas produit cette preuve dans ses observations postérieures à l'audience.
[29]
Deuxièmement, la SPR a demandé à la demanderesse de confirmer que, comme elle le prétendait, les terroristes étaient bien connus dans sa région. La demanderesse a dit que les médias avaient abondamment parlé d'eux dans sa région, mais elle n'a pas été en mesure de présenter une preuve à l'appui à la SPR lors de l'audience ou dans les observations qu'elle a déposées après celle-ci.
[30]
Troisièmement, la SPR a demandé si la demanderesse pouvait produire une preuve documentaire indépendante démontrant qu'Harun Al-Rashid était réellement un ancien député. La demanderesse ne le pouvait pas, mais la SPR a indiqué qu'elle ne s'attendait pas à ce que celle-ci ait cette information à l'audience. La demanderesse n'a toutefois pas produit de documents corroborant cette allégation avec les observations qu'elle a déposées après l'audience, même si la SPR avait soulevé cette question à l'audience.
[31]
Dans l'ensemble, la SPR a conclu que la preuve de la demanderesse n'était pas crédible et qu'elle n'était pas suffisante pour étayer sa demande d'asile.
La protection de l'État
[32]
La SPR a souligné qu'il a été établi dans
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, que la protection des réfugiés est une mesure auxiliaire qui se substitue à la protection de l'État d'origine et qui ne peut être sollicitée qu'après que le demandeur a essayé d'obtenir la protection de son État d'origine. Cet arrêt indique également qu'il existe une présomption sous-jacente selon laquelle un État peut protéger ses citoyens, qui ne peut être réfutée que par une preuve claire et convaincante contraire. En outre, selon
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la preuve produite par un demandeur d'asile pour réfuter la présomption doit être pertinente, digne de foi et convaincante et doit démontrer au décideur, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que la protection de l'État est insuffisante.
[33]
La SPR a fait remarquer que la demanderesse n'avait pas porté plainte à la police la première fois qu'elle avait reçu des menaces de la part des terroristes. La demanderesse a dit qu'elle pensait que les terroristes la laisseraient tranquille si elle leur donnait de l'argent. Elle a reconnu qu'elle s'était trompée et qu'elle aurait dû signaler l'incident à la police.
[34]
La SPR a constaté que la demanderesse n'avait pas essayé d'obtenir la protection de son État d'origine au moment le plus important décrit dans son exposé circonstancié. La raison qu'elle a donnée pour avoir agi ainsi - éviter que les terroristes n'interrompent le mariage de sa fille - était insuffisante pour expliquer qu'elle n'ait pas informé la police des menaces proférées contre elle.
[35]
La demanderesse a affirmé qu'elle avait signalé l'incident de janvier 2007 à la police, mais la SPR a constaté qu'elle ne pouvait pas le prouver. La demanderesse a aussi affirmé que la police n'avait rien fait, n'avait rédigé aucun rapport et lui avait dit d'aller voir son député. Comme la SPR était d'avis que la lettre de M. Rashid n'était pas authentique, elle a conclu que la demanderesse n'avait pas parlé à son député, contrairement à ce qu'elle affirmait.
[36]
La demanderesse a dit également qu'elle s'était rendue au poste de police après l'incident de juin 2007. À l'audience, la SPR a signalé que la demanderesse n'en avait rien dit dans son FRP. La demanderesse a alors indiqué qu'elle était troublée, mais qu'elle se rappelait être allée voir la police à deux reprises. La SPR a convenu qu'il était possible que la demanderesse soit troublée à ce sujet et elle n'a pas tiré de conclusion défavorable à l'égard de l'ajout tardif à son récit de sa visite au poste de police en juin 2007. La SPR a cependant conclu en conséquence que la demanderesse n'était pas allée voir la police, ce qui démontrait bien qu'elle n'avait pas sollicité la protection de l'État.
[37]
Enfin, la SPR a fait remarquer que la demanderesse avait dit qu'elle était allée voir la police après l'incident d'avril 2008, mais que son fils n'avait pas signalé l'incident de mai 2008 à la police. La demanderesse ne pouvait pas produire de preuve documentaire de sa visite au poste de police en avril 2008 parce que les policiers n'avaient rien fait et ne lui avaient rien remis. Lorsque la SPR lui a demandé pourquoi elle était allée voir la police alors que celle-ci ne l'avait pas protégée auparavant, elle a répondu qu'elle espérait que ce serait différent cette fois-là. La SPR a conclu que cette réponse était raisonnable (voir le paragraphe 38 de sa décision).
[38]
Compte tenu des autres doutes concernant la crédibilité et du fait que la demanderesse n'avait produit aucun document prouvant qu'elle était bien allée voir la police à deux reprises, la SPR a conclu que la demanderesse n'avait rien signalé à la police. Elle a souligné que la demanderesse n'avait produit ou mentionné expressément aucune preuve documentaire indiquant que la police au Bangladesh ne voudrait pas et ne pourrait pas protéger adéquatement une personne comme elle contre des extorqueurs.
[39]
La SPR a conclu que la demanderesse n'avait rien fait pour obtenir la protection de son propre État avant de venir au Canada et qu'elle n'avait pas produit une preuve claire et convaincante démontrant que la protection de l'État n'aurait pas été adéquate si elle l'avait demandée. Comme elle pouvait obtenir la protection de l'État, la demanderesse ne pouvait pas avoir une crainte fondée de persécution et ne pouvait pas être une personne à protéger.
LES DISPOSITIONS LÉGISLATIVES
[40]
Les dispositions suivantes de la Loi s'appliquent en l'espèce:
96. A qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention - le réfugié - la personne qui, craignant avec raison d'être persécutée du fait de sa race, de sa religion, de sa nationalité, de son appartenance à un groupe social ou de ses opinions politiques:
a
) soit se trouve hors de tout pays dont elle a la nationalité et ne peut ou, du fait de cette
crainte, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de chacun de ces pays;
b) soit, si elle n'a pas de nationalité et se trouve hors du pays dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, ne peut ni, du fait de cette crainte, ne veut y retourner.
[...]
97. (1) A qualité de personne à protéger la personne qui se trouve au Canada et serait personnellement, par son renvoi vers tout pays dont elle a la nationalité ou, si elle n'a pas de nationalité, dans lequel elle avait sa résidence habituelle, exposée:
a
) soit au risque, s'il y a des motifs sérieux de le croire, d'être soumise à la torture au sens de l'article premier de la Convention contre la torture;
b) soit à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités dans le cas suivant:
(i) elle ne peut ou, de ce fait, ne veut se réclamer de la protection de ce pays,
(ii) elle y est exposée en tout lieu de ce pays alors que d'autres personnes originaires de ce pays ou qui s'y trouvent ne le sont généralement pas,
(iii) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de sanctions légitimes - sauf celles infligées au mépris des normes internationales - et inhérents à celles-ci ou occasionnés par elles,
(iv) la menace ou le risque ne résulte pas de l'incapacité du pays de fournir des soins médicaux ou de santé adéquats.
96. A Convention refugee is a person who, by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion,
(a) is outside each of their countries of nationality and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of each of those countries; or
(b) not having a country of nationality, is outside the country of their former habitual residence and is unable or, by reason of that fear, unwilling to return to that country.
...
97. (1) A person in need of protection is a person in Canada whose removal to their country or countries of nationality or, if they do not have a country of nationality, their country of former habitual residence, would subject them Personally
(a) to a danger, believed on substantial grounds to exist, of torture within the meaning of Article 1 of the Convention Against Torture; or
(b) to a risk to their life or to a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if
(i) the person is unable or, because of that risk, unwilling to avail themself of the protection of that country,
(ii) the risk would be faced by the person in every part of that country and is not faced generally by other individuals in or from that country,
(iii) the risk is not inherent or incidental to lawful sanctions, unless imposed in disregard of accepted international standards, and
(iv) the risk is not caused by the inability of that country to provide adequate health or medical care.
LES QUESTIONS EN LITIGE
[41]
La demanderesse soulève quatre questions en l'espèce:
1. La SPR a-t-elle manqué à l'équité procédurale en ne fournissant pas une interprétation adéquate?
2. Les motifs de la SPR étaient-ils suffisants?
3. La conclusion de la SPR concernant la crédibilité était-elle raisonnable?
4. La conclusion de la SPR concernant la protection de l'État était-elle raisonnable?
LA NORME DE CONTRÔLE
[42]
La Cour suprême du Canada a conclu dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  que l'analyse relative à la norme de contrôle n'a pas à être menée dans tous les cas. Lorsque la norme de contrôle applicable à une question particulière dont la cour est saisie est bien établie par la jurisprudence, la cour de révision peut tout simplement appliquer cette norme. Ce n'est que lorsque cette démarche s'avère infructueuse que la cour de révision doit examiner les quatre facteurs faisant partie de l'analyse relative à la norme de contrôle.
[43]
En ce qui concerne la première question, la Cour d'appel fédérale a statué dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , s'appliquent en matière d'immigration. Le juge François Lemieux a résumé les facteurs au paragraphe 3 de
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
a. L'interprétation doit être continue, fidèle, compétente, impartiale et concomitante.
b. Il n'est pas nécessaire de prouver l'existence d'un préjudice réel pour obtenir une réparation.
c. L'interprétation doit être adéquate, mais n'a pas à être parfaite. Le principe le plus important est la compréhension linguistique.
d. Il y a renonciation au droit lorsque la qualité de l'interprétation n'est pas contestée par le demandeur à la première occasion, chaque fois qu'il est raisonnable de s'y attendre.
e. La question de savoir s'il est raisonnable de s'attendre à ce qu'une plainte soit présentée à l'égard de la mauvaise qualité de l'interprétation est une question de fait, qui doit être déterminée dans chaque cas.
f. Si l'interprète a de la difficulté à parler la langue du demandeur ou à se faire comprendre par lui, il est clair que la question doit être soulevée à la première occasion.
[44]
Le caractère adéquat de la traduction relève de l'équité procédurale. Comme la Cour suprême du Canada l'a affirmé dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 43, les questions d'équité procédurale sont examinées selon la norme de la décision correcte. La norme de contrôle qui s'applique à la première question est celle de la décision correcte.
[45]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CAF), la Cour d'appel fédérale a statué que la norme de contrôle applicable aux conclusions relatives à la crédibilité est celle de la décision raisonnable. En outre, dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  le juge Max Teitelbaum a statué, au paragraphe 21, que les conclusions relatives à la crédibilité sont au centre de la conclusion de fait de la SPR, de sorte qu'elles doivent être assujetties à la norme de la décision raisonnable.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  le juge Michael Kelen a statué au paragraphe 17 que c'est la norme de la raisonnabilité qui s'applique aux décisions en matière de crédibilité. La norme de contrôle applicable à la troisième question est celle de la raisonnabilité.
[46] <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la Cour suprême du Canada a statué au paragraphe 14 que le caractère insuffisant des motifs ne permet pas à lui seul de casser une décision. En fait, les motifs doivent être examinés en corrélation avec le résultat dans le cadre d'un processus global visant à déterminer si ce dernier fait partie des issues acceptables. Dans la mesure où les motifs, complétés par le dossier, démontrent que le résultat était raisonnable, ils sont suffisants.
[47] <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Carillo
, précité, la Cour d'appel fédérale a statué au paragraphe 36 que la norme de contrôle applicable à une conclusion concernant la protection de l'État est celle de la raisonnabilité. Le même raisonnement a été suivi par le juge  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . En outre, dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la juge Danièle Tremblay-Lamer a indiqué au paragraphe 11 que les conclusions relatives à la protection de l'État sont assujetties à la norme de la raisonnabilité. La norme de contrôle applicable à la quatrième question est celle de la raisonnabilité.
[48]
Lorsque la norme de la raisonnabilité s'applique, l'analyse porte sur « la justification de la décision, [...] la transparence et [...] l'intelligibilité du processus décisionnel, ainsi [que sur] l'appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit ». Voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 47, et
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . En d'autres termes, la Cour devrait intervenir seulement si la décision était déraisonnable en ce sens qu'elle n'appartient pas aux « issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit ».
LES PRÉTENTIONS DES PARTIES
La demanderesse
La SPR a fourni une interprétation inadéquate
[49]
La demanderesse affirme qu'elle ne pouvait pas comprendre toutes les questions qui lui ont été posées à l'audience et qu'elle a signalé le problème à la SPR. Avant l'audience, elle avait été évaluée par M. Pilowsky, qui avait relevé une multitude de problèmes de santé mentale et de mémoire. La demanderesse dit que l'interprétation inadéquate a aggravé sa confusion, ses troubles de mémoire et son sentiment d'anxiété.
[50]
Le conseil de la demanderesse a porté le problème de la traduction à l'attention de la SPR après que la demanderesse lui a dit qu'elle avait de la difficulté à comprendre l'interprète. Il s'est opposé à la tenue de l'audience et a demandé la présence d'un interprète compétent. La SPR a toutefois rejeté sa demande et l'audience s'est poursuivie avec la même interprète. La demanderesse dit qu'elle n'a pas renoncé à son droit à une interprétation adéquate et qu'il y a eu atteinte à son droit à une interprétation continue, fidèle, compétente, impartiale et concomitante qui lui est garanti à l'article 14 de la
Charte
.
[51]
Les erreurs commises par l'interprète ont joué un rôle fondamental dans la décision de la SPR de rejeter la demande d'asile de la demanderesse. La SPR s'est appuyée, à tout le moins en partie, sur les erreurs de traduction pour conclure que la demanderesse n'était pas crédible. Comme la principale raison pour laquelle la SPR a rejeté la demande d'asile de la demanderesse était sa conclusion selon laquelle celle-ci n'était pas crédible, le droit à l'équité procédurale de la demanderesse n'a pas été respecté, de sorte que la décision doit être réexaminée.
La conclusion de la SPR concernant la crédibilité était déraisonnable
[52]
La SPR a omis de tenir compte de l'état psychologique de la demanderesse lorsqu'elle a évalué sa crédibilité. La demanderesse fait valoir que le rapport Pilowsky indique qu'elle souffre du trouble de stress post-traumatique et qu'elle doit être traitée par un professionnel de la santé mentale. Ce rapport renferme des éléments de preuve que la SPR aurait dû prendre en compte lorsqu'elle a évalué la crédibilité de la demanderesse:
a. la demanderesse fait des cauchemars, a des difficultés cognitives et souffre de dépression, d'anxiété et d'autres problèmes de santé;
b. elle souffre de détresse psychologique caractérisée par une anxiété et une dépression post-traumatiques et elle est incapable de relaxer même si elle prend des médicaments;
c. elle prend différents médicaments - Novolin, Hyzaar, PMS-Clonazepam, Novofine, Teva-Raberprazole et Apo-Metformin - pour traiter ses problèmes psychologiques;
d. ses symptômes nuisent à ses fonctions cognitives immédiates et elle a des troubles de mémoire et de concentration.
[53]
La demanderesse soutient que, comme la SPR a reconnu qu'elle souffrait du trouble de stress post-traumatique chronique, elle devait tenir compte de l'effet de celui-ci sur la qualité de son témoignage.
[54]
La demanderesse s'appuie sur
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  pour affirmer que, lorsque la SPR dispose d'une preuve médicale pouvant expliquer les défauts du témoignage d'un demandeur d'asile, elle doit en tenir compte et lui accorder le poids qui convient. Elle fait valoir que, selon
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Singh
1], la SPR commet une erreur lorsqu'elle fonde sa décision sur une contradiction entre l'information donnée au point d'entrée et l'information donnée par la suite sans tenir compte de la preuve de l'état psychologique du demandeur d'asile.
[55]
Il ne suffit pas que la SPR ait fait référence au rapport Pilowsky dans sa décision. La SPR était tenue de déterminer si l'état psychologique de la demanderesse pouvait expliquer en partie les omissions, absence de détails ou confusion au sujet des faits. Le rapport Pilowsky faisait précisément état de ces erreurs cognitives. La demanderesse s'appuie à cet égard sur
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[56]
En l'espèce, le traitement réservé au rapport Pilowsky par la SPR était déraisonnable. La SPR a reconnu que la demanderesse avait eu de la difficulté à témoigner à certains égards parce qu'elle était incapable de se rappeler certaines choses. Elle a cependant conclu que la demanderesse n'était pas crédible relativement à d'autres éléments de son témoignage et parce qu'elle était incapable de se rappeler certains faits. Ce traitement incohérent de son état était déraisonnable. La SPR ne s'est pas demandé si, à cause de son état de santé attesté et reconnu, la demanderesse pouvait être réticente à révéler tous les détails de la torture et de la persécution mentionnées dans son FRP. En conséquence, sa décision était déraisonnable.
[57]
La demanderesse s'appuie également sur
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  où le juge Konrad von Finckenstein a dit au paragraphe 12:
La crédibilité constituait aussi le « pivot » de la décision de la Commission en l'espèce. Celle-ci a néanmoins omis d'indiquer de quelle façon elle avait tenu compte du rapport psychologique lorsqu'elle avait tiré sa conclusion concernant la crédibilité, si tant est qu'elle en ait tenu compte. La Commission ne devait pas se contenter d'indiquer qu'elle avait « examiné » le rapport. Elle devait expliquer de manière satisfaisante comment elle avait tenu compte du grave problème de santé du demandeur avant de conclure à son manque de crédibilité. En ne le faisant pas, elle a commis une erreur susceptible de contrôle qui justifie le renvoi de l'affaire à un tribunal de la Commission différemment constitué.
[58]
La demanderesse soutient que le principe énoncé par le juge von Finckenstein dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> s'applique en l'espèce. La conclusion défavorable que la SPR a tirée au sujet de la crédibilité était au cœur de sa décision, et elle n'a pas examiné de manière appropriée l'effet que les problèmes de santé de la demanderesse pouvaient avoir sur le comportement de celle-ci lorsqu'elle a tiré cette conclusion. À cause de cette erreur, la décision de la SPR doit être renvoyée pour faire l'objet d'un nouvel examen.
La conclusion de la SPR concernant la protection de l'État était déraisonnable
[59]
La demanderesse soutient également que la conclusion de la SPR selon laquelle elle n'a pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État ne saurait être maintenue puisqu'elle est fondée sur une conclusion déraisonnable concernant la crédibilité. La SPR n'a établi aucun lien entre les motifs que la demanderesse a invoqués au soutien de sa demande d'asile, d'une part, et la preuve qui avait été décrite ou la conclusion qu'elle avait tirée, d'autre part. La SPR a seulement résumé les conditions existant au Bangladesh au regard de la possibilité d'obtenir la protection de l'État dans ce pays, mais sa conclusion ne reposait sur aucune analyse. La demanderesse rappelle ce que la juge Carolyn Layden-Stevenson a dit aux paragraphes 21 et 22 de
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
Simplement énoncer les éléments de preuve présentés par les parties puis formuler une conclusion ne constitue pas des motifs suffisants. Le décideur doit exposer ses conclusions de fait, les principaux éléments de preuve sur lesquels reposent ses conclusions ainsi que le raisonnement qu'il a suivi:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.F.) au paragraphe 22.
Les demandeurs ont le droit de savoir pour quels motifs l'agent a jugé que les éléments de preuve déposés (que l'agent semble avoir acceptés) ne réfutaient pas la présomption d'existence de protection de l'État. [...] [L] a demande de contrôle judiciaire sera accueillie.
[60]
En l'espèce, la SPR a commis une erreur lorsqu'elle a fait référence au risque de façon superficielle seulement et n'a pas tenu compte de tous les éléments de preuve, en particulier ceux concernant l'état mental de la demanderesse. Celle-ci avance que rien n'indique que la SPR a tenu compte de la persécution dont elle a été victime ou de sa situation particulière. La SPR a ainsi commis une erreur de droit vu la preuve dont elle disposait.
Le défendeur
L'interprétation
[61]
Le défendeur affirme qu'il ressort clairement de la décision de la SPR que la demanderesse a eu la possibilité de faire vérifier l'audience et de présenter le résultat de la vérification à la SPR avant que celle-ci ne rende sa décision finale. La demanderesse n'a pas profité de cette possibilité et n'a pas expliqué pourquoi de manière raisonnable, de sorte qu'il n'y a eu aucun manquement à l'équité procédurale en l'espèce.
L'appréciation de la preuve
[62]
La SPR a examiné le rapport Pilowsky et a appliqué les Directives lorsqu'elle a instruit et tranché la demande d'asile de la demanderesse. Si les Directives sont importantes pour aider la SPR à comprendre les effets de la persécution sur les femmes, elles ne peuvent apporter une solution aux problèmes graves de crédibilité concernant un témoignage. En outre, la SPR n'était pas tenue de faire abstraction des incohérences et des autres problèmes touchant la preuve de la demanderesse simplement parce que celle-ci souffre d'un problème psychologique. Un rapport psychologique ne peut servir de panacée pour tous les défauts contenus dans la preuve d'un demandeur d'asile. La Cour devrait renvoyer l'affaire à la SPR car c'est à elle qu'il incombe de déterminer le poids qu'il convient d'accorder à la preuve.
[63]
La Cour suprême du Canada a affirmé clairement qu'il faut faire montre de déférence à l'égard des conclusions relatives à la crédibilité auxquelles est parvenu le juge des faits qui a eu la possibilité d'entendre directement les témoignages. Elle a statué au paragraphe 20 de
R c Gagnon
, 2006 CSC 17:
Apprécier la crédibilité ne relève pas de la science exacte. Il est très difficile pour le juge de première instance de décrire avec précision l'enchevêtrement complexe des impressions qui se dégagent de l'observation et de l'audition des témoins, ainsi que des efforts de conciliation des différentes versions des faits. C'est pourquoi notre Cour a statué - la dernière fois dans l'arrêt
H.L.
- qu'il fallait respecter les perceptions du juge de première instance, sauf erreur manifeste et dominante.
[64]
En l'espèce, la SPR a expliqué pour quels motifs elle jugeait que le témoignage de la demanderesse n'était pas crédible, et elle pouvait arriver à ses conclusions compte tenu de la preuve dont elle disposait. La demanderesse n'a pas démontré que la SPR avait commis une erreur manifeste et dominante ni donné à la Cour une raison de modifier sa décision.
ANALYSE
[65]
La demanderesse allègue différentes erreurs susceptibles de contrôle qui ne ressortent toutefois pas d'une lecture objective de la décision de la SPR. En fait, certaines de ses prétentions renferment des inexactitudes graves au sujet de ce que le dossier indique. Pour les motifs qui suivent, je conclus que la SPR a assuré une équité procédurale suffisante à la demanderesse et que ses conclusions concernant la crédibilité et la protection de l'État sont raisonnables.
L'équité en ce qui concerne l'interprétation
[66]
La demanderesse a raison lorsqu'elle a dit que la question de savoir si l'interprétation était adéquate soulève des questions d'équité procédurale, ce qui signifie que c'est la norme de la décision correcte qui doit s'appliquer à cet égard.
[67]
La demanderesse soutient qu'elle n'a pas eu droit au degré d'équité procédurale approprié. Elle prétend que l'interprétation n'était pas adéquate, mais il me semble que la SPR a abordé de manière complète et équitable cette question dans sa décision. La SPR a mentionné que le conseil avait indiqué, après la pause de l'après-midi, que la fille de la demanderesse lui avait parlé et lui avait dit que la qualité de l'interprétation était inadéquate. La SPR a mentionné également dans sa décision qu'elle-même, le conseil, l'interprète et la demanderesse n'avaient fait était d'aucun problème concernant l'interprétation auparavant.
[68]
La demanderesse soutient maintenant que [traduction] « l'audience s'est poursuivie, même si le conseil s'y est opposé ». Elle prétend également que [traduction] « [son] conseil [...] a dit au membre de la SPR qu'il y avait des problèmes avec l'interprétation et a demandé les services d'un interprète compétent ». Il ressort de ces prétentions que la demanderesse allègue que son conseil a demandé à la fois l'arrêt de l'audience et la présence d'un nouvel interprète. Après avoir lu la transcription, je ne pense pas que ce soit le cas.
[69]
Le passage suivant tiré de la transcription est assez long (voir la page 261 du DCT). Il est cependant pertinent en grande partie - si ce n'est en totalité - au regard de la question de savoir si la SPR a pris en compte de manière appropriée les préoccupations de la demanderesse au sujet du caractère adéquat de l'interprétation et a assuré un degré approprié d'équité procédurale à cet égard.
[traduction]
LE CONSEIL DE LA DEMANDEURE D'ASILE [C] :
J'aimerais aborder une question préliminaire. J'ai des doutes au sujet de la qualité de l'interprétation, malgré tout le respect que j'ai pour l'interprète ---
LE MEMBRE [M] :
D'accord.
C:
--- La fille de la demandeure d'asile, qui parle anglais, a porté à mon attention deux erreurs. Elle a dit qu'il y en avait d'autres, mais ne s'en rappelait pas parce qu'elle ne les avait pas notées.
M:
Hum.
C:
Elle a dit que les années n'ont pas été bien traduites à quelques reprises. Par exemple, l'interprète a dit 2006 au lieu de 2007. L'autre erreur concernait ce que le membre avait demandé tout juste avant -- tout juste avant la pause et qui avait trait au fait que l'interprète a dit, en traduisant le rapport Pilowski, que les serviteurs l'avaient harcelée, c'est-à-dire la demandeure d'asile, alors que ce n'est manifestement pas ce qui est écrit --je sais que ce n'est pas ce que le membre a dit et que ce n'est pas ce qui est écrit dans le FRP et qu'il s'agit d'une erreur assez grave.
L'autre problème, dont je n'ai pas parlé même s'il a surgi de manière évidente au cours de la traduction, c'est que l'interprète parlait à la troisième personne presque tout le temps.
M:
Hum.
C:
Et je ne pense pas -- peut-être que j'aurais dû soulever ce point. Je n'ai rien dit, mais je ne pense pas que cela soit approprié parce que, comme je suis convaincu que le membre le sait, l'interprétation doit, selon la Cour fédérale, être concomitante et ---
M:
Adéquate.
C:
--- adéquate.
M:
C'est le critère.
C:
Oui. Et je suis préoccupé par le fait qu'il y a peut-être eu d'autres erreurs dont nous n'avons pas été informés.
M:
Présentez-vous une requête en bonne et due forme?
C:
Oui.
M:
D'accord. Aucun problème d'interprétation n'a été soulevé au cours de la première partie de l'audience. Les deux problèmes que vous mentionnez -- si je comprends bien, il y a une certaine confusion et je peux certainement, vous savez, faire une distinction entre ce qui peut être une légère confusion ou une confusion temporaire concernant une année et des problèmes graves éventuels relatifs à la crédibilité.
Je suis convaincu que -- j'ai l'impression jusqu'à maintenant que l'interprétation a été adéquate. Par conséquent, je rejetterais à ce moment-ci votre -- vous n'avez rien demandé en particulier,
mais ---
C:
Je demanderais que -- je demanderais que l'enregistrement --que l'instance soit vérifiée par un autre interprète afin que ---
M:
Vous pouvez demander l'enregistrement et ---
C:
D'accord. Je suis seulement -- d'accord.
M:
Ouais, vous pouvez demander l'enregistrement, puis, si vous le voulez, je pense que vous pourriez également présenter des observations postérieures à l'audience par écrit plutôt que de vive voix. Peut-être que vous pouvez, vous savez, écouter l'enregistrement ou faire effectuer une vérification et, si vous pensez qu'il y a un -- s'il s'avère qu'il y a d'autres problèmes, l'indiquer dans vos observations et j'évaluerai la situation à ce moment-là.
C:
D'accord.
M:
Mais à ce moment-ci, j'ai l'impression que l'interprétation a été adéquate.
C:
L'interprète ne devrait pas parler à la troisième personne. Ce n'est pas -- je pense que ce n'est pas approprié.
M:
D'accord. Comment -- que voulez-vous dire par là?
C:
Elle dit qu'elle est allée voir son fils, non mon fils. J'ai demandé à mon fils. Son fils a demandé.
M:
D'accord. Je ne pense pas avoir mal compris l'essentiel du témoignage à cause de cette façon de faire. Je pense qu'il s'agit d'une question de style et je ne pense pas que cela rende l'interprétation inadéquate, à tout le moins en ce qui me concerne jusqu'à maintenant.
C:
D'accord. Je veux seulement qu'il soit clair que je m'objecte en bonne et due forme à la qualité de l'interprétation parce que je suis certain, comme le membre le sait, j'ai l'obligation de le faire dès que je suis au courant du problème. Je pourrais ne pas pouvoir le faire plus tard.
M:
D'accord. Cela signifie-t-il que vous n'étiez pas au courant de problèmes concernant l'interprétation jusqu'à -- pendant la première partie de l'audience?
C:
J'ignorais tout de ces erreurs de traduction jusqu'à ce que la fille de la demandeure d'asile me parle à la pause.
M:
D'accord.
C:
J'ai laissé le tiers continuer parce que, comme le membre le dit, cela n'a pas nécessairement une incidence sur votre compréhension de ce que Mme Khatun dit.
M:
D'accord.
C:
Mais je mentionne cela seulement parce que je pense que cela fait partie de la situation générale. Si cela se poursuit et qu'il y a d'autres erreurs, je pense que j'ai l'obligation d'en informer -- de soulever la question.
M:
Vous l'avez fait. Et vous l'avez fait maintenant. Vous vous êtes conformé à vos obligations.
C:
Je vous remercie.
M:
Je vous en prie.
[70]
J'ai lu la transcription et je suis d'avis que le conseil de la demanderesse n'a pas demandé que l'audience soit interrompue ou qu'un nouvel interprète soit présent. Ce qui ressort de la transcription, c'est que la demanderesse a soulevé une objection quant à l'interprétation et a demandé que la traduction fasse l'objet d'une vérification.
[71]
Il ne fait aucun doute que la SPR a examiné la demande du conseil. La SPR a indiqué que la demanderesse pouvait demander l'enregistrement de l'audience et décider si une vérification était nécessaire. Elle a indiqué également que le conseil pourrait ensuite faire état de ses préoccupations concernant la traduction, le cas échéant, dans des observations écrites postérieures à l'audience.
[72]
L'échange qui suit confirme que la SPR a prêté attention à la question de l'interprétation en accordant à la demanderesse le temps demandé pour procéder à la vérification et présenter des observations:
[traduction]
C:
Je n'ai pas d'autres questions.
M:
Bien. Donc vous allez faire vérifier l'interprétation comme vous l'avez laissé entendre?
C:
Oui.
M:
Très bien. Puis-je vous suggérer de déposer des observations, s'il y a lieu, en même temps?
C:
Très bien.
M:
Très bien. De combien de temps avez-vous besoin?
C:
De trois semaines parce que je dois faire effectuer la vérification.
M:
Trois semaines, très bien.
C:
D'accord, ouais ---
M:
J'ai un calendrier. Nous sommes le 13 janvier. 13 et 21 font 33 (
sic
). Ce qui mène -- il n'y a que 31 jours -- au 2 février.
C:
C'est parfait.
[...]
M:
[...] Très bien. Madame, lorsque j'aurai reçu les observations de votre avocat, différentes requêtes, etc., je les examinerai, puis je rendrai ma décision. [...]
[73]
Il est clair que le conseil de la demanderesse a demandé un délai de trois semaines pour faire effectuer la vérification et présenter des observations postérieures à l'audience. La SPR a accordé un délai de trois semaines et a même écrit dans sa décision que ce délai est plus long que la période d'une ou de deux semaines qui est habituellement accordée pour le dépôt d'observations postérieures à l'audience.
[74]
La SPR a donné à la demanderesse la possibilité de faire part d'autres préoccupations concernant le caractère adéquat de l'interprétation, mais la demanderesse n'en a pas profité. Le conseil a demandé une prorogation du délai dans lequel la vérification devait être effectuée et produite, mais la SPR a rejeté cette demande de manière raisonnable.
[75]
Je constate que le DCT indique que le conseil de la demanderesse a demandé l'enregistrement de l'audience le lendemain de celle-ci. Rien n'indique qu'il y a eu des retards dans la transmission de cet enregistrement à la demanderesse.
[76]
La décision de la SPR indique également que celle-ci a pris en considération les problèmes de traduction particuliers soulevés par le conseil à l'audience. Il n'y a aucune raison de croire que, si la demanderesse avait exprimé d'autres préoccupations concernant le caractère adéquat de l'interprétation, la SPR n'en aurait pas tenu compte avant de rendre sa décision. Il est révélateur, à mon avis, que la demanderesse ne m'ait présenté aucune preuve concernant le caractère inadéquat de la traduction dont la SPR n'a pas traité précisément dans sa décision. La demanderesse a eu toutes les chances de le faire, mais elle a préféré ne pas produire une vérification ou une autre preuve démontrant des inexactitudes particulières fondamentales contenues dans la décision de la SPR. En conséquence, la Cour ne dispose d'aucune preuve démontrant que la traduction n'était pas adéquate.
[77]
Je conclus que la SPR a prêté attention aux questions et aux préoccupations formulées par la demanderesse au sujet de la traduction. Il n'était pas raisonnable que la demanderesse (représentée par un conseil) ne tire pas profit de la possibilité qui lui était offerte et prétende ensuite que la SPR n'a pas assuré une équité procédurale adéquate. La SPR a assuré un degré approprié d'équité procédurale dans les circonstances et j'ai conclu qu'aucun manquement à l'équité procédurale n'a été commis.
[78]
À mon avis, la demanderesse comprend très bien ce point de vue parce qu'elle a soulevé, au cours de l'audience devant la Cour, une nouvelle question dont elle n'avait pas parlé dans ses observations écrites. Elle affirme maintenant que la SPR a manqué à l'équité procédurale en n'accordant pas la prorogation de délai demandée par son conseil pour faire effectuer la vérification au motif que:
[traduction] Malheureusement, le délai que j'avais indiqué à la fin de l'instance le 13 janvier 2011 n'est pas suffisant pour faire effectuer la vérification car je n'ai pas pu obtenir le rapport complet de l'interprète depuis cette date en raison des autres obligations que celle-ci avait lorsque j'ai communiqué avec elle.
[79]
L'avocate de la demanderesse a soulevé cette question à l'audience seulement, de sorte que l'avocat du défendeur a été pris totalement au dépourvu et a indiqué qu'il n'était pas en mesure d'aborder cette question.
[80]
La SPR a motivé dans les termes suivants dans sa décision son rejet de la demande de prorogation:
Le tribunal a indiqué - et le conseil était du même avis - que l'interprétation devait être adéquate, mais qu'elle n'avait pas nécessairement besoin d'être parfaite. Le conseil s'est vu octroyer un délai considérable, à savoir trois semaines, pour fournir une vérification. Il n'a cependant pas envoyé cette vérification avec ses observations. Il a sollicité davantage de temps pour produire la vérification, mais sa demande a été rejetée. Le conseil s'était vu octroyer un long délai de trois semaines pour soumettre, s'il le souhaitait, ses observations de même que la vérification de l'audience, et il a indiqué lors de l'audience que ce délai était satisfaisant. Le tribunal mentionne que ce délai est plus long que la période d'une semaine ou deux qui est généralement accordée pour la transmission de documents après l'audience. De plus, c'est exclusivement dans ses observations que le conseil a demandé la prolongation dont il avait besoin pour faire effectuer et pour produire la vérification. Or, il n'a envoyé ces observations que dans l'après-midi de la date butoir prévue pour l'envoi de ses observations postérieures à l'audience.
[81]
L'avocate de la demanderesse en l'espèce aurait pu facilement attirer l'attention de l'avocate du défendeur sur cette nouvelle question avant l'audience et indiqué qu'elle avait l'intention de la soulever. En ne le faisant pas, elle a causé au défendeur un désavantage grave sur le plan de la procédure. Comme la juge Dawson l'a dit dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[...] les nouveaux arguments n'ont rien de commun avec les arguments qui avaient conduit la Cour à accorder l'autorisation. Il s'agit d'un dossier totalement nouveau. Vu que la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
stipule qu'une demande de contrôle judiciaire ne peut être présentée que sous réserve d'une autorisation, il faut à mon avis se montrer prudent avant de permettre que soient invoqués de nouveaux arguments qui ne l'étaient pas dans la demande d'autorisation.
Voir aussi
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 8.
[82]
De plus, je ne dispose tout simplement pas d'une preuve suffisante pour déterminer si la décision de la SPR de rejeter la demande de prorogation de délai était raisonnable selon les critères énumérés à la règle 37 des
Règles de Section de la protection des réfugiés
, DORS/2002-228:
37. (1) Pour transmettre, après l'audience, un document à la Section pour qu'elle l'admette en preuve, la partie en fait la demande à la Section.
Forme de la demande
(2) La partie fait sa demande selon la règle 44 et y joint une copie du document, mais elle n'a pas à y joindre d'affidavit ou de déclaration solennelle.
Éléments à considérer
(3) Pour statuer sur la demande, la Section prend en considération tout élément pertinent. Elle examine notamment:
a) la pertinence et la valeur probante du document;
b) toute preuve nouvelle qu'il apporte;
c) si la partie aurait pu, en faisant des efforts raisonnables, le transmettre selon la règle 29.
37. (1) A party who wants to provide a document as evidence after a hearing must make an application to the Division.
Written application
(2) The party must attach a copy of the document to the application. The application must be made under rule 44, but the party is not required to give evidence in an affidavit or statutory declaration.
Factors
(3) In deciding the application, the Division must consider any relevant factors, including:
(a) the document's relevance and probative value;
(b) any new evidence it brings to the proceedings; and
(c) whether the party, with reasonable effort, could have provided the document as required by rule 29.
Voir aussi
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 17.
[83]
La demanderesse a donné très peu d'explications à la SPR au sujet du retard de l'interprète et des efforts que son conseil avait déployés pour se conformer à la date d'échéance initiale. Je ne peux pas affirmer, à la lumière des explications fournies à la SPR, que le refus d'accorder une prorogation était déraisonnable ou, en conséquence, qu'un manquement à l'équité procédurale est survenu pour cette raison.
Le traitement du rapport Pilowsky et de l'état psychologique de la demanderesse
[84]
La demanderesse soutient que la SPR n'a pas tenu compte de son état psychologique, tel qu'il était décrit dans le rapport Pilowsky, lorsqu'elle a évalué sa crédibilité. Je ne suis pas de cet avis.
[85]
Au début de son analyse de la crédibilité de la demanderesse, la SPR traite précisément de l'état psychologique de la demanderesse et du rapport Pilowsky:
Le tribunal observe que la demandeure d'asile a souvent livré un témoignage non fiable pendant l'audience, et qu'elle en a rejeté la responsabilité sur sa mémoire défaillante. Le tribunal signale que le rapport psychologique consigné à la pièce C-2 mentionne que la demandeure d'asile souffre d'un très large spectre de problèmes psychologiques et mentaux, dont certains problèmes de mémoire. Du point de vue du tribunal, la demandeure d'asile a été en mesure de témoigner adéquatement dans l'ensemble, même si elle a semblé fatiguée vers la fin de l'après-midi. Il a semblé au tribunal, qui n'est ni médecin ni psychologue, que la demandeure d'asile souffrait peut-être de certains troubles de la mémoire mineurs.
Le tribunal peut ainsi attribuer certains problèmes qui se posent, dans cette affaire, à la mémoire défaillante de la demandeure d'asile. Cependant, cette dernière a préparé son FRP avec l'aide de son conseil, a affirmé qu'il était complet, vrai et exact, et doit assumer la responsabilité de tous les éléments de preuve qu'elle fournit.
[Non souligné dans l'original.]
[86]
La SPR a clairement reconnu le rapport Pilowsky et l'état psychologique particulier de la demanderesse. Elle a également souligné que le FRP avait été rempli par la demanderesse avec l'aide d'un conseil et que la demanderesse avait déclaré que son FRP était complet, véridique et exact. Le seul fait que la demanderesse souffre peut-être de problèmes cognitifs et psychologiques ne signifie pas que la crédibilité n'est pas en cause ou que toutes les incohérences peuvent être imputées à ces problèmes. La SPR doit toujours évaluer la crédibilité et, à condition qu'elle prenne en considération la preuve de trouble cognitif ou émotionnel, la Cour doit répugner à intervenir parce qu'elle n'a pas eu l'avantage de voir et d'entendre les témoins.
[87]
Plusieurs des nombreuses conclusions défavorables de la SPR concernant la crédibilité résultaient de contradictions entre le témoignage de la demanderesse et son FRP. Dans un cas, la SPR a conclu que les contradictions découlaient d'un embellissement apporté à l'audience et non d'un problème de mémoire. Dans un autre cas cependant, la SPR a convenu que la demanderesse pouvait avoir été confuse et qu'elle ne se rappelait pas les faits, et elle n'a pas tiré une conclusion défavorable concernant la crédibilité.
[88]
Il ressort clairement d'une lecture de la décision dans l'ensemble que la SPR a examiné chaque contradiction ou incohérence et qu'elle a pris une décision concernant la crédibilité de la demanderesse. La SPR a clairement tenu compte de toutes les circonstances, notamment les problèmes médicaux et émotionnels de la demanderesse, le fait qu'elle a rempli son FRP avec l'aide d'un conseil ainsi que les pressions et le stress liés à l'audience.
[89]
À mon avis, toutes les décisions judiciaires invoquées par la demanderesse sont différentes des faits de l'espèce.
[90]
La demanderesse s'appuie sur
Min
, précitée, pour faire valoir que, lorsque la SPR dispose d'une preuve médicale pouvant expliquer les défauts contenus dans le témoignage d'un demandeur, elle doit accorder un poids particulier à cette preuve. Comme je l'ai mentionné précédemment, la SPR a clairement reconnu et pris en compte la preuve médicale qui avait été produite. En fait, elle a même refusé de tirer une conclusion défavorable concernant la crédibilité à un moment donné en raison des problèmes de mémoire dont souffrait la demanderesse selon le rapport Pilowsky. Ce n'était pas le cas dans
Min
, où la SPR n'a même pas fait référence au rapport.
[91]
La demanderesse s'appuie également sur
Singh
1, précitée, pour faire valoir que la SPR commet une erreur quand elle fonde sa décision sur une contradiction entre l'information donnée au point d'entrée et l'information donnée ensuite au cours du processus, sans tenir compte de la preuve de l'état psychologique du demandeur. À cet égard également, l'affaire dont la Cour est actuellement saisie est différente. Dans
Singh
, la SPR a omis de faire référence à une évaluation psychiatrique qui indiquait que, à l'époque où les notes avaient été prises par l'agent d'immigration, le demandeur d'asile souffrait du stress post-traumatique, alors que, en l'espèce, non seulement la SPR a mentionné le rapport Pilowsky, mais elle en a aussi clairement tenu compte lorsqu'elle a tiré ses conclusions concernant la crédibilité.
[92]
Enfin, en ce qui concerne l'extrait tiré de <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précitée, qui est reproduit ci-dessus, il faut noter encore une fois que les faits dans cette affaire sont différents de ceux de l'espèce. Dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , le juge von Finckenstein a déclaré que la SPR avait l'obligation d'expliquer de manière satisfaisante comment elle avait tenu compte du grave problème de santé du demandeur avant de conclure à son manque de crédibilité. La SPR avait omis de le faire dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et la demande de contrôle judiciaire a été accueillie.
[93]
En l'espèce, la SPR a expliqué de manière satisfaisante comment elle a tenu compte des problèmes de santé de la demanderesse. Elle a abordé la question au début de son analyse de la crédibilité et en a tenu compte au moment de tirer chacune des conclusions défavorables concernant la crédibilité.
[94]
En l'espèce, la demanderesse essaie de s'appuyer sur le rapport Pilowsky et sur le fait que la SPR n'en aurait pas tenu compte pour expliquer tant bien que mal toutes les conclusions défavorables concernant la crédibilité. Cependant, comme le défendeur l'a dit, aucun rapport psychologique ne pourrait agir comme panacée pour tous les défauts contenus dans la preuve de la demanderesse.
La protection de l'État et la crédibilité
[95]
La demanderesse soutient que la conclusion de la SPR selon laquelle elle n'a pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État ne peut être maintenue car elle est fondée sur une conclusion déraisonnable concernant la crédibilité. Cette prétention doit être rejetée parce que j'ai conclu précédemment que la SPR n'avait pas commis d'erreur en concluant que la demanderesse n'était pas crédible.
[96]
La demanderesse soutient également que la SPR s'est contentée de résumer les conditions existant au Bangladesh au regard de la protection de l'État, sans procéder à aucune analyse au soutien de sa conclusion finale. Elle s'appuie sur
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  pour soutenir que la SPR a commis une erreur à cet égard. Cette prétention n'est pas défendable pour deux raisons.
[97]
Premièrement, il incombait à la demanderesse de réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État en produisant « une preuve pertinente, digne de foi et convaincante qui démontre au juge des faits, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que la protection accordée par l'État en question est insuffisante ». Voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 30. La demanderesse ne s'est pas acquittée de ce fardeau et la SPR était libre de conclure que la protection de l'État pouvait être obtenue.
[98]
Deuxièmement, le paragraphe de <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> sur lequel la demanderesse s'appuie est clairement différent des faits en l'espèce. Dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la juge Layden-Stevenson a statué au paragraphe 22:
Les demandeurs ont le droit de savoir pour quels motifs l'agent a jugé que les éléments de preuve déposés (que l'agent semble avoir acceptés) ne réfutaient pas la présomption d'existence de protection de l'État. [...] [L] a demande de contrôle judiciaire sera accueillie.
[99]
Contrairement à ce qui s'est passé dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la SPR n'a accepté aucun des éléments de preuve que la demanderesse a produits en l'espèce. La SPR a dit clairement que la demanderesse n'avait pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État parce qu'elle n'avait pas produit une preuve corroborante - des rapports de police, par exemple - qui démontrait qu'elle avait essayé d'obtenir la protection de l'État. La demanderesse n'a pas non plus produit ou mentionné expressément une preuve documentaire indiquant que la police au Bangladesh ne voudrait pas ou ne pourrait pas protéger adéquatement une veuve comme elle contre de présumés extorqueurs.
CONCLUSION
[100]
À mon avis, l'équité procédurale a été adéquate en l'espèce et la demanderesse n'a pas profité de la possibilité qui lui était offerte d'étayer ses allégations d'interprétation inadéquate.
[101]
Par ailleurs, il semble ne faire aucun doute que la SPR a tenu compte de l'état mental et psychologique particulier de la demanderesse lorsqu'elle a évalué les contradictions entre son témoignage et son FRP. Toutes les conclusions de la SPR concernant la crédibilité, qui sont des conclusions de fait qui appellent une certaine déférence, sont raisonnables, compte tenu de la preuve dont la SPR disposait.
[102]
Enfin, la conclusion de la SPR selon laquelle la demanderesse n'a pas produit une preuve claire et convaincante pour réfuter la présomption relative au caractère adéquat de la protection de l'État était également raisonnable, compte tenu des conclusions défavorables raisonnables tirées par la SPR au sujet de la crédibilité.
[103]
Pour tous ces motifs, la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire doit être rejetée.
[104]
Les avocats conviennent qu'il n'y a aucune question à certifier, et la Cour partage leur avis.
JUGEMENT
[105]
LA COUR STATUE
:
1. La demande est rejetée.
2. Il n'y a aucune question à certifier.
[End of document]