[1]
Richard, J.
: The plaintiffs have brought a motion before this court for an order striking out the affidavit of Harvey M. Shanefield dated June 28, 1996, and, in the alternative, for an order striking out a number of paragraphs and annexes in that affidavit. The motion to strike is brought pursuant to rule 332(1), which reads as follows:
"Affidavits shall be confined to such facts as the witness is able of his own knowledge to prove, except on interlocutory motions on which statements as to his belief with the grounds thereof may be admitted."
[2]
On the return of the motion counsel for the Canadian defendants moved to dismiss the plaintiffs' motion to strike the Shanefield affidavit on the following grounds: (1) the motion to strike the affidavit was not supported by an affidavit; (2) the motion doesn't set out the grounds to be argued sufficiently; (3) the motion does not list the documentary evidence to be relied on; and (4) in the circumstances of this action it is not appropriate to strike the affidavit.
[3]
With respect to the first ground raised by counsel for the Canadian defendants, rule 319(2) reads as follows:
"A motion shall be supported by affidavit as to all the facts on which the motion is based that do not appear from the record, which affidavit shall be filed and an adverse party may file an affidavit in reply. However, if an application is unsupported by an affidavit the applicant can rely on the facts that do appear from the record and provide support for the motion."
Counsel for the plaintiffs has stated that they will rely on the record. Therefore, I reject this ground to dismiss the motion to strike.
[4]
The next two grounds relied on by the Canadian defendants are not sufficient in themselves to justify dismissing the motion to strike. At the very most they would support a request for an adjournment, which was not requested. In any event, the grounds are particularized in the motion to strike as well as in the memorandum filed by the plaintiffs on August 16, 1996.
[5]
The final ground relied upon by counsel for the Canadian defendants is that given all of the circumstances of this action, the relevant ones being the agreement to expedite the trial of certain issues, the agreement on what material will go into the record and the complexity of the historical issues, it would be inappropriate to strike the Shanefield affidavit in whole or in part at this stage of the proceedings and before he has been cross-examined since the trial judge designated to hear the expedited issues would be better placed to assess its weight and admissibility.
[6]
Counsel for the Canadian defendants relied on a judgment of this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  objection had been taken to the relevancy or admissibility of affidavits filed in trademark proceedings and Mr. Justice Jackett looked at the timeliness of the application to strike. He said:
"As a practical matter, the most efficient and economical way of deciding such questions is by having them so raised and decided at the hearing and as a practical exercise of judicial discretion the parties should not be permitted to raise them before the hearing. The two exceptions of that general rule that I contemplate at the moment are:
(a) where a party has to obtain leave to admit evidence and it is obvious in the view of the court that it is inadmissible, and;
(b) where the court can be convinced that as a practical matter the admissibility of the affidavits filed by one of the parties should be considered some time before the hearing so that the hearing can proceed in an orderly manner."
[7]
In that case, rule 36 of the
Exchequer Court Rules
contemplated the filing in advance of the hearing of the affidavits that the respective parties proposed to put before the court for the hearing. Mr. Justice Jackett in that decision said that in his view in the ordinary course of events each of the respective parties, having complied with this condition precedent to using such affidavits as evidence, should tender at the hearing such of the affidavits he has previously filed as he then decides to make part of his case at the hearing. At that time, the opposing party can take or make all proper objections to their being admitted and the court can, after hearing anything that the parties may have to say, admit each affidavit in whole or in part or reject it.
[8]
As counsel for both parties have indicated to me, the present action is not only a complex one, but one that is particular in the sense that some of the issues are to be tried on an expedited basis. There is an agreement as to procedure on record with this court, which was filed by the parties, dated January 25, 1996. The agreement was included in an order of this court made by the Associate Chief Justice on the twenty-sixth day of January 1996, which of course also appears in the record. I'll read portions of it.
"The acquiescence and estoppel affidavits filed by the Canadian defendants and by plaintiff Unitel in respect of plaintiff Unitel's motion for interlocutory injunction and the cross-examinations thereon shall become part of the record in respect of the expedited issues. Plaintiffs are entitled to file defence affidavits on the issues of acquiescence and estoppel only in respect of telephone charge card authorization, following which the Canadian defendants are entitled to file rebuttal affidavits on all issues of acquiescence and estoppel. Following filing of all affidavits on these issues cross-examinations will be held, first of Canadian defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment affiants only on issues dealing with telephone charge card authorization, following which plaintiff's defence affiants may be cross-examined as to the telephone charge card authorization, following which Canadian defendants' rebuttal affiants may be examined on all issues of acquiescence and estoppel."
[9]
It goes on to say with respect to discovery:
"Each party as well as Stentor Services Inc. shall designate and offer up appropriate representatives for additional oral examinations on discovery by the other parties. Such additional discovery shall be limited, to the extent possible, only to matters not adequately covered in the cross-examinations to date."
I have been informed that oral discoveries have not yet been held.
With respect to evidence at trial the agreement states:
"Viva voce evidence at trial shall be permitted both from witnesses who have already filed affidavits and from other witnesses, provided that the other parties have been given notice by the party producing the witness, well in advance, of the identity of the witness, together with an outline of the nature of the evidence that the witness will give; affidavits to constitute notice in respect of content of evidence of affiants who will be called at trial with supplementary disclosure in respect of new evidence."
It continues:
"All evidence adduced to date and to be adduced on either of the Canadian defendants' Motions for Summary Judgment, (NorTel/Bellcore) or the plaintiff Unitel's Motion for Interlocutory Injunction forms part of the record and may be relied upon at trial of the expedited issues by any party."
With respect to scheduling it says:
"The parties shall cooperate in order to create as soon as possible an expeditious schedule for matters prior to trial on the expedited issues including in respect of discoveries, affidavits and examinations. Any party may submit any difficulty arising therefrom to the court for resolution."
I have been informed by the court administrator that the trial of the expedited issues is scheduled to be heard over a period of 15 days starting on January 13, 1997.
[10]
Given the special circumstances of this action, given the agreement of the parties as to how the action would be conducted, and in particular how the expedited issues would be dealt with, given that the matter is to be heard by a judge designated by the Associate Chief Justice commencing on January 13, 1997, that is to say, the expedited issues, I have concluded that it would not be appropriate to proceed with the plaintiffs' motion to strike. This is a matter that should be heard and determined, if necessary, by the trial judge both as to weight and admissibility, and in making this ruling I do not prejudice in any way the parties from making such submissions at the appropriate time to the trial judge who will be designated to hear the expedited issues.
[11]
As Mr. Justice Jackett said in the
Home Juice
decision, I'm not convinced that as a practical matter, given the history of this litigation, the agreement of the parties, and the order of this court giving effect to that agreement, that the admissibility of the affidavits filed by one of the parties should be considered before the hearing so that the hearing can proceed in an orderly manner. I think that the hearing would proceed in a far more orderly manner if the parties carried on with their agreement and had matters of admissibility dealt with by the trial judge hearing the expedited issues.
[12]
Accordingly, and for the reasons given, the motion to strike the Shanefield affidavit is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/slm
[End of document]