[1]
Reed, J.
: A show cause order was issued on October 6, 1997, ordering the defendant and James Williams to appear to show cause why they should not be found in contempt of court for having failed to honour an undertaking made to the court on September 10, 1997.
[2]
At the commencement of the show cause hearing, and before hearing any witnesses, I asked for argument on the nature and existence of the undertaking that had allegedly been given to the court. On reviewing the file I had been unable to locate any undertaking.
[3]
The facts are as follows. On September 8, 1997, the plaintiff filed a motion for an interlocutory injunction to prevent the defendant using the name WILTEL at a trade show to be held from September 15 to September 18, 1997, in Toronto. On September 10, 1997, the defendant brought a motion for an interlocutory injunction to prevent the plaintiff using the name WILTEL at that show. The hearing of these motions was scheduled for September 11, 1997.
[4]
On September 10, 1997, the parties reached the following agreement, signed on their behalf by their respective counsel:
"1. Each party will undertake to the court to post a notice at its respective trade show booth at the upcoming CBTA Trade Show in Toronto stating as follows:
'X is not associated with Y'
in such notice X will name the proprietor of the booth at which the notice is displayed, and Y will name the other party; the sign will be at least 2 feet by 1 foot in size and will be displayed in full view with proportionally sized print.
2. The parties undertake to advise their personnel manning their respective booths that they are to refrain from saying anything that adversely effects the reputation of the other."
[5]
On September 11, 1997, counsel for the plaintiff appeared and informed the court that the interlocutory injunction applications had been settled and that they should be dismissed on consent. Orders were signed and they read:
"This motion is dismissed, on consent, with costs to be determined by the trial judge."
[6]
A letter found on the court file from counsel for the defendant, dated September 11, 1997, reads, in part:
"... With respect to the ... motions relating to interlocutory injunctive relief, the parties have agreed to a consent order that they be dismissed with costs reserved to the trial judge. ... This resolution was only reached at approximately 8:30 p.m. last night and we apologize for any inconvenience that this late notice may cause to the court and its staff."
[7]
As I indicated to counsel, I reviewed both the Abstract of Hearing and the Minutes taken by the Registrar at the September 11, 1997 hearing. Neither contains any mention of an undertaking having been given to the court. I also spoke with the judge who signed the dismissal orders of September 11, 1997, to ascertain whether an undertaking had been given orally; none had. I understand from counsel's submissions, that the settlement reached by the parties had not been disclosed to the court because both parties were concerned that the agreement be kept confidential. The court was told only that a settlement had been reached.
[8]
Counsel for the plaintiffs argues that the wording of the agreement of September 10, 1997, should be understood to read "an undertaking is hereby given to the court ..." rather than "[e]ach party will undertake to the court ...". He also argues that since counsel are officers of the court, when they signed the agreement, on behalf of their clients, the agreement became an undertaking to the court.
[9]
The decisions in
Baxter Laboratories of Canada Ltd., Travenol Laboratories Inc. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 1 and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 435 (T.D.) were cited in support of the plaintiffs' arguments.
[10]
In the
Baxter
case, the court issued written reasons and asked counsel to prepare a formal order for signature. The order was signed a week later. Under the
Federal Court Rules
an order does not formally operate until a written order has been signed. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court held that actions that occurred after the reasons were issued but before the formal order was executed, and that were contrary to the terms of the order as described in the reasons, could constitute contempt of court. It was held that such actions constituted an interference with the orderly administration of justice and were an impairment of the order and dignity of the court.
[11]
In reaching a decision that contempt could occur the following reasoning was set out:
"... In support of this proposition reliance is placed on a long line of English cases.
Halsbury's Laws of England
(4th Ed.), vol. 24, para. 1099, p. 607, summarizes the law as follows:
'An injunction in prohibitory form operates from the time it is pronounced, not from the date when the order is drawn up and completed. Consequently the party against whom it is made will be guilty of contempt if he commits a breach of the injunction after he has received notice of it, even though the order has not been drawn up.'
. . . . .
The same kind of analysis applies to the period between reasons for decision and the pronouncement of judgment. Cutter argues, in effect, that this constitutes a period of grace in which the defendant can contravene the prohibitions set out in the reasons for decision with impunity. To accept that argument would be to accede to the proposition that it is open to a party completely to defeat an injunction. That would subvert the whole process of going to court to settle disputes. That is precisely what the contempt power is designed to prevent. ..."
[12]
In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, the plaintiff applied for an interlocutory injunction to prevent the defendant using a trademark that the plaintiff asserted belonged to it. That application was not pursued when the defendant filed undertakings with the court. The undertakings were set out in a document placed in a sealed envelope, covered by a confidentiality order. The confidentiality order kept the undertakings off the public record. The confidentiality order did not curtail access to the documents by the judge or the court staff. When a show cause order was sought for breach of the undertakings, Mr. Justice Muldoon was concerned that since contempt proceedings are quasi-criminal in nature, the undertakings should not remain off the public record.
[13]
Neither the
Baxter
nor the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case addresses the circumstances of the present case. In the
Baxter
case, the court had clearly indicated the order it intended to issue. The formal order was delayed to await a proposed draft from counsel. The court and both parties knew the content of the order that would issue. In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, the undertakings had been communicated to the court by filing them with the court, albeit under cover of a confidentiality order that kept them off the public record.
[14]
Rule 355(1) of the
Federal Court Rules
states:
"Anyone is guilty of contempt of court who disobeys any process or order of the court or a judge thereof, or who acts in such a way as to interfere with the orderly administration of justice, or to impair the authority or dignity of the court."
[15]
I do not see how an agreement between the parties, signed on their behalf by their counsel, that has never been communicated to the court can be defined as an undertaking given to the court. Nor can it be seen as an interference with the orderly administration of justice or an impairment of the authority or dignity of the court. While the parties each agreed to give an undertaking to the court, they never did so. An analogy can be drawn to a settlement agreement, signed by counsel on behalf of their clients, which is not honoured. If the terms of the settlement are never made part of a court order, either directly or indirectly by incorporation by reference, a breach of those terms does not become a ground for a finding that contempt of court has occurred.
[16]
I quote from
Halsbury's Laws of England
(4th Ed.), vol. 9, para. 75:
"An undertaking
given to the court
by a person or corporation in pending proceedings,
on the faith of which the court sanctions a particular course of action or inaction
, has the same force as an injunction made by the court and a breach of the undertaking is misconduct amounting to contempt."
[17]
One of the decisions cited in support of this summary of the law is
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  1989) at 1045.
[18]
Where an undertaking is given between the parties but not to the court the appropriate procedure is to first apply to the court for an order compelling compliance with the undertaking and, then, if compliance does not occur to bring a proceeding for contempt:
Solicitor, Re
, [1966] 3 All E.R. 53 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  William could not be found to be in contempt of court for not complying with the agreement of September 10, 1997.
[20]
Counsel for the defendant and Mr. Williams asked that they be awarded solicitor/client costs. As I indicated at the hearing, I am not prepared to make such an award. Argument on the issue that resulted in the dismissal of the contempt allegation was not initiated by counsel. It arose at the court's initiative. Had the issue been raised at an earlier time, for example, by counsel for the defendant, it could have led to an early disposition of the matter and the saving of considerable cost for both parties. Both counsel, however, signed an agreement, on their client's behalf stating that "each party will undertake to the court ..." and, then, neither made such an undertaking. In such circumstances, the costs of the present proceeding should follow the disposition of the main action.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Janette Blue/sms
[End of document]