[1]
Rothstein, J.
: This is an appeal by the Minister from the decision of Citizenship Court Judge Renaud dated January 28, 1994, which granted citizenship to Kehua Yu. While Ms. Yu was originally from China, she had been living in the United States from 1985, having gone to school there from that time.
[2]
Ms. Yu arrived as a landed immigrant in Canada on December 28, 1989, and remained in Canada for 17 days until January 14, 1990, when she left to continue her studies in Lubbock, Texas.
[3]
After her initial return to Lubbock, Texas, on January 14, 1990, she continued her schooling there for approximately three years, returning to Canada periodically when not required to be at school.
[4]
Her application for citizenship was made on January 4, 1993. During the relevant period, prior to her application, she spent 156 days in Canada with 939 days away from Canada. While there was some evidence that Ms. Yu had a room at her uncle's residence in Vancouver and that she was covered by British Columbia health care and had certain other indicia of Canadian residency, the striking fact of this case is that her initial stay in Canada was only some 17 days.
[5]
I think this is a case in which the words of Cattanach, J., in
Re Mitha
, 1 June 1979, T-4832-78, (F.C.T.D.), (unreported), are pertinent:
"It seems to me that in determining whether physical absences from Canada are for such temporary purposes as will not break the continuity of residence, there must first be a 'residence' established and that is a matter of degree with respect to how the person 'settles into or maintains or centralizes his ordinary mode of living with its accessories and social relations, interests and conveniences at or in the place in question' but residence should be distinguished as in ordinary speech 'from the field of stay or visit'."
[6]
I regret that I am not satisfied that there was an initial residency established by Ms. Yu in the 17 days from December 28, 1989 to January 14, 1990. I find it difficult to accept that one could be said to maintain or centralize an ordinary mode of living with its accessories and social relations, interests and conveniences in a period of only 17 days with only a room at the residence of an uncle.
[7]
Where a person leaves Canada for a period of time after initially establishing a residency, it is possible that they may comply with the three-year period referred to in s. 5(1)(c) of the
Citizenship Act
, even though they may be away from some required purpose, as in this case, attendance at school outside of Canada. But I think the establishment of an initial residency is essential and I do not see that that took place in this case.
[8]
I must say that I regret having to come to this conclusion because of what transpired in the last two years. Indeed, it appears Ms. Yu has established her residency in Canada as of August 1993. She has remained in Canada virtually constantly since that time. Unfortunately, the wording of s. 5(1)(c) requires that the calculation of time for residency be for a period that immediately precedes the date of the application for citizenship. Where an appeal is heard some years later, as in this case, that calculation can seem artificial. However, the relevant period is prescribed by law and is not something that may be ignored.
[9]
My decision is not to be considered a reflection on Ms. Yu, who impressed me as an individual, and as a witness.
[10]
I have no doubt, from hearing the evidence, that Ms. Yu is a well educated person who will make a significant contribution in Canada and will make a fine citizen once she satisfies the residency requirement of s. 5(1)(c) of the
Citizenship Act
.
[11]
The appeal is allowed.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slm
[End of document]