[1]
Strayer, J.
: When this matter came on for hearing before me, counsel for the Minister of Employment and Immigration, the applicant, filed a notice of discontinuance with respect to all respondents other than Ehay Ermeyev, the father of the respondents Edan, Sharon, and Ronit Ermeyev and the husband of Raisa Ermeyev. Counsel for the respondents in turn consented on behalf of Ehay Ermeyev to the order quashing the decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board, Immigration Appeal Division, dated April 21, 1993 and signed May 6, 1993, in respect of him. That decision had allowed his appeal under s. 70 of the
Immigration Act
against a removal order issued against him. My order implements that consent.
[2]
My order also grants costs of this motion against the applicant as requested by the respondents. In so ordering I have given careful consideration to the provisions of Immigration Rule 22 which provides as follows:
"No costs shall be awarded to or payable by any party in respect of an application or an appeal under these
Rules
unless the court, for special reasons, so orders."
There is little guidance in the jurisprudence as to what constitutes "special reasons" and because of this I thought it appropriate to write brief reasons.
[3]
Without going into the details of this case, some background facts should be noted. The respondents are all Israeli citizens. The father and husband, Ehay Ermeyev, made an application at the Canadian consulate in Tel Aviv in 1990 for an immigration visa for himself and his family to come to Canada to establish permanent residence. Before the visa issued he obtained a visitor's visa and came to Canada. That visa was ultimately extended to November 5, 1990. While he was in Canada the immigration visas for the family were issued on August 20, 1990. When Raisa Ermeyev picked up the visas at the Canadian consulate on September 10, 1990, it was noted that the expiry date on the visas was set for September 27, 1990. After a telephone conversation it was agreed that Ehay should remain in Canada and the family should join him. The family arrived on September 17, 1990, at Pearson International Airport where Ehay was awaiting them. When immigration officers realized that Ehay had not actually accompanied them, all of the visas were seized. Eventually reports were made with respect to all members of the family that they were unlawfully in Canada and removal orders were made against all of them. Ehay's removal was ordered because by then his visitor's visa had expired (albeit that when his wife and children had arrived on September 17, 1990, to join him the whole family had current immigration visas). These removal orders were appealed to the Immigration Appeal Division under s. 70 of the
Act
. The jurisdiction of the Division to hear Ehay's appeal was challenged and his counsel conceded the Board had no jurisdiction (apparently on the ground that at the time the removal order was made Ehay no longer had a valid visitor's permit). The Board nevertheless allowed all of the appeals in a decision signed on May 6, 1993. This application for judicial review was commenced by the Minister on May 20, 1993. Leave was granted on April 26, 1994 and the application was set down for hearing on July 13, 1994. On July 12, counsel for the Minister advised the court that the matter was no longer to be contested, the Minister discontinuing the application against the wife and children and the husband consenting to the order against him.
[4]
I consider that special reasons exist for granting costs against the Minister in this case. In my view the respondents have been put to a great deal of unnecessary trouble and expense by the way that the Minister's officials have dealt with the respondents and in the manner in which the litigation has been conducted on behalf of the Minister. With respect to the treatment of the respondents, there was at worst a technical error committed by the respondents in that Ehay Ermeyev did not join his family somewhere outside of Canada and return to Canada with them pursuant to the valid immigration visas which had been previously obtained in the proper manner. Once this mistake was discovered it should not have strained the imagination of officials at Pearson International Airport to find a relatively simple solution such as the departure of the whole family temporarily to the United States from where they could return together. Instead the whole family was put through removal hearings, appeals to the Immigration Appeal Division, and ultimately an application to this court. Almost four years has elapsed since Mrs. Ermeyev and her children arrived in Toronto carrying, in good faith, valid immigration visas for the whole family. It is incredible that some simple discretionary action was not taken during this four year period to legitimate the landing of the whole family: at the time of their arrival, or at the time removal orders were sought, or at the time this application was launched. While the Minister's legal advisors may have felt it necessary, once the appeal decision was entered, to launch this application for judicial review as a matter of principle with respect to the jurisdiction of the Immigration Appeal Division to hear the appeal of Ehay Ermeyev, it is difficult to believe that even this matter could not have been settled months ago as it was ultimately settled on the eve of the hearing.
[5]
For these reasons I have awarded costs against the applicant.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/mjp
[End of document]