[1]
Reed, J.
: This is a motion to strike out the plaintiffs' Statement of Claim. Both sets of defendants seek such striking out but on different grounds. The defendants, Her Majesty the Queen in the Right of Canada, et al. (hereinafter referred to as the Crown) seek to have the claim struck out on the ground that it is an abuse of the process of the court or otherwise falls within one or more of the subheadings of Rule 419 [which reads as follows]:
"419(1) The Court may at any stage of any action order any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that
(a) it discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, as the case may be,
(b) it is immaterial or redundant,
(c) it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious,
(d) it may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action,
(e) it constitutes a departure from a previous pleading, or
(f) it is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court.
and may order the action to be stayed or dismissed or judgment to be entered accordingly."
The defendants, Youngman et al., seek to have the claim struck out as against them on the ground that the court has no jurisdiction.
[2]
The dispute between the parties arises out of a clause found in Treaty No. 7, expressed to be with the "Blackfoot and other Indian Tribes at the Blackfoot Crossing of Bow River and Fort Macleod". That treaty is dated 22 September, 1877. An adhesion to the Treaty was signed by the other members of the Blackfoot Band on December 4, 1877.
"... and further, Her Majesty agrees that the said Indians shall be supplied as soon as convenient, after any Band shall make due application therefore, with the following cattle for raising stock, that is to say: for every family of five persons, and under, two cows; for every family of more than five persons, and less than 10 persons, three cows; for every family of over ten persons, four cows; and every Head and Minor Chief, and every Stony Chief, for the use of their Bands, one bull; but if any Band desire to cultivate the soil as well as raise stock, each family of such Band shall receive one cow less than the above mentioned number, and in lieu thereof, when settled on their Reserves and prepared to break up the soil, two hoes, one spade, one scythe, and two hay forks, and for every three families, one plough and one harrow, and for each Band, enough potatoes, barley, oats and wheat (if such seeds be suited for the locality of their Reserves) to plant the land actually broken up. All the aforesaid articles to be given, once for all, for the encouragement of the practice of agriculture among the Indians ..."
In 1980 a claim was made for delivery of cattle pursuant to the treaty. Negotiations ensued with the Crown and on February 21, 1984, the Band Council of the Blackfoot Band of Indians Number 146 approved (by resolution) a settlement and requested that a referendum be held for the purpose of obtaining from the Band approval of the settlement. A referendum was held and of the 957 persons entitled to vote, 792 did so. Of these 574 voted in favour of the settlement; 48 voted against and 170 ballots were rejected.
[3]
On April 6, 1986, the settlement agreement was signed by the Band Council on behalf of the Band. The terms of that settlement provide in part:
"That in consideration of the sum of one million six hundred and seventy-five thousand dollars ($ 1,675,000) paid by the Minister to the Band, the Band releases Canada from all actions, claims and demands of whatsoever nature and kind arising out of the aforementioned provision of the said Treaty.
"The Band hereby authorizes and directs the Minister to pay out of the aforementioned consideration the sum of $95,000 DOLLARS into the Band's Revenue Account.
"The Band hereby authorizes and directs the Minister to pay the remainder of the aforementioned consideration, being $1,580,000 DOLLARS into a designated Band Capital Account. This sum is so placed with Her Majesty for the purpose of maintaining a fund out of which the Band may draw by Band Council Resolution, in accordance with the Indian Act."
[4]
The plaintiffs allege that they are lawfully entitled to the money paid in lieu of cattle pursuant to the Treaty and that the money ought to be divided on a per capita basis among all the members of the said Blackfoot Band. They claim that the Band Council has already spent "a large portion of the money on capital improvements to the Blackfoot Indian Reserve and on an annuity to a research employee of the said Band". They allege that the defendants have converted money belonging to the plaintiffs. They allege that the Crown was in a fiduciary position with respect to the plaintiffs and breached that fiduciary obligation.
[5]
The Crown seeks to have the Statement of Claim struck out on the ground that "it is doomed to fail". In support of that argument are cited  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at 742;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) at 273, 274 and 278.
[6]
The Canada Packers case dealt with a Statement of Claim filed in the Alberta Court of Queens Bench seeking a declaration that criminal charges, brought against the plaintiff under the Combines Investigation Act, were invalid and of no force and effect because certain sections of the Criminal Code were unconstitutional as contrary to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The Statement of Claim also sought an injunction restraining the Attorney General of Canada from proceeding with the charges. The claim was struck out on the ground that the Court of Queens Bench on its civil side was not the appropriate place to bring such actions in the light of the charges laid.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  plaintiff with respect to a proposed tax evasion prosecution. The defendant was subsequently hired to prosecute such action. The plaintiff successfully defended the action and then brought suit against the defendant for damages alleging conspiracy to commence and continue a malicious prosecution and negligence. The claim was struck out on the ground that the facts pleaded did not support such a claim. The Hollinger Bus Lines case dealt with an action against the Ontario Labour Relations Board seeking a declaration that the Board was acting beyond its jurisdiction. The claim was struck out on the ground that certiorari and/or prohibition, not a declaration, were the appropriate remedies. The Weider case dealt with a motion to strike out parts of a statement of claim on the ground that the Federal Court was without jurisdiction over passing off actions. The, then, recently rendered Supreme Court of Canada decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  basis for the impugned sections of the statement of claim was section 7(b). The Burnell case sought damages from the International Joint Commission for flooding caused to his property. The action was struck out on the ground that the defendant was not a suable entity.
[7]
All the claims in the cases cited were on their face not supportable. This is not true of the plaintiffs' claim. There is no doubt that the Statement of Claim is deficient in its recital of material facts. The defendants might very well have succeeded in a claim for better and further particulars had such been sought. Indeed the memorandum of argument filed by counsel for the plaintiffs in this case is in reality a recitation of further factual allegations (e.g. the referendum had not been properly conducted; corrupt practices had occurred. These obviously should have been pleaded in the Statement of Claim. Also, the memorandum filed was not a memorandum of argument at all. For example, no legal authority was cited for the propositions of law so cavalierly tossed off:
"all the money received ... is 'Treaty Money' and that it is improper and illegal for the Defendants to allocate these funds to capital projects."
[8]
The Crown's response to this last would appear to be the argument that "the settlement agreement is valid and in any event the Treaty itself does not give a right to a per capita distribution of the cattle". This argument relies on  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), a decision which dealt with "ammunition monies" payable under the Treaty:
"Further, Her Majesty agrees that the sum of two thousand dollars shall hereafter every year be expended in the purchase of ammunition for distribution among the said Indians; Provided that if at any future time ammunition become comparatively unnecessary for said Indians, Her Government, with the consent of said Indians, or any of the Bands thereof, may expend the proportion due to such Band otherwise for their profit."
[9]
The "ammunition clause" and the "cattle clause" are not so similar in nature that one can immediately conclude that the requirement of no per capita distribution with respect to one means that there is no such requirement with respect to the other. This is clearly an issue for argument.
[10]
I must note that the Crown's argument was brought under Rule 419 and the authorities cited (as noted above) all dealt with situations in which statements of claim on their face were not supportable. However, the Crown's application in this case is not based on the Statement of Claim itself. It is based on admissions of fact agreed to by counsel for the plaintiffs in reply to a Notice to Admit Facts prepared by counsel for the Crown and which contained the description of the facts sought to be admitted. Thus, it seems to me that what the Crown is really seeking is an order pursuant to Rule 341 for judgment
"upon any admission in the pleadings in other documents filed in the Court ..."
The admissions filed are not such as to support such a judgment. They are not so complete as to put an end to all controversy. In addition, even on the basis of the facts as admitted legal issues are raised, as for example the proper interpretation of the "cattle clause".
[11]
From all of the foregoing it is obvious that the plaintiffs' Statement of Claim is not one which should be struck out on the ground that it constitutes an "abuse of the process of the court".
[12]
The defendants, Youngman et al., assert that the Statement of Claim should be struck out against them because the court does not have jurisdiction. The decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) is cited in support of this proposition. I have expressed the view elsewhere, that in cases such as the present, where a plaintiffs' claim against a private individual is intimately intertwined with that against the Crown, section 17(1) of the Federal Court Act supports jurisdiction over the whole cause of action:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Employees, Component (unreported decision of November 19, 1985, Court file number T-1085-85). The fact situation in the present case is closer to that in the Marshall case than it is to that  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[13]
In any event quite apart from any argument on the basis of the reasoning in the Marshall case, it suffices to note two paragraphs of the defendants' (Youngman et al.) argument:
"7. Although Section 18 of the Act vests in this Court jurisdiction to entertain an application against a Federal tribunal, including a band council, such jurisdiction is limited to applications for injunctive relief or relief in the nature of a prerogative writs. The Plaintiffs only claim for relief against the Defendants which could be entered by this Court is their claim for injunctive relief.
"8. The Plaintiffs seek to enjoin the Defendants from consenting to the distribution of capital funds in a manner that is prima facie authorized by the Indian Act. On the one hand the Plaintiffs have admitted that payment of settlement funds have been authorized pursuant to s. 64 of the Indian Act while, on the other hand, the Plaintiffs have plead [sic] that the Defendants have authorized payments in an unlawful manner. It is submitted that the plaintiffs have not established a proper basis for the Court to exercise its jurisdiction to entertain the claim against these Defendants for injunctive relief."
[14]
Paragraph 7 admits jurisdiction with respect to the injunctive relief claimed by the plaintiffs in paragraph 14 of the Statement of Claim. Paragraph 8 contests the validity of the grounds of that claim. This last is clearly a matter to be dealt with at trial.
[15]
In my view both defendants are seeking a premature disposition of the substantive issues of this case. The applications accordingly will be dismissed.
Applications dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]