[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: On June 11, 1996, Mr. John A. Hargrave, a Prothonotary of the Federal Court of Canada, issued an order pursuant to a motion made by the Defendants, pursuant to rule 446 of the
Federal Court Rules
, that the plaintiff post security for costs. This order reads as follows:
"ORDER:
1. Proceedings by the plaintiff are stayed pending provision of security by the plaintiff to the defendant, Arctic Transportation Ltd., in the amount of $50,000.00 in a form either satisfactory to the court or as may be agreed by counsel, which security shall be provided within forty-five days;
2. The stay shall be without prejudice to any undertakings owed by the plaintiff, pretrial conferences and settlement conferences, and any steps in the proceeding which either the defendant or the third party may wish to take;
3. In the event that security is posted, but this matter is not resolved by September 15, 1996, the defendant may apply for further security for costs; and
4. The costs of this motion shall be in the cause."
[2]
When the prothonotary issued the above order, he issued very extensive reasons. What is most important to note is the following statement of the prothonotary: "The plaintiff, presently unrepresented by Canadian counsel, did not participate, although properly served and given ample opportunity".
[3]
As can be seen from the prothonotary's reasons, it appears that the plaintiff's solicitors had themselves removed from the record on April 29, 1996, remaining as an address for service until plaintiff instructed new solicitors, which he has now done. The motion for security for costs was served on May 27, 1996, and was made returnable on June 10, 1996, two weeks after service.
[4]
As I have stated, neither plaintiff nor anyone on his behalf appeared for the hearing. Not only did no one appear for the hearing, but neither the plaintiff nor anyone else wrote to the court concerning the motion for security for costs. Present counsel for plaintiff admits that plaintiff was aware of the filing of the motion and of the hearing date. Notwithstanding this knowledge, plaintiff did not appear nor does plaintiff give any explanation for failing to appear.
[5]
Now plaintiff files a Notice of Motion for an order pursuant to rule 336(5) of the
Federal Court Rules
to set aside the order of the prothonotary dated June 11, 1996. The grounds, as stated in plaintiff's Notice of Motion are:
"1. The plaintiff, James L. Ferguson, is a seaman and as such is excepted from paying security pursuant to rule 1014 of the
Federal Court Rules
which states that a seaman suing for wages in a collision shall not be ordered to give security for costs.
"2. That James L. Ferguson, the undersigned is so impecunious that requiring him to pay security cannot be complied with and enforcement of such an order would deprive him of the ability to bring or continue this action. In support of this the plaintiff states that all assets owned by him, with the sole exception of one automobile of approximate value of $20,000, are jointly held with his wife, who is not a party to this action.
"3. That the defendants delay in bringing this application was unreasonable, considering that the plaintiff has always resided outside the jurisdiction, that the action was commenced on August 6, 1993 and the application for security for costs was heard May 27, 1996."
[6]
Plaintiff has also filed a Notice of Motion wherein he is asking to be permitted to file fresh evidence on the appeal of the prothonotary's order of June 11, 1996. The grounds for this motion, as stated in the Notice of Motion, are:
1. The hearing of the appeal is in the nature of a hearing de novo,
2. The evidence is credible, and the evidence is practically determinative of the issue, and
3. The plaintiff, an American resident, was unrepresented by Canadian counsel at the time of the hearing, and as such was unable to adduce evidence on his own behalf.
The "fresh evidence" is found in the affidavit of the plaintiff sworn on July 31, 1996, and is "fresh" only in that it was not before the prothonotary on June 10, 1996, but is evidence that was available to the plaintiff on and before June 10, 1996, but never submitted.
[7]
The first issue is to determine whether the "fresh evidence", as found in the plaintiff's affidavit, should be allowed to be produced as part of the plaintiff's appeal. I am prepared to allow the plaintiff, in the circumstances of this case only, to file his affidavit sworn on July 31, 1996, and to file the affidavit of his wife, of the same date, on evidence in the present appeal.
[8]
An appeal of a prothonotary's decision to a judge of the Federal Court Trial Division is in the nature of a hearing de novo. This does not mean that no consideration should be given to the prothonotary's decision, particularly if the prothonotary has issued very extensive reasons as in the present case.
[9]
The plaintiff was not represented at the hearing before the prothonotary, and no explanation was given as to why this was so. I can only conclude that it was as a result of his own negligence that he or a representative did not appear before the prothonotary. Nevertheless, I believe that it is in the interest of justice to allow the production of the affidavits of the plaintiff and his wife as evidence in this appeal.
[10]
I will deal, in deciding the appeal, with each of the grounds as found in the Amended Notice of Motion.
[11]
Rule 1014 of the
Federal Court Rules
states:
"A seaman suing for wages or for the loss of his clothes and effects in a collision shall not be ordered to give security for costs."
In order for rule 1014 to be applicable, the plaintiff must show (1) that he is a seaman and (2) that he is suing for wages or (3) he is a seaman and (4) he is suing for the loss of his clothes and effects in a collision.
[12]
I am satisfied that on a plain reading of this rule there are two situations when there should not be an order for security for costs. The first, as above stated, is a seaman suing for wages and the second is a seaman suing for loss of his clothes and effects but only if lost as a result of a collision.
[13]
Is the plaintiff a seaman? I think not. In plaintiff's statement of claim he describes himself as a "master mariner" and that "at all material times he was employed by the Panama Canal Commission as a pilot". I am satisfied that a "pilot" is not a seaman. Under the heading of Definitions, s. 2 of the
Canada Shipping Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-9, pilot is defined as:
"'pilot' means any person not belonging to a ship who has the conduct thereof;"
while seaman is defined as:
"'seaman' includes
(a) every person, except masters, pilots and apprentices duly indentured and registered, employed or engaged in any capacity on board any ship, and
(b) for the purposes of the Seaman's Repatriation Convention, every person employed or engaged in any capacity on board any vessel and entered on the ship's articles,
but does not include pilots, cadets and pupils on training ships and naval ratings, or other persons in the permanent service of a government except when used in Part IV where it includes an apprentice to the sea service;"
Clearly, if "pilots" were to be considered "seamen" as defined in the
Canada Shipping Act
, there would be no need for a paragraph that states that seaman does not include pilots. In the
Interpretation Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-21, under the title
Rules of Construction
at section 15(2) it states:
"(2) Where an enactment contains an interpretation section or provision, it shall be read and construed
(a) as being applicable only if a contrary intention does not appear; and
(b) as being applicable to all other enactments relating to the same subject-matter unless a contrary intention appears."
[14]
Counsel for plaintiff was unable to show that a "pilot" can be defined as a "seaman". I am satisfied that the function of a "pilot" is very different from that of a "seaman". Furthermore, I believe that the reason why a "seaman" would be exempt from having to give security for costs is that a "seaman" would be working on a "foreign ship" usually travelling in "foreign waters" and would, of necessity, have to sue for his wages in foreign jurisdictions. In addition, if a "seaman" is suing for wages in a foreign jurisdiction he should not be prevented from doing so because he may not have, and this is most likely, the funds to deposit as security for costs. From reading the affidavit of plaintiff, I am satisfied plaintiff's earnings as a "pilot" and his revenue from his present pension do not put him into the same financial position as a seaman. I am satisfied that the raison-d'être behind rule 1014 is the issue of the financial position of a seaman.
[15]
In addition to the fact that I am satisfied a "pilot" is not a "seaman" when he is working as a pilot, and therefore rule 1014 is not applicable, is that even if it were that a "pilot" and "seaman" could be used synonymously, the plaintiff is not suing for wages. From a plain reading of the statement of claim it is apparent that plaintiff is suing for damages.
[16]
Plaintiff, in paragraph 9 of the statement of claim, alleges, as a result of an incident (see paragraph 8) he suffered "severe and permanent physical injuries". He states, in paragraph 10, that this was as a result of negligence. Surely, plaintiff cannot say that he is suing for wages. It is also apparent that plaintiff is not suing for loss of his clothes and effects as a result of a collision. No collision occurred. Therefore, rule 1014 has no application in this case.
Plaintiff Is Impecunious
[17]
After verifying the facts as to the plaintiff's financial situation, I am satisfied there is no merit to the allegation that the plaintiff is impecunious.
The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary On Historical Principles
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993) defines the word "impecunious" as "in need of money, poor, penniless". The
American Heritage Dictionary
defines the word "impecunious" as "lacking money - penniless". The word "impecunious" is an adjective to denote someone who is "poor" or "impoverished" or "needy".
[18]
As I have stated, it is difficult to find the plaintiff to be poor or impoverished or needy. From his affidavit evidence, and from the evidence obtained in an examination for discovery of plaintiff, it is, in my opinion, difficult to consider the plaintiff as one in need of money or poor or penniless.
[19]
The affidavit of the plaintiff dated July 31, 1996, states that the plaintiff has current savings of $13,000.00 US, an automobile valued at approximately $20,000.00 US, owns a home in joint tenancy with his wife, owns one rental property in joint tenancy with his wife (a second rental property was sold in January 1996) and owns, in joint tenancy with his wife, an undeveloped parcel of land in Florida.
[20]
It is interesting to note that the plaintiff fails, for reasons only known to him, to mention the value of the above joint-tenancy assets and, more particularly, fails to mention the sale price of the second joint-tenancy rental property and what became of the monies received for the said sale.
[21]
As an exhibit to the affidavit of Robina M. Struthers dated July 30, 1996, and found under Tab 6 of plaintiff's Motion Brief, one finds extracts from an examination for discovery of plaintiff that took place on March 16, 17 and 20, 1995, and on December 13, 1995. In the examination for discovery of March 16, 1996, in reply to questions 3 to 10, one can see that the plaintiff (in joint tenancy) owns his own home at 15 Digges Drive, Newport News, Virginia, U.S.A., owned (in joint tenancy) on March 16, 1995, two rental properties located in Newport News, Virginia (one of which was sold in January 1996) and recreational (land) property in Florida (in joint tenancy). It is hard to imagine being impecunious with these assets even if they are held in joint -- tenancy, and particularly where these properties are mortgage free (see questions 2345, 2346 and 2347).
[22]
In addition, the plaintiff received a pension from the U.S. Federal Civil Service, when he retired, of $56,322.03 US for the 1993 calendar year and $60,546 US for the 1994 calendar year. A small amount of this money, $4,200.00 of the $60,546.00 1994 payment, was tax free (Questions 2271 to 2277).
[23]
The plaintiff still receives a pension. I assume that the sum received or to be received as pension for 1995 and for 1996, is more than 1993 and 1994. Reading the extract of the examination for discovery filed as an exhibit to the Struthers affidavit makes me wonder how one can say that the plaintiff is impecunious. I also note that the plaintiff himself, in his affidavit evidence, does not make any such allegation. It is only found as a ground for his motion in appeal.
The Defendants' Delay
[24]
As seen from the Notice of Motion, the plaintiff alleges that the delay in bringing the application for security for costs was unreasonable considering that the plaintiff has always resided outside the jurisdiction, that the action was commenced on August 6, 1993, and that the application for costs "was heard May 27, 1996".
[25]
The application for security for costs is dated May 27, 1996. By letter dated May 27, 1996, the Notice of Motion was forwarded by overnight courier to McEwen, Schmitt & Company. As previously stated, McEwen, Schmitt & Company were plaintiff's counsel but withdrew on April 29, 1996, yet remained as an address for service. The hearing of the application took place on June 10, 1996.
[26]
It is necessary to give a brief history of this case in order to attempt to determine if there was an inordinate delay in bringing on their application for security for costs, and if answered in the affirmative, if there was a prejudice caused to the plaintiff.
[27]
Rule 446(1)(a) of the
Federal Court Rules
states:
"446(1) Where, on an application of a defendant, it appears to the court
(a) that the plaintiff is ordinarily resident out of the jurisdiction, ...
if, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, it seem just to do so, the court may order the plaintiff to give such security for the defendant's costs of the action or other proceeding as seems just."
The plaintiff is ordinarily resident out of the jurisdiction and, therefore, after having regard to all of the circumstances of the case it seems just to do so, the court may order the plaintiff to give such security for costs.
[28]
As I have stated, the plaintiff, because, I believe, of his own negligence, failed to appear either personally or through a representative before the prothonotary to make the argument of delay. In reading the prothonotary's decision it is understandable that this issue was not considered, nor should it have been.
[29]
This being a hearing de novo, and delay being a question of law, I am prepared to give this item consideration. The plaintiff has submitted a number of cases wherein the issue of delay was considered. In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at 427, MacGuigan, for the majority states:
"The Motions Judge properly exercised his discretion by taking into consideration all relevant factors, including the question of whether the subsequent delay by the respondent was sufficient to excuse the appellant's failure to prosecute in a reasonable and timely manner. He did not find the respondent's lack of response to amount to condonation, acquiescence or waiver.
Nor did he err in law in considering how serious was the prejudice caused by the delay and he raised the question properly in saying: 'the defendant must show ... that it will likely be seriously prejudiced by the delay
'. There was no manifest error of law on the Motions Judge's part such as would permit the court to interfere with his exercise of discretion." (underlining mine)
[30]
Clearly I take this case to mean, on the facts of the case before me, the plaintiff must, at least, show some prejudice caused to him by defendants' delay in bringing on the motion for security in a dilatory manner, if in fact there was "delay".
[31]
I am satisfied that the delay in bringing the application for security was not "completely out of the ordinary" and, moreover, I have
absolutely no evidence
that the plaintiff has suffered or will suffer
any
prejudice as a result of the "delay" of the defendants to bring the motion for security for costs.
[32]
One only has to look at the Summary of Recorded Entries attached to the court file to see the number of proceedings taken in this case. There are approximately 40 typewritten pages listing the proceedings filed into court and the hearings that took place. Suffice it to say that although the statement of claim was filed into the court Registry on August 6, 1993, and the motion for security being made on May 27, 1996, a delay of almost three years, I do not, after reviewing what has taken place in this file, consider the delay in bringing on the application for security to be out of the ordinary, particularly since the plaintiff has not submitted any evidence of prejudice.
[33]
It cannot be assumed that the plaintiff has been prejudiced by the delay. Prejudice may sometimes be caused by a delay of some months or not be caused by a delay of almost three years. If plaintiff alleges, as he does, that he should not be required to provide security for costs because of the issue of delay, he must show that as a result of the delay he suffered some prejudice. The plaintiff has failed to do so.
[34]
I do not accept the submissions of counsel for plaintiff that if there is "delay" then no security need be posted. The general rule, rule 446, is that out of country residents must post security unless they fit into one of the exceptions of rule 446. Rule 446 uses the words "if, having regard to all the circumstances of the case ...". I take this to mean that there are cases in which a plaintiff may be an out of country resident, an individual or a corporation, and have sufficient assets in Canada and thus, the defendant would not be concerned with recouping its court costs. I also take these words to mean that if an individual out of country plaintiff shows that he or she has a "strong case", and he or she would lose the right to pursue the case because they are, in fact, impecunious, there may be special circumstances to allow the case to proceed without the posting of security.
[35]
Having regard to all the circumstances of this case, I can see no error in the decision of the prothonotary of June 11, 1996. I, therefore, dismiss the present appeal with costs, on a party to party basis, payable to defendants forthwith.
[36]
Furthermore, in that this was a hearing de novo, I amend the order issued by the prothonotary to read:
"Proceedings by the plantiff are stayed pending provision of security by the plaintiff to the defendant, Arctic Transportation Ltd., in the amount of $50,000.00 in a form either satisfactory to the court or as may be agreed by counsel which security shall be provided within 30 days of today's date, failing which the action shall be dismissed."
As I have said, costs are in favour of defendants payable forthwith and on a party and party basis.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/slm
[End of document]