 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 1045)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
de Montigny, J.
August 31, 2012.
Counsel:
Kristine Dela Cruz, for the applicant;
Bridget O'Leary, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Green and Spiegel LLP, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
de Montigny, J.
: This is an application under subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001 c 27 [IRPA or the "Act"] to judicially review the decision of an immigration officer (the "Officer") at Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) dated August 16, 2011. The Officer refused the Applicant's permanent residence application on the basis that, as a member of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN), an organization that has engaged in acts of terrorism, she is inadmissible as a person described in paragraph 34(1)(f) of the Act.
1. Facts
[2]
The Applicant is a 44 year-old citizen of El Salvador and has been living in Canada since 2002.
[3]
On August 4, 2002, the Applicant arrived in Canada from the United States of America (USA) where she had been living illegally with her estranged husband, Renato Menendez ("Renato"), who is a Canadian citizen. They had been in the USA since 1999, having fled there from El Salvador to escape the Salvadoran civil war.
[4]
Upon arrival at the Fort Erie port of entry, the Applicant claimed refugee status because she feared persecution on the basis of her political beliefs. Renato was not present at the port of entry when she completed a Schedule 1 -Background Information Form (the "Schedule 1 Form"). In her Schedule 1 Form, which was completed with the assistance of a Spanish translator, the Applicant indicated that she had been a member of the FMLN. The Applicant answered "yes"to the following questions on the Schedule 1 Form:
G. Have you ever used, planned, or advocated the use of armed struggle or violence to reach political, religious or social objectives?
H. Have you ever been associated with a group that used, uses, advocated or advocates the use of armed struggle or violence to reach political, religious or social objectives?
[5]
The Applicant also said in the Schedule 1 Form that she "used to be a member of the guerilla - FMLN" and that some of the guerillas used force, but she had not done so. At the bottom of the Schedule 1 Form, the Applicant signed a declaration, saying that the information she gave in the form was truthful, complete, and correct, and that she understood all the statements in the Schedule 1 Form"having asked for and obtained an explanation on every point that was not clear to [her]." She also declared that she would immediately inform CIC if any of the information in the form changed.
[6]
To support her refugee claim, the Applicant submitted a Personal Information Form (PIF) to the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (RPD). The PIF she completed indicates on the first page that the information provided must be complete, true, and correct; it also required the Applicant to notify the RPD if any of the information in it changed. She completed the PIF with Renato's help and he signed the interpreter's declaration indicating that he had accurately interpreted the contents of the form for her.
[7]
In her PIF narrative, reproduced at page 44 of the Applicant's Record, the Applicant wrote that she first sympathized with the FMLN guerillas in her teen years. At that time, she believed that one option for changing El Salvador was revolution. She also wrote that, in 1985, she met people in FMLN and learned methods for collecting information on people who disagreed with the guerillas. She also learned how to use a gun for protection, and participated by preparing propaganda, organizing strikes, and gathering intelligence. Further, the Applicant sheltered guerillas in her home after they made attacks in two of El Salvador's major cities.
[8]
On May 9, 2005, the RPD declared the Applicant's refugee claim abandoned. Also in May of that year, the Applicant applied for a Permanent Resident Visa with Renato as her sponsor. The Certified Tribunal Record (CTR) does not include her application form related to this application and does not show if she disclosed her membership in FMLN at that time.
[9]
On January 6, 2006, Renato was convicted of uttering threats to the Applicant. As a term of his probation for this offence, Renato was forbidden from having contact with the Applicant. He wrote to CIC on December 20, 2007, declaring that he wanted to withdraw his sponsorship of the Applicant. He stated in this letter that they had been separated for three years, since 2004.
[10]
CIC denied the Applicant's 2005 permanent residence application (CTR page195) on February 26, 2008. The officer who denied that application said that she was not satisfied that the Applicant's marriage to Renato was not entered into primarily for immigration purposes. That officer noted that they had ceased to cohabit before she submitted her application for permanent residence and said that the Applicant attempted to gain permanent resident status through misrepresentation.
[11]
The Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) informed the Applicant on December 10, 2008, that she was eligible to apply for a Pre-Removal Risk Assessment (PRRA). She applied for a PRRA on December 22, 2008. On her PRRA application form, she indicated that she had not been a member of a paramilitary organization or involved in armed conflict.
[12]
The Applicant also referred to her counsel's submissions in response to the direction on her PRRA application form to set out all significant events which had caused her to seek protection outside of El Salvador. In these submissions, the Applicant said that she left El Salvador because of the ongoing strife in that country. She also said that Renato had abused her during their relationship and that she largely followed the instructions of her husband as to immigration matters in Canada. Finally, she stated that Renato had filled out the PIF on her behalf because she trusted him, but that she did not understand its contents. At the bottom of the PRRA form, the Applicant signed a declaration that the information within that form was truthful, complete, and correct.
[13]
On November 3, 2008, the Applicant also submitted an application for permanent residence on humanitarian and compassionate grounds under subsection 25(1) of the Act (an "H&C Application"). The form she filled out for the H&C Application asked her to list all the organizations she had belonged to since her eighteenth birthday, including political and social organizations. In submissions she made with her H&C Application, the Applicant again stated that Renato had completed her PIF and that she did not understand its contents. She also reiterated her position that she had not questioned him about its contents and had signed it on his instructions. The Applicant did not disclose her FMLN membership in her H&C Application. She declared that the information in the H&C Application form and her submissions was truthful, complete, and correct (CTR page 208).
[14]
CIC informed the Applicant by letter dated September 9, 2009, (the "Interim Letter") that her H&C Application was approved in principle. The Interim Letter informed her that CIC had approved an exemption under section 25 of the Act. It also informed her that she would need to meet all other statutory requirements of the Act and that her application could be refused if she did not meet those requirements. The CBSA informed the Applicant on September 9, 2009, that her PRRA file was closed because her H&C Application was approved in principle.
[15]
The Applicant made additional submissions in support of her H&C Application on March 22, 2011, (CTR page 140) including an updated application form. This form was the same as the one she had completed in 2008. She again did not mention her FMLN membership and declared that this information was also truthful, complete and correct.
[16]
On June 2, 2011, the Officer requested the Applicant's file from the RPD, including her PIF and any documents entered as evidence. He wrote to the Applicant on June 13, 2011, to inform her that he believed she might be inadmissible under subsection 34(1) of the Act (the "Fairness Letter"). The Officer invited the Applicant to attend an interview at CIC in order to address these concerns. He said that information indicated that she may have been an FMLN member, and included with his letter documents on the FMLN and its activities.
[17]
The Officer interviewed the Applicant on August 4, 2011. He began by explaining that the interview was to discuss her admissibility under section 34 of the Act. The Officer asked the Applicant if the information in her PIF was correct, to which she replied that Renato had completed it. She confirmed that it was her signature in the declaration portion of her PIF. When asked about the FMLN membership, the Applicant said she was never involved with them, had no role in the organization, and that she had no opinion on the events which occurred in El Salvador while the FMLN was a terrorist organization. The Applicant also said she had not seen combat and did not know what the FMLN was fighting for, though she knew that the current President of El Salvador was a member of the FMLN. The Applicant told the Officer that what she said to him was the complete truth.
[18]
The Officer wrote to the Applicant again on August 16, 2011 (the "Refusal Letter"). In this letter, he told her that it appeared she was inadmissible under paragraph 34(1)(f) of the Act because of her involvement with the FMLN. The Officer wrote that he had considered the information in her application along with the results of her interview. The Officer refused the Applicant's permanent residence application on the grounds of inadmissibility described under paragraph 34(1)(f) of the Act.
2. The impugned decision
[19]
The decision in this case consists of the Refusal Letter and the Officer's memorandum to the Intelligence Directorate of the CBSA's Enforcement Branch.
[20]
The Officer briefly reviewed the Applicant's immigration history. He then reviewed the documents that had been sent to the Applicant with the Fairness Letter, as well as sections 33 and 34 of the Act. The Officer informed himself regarding the test for inadmissibility under paragraph 34(1)(f) of the Act. He said that he needed to have reasonable grounds to believe that the Applicant was a member of a group that there are reasonable grounds to believe engaged, engages, or will engage in acts of terrorism. He noted that, although the test involves a subjective assessment, it requires objective evidence.
[21]
The Officer also reviewed the legal definitions of "terrorism" and "member." He noted that the Supreme Court of Canada defined terrorism in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 98 as follows:
[Any] act intendedto cause death or serious bodily injury to a civilian, or to any other person not taking an active part in the hostilities in a situation of armed conflict, when the purpose of such act, by its nature or context, is to intimidate a population, or to compel a government or an international organization to do or to abstain from doing any act.
[22]
The Federal Court of Appeal reviewed the notion of membership in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] FCR 487, and said that, based in part on the availability of an exemption from the operation of paragraph 34(1)(f) in appropriate circumstances under subsection 34(2) of the Act, "the term 'member' under the Act should continue to be interpreted broadly" (at paragraph 29).
[23]
As for the FMLN, the Officer found that it was a Marxist-Leninist group that was founded in 1980 with the goal of overthrowing the El Salvadoran government. The FMLN had used violence in its attempt to achieve its goal and had destroyed a suspension bridge, attacked El Salvador's electricity infrastructure, and detonated a bomb in a market in San Salvador which killed nine civilians and two soldiers. The Officer concluded that, although the FMLN had become an official political party, he was satisfied that there were reasonable grounds to believe it was an organization that has engaged in acts of terrorism.
[24]
Having determined that the FMLN was a terrorist organization, the Officer examined the Applicant's ties to the group. In her PIF, she made several statements that suggested her involvement to the Officer.
[25]
The Officer also noted that the Applicant had not indicated that she was a member of the FMLN in the H&C forms she completed in 2011. He further noted her denial at the interview of the statements made in her PIF, her statement that Renato had completed the PIF on her behalf, and the fact that she had confirmed the declaration at the bottom of the PIF. The Officer noted that the Applicant said she had become aware of the PIF content at a hearing in 2009 and that she had not read it until a week prior to the interview because her English was poor.
[26]
At the interview, the Officer also asked the Applicant why, if her PIF was not true, she had said at the port of entry that she was an FMLN member. She answered that Renato had told her what to say and that Renato told her to lie, as this was a sure way to get into Canada. When confronted at the interview with the statements from her PIF, she said she did not support the FMLN cause, did not know any FMLN members, and had not collected information on behalf of the FMLN. She also denied participating in propaganda activities, sheltering guerillas, or receiving weapons training. When asked why she left El Salvador, the Applicant said she left to obtain a better education for her daughters.
[27]
The Officer noted that the Applicant did not dispute that the FMLN was a terrorist organization, though she denied involvement with the group. He found that she was downplaying her role in FMLN because she learned that it would be an obstacle to obtaining status in Canada. The Officer found that it was not reasonable to believe that she first learned of the contents of her PIF in 2009. He found that the statements she made in her PIF about being a member of FMLN were true in light of similar statements made previously at the port of entry.
[28]
The Officer found that the Applicant, by her own admission, was a member of FMLN for fifteen years. During that time, she had attended meetings, collected information about the FMLN's opposition, organized strikes, circulated propaganda, and received weapons training. The Officer found that these activities met the threshold for membership as they were more than casual in nature. The fact that she had received weapons training suggested that she knowingly put herself in danger through her support of the FMLN.
[29]
The Officer found that the Applicant had joined the FMLN of her own free will and would have been aware of the group's violent activities. On all the facts before him, the Officer was satisfied that the Applicant was a member of the FMLN. The Officer denied the Applicant's permanent residence application on that basis.
3. The issues
[30]
This application for judicial review raises the following three issues:
i) Did the Officer err by failing to adequately consider all of the evidence?
ii) Did the Officer err procedurally by failing to consult with the National Security Division prior to rendering his decision?
iii) Did the Officer err procedurally by failing to exercise his discretion to refer the matter to a delegated authority to assess whether, on humanitarian and compassionate grounds, the Applicant should be exempted from the inadmissibility determination?
4. Analysis
Preliminary issue
[31]
Before addressing the substantive issues raised by this application, a word must be said about the motion for non-disclosure brought by the Respondent pursuant to section 87 of IRPA. The CTR was filed with this Court on January 4, 2012. The cover letter accompanying the CTR indicated that certain pages or portions thereof had not been disclosed on the grounds that disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person, or on the grounds that the information consisted of third-party information unrelated to this case. By letter dated January 26, 2012, the Respondent forwarded another letter to this Court and to the parties, advising that certain pages that had previously been redacted in their entirety were now being fully disclosed. In addition, one page was modified so that certain portions of the page were no longer black-lined.
[32]
In support of the motion for non-disclosure of information, the Respondent presented to this Court a classified affidavit that included the information which the Respondent does not want disclosed to the public or to the Applicant and her counsel. Having carefully reviewed that affidavit and the information redacted, and having heard the Respondent in an
in camera
hearing held on March 22, 2012, I indicated that the motion for non-disclosure would be granted, for the following reasons.
[33]
First of all, the information redacted is not substantial and does not prejudice the Applicant in making her case. Moreover, that information is not material to the issues raised on the application for judicial review and the Respondent does not rely on the confidential information for the purpose of responding to the Applicant's application for judicial review. Finally, counsel for the Applicant consented to the Respondent's motion.
[34]
Secondly, I am satisfied that the disclosure of the redacted information could have a detrimental effect on the ability of investigative agencies to fulfil their mandates in relation to Canada's national security. If released, that information would be injurious to the national security of Canada or endanger the safety of persons. Therefore, it ought not be disclosed to the public or to the Applicant and her counsel.
Standard of review
[35]
The Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], held that a standard of review analysis need not be conducted in every instance. Where the standard of review applicable to a particular question before the court is well-settled by past jurisprudence, the reviewing court may adopt that standard of review. Only where this search proves fruitless must the reviewing court undertake a consideration of the four factors comprising the standard of review analysis.
[36]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice Eleanor Dawson held at paragraph 40 that the standard of review on an admissibility decision under section 34 of the Act was reasonableness
simpliciter
. Justice Frederick Gibson made a similar finding in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] FCJ no 750, at paragraph 19. Further, Justice Anne Mactavish held at paragraph 35 of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] FCJ no 1484, that the standard of review on an admissibility finding under section 34 was reasonableness. Accordingly, the standard of review on the first issue is reasonableness.
[37]
When reviewing a decision on the standard of reasonableness, the analysis will be concerned with "the existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process [and also with] whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law" (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 47, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 59). Put another way, the Court should intervene only if the decision was unreasonable in the sense that it falls outside the "range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law."
[38]
On the second and third issues, Justice Judith Snider held in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 133. Finally, the Federal Court of Appeal held in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 33, that the standard of review with respect to fettering of discretion is correctness. The standard of review on these issues, therefore, is correctness.
i) Did the Officer err by failing to adequately consider all of the evidence?
[39]
The Applicant does not take issue with the finding by the Officer that the FMLN is/was a terrorist organization. The Applicant only takes issue with the finding by the Officer that she was a member of the FMLN.
[40]
The Applicant argues that the Officer did not examine all the evidence which was before him when he concluded that she was inadmissible under paragraph 34(1)(f) of IRPA. According to the Applicant, the only time she said she was an FMLN member was in her PIF, which Renato completed for her. She made no mention of the FMLN in her 2005 application for permanent residence, her 2008 H&C Application, or the supplementary H&C Application form she submitted in 2011. While this would tend to show that she was not trying to minimize her involvement with the FMLN in order to gain status in Canada, and that she was consistent since at least 2008 in asserting that she did not know the contents of her PIF, this is inconsistent with the statements made by the Applicant at the port of entry.
[41]
The Applicant also contended, however, that the Officer did not consider the abusive nature of the Applicant's relationship with Renato. This would explain why the Applicant signed her PIF without knowing its contents, blindly trusted his advice and followed his advice in answering the questions at the port of entry as she did.
[42]
After carefully reviewing the file and considering the oral and written submissions from both counsel, I find that the Applicant has failed to demonstrate that the Officer ignored any evidence or improperly considered the evidence when he assessed the credibility of the Applicant's assertion that she was not a member of the FMLN. She clearly indicated that she had been a member of the FMLN when she answered questions set out in the Schedule 1 Form at the port of entry. Renato was not present when she completed this form. The entire form was interpreted for her. The Officer found it difficult to believe her story that she could have no idea of the contents of her PIF given that she had made similar statements at the port of entry.
[43]
Her explanation that she was unaware that her husband had said she was a member of the FMLN until she became apprised of the content of her PIF in 2009, does not address the fact that at the port of entry she claimed to be a member of the FMLN. She cannot claim that she did not know about this statement, as she made it in the presence of an interpreter. I agree with the Respondent that the Officer's reliance upon this noted contradiction is reasonable and well within the range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and of the law.
[44]
I also agree with the Respondent that the Applicant's abusive relationship with Renato is immaterial to the Officer's findings and is not relevant to the credibility of her explanation that she did not know what was written in her PIF. The abusive relationship cannot explain the fact that she must have known about her claim of membership in the FMLN even prior to completing the PIF since this was the statement she made at the port of entry while she was assisted by an interpreter.
[45]
If the Applicant's assertion that she was coached into misrepresenting her role with the FMLN to obtain refugee status in Canada were to be accepted, questions arise as to why the Applicant persisted in misrepresenting herself to the Respondent, even after having separated from her husband in 2004. If she had truly been coached, one might have expected the Applicant to take steps to rectify her prior fraudulent representations in subsequent applications or correspondence. The fact that she made no such attempt and made no express mention of her membership in the FMLN in her 2005 permanent residence application or in any subsequent forms or correspondence with CIC undermines the credibility of this claim.
[46]
With these considerations in mind, it was reasonable for the Officer to conclude that the Applicant lacked credibility and modified her story so as to secure a status in Canada. The Officer made a reasonable decision when he rejected her explanation for not disavowing membership sooner, and it was open to him to disbelieve her later disavowal of that membership.
ii) Did the Officer err procedurally by failing to consult with the National Security Division prior to rendering his decision?
[47]
The Applicant alleges that the Officer, though not bound to follow Operational Manuals, acted in a manner contrary to section 5 of
ENF 2/OP 18: Evaluating Inadmissibility
by failing to consult with the CBSA's National Security Division prior to deciding on her inadmissibility. According to the Applicant, this has the double implication that the Officer did not apply the law in a consistent manner, carry out his duties "with prudence" or establish his reasons "with the utmost clarity" (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] FCJ no 913 at para 8).
[48]
As the Applicant herself conceded, it is trite law that policy guidelines are not legally binding on immigration officers. The policy itself states that officers "should not" refuse an application based on subsection 34(1) allegations without first consulting the CBSA's National Security Screening Division. It is true that the opening paragraph of section 5 of that Operational Manual states that "[s]hould CIC officers encounter security issues, they must seek guidance from the appropriate section of the National Security Division at the CBSA, NHQ." In the case at bar, however, the facts did not require the Officer to consult with the National Security Division as the Applicant had clearly admitted on at least two occasions to being a member of the FMLN, which, incidentally, she concedes to be an organization that has engaged in terrorism. Any request for guidance in those circumstances would have been superfluous.
iii) Did the Officer err procedurally by failing to exercise his discretion to refer the matter to a delegated authority to assess whether, on humanitarian and compassionate grounds, the Applicant should be exempted from the inadmissibility determination?
[49]
Counsel for the Applicant submitted that the Officer erred because he fettered his discretion by not considering, on his own initiative, an H&C exemption from paragraph 34(1)(f) of IRPA. In support of this conclusion, the Applicant points to the fact that the Officer does not address any H&C factors such as, for example, the best interests of the child or establishment in Canada. Once again, I must disagree with the Applicant.
[50]
When, as in the case herein, the Applicant has not made a specific request to be exempted from an inadmissibility finding, the decision to consider H&C grounds for exemption from the inadmissibility determination is wholly discretionary. Applicants remain responsible for requesting such an exemption, as is made clear by sections 5.25 and 5.27 of the CIC Operational Bulletin
IP 5 - Immigrant Applications in Canada made on Humanitarian and Compassionate Grounds
, which state as follows:
5.25
[...]
If the applicant did not specifically request an exemption and the inadmissibility was discovered during the application process, the officer can refuse the application.
[...]
5.27
[...]
When the applicant does not directly request an exemption, but facts in the application suggest that they are requesting an exemption for the inadmissibility,
officers should treat the application as if the exemption has been requested
. [Emphasis in the original]
[...]
[51]
Counsel for the Applicant relied on my decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 191 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], for the proposition that the Officer erred by failing to consider exempting the Applicant on H&C grounds from her inadmissibility. The Applicant's reliance on <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , however, ignores an important statement that I made at paragraph 41 of that case:
The respondent is no doubt correct in stating that no breach of procedural fairness is established on the mere basis that the immigration officer did not put the applicant's case forward for consideration for an exemption on his own initiative. Although the Bulletin contemplates situations in which an immigration officer may consider putting an applicant's case forward for an exemption in the absence of a request from an applicant, it cannot mandate an officer to do so.
[52]
Moreover, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was fact specific and can easily be distinguished from the present one. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the applicant was self-represented and he filled out an application for permanent residence that contained no information on presenting an H&C claim. It is in that context that the Court concluded that the Officer should have considered whether there were sufficient grounds to grant an exemption.
[53]
In the case at bar, on the other hand, the Applicant had the benefit of both legal counsel and new permanent residence application forms that instruct applicants that they must clearly indicate that they wish to be considered for an exemption to overcome an inadmissibility, thus bringing the form in line with the CIC Operational Bulletin
IP 5
. As a result, the Officer was not required to consider an H&C exemption without a proper request. Not only has the Applicant never explicitly requested an exemption from an inadmissibility finding, but she never even implicitly alluded to that possibility. The Applicant knew that the basis of the interview in 2011 was to consider whether she was inadmissible. She could have made a request for an exemption; however, she did not do so, choosing instead to go to great lengths to convince the Officer that she was never at any given time a member of the FMLN. In those circumstances, the Officer cannot be faulted for not having considered that possibility.
[54]
In light of all the foregoing reasons, I find that this application for judicial review ought to be dismissed. Of course, the Applicant is still entitled to make an application for ministerial relief under subsection 34(2) of IRPA.
JUDGMENT
[55]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
this application for judicial review is dismissed. No question was proposed for certification, and none arises.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Il s'agit de la demande de contrôle judiciaire, présentée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 (la Loi), d'une décision datée du 16 août 2011 rendue par un agent d'immigration (l'agent) de Citoyenneté et Immigration Canada (CIC). L'agent a rejeté la demande de résidence permanente de la demanderesse au motif qu'elle était frappée d'interdiction de territoire, aux termes du paragraphe 34(1) de la Loi, à titre de membre du front Farabundo Martí de libération nationale (FMLN), une organisation qui s'était livrée à des actes de terrorisme.
1. Faits
[2]
La demanderesse, une citoyenne du Salvador âgée de 44 ans, vit au Canada depuis 2002.
[3]
Le 4 août 2002, la demanderesse est arrivée au Canada en provenance des États-Unis d'Amérique (É.-U.), où elle avait vécu illégalement avec son ex-mari, Renato Menendez (Renato), un citoyen canadien. Ils se trouvaient aux É.-U. depuis 1999, après avoir fui le Salvador pour échapper à la guerre civile.
[4]
À son arrivée au point d'entrée de Fort Erie, la demanderesse a demandé l'asile parce qu'elle craignait d'être persécutée en raison de ses convictions politiques. Renato n'était pas présent au point d'entrée lorsqu'elle a rempli le formulaire « Annexe 1 - Renseignements de base » (l'annexe 1). Dans l'annexe 1, qu'elle a remplie avec l'aide d'un traducteur espagnol, la demanderesse a indiqué avoir été membre du FMLN. Elle a répondu« oui » aux questions suivantes de l'annexe 1:
G. Avez-vous déjà pris part à la lutte armée ou à des actes de violence, et épousé et défendu cette cause, dans le but d'atteindre des objectifs politiques, religieux ou sociaux?
H. Avez-vous déjà été associé ou appartenu à un groupe qui a ou a eu recours à la lutte armée ou à la violence afin d'atteindre des objectifs politiques, religieux ou idéologiques, ou qui les défend ou les a défendus?
[5]
La demanderesse a également indiqué dans l'annexe 1 qu'elle était autrefois membre de la guérilla - FMLN et que certains guérilleros utilisaient la force, mais qu'elle-même n'y avait jamais eu recours. Au bas de l'annexe 1, la demanderesse a signé une déclaration attestant que les renseignements fournis dans le formulaire étaient véridiques, complets et exacts, et qu'elle avait compris tous les éléments de l'annexe 1, ayant demandé et obtenu une explication sur chacun des points qu'elle ne comprenait pas bien. Elle a aussi déclaré qu'elle informerait immédiatement CIC de tout changement dans les renseignements donnés sur le formulaire.
[6]
À l'appui de sa demande d'asile, la demanderesse a présenté un Formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP) à la Section de la protection des réfugiés (SPR) de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié. À la première page du FRP, il est indiqué que les renseignements fournis doivent être complets, véridiques et exacts, et que le demandeur doit aviser la SPR de tout changement dans les renseignements donnés sur le formulaire. La demanderesse a rempli le FRP avec l'aide de Renato, qui a signé la déclaration de l'interprète indiquant qu'il avait interprété fidèlement le contenu du formulaire pour elle.
[7]
Dans son exposé circonstancié du FRP, reproduit à la page 44 de son dossier, la demanderesse a écrit qu'elle avait d'abord sympathisé avec les guérilléros du FMLN à l'adolescence. À cette époque-là, elle croyait que seule la révolution pouvait changer les choses au Salvador. Elle a écrit aussi que, en 1985, elle avait rencontré des membres du FMLN et appris comment recueillir des renseignements sur les personnes qui n'appuyaient pas les guérilléros. Elle avait aussi appris à manier une arme pour se protéger et participé en préparant de la propagande, en organisant des grèves et en recueillant des renseignements. En outre, la demanderesse avait hébergé des guérilléros chez elle après qu'ils eurent lancé des attaques dans deux grandes villes du Salvador.
[8]
Le 9 mai 2005, la SPR a prononcé le désistement de la demande d'asile de la demanderesse. Le même mois, la demanderesse a présenté une demande de visa de résidente permanente, parrainée par Renato. Le dossier certifié du tribunal (DCT) ne contient pas le formulaire de cette demande et ne révèle pas si la demanderesse a divulgué son appartenance au FMLN à ce moment-là.
[9]
Le 6 janvier 2006, Renato a été reconnu coupable d'avoir proféré des menaces à l'endroit de la demanderesse. Aux termes de la probation imposée à Renato pour cette infraction, il lui était interdit d'entrer en contact avec la demanderesse. Dans une lettre datée du 20 décembre 2007 envoyée à CIC, il a déclaré qu'il ne voulait plus parrainer la demanderesse et qu'ils étaient séparés depuis trois ans, c'est-à-dire depuis 2004.
[10]
Le 26 février 2008, CIC a rejeté la demande de résidence permanente présentée en 2005 par la demanderesse (DCT, page 195). L'agente qui a rejeté la demande n'était pas convaincue que le mariage de la demanderesse et de Renato n'avait pas été contracté essentiellement aux fins d'immigration. L'agente a noté qu'ils avaient cessé de cohabiter avant que la demande de résidence permanente ne soit présentée et a déclaré que la demanderesse essayait d'obtenir le statut de résidente permanente en faisant de fausses déclarations.
[11]
Le 10 décembre 2008, l'Agence des services frontaliers du Canada (ASFC) a fait savoir à la demanderesse qu'elle pouvait présenter une demande d'examen des risques avant renvoi (ERAR), ce que la demanderesse a fait le 22 décembre 2008. Dans le formulaire, elle a indiqué ne pas avoir été membre d'une organisation paramilitaire impliquée dans un conflit armé.
[12]
La demanderesse a également renvoyé aux observations présentées par son avocate en réponse à la directive, donnée dans le formulaire d'ERAR, d'exposer tous les événements importants qui l'avaient poussée à chercher protection à l'extérieur du Salvador. Dans ces observations, la demanderesse affirme avoir quitté le Salvador en raison des conflits incessants qui déchiraient le pays. Elle ajoute que Renato l'avait maltraitée durant leur relation et qu'elle avait en grande partie suivi les instructions de son mari sur les questions concernant l'immigration au Canada. Enfin, elle affirme que Renato avait rempli le FRP pour elle parce qu'elle lui faisait confiance, mais qu'elle n'avait pas compris le contenu du formulaire. Au bas de la demande d'ERAR, la demanderesse a signé la déclaration attestant que les renseignements fournis dans le formulaire étaient véridiques, complets et exacts.
[13]
Le 3 novembre 2008, la demanderesse a également présenté une demande de résidence permanente fondée sur des considérations d'ordre humanitaire, aux termes du paragraphe 25(1) de la Loi (la demande CH). Dans le formulaire qu'elle a rempli à cette fin, la demanderesse devait indiquer toutes les organisations dont elle avait été membre depuis le jour de ses dix-huit ans, y compris les organisations politiques et sociales. Dans les observations présentées avec sa demande CH, la demanderesse répète que Renato avait rempli son FRP et qu'elle n'avait pas compris le contenu du formulaire. Elle affirme encore n'avoir pas questionné Renato sur le contenu du formulaire, qu'elle avait signé selon les instructions de son mari. La demanderesse n'a pas divulgué son appartenance au FMLN dans sa demande CH, et a déclaré que tous les renseignements contenus dans sa demande CH et ses observations étaient véridiques, complets et exacts (DCT, page 208).
[14]
Dans une lettre datée du 9 septembre 2009 (la lettre provisoire), CIC a avisé la demanderesse que sa demande CH était approuvée en principe. La lettre provisoire informait la demanderesse du fait que CIC avait accordé une dispense en vertu de l'article 25 de la Loi. La lettre disait aussi que la demanderesse devait satisfaire à toutes les autres exigences de la Loi, à défaut de quoi sa demande pourrait être refusée. Le 9 septembre 2009, l'ASFC a fait savoir à la demanderesse que le dossier de sa demande d'ERAR avait été fermé parce que sa demande CH était approuvée en principe.
[15]
La demanderesse a présenté d'autres observations à l'appui de sa demande CH le 22 mars 2011 (DCT, page 140), y compris un formulaire de demande mis à jour. Ce formulaire était pareil à celui qu'elle avait rempli en 2008. Elle ne mentionnait toujours pas son appartenance au FMLN et déclarait que les renseignements fournis étaient véridiques, complets et exacts.
[16]
Le 2 juin 2011, l'agent a demandé à la SPR de lui transmettre le dossier de la demanderesse, y compris le FRP et tout document produit en preuve. Le 13 juin 2011, l'agent a envoyé une lettre à la demanderesse pour l'informer que, selon lui, elle pourrait être interdite de territoire en application du paragraphe 34(1) de la Loi (la lettre d'équité). L'agent a demandé à la demanderesse de se présenter à une entrevue à CIC pour faire la lumière sur ce point, disant que, selon certains renseignements, elle avait peut-être été membre du FMLN. Il a joint à sa lettre des documents sur le FMLN et ses activités.
[17]
L'agent a reçu la demanderesse en entrevue le 4 août 2011. Il a commencé par expliquer que l'objet de l'entrevue consistait à déterminer si elle était frappée d'interdiction de territoire aux termes de l'article 34 de la Loi. À la question de savoir si les renseignements donnés dans le FRP étaient exacts, la demanderesse a répondu que c'était Renato qui avait rempli le formulaire. Elle a confirmé que c'était bien elle qui avait signé la section « déclaration »du FRP. À propos de son appartenance au FMLN, la demanderesse a affirmé n'avoir jamais été impliquée ni n'avoir eu de rôle dans l'organisation, et elle a soutenu n'avoir aucune opinion sur les événements qui s'étaient produits au Salvador à l'époque où le FMLN était une organisation terroriste. La demanderesse a ajouté qu'elle n'avait jamais été témoin de combat et qu'elle ignorait ce pour quoi le FMLN se battait, même si elle savait que l'actuel président du Salvador était membre du FMLN. La demanderesse a affirmé à l'agent qu'elle lui avait dit l'entière vérité.
[18]
L'agent a envoyé une nouvelle lettre à la demanderesse le 16 août 2011 (la lettre de refus), dans laquelle il lui dit qu'elle était interdite de territoire aux termes de l'alinéa 34(1)
f
) de la Loi en raison de son implication auprès du FMLN. L'agent dit avoir examiné les renseignements que la demanderesse avait présentés dans sa demande et les résultats de l'entrevue. L'agent a rejeté la demande de résidence permanente de la demanderesse au motif qu'elle était interdite de territoire aux termes de l'alinéa 34(1)
f
) de la Loi.
2. Décision contestée
[19]
En l'espèce, la décision s'entend de la lettre de refus et de la note que l'agent a envoyée à la Direction du renseignement, Direction générale de l'exécution de la loi, ASFC.
[20]
L'agent a examiné brièvement les antécédents de la demanderesse en matière d'immigration. Il a ensuite passé en revue les documents qui avaient été envoyés à la demanderesse avec la lettre d'équité ainsi que les articles 33 et 34 de la Loi, et s'est renseigné sur le critère applicable à l'interdiction de territoire au sens de l'alinéa 34(1)
f
) de la Loi. Il devait, dit-il, avoir des motifs raisonnables de croire que la demanderesse était membre d'un groupe dont il y avait des motifs raisonnables de croire qu'il était, avait été ou aurait été l'auteur d'actes de terrorisme. L'agent a fait remarquer qu'une preuve objective était nécessaire, même si le critère supposait une évaluation subjective.
[21]
L'agent a aussi examiné les définitions juridiques des termes « terrorisme »et « membre ». Il a constaté que la Cour suprême du Canada avait ainsi défini le terme « terrorisme » dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 98:
[T]out « acte destiné à tuer ou blesser grièvement un civil, ou toute autre personne qui ne participe pas directement aux hostilités dans une situation de conflit armé, lorsque, par sa nature ou son contexte, cet acte vise à intimider une population ou à contraindre un gouvernement ou une organisation internationale à accomplir ou à s'abstenir d'accomplir un acte quelconque ».
[22]
La Cour d'appel fédérale a examiné la notion d'appartenance dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] RCF 487, et a statué que, eu égard en partie à l'existence d'une dispense d'application de l'alinéa 34(1)
f
), dans les cas qui le justifient aux termes du paragraphe 34(2) de la Loi, « le mot "membre",employé dans la Loi, devrait continuer d'être interprété d'une manière libérale » (au paragraphe 29).
[23]
Pour ce qui est du FMLN, l'agent a appris qu'il s'agissait qu'un groupe marxiste-léniniste, fondé en 1980 dans le but de renverser le gouvernement du Salvador. Le FMLN a utilisé la violence pour parvenir à ses fins: il a détruit un pont suspendu, attaqué l'infrastructure du réseau électrique du Salvador et fait exploser une bombe dans un marché de San Salvador, attaque au cours de laquelle neuf civils et deux soldats ont été tués. Bien que le FMLN fût devenu un parti politique officiel, l'agent était convaincu qu'il avait des motifs raisonnables de croire qu'il s'agissait d'une organisation qui s'était livrée au terrorisme.
[24]
Ayant déterminé que le FMLN était une organisation terroriste, l'agent a examiné les liens de la demanderesse avec le groupe. Plusieurs déclarations faites par la demanderesse dans son FRP ont mené l'agent à conclure qu'elle avait été impliquée dans l'organisation.
[25]
L'agent a aussi remarqué que la demanderesse n'avait pas mentionné son appartenance au FMLN dans la demande CH qu'elle avait remplie en 2011. Il a noté que la demanderesse avait démenti à l'entrevue les déclarations faites dans son FRP et déclaré que Renato avait rempli le FRP pour elle, et qu'elle avait apposé sa signature au bas du FRP. L'agent a aussi pris note du fait que la demanderesse avait dit avoir pris connaissance du contenu du FRP à l'audience de 2009 et l'avoir lu seulement une semaine avant son entrevue en raison de sa piètre connaissance de l'anglais.
[26]
À l'entrevue, l'agent a également demandé à la demanderesse pourquoi, si les renseignements contenus dans le FRP n'étaient pas véridiques, elle avait déclaré être membre du FMLN au point d'entrée. Renato, a répondu la demanderesse, lui avait dit quoi dire et lui avait conseillé de mentir, parce qu'elle serait ainsi certaine d'entrer au Canada. Lorsque les déclarations faites sur son FRP lui ont été présentées à l'entrevue, elle a affirmé ne pas soutenir la cause du FMLN, ne connaître aucun des membres du FMLN et n'avoir jamais recueilli de renseignements pour le compte de ce groupe. Elle a aussi nié avoir participé à des activités de propagande, hébergé des guérilléros et reçu de la formation sur le maniement des armes. À la question de savoir pourquoi elle avait quitté le Salvador, la demanderesse a répondu qu'elle était partie pour que ses filles puissent recevoir une meilleure éducation.
[27]
La demanderesse, a remarqué l'agent, ne contestait pas le fait que le FMLN était une organisation terroriste, bien qu'elle ait nié son implication auprès du groupe. L'agent a conclu que la demanderesse minimisait le rôle qu'elle avait joué au sein du FMLN parce qu'elle avait appris que cette implication pourrait l'empêcher d'obtenir un statut au Canada. L'agent a estimé qu'il était déraisonnable de croire que la demanderesse ne connaissait pas le contenu de son FRP avant 2009. Il a conclu à la véracité des déclarations contenues dans le FRP quant à l'appartenance de la demanderesse au FMLN, à la lumière de déclarations semblables faites auparavant au point d'entrée.
[28]
L'agent a déterminé que la demanderesse avait été, de son propre aveu, membre du FMLN pendant quinze ans. Durant cette période, elle avait assisté à des réunions, recueilli des renseignements sur l'opposition au FMLN, organisé des grèves, fait circuler de la propagande et reçu de la formation sur le maniement des armes. L'agent a estimé que ces activités établissaient l'appartenance de la demanderesse à l'organisation, en raison de leur caractère plus qu'occasionnel. Le fait que la demanderesse avait reçu de la formation sur le maniement des armes donne à penser qu'elle s'était sciemment mise en danger en soutenant le FMLN.
[29]
L'agent a conclu que la demanderesse avait adhéré au FMLN de son plein gré et qu'elle aurait été au courant des activités violentes du groupe. D'après tous les faits au dossier, l'agent était convaincu que la demanderesse avait été membre du FMLN et a rejeté la demande de résidence permanente pour ce motif.
3. Questions en litige
[30]
La présente demande de contrôle judiciaire soulève les trois questions suivantes:
i) L'agent a-t-il commis une erreur en omettant de tenir compte de l'ensemble de la preuve?
ii) L'agent a-t-il commis une erreur en ne consultant pas la Division de la sécurité nationale avant de rendre sa décision?
iii) L'agent a-t-il commis une erreur de procédure en omettant d'exercer son pouvoir discrétionnaire de renvoyer l'affaire à une personne ayant le pouvoir délégué d'évaluer si, pour des considérations d'ordre humanitaire, il fallait accorder à la demanderesse la levée de l'interdiction de territoire?
4. Analyse
Question préliminaire
[31]
Avant d'examiner les questions de fond soulevées par cette demande, je dois dire un mot sur la requête en interdiction de divulgation présentée par le défendeur en vertu de l'article 87 de la Loi. Le DCT a été déposé à la Cour le 4 janvier 2012. Selon la lettre de présentation qui accompagnait le DCT, certaines pages ou parties de page n'avaient pas été divulguées au motif que leur divulgation aurait pu porter atteinte à la sécurité nationale ou à la sécurité d'autrui, ou au motif que ces renseignements portaient sur des tiers sans rapport avec la présente affaire. Le 26 janvier 2012, le défendeur a transmis une autre lettre à la Cour et aux parties pour les aviser que certaines pages entièrement expurgées auparavant étaient maintenant divulguées en entier. De plus, une page avait été modifiée, de sorte que certaines de ses parties n'étaient plus biffées.
[32]
À l'appui de la requête en interdiction de divulgation des renseignements, le défendeur a présenté à la Cour un affidavit classifié qu'il ne voulait pas divulguer au public ni à la demanderesse et à son avocate. Après avoir soigneusement examiné l'affidavit et les renseignements expurgés, et après avoir entendu le défendeur lors d'une audience à huis clos tenue le 22 mars 2012, j'ai dit que la requête en interdiction de divulgation serait accueillie, pour les motifs suivants.
[33]
Premièrement, les renseignements expurgés ne sont pas substantiels, et leur non-divulgation n'empêche pas la demanderesse d'établir le bien-fondé de ses prétentions. De surcroît, ces renseignements n'ont pas d'effet déterminant sur les questions soulevées dans la demande de contrôle judiciaire, et le défendeur ne se fonde pas sur l'information confidentielle pour répondre à la demande de contrôle judiciaire de la demanderesse. Enfin, l'avocate de la demanderesse a consenti à la requête du défendeur.
[34]
Deuxièmement, je suis convaincu que la divulgation des renseignements expurgés pourrait avoir des répercussions sur la capacité des organismes d'enquête à s'acquitter de leurs mandats en matière de sécurité nationale du Canada. S'ils étaient divulgués, ces renseignements porteraient atteinte à la sécurité nationale du Canada ou compromettraient la sécurité des personnes. Par conséquent, ils ne doivent pas être divulgués au public ni à la demanderesse et à son avocate.
Norme de contrôle
[35]
Dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), la Cour suprême du Canada a statué qu'il n'est pas toujours nécessaire de procéder à une analyse relative à la norme de contrôle. En fait, lorsque la norme de contrôle applicable à une question précise est bien établie par la jurisprudence, la cour de révision peut adopter cette norme. C'est seulement lorsque cette recherche est infructueuse que la cour de révision doit entreprendre l'analyse des quatre facteurs servant à déterminer la norme de contrôle applicable.
[36]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la juge Eleanor Dawson a statué, au paragraphe 40, que la norme de contrôle applicable à une décision d'interdiction de territoire en vertu de l'article 34 de la Loi est celle de la décision raisonnable simpliciter. Le juge Frederick Gibson est arrivé à la même conclusion dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] ACF no 750, au paragraphe 19. De plus, la juge Anne Mactavish a statué, au paragraphe 35 de la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF no 1484, qu'une conclusion d'interdiction de territoire prononcée sous le régime de l'article 34 devait être contrôlée suivant la norme du caractère raisonnable. Par conséquent, la norme de contrôle applicable à la première question est celle de la raisonnabilité.
[37]
Dans le cas du contrôle d'une décision suivant la norme de la raisonnabilité, l'analyse tiendra « à la justification de la décision, à la transparence et à l'intelligibilité du processus décisionnel, ainsi qu'à l'appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 47, et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 59). En d'autres termes, la Cour ne doit intervenir que si la décision est déraisonnable en ce sens qu'elle ne fait pas partie des « issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit ».
[38]
En ce qui concerne les deuxième et troisième questions en litige, la juge Judith Snider a statué, dans  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] ACF no 1314, au paragraphe 14, que le fait d'entraver l'exercice d'un pouvoir discrétionnaire est une question qui touche à l'équité procédurale. Le juge Richard Mosley a tiré une conclusion semblable dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 133. Enfin, la Cour d'appel fédérale a statué, dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 33, que la norme de contrôle qui s'applique à l'entrave du pouvoir discrétionnaire est celle de la décision correcte. La norme de contrôle applicable à ces questions est donc celle de la décision correcte.
i) L'agent a-t-il commis une erreur parce qu'il n'a pas tenu compte de l'ensemble de la preuve?
[39]
La demanderesse ne conteste pas la conclusion de l'agent selon laquelle le FMLN est ou était une organisation terroriste. La demanderesse conteste seulement la conclusion de l'agent selon laquelle elle a été membre du FMLN.
[40]
La demanderesse soutient que l'agent n'avait pas examiné toute la preuve au dossier lorsqu'il a conclu qu'elle était interdite de territoire en application de l'alinéa 34(1)
f
) de la Loi. Elle affirme avoir dit une seule fois qu'elle avait été membre du FMLN, à savoir dans le FRP, que Renato avait rempli pour elle. Elle n'a pas parlé du FMLN dans sa demande de résidence permanente de 2005, ni dans sa demande CH de 2008, ni dans l'autre formulaire de demande CH qu'elle a présenté en 2011. Il pourrait donc sembler que la demanderesse n'essayait pas de minimiser son implication auprès du FMLN afin d'obtenir un statut au Canada et qu'elle était cohérente depuis au moins 2008 en déclarant qu'elle ne connaissait pas le contenu de son FRP, mais en réalité, ce comportement ne cadre pas avec les déclarations qu'elle a faites au point d'entrée.
[41]
La demanderesse affirme toutefois que l'agent n'a pas tenu compte du caractère violent de sa relation avec Renato. Cette relation expliquerait pourquoi la demanderesse avait signé son FRP sans en connaître le contenu, faisait aveuglément confiance à Renato et avait suivi ses conseils en répondant comme elle l'avait fait aux questions posées au point d'entrée.
[42]
Après avoir examiné soigneusement le dossier ainsi que les observations présentées de vive voix et par écrit par les deux avocates, je conclus que la demanderesse n'a pas réussi à démontrer que l'agent avait fait abstraction d'un quelconque élément de preuve ou mal apprécié la preuve au moment d'évaluer la crédibilité de la demanderesse quand elle affirmait ne pas avoir été membre du FMLN. Elle a clairement indiqué avoir été membre du FMLN quand elle a répondu aux questions posées à l'annexe 1 au point d'entrée. Renato n'était pas avec elle à ce moment-là; le formulaire au complet avait été interprété pour elle. L'agent pouvait difficilement croire que la demanderesse n'avait aucune idée du contenu du FRP étant donné qu'elle avait fait des déclarations semblables au point d'entrée.
[43]
Selon sa version des faits, la demanderesse ignorait que son mari avait déclaré qu'elle était membre du FMLN jusqu'à ce qu'elle prenne connaissance du contenu de son FRP en 2009, mais cette explication ne révèle pas pourquoi elle a dit être membre du FMLN au point d'entrée. Elle ne peut affirmer qu'elle ignorait cette déclaration, parce qu'elle l'avait formulée en présence d'un interprète. Je conviens avec le défendeur que le fait, pour l'agent, de se fonder sur cette contradiction était raisonnable et appartenait aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit.
[44]
Je conviens aussi avec le défendeur que le caractère violent de la relation entre la demanderesse et Renato a peu d'incidence sur les conclusions de l'agent et n'a aucun rapport avec la crédibilité de l'explication selon laquelle la demanderesse ne savait pas ce qui était écrit dans son FRP. Malgré la violence de la relation, la demanderesse devait savoir qu'elle avait affirmé être membre du FMLN même avant de remplir le FRP, puisque c'était ce qu'elle avait déclaré au point d'entrée alors qu'elle était assistée par un interprète.
[45]
Si l'affirmation de la demanderesse selon laquelle elle avait été incitée à présenter de manière erronée son rôle au sein du FMLN pour obtenir un statut au Canada était acceptée, il faudrait alors se demander pourquoi la demanderesse a continué à faire de fausses déclarations au défendeur, même après s'être séparée de son mari en 2004. Si elle avait vraiment été dirigée, on aurait pu s'attendre à ce que la demanderesse prenne des mesures afin de rectifier ses déclarations trompeuses dans ses demandes ou lettres subséquentes. Le fait qu'elle n'a pas tenté de rectifier la situation ni mentionné expressément son appartenance au FMLN dans sa demande de résidence permanente de 2005 ou dans les autres lettres ou formulaires envoyés à CIC mine la crédibilité de cette affirmation.
[46]
Compte tenu de ces considérations, il était raisonnable pour l'agent de conclure que la demanderesse manquait de crédibilité et avait modifié son récit afin d'obtenir un statut au Canada. L'agent a rendu une décision raisonnable en rejetant l'explication que la demanderesse a donnée pour ne pas avoir réfuté son appartenance au FMLN plus tôt, et il était loisible à l'agent de ne pas prêter foi à la dénégation de cette appartenance exprimée subséquemment par la demanderesse.
ii) L'agent a-t-il commis une erreur en ne consultant pas la Division de la sécurité nationale avant de rendre sa décision?
[47]
La demanderesse soutient que l'agent, bien que non tenu de suivre les guides opérationnels, a agi à l'encontre de la section 5 du document
ENF 2/OP 18- Évaluation de l'interdiction de territoire
en ne consultant pas la Division de la sécurité avant de rendre sa décision. Selon la demanderesse, ce manquement a eu pour double conséquence que l'agent n'a pas appliqué la loi de manière uniforme, et qu'il n'a ni exercé ses fonctions « avec prudence »ni justifié sa décision « de la manière la plus précise possible » (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] ACF no 913, au paragraphe 8).
[48]
Comme la demanderesse l'a elle-même concédé, il est bien établi en droit que les lignes directrices ne sont pas juridiquement contraignantes pour l'agent d'immigration. La politique comme telle énonce que l'agent ne « doit pas » refuser de demandes sur la base d'une allégation fondée sur le paragraphe 34(1) sans consulter d'abord la Division des enquêtes pour la sécurité nationale de l'ASFC. Il est vrai que le paragraphe d'introduction de la section 5 du guide opérationnel indique que « [s] i un agent fait face à des questions de sécurité, il doit demander conseil à la section appropriée de la Division des enquêtes pour la sécurité nationale à l'AC de l'ASFC ». En l'espèce, toutefois, l'agent n'était pas tenu de consulter la Division de la sécurité nationale à la lumière des faits, car la demanderesse avait clairement admis au moins deux fois être membre du FMLN, une organisation qui se livrait au terrorisme, comme la demanderesse l'avait elle-même reconnu, soit dit en passant. Dans ces circonstances, il était inutile que l'agent demande conseil.
iii) L'agent a-t-il commis une erreur de procédure en omettant d'exercer son pouvoir discrétionnaire de renvoyer l'affaire à une personne ayant le pouvoir délégué d'évaluer si, pour des considérations d'ordre humanitaire, il fallait accorder à la demanderesse la levée de l'interdiction de territoire?
[49]
L'avocate de la demanderesse affirme que l'agent a commis une erreur en omettant d'exercer son pouvoir discrétionnaire d'envisager, de sa propre initiative, une dispense d'application de l'alinéa 34(1)
f
)de la Loi. À l'appui de cette affirmation, la demanderesse mentionne le fait que l'agent ne s'est penché sur aucun des facteurs d'ordre humanitaire, comme l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant ou l'établissement au Canada. Là encore, je dois exprimer mon désaccord avec la demanderesse.
[50]
Dans les cas où, comme en l'espèce, le demandeur n'a pas demandé explicitement la levée de l'interdiction de territoire, la décision d'accorder ou non une dispense pour des considérations d'ordre humanitaire est totalement discrétionnaire. Le demandeur a la responsabilité de faire une telle demande, comme l'énoncent clairement les sections 5.25 et 5.27 du Bulletin opérationnel
IP 5
-
Demande présentée par des immigrants au Canada pour des motifs d'ordre humanitaire
, de CIC:
5.25
[...]
Si le demandeur n'a pas demandé explicitement une dispense et que l'interdiction de territoire est découverte durant le traitement de la demande, l'agent peut refuser la demande.
[...]
5.27
[...]
Si l'étranger ne demande pas directement une dispense, mais que les faits dans la demande portent à croire qu'il demande la levée de l'interdiction de territoire,
l'agent doit traiter la demande comme si une dispense avait été demandée.
[Souligné dans l'original.]
[...]
[51]
L'avocate de la demanderesse se fonde sur la décision que j'ai rendue dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 191 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], pour avancer que l'agent a commis une erreur en n'envisageant pas d'accorder une dispense à la demanderesse pour des considérations d'ordre humanitaire. En invoquant <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la demanderesse fait toutefois abstraction d'une importante remarque que j'ai faite au paragraphe 41:
Le défendeur a sans doute raison d'affirmer qu'aucun manquement à l'équité procédurale n'a été établi pour le simple motif que l'agent d'immigration n'a pas, de sa propre initiative, envisagé d'octroyer une dispense au demandeur. Même si le Bulletin vise des situations dans lesquelles un agent d'immigration peut envisager d'octroyer à un demandeur une dispense même si le demandeur n'en a pas fait la demande, il n'ordonne pas à l'agent de le faire.
[52]
De plus, la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> reposait sur des faits qui lui étaient propres et qui peuvent facilement être distingués de ceux de la présente espèce. Dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , le demandeur avait rempli, sans l'aide d'un représentant, une demande de résidence permanente qui ne contenait pas de renseignements sur la présentation d'une demande CH. Dans ce contexte particulier, la Cour a conclu que l'agent aurait dû se demander s'il y avait des motifs suffisants pour accorder une dispense.
[53]
Dans l'affaire qui nous occupe, en revanche, la demanderesse avait l'aide d'un conseiller juridique et elle a pu remplir le nouveau formulaire de demande de résidence permanente; ce nouveau formulaire, conforme au Bulletin opérationnel
IP 5
de CIC, mentionne que le demandeur doit indiquer clairement s'il souhaite demander une dispense pour faire lever une interdiction de territoire. Ainsi, l'agent n'était pas tenu d'envisager une dispense pour des considérations d'ordre humanitaire en l'absence de demande à cet effet. La demanderesse n'a jamais demandé explicitement que l'interdiction de territoire soit levée, et n'a même jamais fait implicitement allusion à cette possibilité. La demanderesse savait que l'objet de l'entrevue de 2011 consistait à déterminer si elle était interdite de territoire. Elle aurait pu demander une dispense, mais elle ne l'a pas fait; elle a plutôt choisi de s'évertuer à convaincre l'agent qu'elle n'avait au grand jamais été membre du FMLN. Dans ces circonstances, on ne saurait reprocher à l'agent de ne pas avoir envisagé la dispense.
[54]
Pour tous les motifs qui précèdent, je conclus que la demande de contrôle judiciaire doit être rejetée. Bien entendu, la demanderesse peut encore demander une dispense ministérielle aux termes du paragraphe 34(2) de la Loi.
JUGEMENT
[55]
LA COUR STATUE
que la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée. Aucune question n'a été proposée aux fins de certification, et l'affaire n'en soulève aucune.
[End of document]