[1]
Evans, J.
: This is an appeal under
Fed­eral Court Rules
, 1998, rule 51 against an order of Giles, A.S.P., dated September 8, 1998 [see 155 F.T.R. 319], dismissing a motion brought under rule 107 by the de­fendants in the action to order the postpone­ment of the discovery and trial of the issue of the quan­tum of damages or profits pay­able to the plaintiff until the liability of the defendants to the plaintiff has been deter­mined at trial.
[2]
The plaintiff's statement of claim alleges that the defendants have infringed its rights under the
Trade Marks Act
through the manufacture, importation, marketing and distribution in Canada of a liqueur with a name and get-up confusingly similar to that of a product of the plaintiff. In the case of the defendant, Saverio Schiralli Agencies Limited, liability is alleged to extend over a period of nearly 30 years, while the infringe­ments allegedly committed by the other defendants commenced only in the late 1980s.
[3]
The plaintiff is an Italian corporation, as is the defendant Luxardo, the manufacturer of the liqueur. The plaintiff has not yet elected whether to claim damages for loss suffered, or to seek an accounting of profits made by the defendants as a result of their alleged infringement of the plaintiff's rights under the
Trade Marks Act
.
[4]
There have been six days of discovery of the defendant Saverio Schiralli to date, including one day devoted to the remedial issue; counsel anticipate that another three days will be required on this issue. The discovery of the two other defendants has not yet commenced, although it may not require as much time as that spent on Save­rio Schiralli since the alleged infringements only go back for approximately 10 years. The fact that the defendants are said to have a number of product lines is a complicating factor in the discovery directed at determin­ing the amount of any unlawfully made profits that they may be required to disgorge to the plaintiff. Counsel for the defendants, the moving party in this motion, estimated that five days of the trial were likely to be required on the remedial issue.
[5]
Giles, A.S.P., dismissed the motion on the ground that the defendants had failed to provide any evidence that bifurcating the issues of liability and remedy would result in an
inevitable
saving of time and expense if discovery and trial of the remedial issue were deferred until after discovery and trial of the issue of liability.
[6]
He relied on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 150 F.T.R. 92 (T.D.), in which Hugessen, J., held that the principles governing the separation of issues under former rule 480 were applicable to the current rule 107. Giles, A.S.P., inferred from Hugessen, J.'s, reasons that the case law establishing those principles continued to be binding. The relevant test he summarized as follows:
"That in my view makes it necessary for litigants seeking separate determinations of issues to
show
there will
necessarily
be some saving of expense and time if dis­covery and trial of damages or profits is postponed until the matter of liability is settled. The fact that discovery and trial time would be reduced if the defendant were successful at trial, is not sufficient ..." (emphasis in original).
[7]
It was common ground between the parties that on an appeal under rule 51 the court could only interfere with a Prothono­tary's disposition of a motion if the Prothonotary had misapprehended the facts or proceeded on some wrong principle, or the order raises a question vital to the final issue of the case; however, if such an error were identified, then the court could exercise its own discretion de novo, and dispose of the motion on the merits:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). The first issue, therefore, is whether Giles, A.S.P., was correct in his conclusion that rule 107 must be applied by reference to the principles and case law governing the exercise of discretion under former rule 480.
[8]
With an economy and simplicity that characterize the 1998
Rules
, rule 107 pro­vides:
"(1) The court may, at any time, order the trial of the issue or that issues in proceed­ings be determined separately."
"(1) La cour peut, à tout moment, ordonner l'instruction d'une question soulevée ou ordonner que les questions en litige dans une instance soient jugées séparément."
As Hugessen, J., pointed out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , an order under rule 107 does not preclude a further order, if appropriate, that the quantum of damages or profits be determined by a reference under rule 153 to the extent that they raise questions of fact alone.
[9]
Former rule 480 enabled a party who wished to proceed to trial without adducing evidence of any issue of fact including, inter alia, questions as to the damages caused by or profits arising from the infringement of a right, to seek a determination by a reference of such issues after trial under rule 500, et seq. Rule 476 also authorised the court to order that a question be decided at trial before discovery on some issue that depended on the determination of that question.
[10]
Giles, A.S.P., was certainly correct to hold that in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, which raised issues very similar to those in the case at bar, Hugessen, J., stated that the principles previously applicable to motions to postpone discovery and trial of the remedial issue until after the trial on liability "appear to me to be applicable in this case."
[11]
Hugessen, J., cited
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), as illustrative of those principles. In that case, Hugessen, J.A., as he then was, delivering the judgment of the court, held that the motions judge had erred in law when he required the applicants to show "exceptional circumstances and extraordinarily complex issues" before ordering a severance of the issues of liability and remedy. "That", said Hugessen, J.A. (at p. 146), "set the threshold far too high". However, he also cited with approval the statement by Jackett, C.J., in
Brouwer Turf Equipment Ltd. v. A and M Sod Supply Ltd.
, [1977] 1 F.C. 51; 13 N.R. 83 (F.C.A.), at p. 54 to the effect that:
"The general principle is that the plaintiff must make out the whole of his case in the first instance; and in the absence of consent or of 'reasons bearing on the conduct of the action as a whole', rule 480 should not be invoked to set that principle aside."
[12]
My conclusion is that Giles, A.S.P., was broadly correct to state that the exercise of the court's discretion under rule 107 to order a separate trial or a reference of remedial issues is subject to the principles applicable under former rule 480. However, those principles, and the jurisprudence establishing them, must be read subject to two changes made by the 1998
Rules
. First, rule 107 gives the court more flexibility in the sense that, unlike the former rule 480, the court may now order a severance of issues even though the severed issues may not be suitable for determination on a reference because, for example, they raise issues of both fact and law. Second, like all provision of the new
Rules
, rule 107 must be read subject to rule 3, and accordingly "applied so as to secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive determination of any proceeding on its merits". However, since the saving of time and expense was also understood to be the rationale of the former rule 480 (see
Brouwer Turf
, loc. cit.), not too much should be made of this point in this context.
[13]
This leads me to the further conclusion that the test formulated by Giles, A.S.P., for determining when discretion should be exercised under rule 107 to postpone remedial questions was too stringent. I do not see in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , or the cases therein cited, a requirement that the production of proof that such an order will
necessarily
result in a saving of time and expense, although in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Dubé, J., approached this standard when he stated that a reference was appropriate if "it appears reasonably certain" that severance would result in a saving of time and expense. However, in my opinion, Giles, A.S.P.'s, test is too close to that disapproved in the more recent case of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and is more restrictive than that formulated in
Pan-American
.
[14]
Accordingly, on the basis of previous authority and in light of the changes introduced by the 1998
Rules
, I would formulate the test to be applied under rule 107 as follows. On a motion under rule 107, the court may order the postponement of discovery and the determination of remedial issues until after discovery and trial of the question of liability, if the court is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that in view of the evidence and all the circumstances of the case (including the nature of the claim, the conduct of the litigation, the issues and the remedies sought), severance is more likely than not to result in the just, expeditious and least expensive determination of the proceeding on its merits.
[15]
Having found that Giles, A.S.P., erred in his formulation of the relevant test, I must now exercise de novo the discretion conferred by rule 107. This is no easy task. However, I start with the premise on which Jackett, C.J.'s, statement on
Brouwer Turf
is based, namely, that it will normally be more efficient to require all the issues in a proceeding be determined together rather than separately. In addition, I am mindful of the fact that the moving party has the burden of proof and persuasion that a departure from the general rule is justified.
[16]
Turning to the facts of the present case, I note that, while there has been one day of discovery of one defendant on the remedial question, there are estimated to be three more to go, and discovery of the other parties has not yet started. The discovery required for the remedy of the disgorgement of profits is apt to be particularly time-consuming and expensive for defendants where, as here, they have a number of product lines. The fact that two of the parties are Italian corporations may also involve extra time and expense, in the translation of documents and the attendance of witnesses, for example. The length of time over which the infringements allegedly occurred (nearly 30 years in the case of one defendant, and 10 years in the case of another) also favours bifurcation.
[17]
On the other hand, as Mr. Edmonds, counsel for the plaintiff, pointed out when responding to this motion, postponing discovery and trial of the remedial issues until after trial of the question of liability may itself occasion additional and unnecessary expense and delay. Thus, if the defendants are held liable, bifurcation may duplicate discovery, trials and possible appeals. Moreover, he submitted, when the parties are in possession of all the relevant information after a complete discovery on all the issues, it may be easier for them to reach a settlement of the proceeding, or to consider at that stage the desirability of separating the issues.
[18]
Mr. Edmonds also relied on the facts that, the bulk of the discovery was finished; the defendants had not raised the possibility of severance until the fourth day of discovery; there had been little need for translation of documents; and it was not yet clear whether the defendants had made any profits at all that they could be required to disgorge. He was also concerned about the advanced ages of those in possession of financial information pertaining to the business of one of the defendants, and the possibility that, if final judgment were delayed, the judgment debt might be incapable of collection.
[19]
Mr. Edmonds also emphasized a point made by Giles, A.S.P., in the reasons for his order, namely that bifurcation would only shorten the trial time if the defendants won on the issue of liability, something that the defendants had not addressed by showing that the plaintiff's claim was weak. On the other hand, it could also be said with some plausibility that, if the plaintiff were successful at trial, the defendants might be more willing to agree an amount to be paid in settlement of their liability.
[20]
On balance, I have decided that the defendants have not discharged the burden of establishing on the balance of probabilities that savings of expense and time are sufficiently likely, and the interest of a just disposition of the proceeding on its merits sufficiently likely to be advanced, as to justify departing from the general principle that all issues in a proceeding should be dealt with together. In reaching this conclusion, I have been particularly influenced by the following considerations: the paucity of information in the defendants' affidavit; discovery is already under way; the existence of profits is questionable; delays in the final disposition of the case are likely to be prejudicial to the plaintiff; and the difficulty of totally disentangling questions of law that go to liability from those pertaining to the remedy to be granted, if any.
[21]
For these reasons I would dismiss the appeal from Giles, A.S.P., but because I have found that he applied the wrong test to the exercise of discretion under rule 107, I make no award of costs.
Order
[22]
The motion to set aside the Order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary dated September 3, 1998 dismissing the defendants' motion to have the issues of damages and profits determined by a reference is hereby dismissed. No award as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Giovanni A. Merlini/saf
[End of document]