[1]
Blais, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of the Immigration and Refugee Board's [the "Board"] decision rendered on April 10, 2000, wherein the Board determined that the applicant was not a Convention refugee.
[2]
The applicant, a 25 year-old citizen of Kenya, claims a well-founded fear of persecution in his country because of his political activities and his sexual orientation.
[3]
In March 1994, the applicant registered at the University of Nairobi in a four year Bachelor of Commerce program. He left the university in July 1998 without having finished his studies.
[4]
In September 1997, the applicant allegedly became a member of the University of Nairobi Education Student Organization ["UNESO"] until June 15, 1998. As a student leader, he supposedly participated in several student demonstrations concerning student affairs as well as general political issues.
[5]
The following year, on March 23, 1998, the applicant allegedly organized another student demonstration to protest against new university entrance requirements and tuition fees. This demonstration which began peacefully became very destructive because of student and police violence.
[6]
It was also alleged by the applicant that he was a member of a gay group called the Nairobi Independent People Movement. At the hearing, the applicant described the members of this group as being wealthy and influential business people. He organized meetings with this group and members of UNESO in the hope of getting some funding for the student group.
[7]
On June 13, 1998, the applicant organized a get-together party with members of the two groups. That evening he was seen publicly kissing his friend William, by his student colleagues. Because of this, he was asked to resign from his post in UNESO on June 15, 1998.
[8]
As a result of his sexual orientation being known, the applicant alleged that he was attacked on campus on his way back to the university hostel. He escaped with bruises.
[9]
On July 4, 1998, the applicant was arrested at his home. Police ransacked the house, took all the applicant's personal papers and told his parents that the reasons for the arrest was the applicant's participation in the disturbances of March 23, 1998. They also informed his parents of his sexual orientations.
[10]
The applicant was taken to the police station where he alleged he was beaten and tortured. He refused to sign a document linking him to the events of March 23, 1998. A police informer friend of his told him that the police were planning a frame-up with some street boys and intended to accuse him in Court of having sodomized them while they were in jail. The applicant gave him his friend William's phone number. William bailed him out on July 7.
[11]
The applicant contends that he lived with his friend William until his departure from the country on August 28, 1998.
NOTICE OF CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTION
[12]
The applicant filed on February 19, 2001, an affidavit of service of the notice of constitutional question which was served on February 16, 2001, on the Minister of Justice of every provinces, except for the province of Manitoba, and on the respondent's counsel.
[13]
In the notice of constitutional question, the applicant indicates his intention to question the constitutional validity of the hearing practices and the new hearing model before the Board in Montréal and their validity under sections 7, 12 and 15 of the
Charter
and the respondent's international obligations.
PRELIMINARY ISSUE
[14]
1. Was the notice of constitutional question served in a proper manner and can the issues raised be considered by the Court?
ISSUES
[15]
2. Was the Board biased and was the applicant's right to a fair hearing infringed?
3. Did the Board err in its appreciation of the applicant's credibility?
4. Did the Board err by failing to consider the objective situation prevailing in Kenya?
5. Would the applicant's deportation violate his rights under section 7 and 12 of the
Charter
and article 3 of the
Convention against Torture
?
ANALYSIS
Preliminary Issue
1. Was the notice of constitutional question served in a proper manner and can the issues raised in the notice of constitutional question be considered by the Court?
[16]
The affidavit of service stated that the notice of constitutional question was served to the Minister of Justice of each province rather than to the Attorney General of each province.
[17]
However, it has to be noted that the notice of constitutional question itself was addressed to Morris Rosenberg, Deputy Attorney General of Canada and to Attorneys general of the provinces.
[18]
The affidavit of service of Mr. Stewart Istvanffy indicates that he served by fax the Minister of Justice of every provinces, except the province of Manitoba, and that he also served the solicitor for the respondent.
[19]
Section 57 of the
Federal Court Act
states:
"57(1) Where the constitutional validity, applicability or operability of an Act of Parliament or of the legislature of any province, or of Regulations thereunder, is in question before the Court or a federal board, commission or other tribunal, other than a service tribunal within the meaning of the National Defence Act, the Act or
Regulation
shall not be adjudged to be invalid, inapplicable or inoperable unless notice has been served on the Attorney General of Canada and the attorney general of each province in accordance with subsection (2)."
"57(1) Les lois fédérales ou provinciales ou leurs textes d'application, don't la validité, l'applicabilité ou l'effet, sur le plan constitutionnel, est en cause devant la Cour ou un office fédéral, sauf s'il s'agit d'un tribunal militaire au sens de la Loi sur la défense nationale, ne peuvent être déclarés invalides, inapplicables ou sans effet, à moins que le procureur général du Canada et ceux des provinces n'aient été avisés conformément au paragraphe (2)."
[20]
The question is whether the notice of constitutional question was improperly served since it was served on the Ministers of Justice instead of the Attorneys General of the provinces.
[21]
Usually, the Minister of Justice is ex-officio the Attorney General. However, they are two distinct legal entities. It should be noted that there is not always a Minister of Justice in some provinces. For example in Ontario, British Columbia and Prince Edward Island, there is no Minister of Justice, only an Attorney General. Therefore, I do not know how the applicant's solicitor can have sworn that he served the Minister of Justice since that person does not exist.
[22]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 161; 142 D.L.R.(4th) 385, the Supreme Court examined section 109(1) of the
Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c. C-43, which is similar to section 57(1) of the
Federal Court Act.
The Supreme Court stated:
"In view of the purpose of s. 109 of the
Courts of Justice Act,
I am inclined to agree with the opinion of the New Brunswick Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in
Mandelbaum,
supra, that the provision is mandatory and failure to give the notice invalidates a decision made in its absence without a showing of prejudice. It seems to me that the absence of notice is in itself prejudicial to public interest. I am not reassured that the Attorney General will invariably be in a position to explain after the fact what steps might have been taken if timely notice had been given. As a result, there is a risk that in some cases a statutory provision may fall by default.
"There is, of course, room for interpretation of s. 109 and there may be cases in which the failure to serve a written notice is not fatal either because the Attorney General consents to the issue's being dealt with or there had been a de facto notice which is the equivalent of a written notice. It is not, however, necessary to express a final opinion on these question in that I am satisfied that under either strand of authority the decision of the Court of Appeal is invalid. No notice or any equivalent was given in this case and in fact the Attorney General and the courts have no reason to believe that the
Act
was under attack. Clearly, s. 109 was not complied with and the Attorney General was seriously prejudiced by the absence of notice."
[23]
Therefore, if there has been a de facto notice which is the equivalent of a written notice, the failure to serve a written notice may not be fatal. In this case, I would be ready to consider that the fact that the notice was served on Ministers of Justice instead of the Attorneys General of the provinces is not fatal. Once the Minister of Justice is served, it can be said that the Attorney General has knowledge of the notice and was served.
[24]
However, I do not know how the Attorneys General for Ontario, British Columbia and Prince Edward Island could have had knowledge of the notice since there is no Minister of Justice for these provinces and the applicant's solicitor has sworn that he served the Ministers of Justice for these provinces. If the solicitor has made a mistake in his affidavit (which he probably did) and really served the Attorney General, the error might not be fatal either. Even if he addressed the notice to the Minister of Justice of those provinces, the notice probably was received by the Attorneys General. My concerns are more on the fact that I am not sure if the Attorneys General were really served. Right now, I am presuming that they were served but I am not sure that presumptions are sufficient in this instance.
[25]
Furthermore, the fact that there is no evidence that the Attorney General of Manitoba was served with the notice is a serious issue.
[26]
There is two strands of decisions in the jurisprudence regarding the failure to give proper notice.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  addressed the issue of the legal effect of the absence of notice, it has been addressed by other courts. The results are conflicting, One strand of decision favours the view that in the absence of notice the decision is ipso facto invalid, while the other strand holds that a decision in the absence of notice is voidable upon a showing of prejudice."
[27]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal stated:
"As to the question of the attorneys general not demonstrating prejudice, whether subsection 57(1) is mandatory has not conclusively been decided by the Supreme Court of Canada. However, except in limited circumstances which are not applicable here, I think the weight of judicial authority is in favour of the provision being mandatory. [...]
. . . . .
"I think these comments suggest that the requirement to give notice in accordance with subsection 57(1) is mandatory (except in limited circumstances, i.e. where the attorneys general consent or where there has been de facto notice) and that the presence or absence of prejudice is irrelevant."
[28]
In light of the above jurisprudence, if the notice was not served on the Attorney General of Manitoba the error should be considered fatal.
[29]
There is, however, the issue that the notice might not have been necessary at all. Section 57(1) provides for a notice where the constitutional validity, applicability or operability of an Act of Parliament or of the legislature of any province, or of
Regulations
thereunder, is in question before the Court.
[30]
The applicant intends to question the constitutional validity of the hearing practices and the new hearing model before the Board. He also intends to raise the question of administrative bias in the context of the hearing of African refugee claims by Jeannine Beaubien-Duque and Michel Goulet. The applicant will also raise the fact that his own deportation would be in violation of the
Charter
and of the minimal international norms. These concerns cannot be said to question the constitutional validity, applicability or operability of an Act of Parliament or of the legislature of any province or of
Regulations
thereunder.
[31]
However, the applicant intends to ask that the
Charter
be interpreted so as to include article 3 of the
United Nation Convention against Torture
, as a fundamental guarantee of a free and democratic society.
[32]
This last issue might be said to question the constitutional validity, applicability or operability of an Act of Parliament.
[33]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Rothstein, J., held:
"In an effort to get around section 57, counsel argues that section 14 must only be 'construed' with a view to paragraph 2(b) of the
Charter
and that this is different than questioning the validity, applicability or operability of the section.
"While there may be circumstances where an argument relating to the construction of a statute does not involve the question of its validity, applicability or operability, I cannot appreciate such a distinction in this case based upon the arguments made. Counsel argues that the information in question here contributes to 'core values' thereby creating a prima facie right of access and that in these circumstances the exemption in section 14 is narrowed by paragraph 2(b) of the
Charter
. This argument if accepted would, to my mind, result in the inapplicability or inoperability of the exemption under section 14 or at least the limiting or narrowing of the applicability or operability of the exemption when documents relating to core values are at issue. If it does not result in limiting or narrowing of the applicability or operability of the exemption then 'construing' section 14 in light of the
Charter
serves no useful purpose.
With respect to the
Charter
arguments, therefore I conclude:
1. The
Charter
challenge necessarily involves a challenge to section 14 of the
Access to Information Act.
2. To the extent section 14 was found to contravene paragraph 2(b) of the
Charter
the result would be its inapplicability or inoperability or at least a limitation on its applicability or operability. Such a determination requires notice in accordance with section 7 of the
Federal Court Act
which was not given."
[34]
In
Royal Canadian Mounted Police Complaints Commissioner, Re
, [1993] 2 F.C. 351; 61 F.T.R. 210 (T.D.), affd. [1994] 3 F.C. 562; 173 N.R. 290 (F.C.A.), MacKay, J., stated:
"As I understand the Supreme Court's practice, a constitutional question under the
Charter
is treated the same as any other constitutional question, and a constitutional question is stated under Rule 32 only when the constitutional validity, or the constitutional applicability of a statute or of Regulations is raised or the inoperability of a statute or regulation is urged. A question is not stated under the rule where there is not an attack on the validity, applicability or inoperability of legislation and where all the Court is being asked to construe a law in light of a section of the
Charter
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
. . . . .
"At the end of the hearing I reserved decision in relation to the query raised in order to give the matter brief consideration, with arrangements that counsel would be advised through the Registry if, in my opinion, I considered section 57 applicable in this case, in which event counsel for Mr. Jensen would give notice to provincial (and territorial) attorneys general and an opportunity would be provided for any of them interested in intervening to have the record and a transcript of proceedings in this matter and to be heard before the Court reached judgment in the stated case. After brief consideration, the Registry was directed to advise counsel that I concluded section 57 was not applicable in this case.
"That conclusion is based on reasons underlying the submission made jointly for the original parties to this case. Here the Court is asked to construe the
RCMP Act
in a manner consistent with the
Charter
, a
Charter
argument which was not supported by all counsel, and there was no direct request for the Court to rule on the validity, applicability or operability, in a constitutional sense, of the
Act
. In those circumstances, in my view, section 57 does not apply and notice is not required to be provided to all attorneys general. I note that this judgment includes no ruling of the sort described in section 57 in relation to the statute of Parliament here in issue, the
RCMP Act
."
[35]
In the case at bar, the applicant asked that the
Charter
be construed as including article 3 of the
United Nation Convention Against Torture
. Whether this issue questions the constitutional operability of an Act of Parliament is not clear.
[36]
In favour of the position that it raises a constitutional question is that the applicant seems to seek an interpretation of the
Charter
that would have the effect to make a constitutional guarantee out of article 3 of the
Convention against Torture
. However, the
Convention Against Torture
was ratified by Canada and is applicable to our domestic law. Therefore, article 3 can be considered even if it is not guaranteed under the
Charter.
I believe that the applicant wants to give more weight on article 3 by bringing it under the scope of the
Charter
and having it considered a constitutional guarantee. If this is so, then I think a notice of constitutional question might be necessary since it questions the operability of the
Charter.
2. Was the Board biased and was the applicant's right to a fair hearing infringed?
[37]
The applicant contends that the Board was biased and had already taken its decision before coming into the room. The applicant alleges that more often than not, negative statements on the credibility or the plausibility of an applicant's testimony and the cross-cultural misunderstandings or bias are tightly related. According to the applicant, he was subjected to attack during the entire hearing and his counsel and him were constantly interrupted. The Board members' bias was verbalised on numerous occasions when they said "That's you answer, that's all" and "That's your answer, sir". The applicant claims that this demonstrated the Board members' pre-existing bias and lack of open mind.
[38]
The applicant also submits that the Board's finding that he was not credible because he named African authors when asked to name some authors he studied in English literature demonstrates the worst type of ignorance and cultural bias. It also showed a closed mind. The manner in which the Board questioned the applicant on this point and the radical conclusions reached do not respect the right to equality guaranteed by section 15 of the
Charter
.
[39]
The applicant alleges that in Montréal, the hearing practices and the new hearing model violates the right to a fair hearing and constitutes administrative bias. According to the applicant, the Board will ask the lawyer of the refugee claimant, in a systematic manner, to permit the refugee hearing officer to ask their questions first, violating the natural order of evidence when the refugee claimant has the burden of proof. The Board members systematically say to refugee claimant that they should not repeat the story presented in the PIF, this although they are guaranteed the right to an oral hearing. The presentation of the evidence is interrupted often by the Board. The applicant contends that these practices do not respect the right to be heard and infringe sections 7, 15 and 27 of the
Charter.
[40]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Teitelbaum, J., indicated:
"The Supreme Court of Canada has held that the process of determining refugee claims must proceed in accordance with the rules of fundamental justice set out in s. 7 of the
Charter
:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 9 N.R. 115, at p. 394  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the test applicable in order to determine the existence of a reasonable apprehension of bias was stated as follows:
"... the apprehension of bias must be a reasonable one, held by reasonable and right-minded persons, applying themselves to the question and obtaining thereon the required information ... [The] test is 'what would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically - and having thought the matter through - conclude'."
[42]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.S.R.(2d) 241; 477 A.P.R. 241, it was held by Cory, J.:
"Further the reasonable person must be an informed person, with knowledge of all the relevant circumstances, including 'the traditions of integrity and impartiality that form a part of the background and apprised also of the fact that impartiality is one of the duties the judges swear to uphold':
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C.), at para. 14. See also
Stark
, supra, at para. 74;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.), at para. 34. To that I would add that the reasonable person should also be taken to be aware of the social reality that forms the background to a particular case, such as societal awareness and acknowledgement of the prevalence of racism or gender bias in a particular community."
[43]
The respondent notes that the applicant did not ask the Board members to recuse themselves during the hearing. The respondent submits that it is an essential condition for an applicant arguing an apprehension of bias to show that he asked the Board members to recuse themselves as soon as reasonably practicable, failing which his arguments will be rejected.
[44]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Nadon, J., reviewed the jurisprudence relating to the issue of the time when a reasonable apprehension of bias should be raised and concluded:
"From the above authorities, one can conclude that a reasonable apprehension of bias should be raised at the first opportunity. The question that flows from this is: 'When is the first opportunity?'
Halsbury's Laws of England
, to which reference is made by Marceau, J.A., in
In re Human Rights Tribunal,
states that there is no waiver unless the party entitled to make the objection is fully aware of the nature of the disqualification and has an adequate opportunity to make the objection.
"Mullan states that the Court will imply a waiver where a party or its representative knows of the facts that give rise to an apprehension of bias and, notwithstanding, does not object. However, Mullan qualifies his statement by adding that the party or its representative must be 'fully cognisant of the right to take objection'.
"Craig states that the courts have become more reluctant to infer waiver where a party is not aware of its right to object.
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  following remarks at page 1048:
'The solicitor did not take his objection then and it seems clear that he decided to let the matter go on, taking the view that this was a heaven-sent opportunity of getting the order quashed if the committee found in favour of the application. That would be sufficient ground for refusing this application ...'
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Muldoon, J., of this Court held that a party had waived its right to raise reasonable apprehension of bias as it had not raised the objection at the first opportunity. Muldoon, J., wrote [at page 46]:
'A nullity a initio can be perceived and declared almost at any later time for it never was of any effect, and demonstrably so. However, when one alleges a denial of natural justice by means of alleged prejudice, one should- nay, must so allege promptly, for effluxion of time can render such allegation not objectively demonstrable at all. The allegation of prejudice should not be secretly harboured, but made public immediately, thereby hoping to catch the tribunal 'red handed', so to speak, in its prejudice and misconduct. So it is that the posture of waiting to discover whether one wins the contention before the adjudicator, prepared to make no allegation of prejudice if one does win, and complaining of alleged prejudice as a means of trying to avoid confirmed loss, is abusive and to be discouraged.'"
[45]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Denault, J., stated:
"In addition, neither the applicant nor his counsel raised the issue of a reasonable apprehension of bias during the course of the hearing.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D), I held that:
'Moreover, even if the facts had shown a probability of bias on the officer's part, which is not the case, the failure of the applicant's attorney to raise this issue forthwith leads to a presumption that he had given up on invoking the reasonable apprehension of bias.'
"I believe this principle still applies, notwithstanding the recent judgment of my colleague, Nadon, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Court file no. T-315-93. In his decision, Nadon, J., canvassed the jurisprudence and literature on the issue of whether the failure to raise the issue of bias during the hearing is fatal to a later determination of the question. He found that a failure to raise the issue does not constitute waiver if the applicant or his counsel was unaware of the right to object on the ground of a reasonable apprehension of bias or of the facts giving rise to the disqualification (in that instance the applicant was unrepresented) ..."
[46]
In the case at bar, the applicant did not ask the Board members to recuse themselves at the first opportunity which was when the applicant was of the view that the Board's methods raised an apprehension of bias. However, before the Board, the applicant's counsel did comment the fact that the Board asked questions at the hearing and did ask that the Board refrain to interrupt the applicant during the testimony.
[47]
The applicant also alleges that the Board's conclusion regarding the possibility of studying African authors in English literature courses raises a reasonable apprehension of bias. This issue could only be raised by the applicant after the Board's decision was rendered. Since an accumulation of incidents can also give rise to an apprehension of bias, I am ready to accept that the applicant raised the issue at the earliest practicable opportunity. I wish to add however, that this case is a borderline case and that had it not been for the issue pertaining to the English literature courses, I would have concluded that the applicant had waived his right to complain.
[48]
Therefore, I will proceed to the evaluation of the apprehension of bias raised by the applicant.
[49]
As was stated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, mere suspicion of bias on the part of a party is insufficient to ground a claim for judicial review based on bias.
[50]
The applicant argues that he was subjected to attack during the entire hearing and his lawyer and him were constantly interrupted during the testimony. Furthermore the applicant argues that the Board's interrogation was narrowly focussed, biased and constantly seeking to contradict the applicant even on points where there was no serious reason not to believe him.
[51]
On the issue of questioning by a Board in a refugee hearing, Teitelbaum, J., held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), where Justice Mahoney, writing for the Federal Court of Appeal held that intrusive and intimidating interventions interfered significantly with the presentation of the applicant's case. [...]
. . . . .
"The applicant also relied on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).
"In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Court considered whether the applicant was provided a full opportunity to properly present his case. In concluding that the decision could not stand Justice McKeown remarked at pages 29-30:
'The Board continually and repeatedly prevented the applicant from presenting his evidence relevant to persecution prior to 1990 in an organized fashion.'
. . . . .
'It is also no answer to say that the Board allowed the applicant to put into evidence all evidence relating to past persecution when it is clear from the transcript that the Board members were not interested, constantly interrupted and prevented counsel from proceeding in an orderly fashion.'
. . . . .
"In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , another case invoked by the applicant, the Federal Court of Appeal considered that applicant's allegations that his right to a fair hearing had been violated and that the circumstances raised an apprehension of bias as he was aggressively cross-examined by members of the Board. The Court dismissed the appeal and disposed of the question of natural justice as follows at pages 32-33:
'I have no hesitation in expressing my concern at the lengthy nature of the interventions of Board member Groos. I think it would have been preferable for him to have left the main burden of questioning the appellant to the Refugee Hearing Officer. However, having said this, I hasten to add that members of this Tribunal are enabled, pursuant to subsection 67(2) of the
Immigration Act
, to 'administer oaths and examine any person on oath', and: '... do any other thing necessary to provide a full and proper hearing'. If Board member Groos, as seems evident from the transcript, had problems with the appellant's testimony at the conclusion of the examinations conducted by the appellant's counsel and by the Refugee Hearing Officer, he was entitled to conduct his own questioning of the appellant in the proper discharge of his duties as he perceived them. On this basis, it is necessary to assess the nature of this questioning in order to determine whether there is merit in the objections to that questioning by counsel for the appellant, as set forth supra. After carefully reviewing the transcript, I must respectfully disagree with counsel's criticisms of the questioning by Mr. Groos. I would characterize his questioning as being an energetic exercise in attempting to clear up some inconsistencies in the evidence. It also discloses some frustration at being unable to get a clear picture of the general purport of the evidence being given. I am also unable to conclude from this record that Board member Groos has demonstrated a reasonable apprehension of bias.'
"In the present case, despite Counsel's arguments, I must find that the circumstances do not raise a bias or a reasonable apprehension of bias. I read and reread the transcript of the hearing and I note that the Board played an active role in examining the applicant. I have also noted that the Board did ask the same question on a few occasions. The applicant submits that the Board interrupted her examination by her then Counsel. The transcript shows that the Board members did intervene frequently during Counsel's examination. However, I am not persuaded that the Board's conduct amounts to a breach of natural justice in that the applicant was denied the opportunity to fully present her case or that the Board's questioning raised an apprehension of bias.
"In my view, the foregoing cases relied upon by the applicant must be distinguished on their facts. For example, the presiding member in the case at bar did not aggressively and significantly intervene as did the member in the case of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; the manner in which the presiding member in the present case questioned the applicant was not an attempt at entrapment as was the case  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
and it cannot be said that the presiding member in the present case was 'not interested, constantly interrupted and prevented Counsel from proceeding in an orderly fashion' as with <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
"I am persuaded that the present case is rather similar to the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case where the Federal Court of Appeal indicated that the questioning was an attempt to clear up inconsistencies in the evidence which disclosed the Board's frustration at being unable to get a clear picture of the general purport of the evidence. In the present case, the Board appeared to merely attempt to clarify or to reconcile the inconsistent testimony.
"While the foregoing cases provide precedents regarding questions of apprehension of bias and fair hearing, the circumstances of this case must be determined in light of the test enunciated in National Energy Board cited in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. After reading the transcript, I am of the view that an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically and having thought the matter through would not conclude that the Board will make a biassed decision."
[52]
Therefore, it seems that an energetic questioning by a Board member and frequent interruptions will not necessarily give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias, especially if the intervention is to clarify a claimant's testimony.
[53]
I have carefully reviewed the transcript. I cannot find that the Board constantly interrupted the applicant and that the Board did not let the applicant present his case. The Board rarely interrupted the applicant during his examination by counsel and when the Board did interrupt it was to clarify some issue and understand the applicant better or to have the applicant speak louder. In some instance, the Board even asked counsel permission to intervene. The Board asked the applicant more questions when his counsel was finished examining him but the questions were clarifying questions.
[54]
The Board cannot be faulted for these few interruptions and the applicant's allegations that he was constantly interrupted are an exaggeration of what really occurred at the hearing. In the case at bar, it cannot even be said that the Board frequently interrupted the applicant as was the case in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra.
[55]
The applicant also contends that the Board's new procedures which consist of asking the claimant's lawyer to permit the refugee hearing officer to ask his questions first raise a reasonable apprehension of bias.
[56]
At page 10 of the transcript, the following exchange took place between the Presiding Member and the applicant's counsel:
"Presiding Member: Maitre Istvanffy, il you agree, unless you have your own specific preliminary questions, would you accept that Madame Setton opens with a few clarifying questions?
Counsel: I would prefer to question first. Madame Setton proposed to me focussing on the question of being gay first. I don't know if the panel agrees with that or not.
Well I have no objections. It certainly is an important point in the claimant's story. It seems to be quite as important as his student activities at the university, so it's certainly a point that has to be dealt with. I agree that it should be dealt with ... could be dealt with first.
Presiding Member: Do you agree with that also? It's fine with you?
Counsel: Yes. Yeah, it's okay.
Presiding Member: Okay. So, if you, Madame Setton, you agreed with Maitre Istvanffy that he would start on that, or did you have ...?
RCO: He would start on that.
Presiding Member: Yeah?
RCO: Yes
Presiding Member: Okay. So ...
RCO: It was a suggestion. It was not ...
Well, I think we ...
RCO: ... a formal agreement."
[57]
I am not sure if the Presiding Member was saying that the RCO should start with her full examination of the applicant or if she was asking if the RCO could ask some questions as preliminary matters. It seems, in light of the transcript, that the Board was asking if the RCO could ask a few clarifying questions as preliminary questions.
[58]
Nevertheless, Teitelbaum, J., has explained in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.):
"The Panel made no reviewable error by allowing the refugee hearing officer to begin his cross-examination first, or by hearing a number of claims in the same half day. Subsections 68(2) and 68(3) of the
Immigration Act
clearly state that the Panel is master of its own procedure and is not bound by any legal rules of evidence:
"68(2) The Refugee Division shall deal with all proceedings before it as informally and expeditiously as the circumstances and the considerations of fairness permit.
"(3) The Refugee Division is not bound by any legal or technical rules of evidence and, in any proceedings before it, it may receive and base a decision on evidence adduced in the proceedings and considered credible or trustworthy in the circumstances of the case."
"68(2) Dans la mesure où les circonstances et l'équité le permettent, la section du statut fonctionne sans formalisme et avec célérité.
"(3) La section du statut n'est pas liée par les règles légales ou techniques de présentation de la preuve. Elle peut recevoir les éléments qu'elle juge crédibles ou dignes de foi en l'occurrence et fonder sur eux sa décision."
"In
Morante del  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  dismissed the applicant's arguments:
'Counsel who represented the applicants at the hearing of this application for judicial review challenges the panel's decision on the ground that it showed bias against these applicants in particular and all applicants from Mexico in general. He pointed out to the Court that the hearing lasted only 30 to 45 minutes, which was a short period of time, and that the panel showed no interest in the explanations the applicants tried to provide about the dangerous situation in Mexico.
'Counsel further submits that the panel's [TRANSLATION] "standard practice" is to deal with the cases of Mexican claimants, who are [TRANSLATION] "presumed to be economic refugees", as quickly as possible. The panel apparently heard three or four other claims by Mexicans that same afternoon. He also questions the panel's order that the refugee hearing officer begin her examination first, which he considers an unfair procedure intended to arrive at a quick negative response. He submits that the panel based its decision on two insignificant contradictions and completely disregarded the situation in Mexico in general, and the principal applicant's well-founded fear in particular.
'Counsel for the applicants did not however object to the proceedings and did not raise any issue of apprehension of bias on the part of the panel's members.
'It is well established that a panel is the master of its own procedure and is not bound by the formal rules of a court. The applicants had every opportunity to prove the merits of their case. Moreover, subsections 68(2) et 68(3) of the
Immigration Act
(the
Act
) are very clear on this point:
"68(2) The Refugee Division shall deal with all proceedings before it as informally and expeditiously as the circumstances and the considerations of fairness permit.
"(3) The Refugee Division is not bound by any legal or technical rules of evidence and, in any proceedings before it, it may receive and base a decision on evidence adduced in the proceedings and considered credible or trustworthy in the circumstances of the case."
'As can be seen from the transcript of the testimony at the hearing, the presiding member opened the hearing, summarized the facts and started to question the principal applicant. The refugee hearing officer and counsel for the applicants also participated. Toward the end of the hearing, the presiding member granted counsel the right to speak and he presented his arguments.
'The courts have clearly established that a party reasonably apprehensive of bias on the part of a tribunal must allege a violation of natural justice at the earliest practicable opportunity:
"... Correlatively, the right of the individual who apprehends bias on the part of the Tribunal before which he is brought has always been, again as I understand the jurisprudence, a right to object to being judged by the Tribunal, but a right that exists only until he expressly or impliedly submits to it. It is only because Mr. MacBain raised his objections at the outset that his attack on the proceedings could be successful.
. . . . .
"However, even apart from this express waiver, AECL's whole course of conduct before the Tribunal constituted an implied waiver of any assertion of a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the Tribunal. The only reasonable course of conduct for a party reasonably apprehensive of bias would be to allege a violation of natural justice at the earliest practicable opportunity."
'Furthermore, the Supreme Court has clearly established that an apprehension of bias must be reasonable. In
Comm. for  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  principle is of course the same, namely that natural justice be rendered. But its application must take into consideration the special circumstances of the tribunal. As stated by Reid,
Administrative Law and Practice, 1971
, at p. 220:
'... "tribunals" is a basket word embracing many kinds and sorts. It is quickly obvious that a standard appropriate to one may be inappropriate to another. Hence, facts which may constitute bias in one, may not amount to bias in another.' [Footnotes omitted.]
"I am of the same view; the Panel is master of its own procedure. In this case, the applicant has not shown the Panel's bias."
[59]
In the case at bar, I agree with the comments of both Teitelbaum, J., and Dubé, J., that the Board is not bound by the formal rules of a court and that it is master of its own procedure. Furthermore, when the applicant's counsel refused to let the RCO begin asking questions first, the Board accepted the counsel's request and permitted him to start first.
[60]
I cannot see how the applicant can say that he did not have the right to a fair hearing since his counsel was able to examine him first and he was also able to state his case properly before the Board.
[61]
Regarding the applicant's enrollment in English literature, the applicant submits that the Board's finding that he was not credible because he gave African authors when asked to name some authors instead of naming English authors demonstrates bias. The applicant also contends that this conclusion is discriminatory and that it infringes section 15 of the
Charter.
[62]
I agree with the applicant that the Board had no reason to discredit the applicant because he stated that he studied African authors in an English literature courses. The respondent submits that this finding of fact is perfectly reasonable, as dictionaries unanimously define "literature" as meaning, among other definitions, the body of written works produced in a particular country.
[63]
I agree that English literature can mean literature from England, but it can also mean literature written in English. In the present case, English literature at the University of Nairobi can very well, and more probably than not, encompass African authors who write in English.
[64]
However, although this conclusion denotes ignorance and lack of sensitivity on the Board's part, I do not believe that it denotes racism or bias on the part of the Board as alleged by the applicant nor that it infringes section 15 of the
Charter
.
[65]
As for the applicant's submission that the Board showed bias in responding, "That's your answer that's all" to the answer of the applicant, the transcript at page 112 shows that the following discussion took place:
"RCO: So does that mean English from English authors?
Applicant: Yes, they're English but African.
RCO: So can you give me some English?
Applicant: African authors
RCO: And which African authors? Such as?
Applicant: Like I said, (inaudible) Sebe, he's a Nigerian. (inaudible) he's a Kenyan. You have ...
Presiding Member: And this would be under a subject matter entitled English Literature?
Applicant: Yes.
Presiding Member: People wouldn't think English would be the nationality rather than just the language?
Applicant: Yes, but in the university you decided to take a sub, like a sub faculty.
Presiding Member: No, no, I'm not talking about the faculty here. I'm talking about the subject matter. English Literature usually refers to literature written in England.
Applicant: No, that is not what we refer to it back home.
Presiding Member:
Yes. Well, that's your answer sir.
"
[66]
At page 165 of the transcript:
"Presiding Member: Okay, I'm not talking about saunas. I'm talking about...
Applicant: Yes
Presiding Member: ... entertainment places. Places where you can go to have a coffee or a beer or a coca-cola and meet some friends, maybe meet other Black people, because there are, there's a black community, important Black community in Montreal, and there are other Africans. So there isn't any one in particular that you know that is a little more famous?
Applicant: No, because before I started working weekends, I was working weekdays, sixty hours a week. So it was hard for me to go out and meet friends. So I decided to work weekends so that I can do the.
Presiding Member: But sir, you're going to see Daniel who is a social worker in Project 10. You seem to want to leave your isolation in a sense, but you're not ... Are you telling me that you don't go to any ... you're going to a sauna that is sometimes a little risky, it's a little riskier to go to a sauna that it is to go to a bar and have a coca cola. So I would imagine if you want to meet some friends you would go to a well-known.
So is this your final answer, sir? You cannot name me.
Applicant: Where I go to meet friends nowadays I'm meeting them at Project 10. We have a lot of gay young people there who are really into making friends more than what you go and get in bars.
Presiding Member: And, in your knowledge, you haven't heard of any other place either?"
[67]
At page 168 of the transcript:
"Presiding Member: Maitre Istvanffy, I said name a bar or a restaurant.
Counsel: Not everybody goes to bars.
Presiding Member: No, no, I agree.
Counsel: I'm sorry.
Presiding Member: I didn't say he had to go. I asked him if he knew of one.
Counsel: And you said that he didn't know any one.
Presiding Member: No, no, I had not had one name ...
Counsel: Ane he's named a lot of (inaudible).
Presiding member: ... of a gay bar. I've had one sauna bath and the gay village is huge. The gay village is not only la rue St. Catherine. It's big. it's huge and it's quite extensive.
However, that is your answer. That's all. Thank you.
"
[68]
In
Judicial Review of Administrative Action in Canada
(Toronto: Canvasback Publishing, 1998), Brown and Evans indicate at pages 11-31 and 11-32:
"Extensive and 'energetic' questioning alone by tribunal members will not in itself give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias. And particular latitude is likely to be given to tribunals operating in a non-adversarial setting such as refugee determination hearings, where there is no one appearing to oppose the claim. Nor will an expression of momentary impatience or loss of equanimity by a tribunal member result in disqualification, particularly where it was merely an attempt to control the manner of proceeding. Similarly, a sarcastic comment when a party refused to give evidence, or an ill-chosen and insensitive phrase, will not, without more, lead to disqualification." (Footnotes omitted)
[69]
In the case at bar, the Board's member expressed his scepticism of the applicant's answer.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 4 Imm. L.R.(3d) 152 (T.D.), Lemieux, J., stated in a case where the Board members made various comments:
"In my view, the Presiding member and the other member participating in the questioning, conducted their questioning and made comments which were well within the bounds of proper intervention and with the sole object of assisting and giving a chance to the applicant to tell his whole story, to overcome his nervousness and to clarify points in his testimony which seemed inconsistent or contradictory. On the tape, I heard nothing in the tone of the questioning by each member which was in any manner aggressive, intimidating or hostile. Rather, each question put to the applicant by the members was done so in a calm, precise, and polite way and certainly does not support the contention that the manner of this questioning poisoned the hearing and so deconcentrated the applicant to the point he could not remember the basis of his fear of persecution. It is true that the members of the panel asked the applicant many questions and some of the questions were repetitive. In my judgment, the only purpose for those questions and the repetition of them was because the applicant's answers were vague and imprecise and the members wanted to get at the bottom of his story. It cannot be said that in proceeding in this manner the members became prosecutors or adversaries of the applicant.
"The transcript does not reveal any comments of a sarcastic or improper nature which flagged any evidence of partiality or unfairness. The comment 'you will have to do better than that because that answer does not satisfy me' was not put in any hostile or intimidating way but in a forthright and straightforward manner conveying neutrally to the applicant the problems the panel was having with the applicant's testimony and providing him an opportunity to recalibrate his answers. The '[D]oes that make sense' comment is viewed by me in the same light as is the statement on his credibility."
[70]
In my view, the comments made by the Board member pointed the problems that the Board was having with the applicant's testimony. For example, when the Presiding Member said "So is this your final answer, sir? You cannot name me", she was providing the applicant with the opportunity to further give evidence and was also pointing out problems that she had with the applicant's answers. As for the comment "However, that is your answer. That's all. Thank you"., the comment, in light of the discussion that took place with the applicant's counsel, was an explanation to the applicant's counsel who had objected to the Presiding Member's comment that the applicant had not been able to name any gay bars or entertainment places. I do not see these comments to be sarcastic, hostile or intimidating.
[71]
As for the comment "Yes. Well, that's your answer sir", although it could be said to be sarcastic, I believe that the Presiding Member was expressing, maybe not in the most appropriate way, her scepticism of the applicant's explanation. I cannot find that these comments showed bias.
[72]
Therefore, I find that an informed person, who is aware of the social reality that forms the background of a particular case, such as societal awareness and acknowledgement of the prevalence of racism or gender bias in Canada, viewing the matter realistically and practically - and having thought the matter through - would conclude that the few interruptions and comments made by the Board do not raise an apprehension of bias nor do they show a closed mind.
[73]
Furthermore, I do not find that the applicant did not receive a fair hearing or that the rules of fundamental justice set out in section 7 of the
Charter,
were infringed.
3. Did the Board err in its appreciation of the applicant's credibility?
[74]
The Board found that the applicant was not credible and that the personal documents presented many discrepancies that did not support his claim.
[75]
The applicant submits that the Board had no valid reasons to doubt his story.
[76]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal explained when the intervention of this Court is warranted when the assessment of credibility by the Board is in issue:
"There is no longer any doubt that the Refugee Division, which is a specialized tribunal, has complete jurisdiction to determine the plausibility of testimony: who is in a better position than the Refugee Division to gauge the credibility of an account and to draw the necessary inferences? As long as the inferences drawn by the tribunal are not so unreasonable as to warrant our intervention, its findings are not open to judicial review. In
Giron
, the Court merely observed that in the area of plausibility, the unreasonableness of a decision may be more palpable, and so more easily identifiable, since the account appears on the face of the record. In our opinion,
Giron
in no way reduces the burden that rests on an appellant, of showing that the inferences drawn by the Refugee Division could not reasonably have been drawn."
[77]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Jerome A.C.J. held:
"To begin with, questions of credibility and weight of evidence are within the jurisdiction of the Refugee Division as the trier of facts in respect of Convention refugee claims. When a tribunal's impugned finding relates to the credibility of a witness, the Court will be reluctant to interfere with that finding, given the tribunal's opportunity and ability to assess the witness, his demeanor, frankness, readiness to answer, coherence and consistency in oral testimony before it."
[78]
The applicant alleges that the Board erred in assessing his credibility. His allegations are broad and general. The applicant alleges that there was no rational reasons for setting aside his testimony and that there was solid documentary evidence of the principal facts of his case. According to the applicant, the Board is showing terrible scepticism that has no foundation in the evidence in front of them. The applicant further contends that it is not true that any contradictions were made before the Board and the Board did not pay attention to the evidence in the file.
[79]
I find that the Board gave ample reasons why it found the applicant not credible. These reasons are drawn from the oral and documentary evidence adduced by the applicant, as well as the objective documentary evidence before the Board. I find that the Board did not ignore the evidence but referred to it in many occasions and explained the weight accorded to the evidence. The Board gave very detailed explanations of its conclusions as can be seen from the following excerpts from the Board's decision.
[80]
The applicant stated that he was enrolled in the English Literature and Commerce program. The Board noted that the letter signed by the Dean of the Faculty of Commerce only indicated that the applicant was enrolled in a Bachelor of Commerce and that it did not mention the English Literature program in which the applicant was enrolled. The Board found that the applicant did not know much about the Commerce program and was hesitant and vague on the subject. The Board did not believe that the applicant was studying Commerce at the university.
[81]
The Board found that both letters from the university and adduced by the applicant were original type on photocopied university stationery and that both letters showed spelling mistakes and many corrections and erasures. The Board noted that the letter from the Office of the Deputy vice-chancellor (Academic Affairs) was signed by, J., Omollo as Chairman of UNESO. The Board found it suspicious that someone would use university stationery and sign as chairman of an organization banned by the same university. The Board could not give these two letters any probative value and stated that it was striking that the two letters were written in an identical format and with the same type although they came from different departments and were signed by different people. The Board noted that the letter from the applicant's gay Nairobi Independent People Movement followed the same format and type as the university letters and that these similarities also shed doubt as to the letter's probative value.
[82]
The Board found that the applicant's birth certificate shed doubts on the applicant's identity as well as his credibility since the birth certificate was blurred in specific spots yet the original typed information was perfectly clear. Also, the name of the applicant was incorrectly spelled.
[83]
As for the applicant's story, the Board found that it was limited in general in describing the events which were adduced with his claim and that these events occurred to others. The Board found the applicant's answers vague and brought little information other than what could be read in the documentary evidence adduced by counsel.
[84]
The Board found the applicant's lack of information regarding the violent clashes between students and police in July 1997 and that certain university campuses were closed was contradictory with his allegation of being active and involved in student affairs.
[85]
The applicant said that he organized a demonstration on March 23, 1998. The documentary evidence showed that this manifestation was violent, both on the part of police and the students, but the applicant could not give any further details concerning this demonstration. The Board found that the applicant's vagueness did not support his allegation of being an active student leader.
[86]
When asked if he knew any other student groups, the applicant only mentioned SONU and could not give the meaning of the acronym. He did not know KUSO nor Janai Robert Orina which were referred to in the documentary evidence. Orina was a well-known student leader who supported the teacher's strike in 1994. The Board found it inconceivable that he would not know this well-known student leader since they were university students at the same time and the applicant said that he supported the teacher's strike in 1994.
[87]
The Board found discrepancies in the other documents adduced by the applicant. The Board also found it implausible that the applicant was either arrested or persecuted by the police nor that he was persecuted on the basis of his homosexuality.
[88]
Regarding the applicant's enrollment in English literature, although I agree with the applicant that the Board did not have any reason to discredit the applicant because he stated that he studied African authors in an English literature courses and that the Board should have accepted the applicant's explanation, I do not believe that this issue warrants the intervention of the Court.
[89]
This is only one of the Board's conclusion and the Board gave many other reasons supported by the evidence, why it did not believe the applicant. Consequently, I cannot find that the Board's conclusions regarding the applicant's credibility could not reasonably have been drawn in light of the evidence before it.
4. Did the Board err by failing to consider the objective situation prevailing in Kenya?
[90]
The applicant submits that the Board did not pay any attention to the evidence and the objective situation prevailing in Kenya. Furthermore, the applicant argues that the Board did not explain why it did not take in consideration the documentation.
[91]
The Board does not have to mention every piece of evidence submitted nor does it have to explain why it did not take into consideration certain documentation.
[92]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal stated at paragraph 1:
"The fact that the Division did not mention each and every one of the documents entered in evidence before it does not indicate that it did not take them into account: on the contrary, a tribunal is assumed to have weighed and considered all the evidence presented to it unless the contrary is shown. As the tribunal's findings are supported by the evidence, the appeal will be dismissed."
[93]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at paragraph 16:
"On the other hand, the reasons given by administrative agencies are not to be read hypercritically by a court (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). That would be far to onerous a burden to impose upon administrative decision-makers who may be struggling with a heavy case-load and inadequate resources."
[94]
In the case at bar however, the Board did refer to some documentary evidence in its decision and explained how the documentary evidence contradicted the applicant's story.
[95]
The applicant also argues that the Board erred in failing to consider the objective situation in Kenya. The applicant's contention is that the Board had an obligation to assess the evidence in light of the true situation in the country and not to reject solid evidence without some clear reasons.
[96]
The respondent contends that this line of argument is not capable of warranting the intervention of this Court, as it does not address the central conclusion on which the decision at bar is based, i.e. the applicant's total lack of credibility.
[97]
The Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 1, stated the test to establish fear of persecution as follows:
"As has been alluded to above, the test is bipartite: (1) the claimant must subjectively fear persecution; and (2) this fear must be well-founded in an objective sense. This test was articulated and applied by Heald, J.A., in
Rajudeen
, supra, at p. 134:
'The subjective component relates to the existence of the fear of persecution in the mind of the refugee. The objective component requires that the refugee's fear be evaluated objectively to determine if there is a valid basis for that fear.'"
[98]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal held:
"I would add that in my view, even without disbelieving every word an applicant has uttered, a first-level panel may reasonably find him so lacking in credibility that it concludes there is no credible evidence relevant to his claim on which a second-level panel could uphold that claim. In other words, a general finding of a lack of credibility on the part of the applicant may conceivably extend to all relevant evidence emanating from his testimony. Of course, since an applicant has to establish that all the elements of the definition of Convention refugee are verified in his case, a first-level panel's conclusion that there is no credible basis for any element of his claim is sufficient."
[99]
In the case at bar, the Board found that the applicant was so lacking in credibility that there was no basis for his claim. The Board did so by examining both the oral and documentary evidence that was introduced at the hearing. Since the Board found that the applicant had no basis for his claim, the objective situation in Kenya would not have been of any help to the applicant. The documentary evidence showed the abuses of the Kenyan government. However, the evidence of abuses in Kenya does not remove the applicant's burden to prove that he had a subjective fear that he would be persecuted.
[100]
As was stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), by Noël, J.:
"The applicant admitted that he did not establish that he was personally subject to persecution. He added, however, that since the documentary evidence clearly shows that the poor are mistreated in Haiti, the Board members erred in holding that no evidence of persecution was presented.
"In my opinion, the applicant's claim is entirely unfounded. It is settled law that an applicant must demonstrate an objective and subjective fear of persecution. In this case, it was not sufficient simply to file documentary evidence. It was necessary at the very least to establish that the applicant himself had a real fear of persecution. In the absence of such evidence, the Board members were entitled to conclude as they did."
[101]
Thus, the applicant's argument has to fail.
5. Would the applicant's deportation violate his rights under section 7 and 12 of the Charter and article 3 of the Convention against Torture?
[102]
The applicant alleges that his deportation will violate his rights under sections 7 and 12 of the
Charter
and article 3 of the
Convention against Torture
.
[103]
The present case is an application for judicial review of a Board's decision that the applicant is not a Convention refugee. The case does not deal with the applicant's deportation and I will refer the applicant to the decision of Teitelbaum, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  this Court clearly state that the refusal of a refugee claim does not give rise to the application of sections 7 and 12 of the
Charter
, because it is not a removal. [...] Therefore, it is premature for the applicant to raise
Charter
issues in his application for judicial review."
[104]
I believe that an application for judicial review of a Board's decision is not the appropriate forum to raise this issue since there is no deportation order before us.
[105]
I would also add that even if this was the appropriate forum to raise the issue of sections 7 and 12 of the
Charter
and article 3 of the
Convention Against Torture
, since the applicant failed to prove that his life, security or liberty would be in danger if he was to return to Kenya, sections 7 and 12 and article 3 of the
Convention Against Torture
do not apply.
[106]
The applicant argues that the
Charter
should be interpreted so as to include article 3 of the
Convention Against Torture
.
[107]
Article 3 of the
Convention Against Torture
reads as follows:
"Article 3
"1. No State Party shall expel, return ('refouler') or extradite a person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected to torture.
"2. For the purpose of determining whether there are such grounds, the competent authorities shall take into account all relevant considerations including, where applicable, the existence in the State concerned of a consistent pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights."
[108]
I believe that this case is not the appropriate case to deal with this issue since the applicant has not demonstrated before the Board that he would be subjected to torture. Therefore, I would have to address the issue in a factual vacuum which I refuse to do since I believe this is not appropriate for such a question.
CONCLUSION
[109]
I find that the applicant did not raise any issue that warrants the intervention of this Court. Consequently, this application for judicial review should be dismissed.
[110]
The applicant suggested three serious questions:
"1. A hearing model has been developed in Montreal where the refugee applicant is told that it is not necessary to tell their story in the Personnel Information Form, where the refugee hearing officer is asked to question first, reversing the normal order of the proof and where the right to a complete hearing has been gutted with all emphasis being placed on the cross-examination of the refugee applicant. This hearing model has resulted in systematic injustices. Does the use of the finding of the new hearing model in refugee hearings in Montreal violate the judicial guarantees of article 7 and article 12 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
and the right to equality under article 15 of the
Charter
?
"2. Is article 3 of the
Convention Against Torture
mandatory before the Immigration and Refugee Board and in application of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
? Is its consideration mandatory in the context of the refugee hearing before the Immigration and Refugee Board?
"3. The following statement was made in the decision in this case:
'The panel then questioned the claimant about his courses. He said his program was English literature and commerce and that he studied poems and short stories. When asked to name some authors, the claimant gave African names. The panel was surprised by the claimant's answers and asked him why he was not giving the names of English authors. The claimant said that these were African authors who wrote in English. The panel does not find the claimant's answer acceptable. English literature deals with English authors. The panel has serious doubts as to the claimant's enrollment in English literature courses.'
"Does this indication of racial bias violate the
Charter
guarantees under articles 7 and 12 as well as the right to equality under article 15 of the
Charter
? What is the proper test for reasonable apprehension of bias before the Immigration and Refugee Board?"
[111]
In my view, these questions do not raise an issue of general importance. Therefore, no questions will be certified.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David Weir/slm
[End of document]