[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The defendant, Baltic Shipping Company, the owners of the M.V. "Nikolay Golovanov" (hereinafter: the ship, the vessel; one of Baltic's ships (or) vessels) move for an order pursuant to rule 419, striking the in rem portions or aspects of the plaintiff's claim and thereby setting aside the warrant for arrest and dismissing the arrest of the ship, on the grounds that the pleadings disclose no reasonable cause of action in rem. That defendant (hereinafter: Baltic) relies on the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 and amendments thereto, and particularly on ss. 22 and 43 thereof.
[2]
The plaintiff (hereinafter sometimes: Textainer) is a Netherlands corporation specialized in the leasing of multimodal containers to international shipping firms. Baltic is a Russian shipowner operating, in international trade, a fleet of container vessels of which the ship is one. The ship is registered at the port of St. Petersburg, and according to the
Lloyd's Register of Ships
(1994-95 ed.), exhibit C to Jean Grégoire's affidavit, the ship, beneficially owned by Baltic, is a container ship built with "fixed guides" to carry containers and little else except on deck without undergoing significant modifications. That is the court's understanding of the Lloyd's description, shown as and in exhibit C. Mr. Grégoire, a lawyer, is the deponent of the informative affidavit to lead warrant.
[3]
By virtue of two leases entered into between Textainer and Baltic respectively on August 1, and on November 1, 1990, the former leased to Baltic on Baltic's own behalf and on behalf of all of Baltic's defendant motor vessels, a sizeable number of refrigerated "reefer" containers, approximately 220, and 3,646 non-reefer containers. The copies of those lease agreements are attached to Mr. Grégoire's affidavit as exhibit B. Baltic certainly did agree to pay the rental prices for those containers which were delivered to it at various locations around the planet. The containers have been, and are being used by Baltic in the operation of the defendant vessels.
[4]
Baltic defaulted those leases prior to April 15, 1994, on or about which date Textainer gave Baltic a formal notice of default, according to the statement of claim. The plaintiff alleges that Baltic continued to refuse or to neglect to pay the rental and it owed the plaintiff, as of August 1, 1994, the sum of $3,197,911.51 U.S. in outstanding rental payments, none of which has since bee paid. It hardly needs mention that, in these circumstances, Baltic's indebtedness to Textainer is increasing daily, due in part to interest accruing on the overdue principal sum pursuant to those leases.
[5]
The lease agreements not only accord to the plaintiff the right to claim return of those widespread containers in Baltic's possession, but also accords the plaintiff, Textainer, a lien upon all of the vessels in Baltic's container fleet and their pending freight to cover outstanding liabilities.
[6]
The scope of Canadian maritime liens is not a closed category. Jurists continue to discover subjects which have been within that scope all along, although it is not easy, without tight reasoning, to have the court declare such a discovery. But more than that, it must be seen that the present maritime controversy sounds not in public law, but in private law. Generally speaking, if not inevitably, private law litigation "belongs" to the litigants, for in private law any composition of the dispute involves no State interest to be preserved, no matter what the litigants agree to do with and about "their" litigation. Certainly a purely commercial agreement - the lease for use in carrying cargo, in consideration of the payment of agreed rental money - is within the parties' private making, and the litigation arising out of default of payment is private-law litigation. Thus, whether Baltic be empowered to create and give a recognized maritime lien on its ships to Textainer in the event of the former's default in payment, it is apparent that no State interest prevents Baltic from voluntarily giving a lien of its own making and free will to Textainer as part of the consideration for remedy for default of rentals' payments.
[7]
At first blush, the House of Lords' judgment in
Ship River Rima, Re
, [1988] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 193, would, although not binding on this court, seems to be at least intellectually dispositive of the matters in issue here. A closer comparative reading, however, shows that the first blush is a false blush. The headnote tells the salient facts:
"'River Rima' was a 'Combo' vessel being equipped to carry both containers and general dry cargo [apparently quite unlike the 'Nikolay Golovanov'], and was owned by the Nigerian National Shipping Line (NNSL). NNSL had a number of contracts whereby they leased containers from their owners including one with the plaintiffs.
"The contract with the plaintiffs specified daily rates of hire, handling and other charges and the various depots throughout the world at which containers could be picked up and redelivered.
"On May 9, 1987, the plaintiffs issued a write in rem claiming
damages for the conversion of certain containers
leased to NNSL and further damages for breach of an obligation to maintain the containers in good condition and repair. The vessel was arrested.
"The issue for decision was whether these claims could be maintained in an action in rem. The jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court was governed so far as was material by ss. 20 and 21 of the
Supreme Court Act
1981. Section 20(m) brought within the Admiralty jurisdiction -
'any claim in respect of goods or materials supplied to a ship for her operation or maintenance.'
"The defendants applied to set aside the writ on the ground that the plaintiffs' claim did not come within inter alia, s. 20(2)(m)." (emphasis not in original text)
[8]
The principal judgment in the unanimous
River Rima
case was written by Lord Brandon of Overbrook. It is necessarily cautiously detailed:
"... the appellants (sic) in this case are (sic) Tiphook Container Rental Co. Ltd., whose business is the renting of cargo containers to those who use them, including shipowners. I shall refer to them as Tiphook.
. . . . .
"The agreement dated July 1, 1986 referred to in the endorsement on the writ was entitled 'Lease Plan' and provided for the hiring of cargo containers from Tiphook by NNSL as required by the latter from time to time. It incorporated Tiphook's standard terms and conditions of business. The principal features of the agreement were these. First, containers hired by NNSL from Tiphook were to be collected by NNSL from, and redelivered by them to Tiphook at depots run by Tiphook at various ports and inland cities in numerous countries throughout the world. Secondly, the rent of containers was to be calculated on a daily basis at prescribed rates for different types, beginning on the day of collection and ending on the day of redelivery, and was to be paid monthly. Thirdly, containers were to be supplied by Tiphook at the time of collection in good order and condition, and were to be maintained during hire, and redelivered by the NNSL at the end of hire, in like condition, subject to fair wear and tear. Fourthly, the hire of each container was to be treated as a separate contract.
"There was no term in the agreement relating to the use to which containers hired under it were to be put. In particular, there was no provision that containers so hired or any of them should be used for the carriage of cargo by any of NNSL's ships, specified or unspecified. The procedure followed by NNSL pursuant to the agreement was dealt with in an affidavit sworn by Mr. Abdullah Abubakar, the Liverpool line manager of NNSL, in which he deposed.
'6. The procedure regarding the hire of the containers is as follows. As and when the containers are required, N.N.S.L. contact their leasing agents - all current leasing is now dealt with by Scamar of Paris. The agents then arrange for the containers to be leased and to be delivered to the location where they are required, normally direct to the shippers so that the containers can be stuffed and sometimes to a container terminal. 7. The containers will be carried by an N.N.S.L. vessel if such is available. However, if no N.N.S.L. vessel is available, they will be carried aboard any other vessel which is available with N.N.S.L. being named as the shipper on the bill of lading ... 9. I am informed by Mr. Alegbeleye, the Hamburg line manager of N.N.S.L., that the containers leased to N.N.S.L. have been used by Nigerian Green Line Ltd. ... over the last six months by way of an agreement reached between N.N.S.L. and Nigerian Green Line Ltd. 10. Accordingly, I verily believe that the containers hired by N.N.S.L. are for the use of the company and not by way of supplies to N.N.S.L. vessels, for their operation or otherwise. The containers are for the convenience of the various shippers utilising N.N.S.L. services ...'
"It seems clear from this evidence, and I did not understand Counsel for Tiphook to contend otherwise, that, at the time when NNSL's agents took delivery of any container from the depot run by Tiphook at which it was to be found, Tiphook did not know, from the terms of Scamar's requests or otherwise, on what ship, whether owned by NNSL or some other shipowners, such container, after being stuffed with cargo somewhere on land, would ultimately be carried. As will appear later, I regard this circumstances as of the utmost importance in the decision of this appeal." (pp. 194-195)
"... the first, second and third propositions relied on by Tiphook may well be correct, and I am prepared to assume, without deciding, that they are. The fourth proposition, however, appears to me to present great difficulty. It is clear that par. (m) contemplates a contract of supply, whether by way of sale or hire, between the claimant and a shipowner. But the expression used in par. (m) is 'supplied to a ship' and not 'supplied to a shipowner'. The question is what meaning should be given to the former expression. There are two main kinds of contract pursuant to which goods or materials required for the operation of a ship may reach her. The first kind of contract is one which expressly provides that the goods or materials are required for the use of a particular ship, the identity of which is specified in the contract or will be specified by the time when the contract comes to be performed. The second kind of contract is one which contains no reference to a particular ship for the use of which the goods or materials are required, leaving the shipowner to make his own decision about that later. The first kind of contract is, in my opinion, a contract under which goods or materials are 'supplied to a ship' within the meaning of par. (m). The second kind of contract, however, is, in my opinion, not a contract for goods or materials to be 'supplied to a ship' within the meaning of par. (m). It is no more than a contract for the supply of goods or materials to a shipowner, and as such does not come within par. (m).
"The present case the series of contracts made between Tiphook and NNSL for the hire of individual containers were not contracts of the first kind described above, but contracts of the second kind. It follows that claims in respect of them do not come within par. (m) and are not therefore within the Admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court."
[9]
The
River Rima
judgment was much emphasized by Baltic's counsel in oral argument. As counsel for Textainer allows, so the court agrees:
River Rima
appears to be correctly decided (indeed it is the definitive word in the U.K.), but as counsel asserts, it does not apply in Canada, nor to the facts of the present case.
[10]
In similar circumstances (not juridic facts), the Court of Appeal, speaking through Chief Justice Isaac in
Banco do  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , said, recorded at p. 747:
"Absent a transcript of the argument at trial which would settle the dispute between counsel, I must accept the facts stated in the passage just quoted at face value. To the extent that it contains an admission by counsel for the parties that the principles stated in
The Myrto
[[1977] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 243 (Q.B.C. Adm. Crt.)] represent the law of England, it is my opinion that counsel are bound by those admissions, the law of England being a fact in issues like any other, the proof of which could be dispensed with by admission of the parties or their counsel. To the extent that it contains an admission respecting the state of the maritime common law of Canada, different considerations arise. The law of Canada was not a fact in issue in the case. It was an element in the case which the learned trial judge had sole responsibility to determine. It is true that counsel, by their research and submissions, could have assisted him in the discharge of that responsibility; but they could not, by their admission, relieve him of it. Consequently, I consider the admission contained in the passage just quoted as being an admission of fact that the law of England is as stated in
The Myrto
. Indeed that was the conclusion which the learned trial judge reached on conflicting expert evidence. As an admission of the state of the maritime common law of Canada, it is ineffective to bind this court. In my opinion we are free, as the learned Trial judge was, to determine the principles of Canadian law that govern this case, if we should determine that they differ from what was admitted or from the conclusion of the learned trial judge on the point." (pp. 747-748)
"Having examined
The Myrto
and the authorities cited in it, I make the following observations. First, the facts of all those cases, including
The Myrto
, are different from those of the case before us. ..." (p. 751)
[11]
Here the court does not suggest that the parties, by agreement, can invent a maritime lien where none has yet been discovered in Canadian maritime law. The court however, assuming under rule 419, that the facts alleged in the statement of claim, demonstrated and exhibited in the affidavit to lead warrant are true, ought "ex debito justiciae" hold the parties to the rights and responsibilities which they themselves have created by their agreements. Especially if, as it appears, the
Federal Court Act
in s. 22, invests this court with wider jurisdiction than that accorded in the U.K.
[12]
First the "Nikolay Golovanov" appears on a balance of probabilities to be capable of carrying only containers according to its design description (exhibits A and C
Lloyd's Register
). Secondly, as shown in Mr. Grégoire's exhibit B, the parties have agreed, not as to what constitutes the law, but to compacts and facts which bring them within the law. So, on p. 4 of the agreement that which takes it out of the
River Rima's
sway are clauses under 14. DEFAULT AND REMEDIES (b), thus:
"(b) Upon the occurrence of any Event of Default, and at any time thereafter so long as the same shall be continuing, Lessor may forthwith (but without prejudice to any rights under this Lease), by notice in writing to the Lessee, declare this Lease to be in default and may then exercise any permitted remedy at law or equity, including, without limitation, one or more of the following:
. . . . .
"(d) The remedies and other rights set forth in this Section, elsewhere in this Lease or otherwise available to Lessor, are cumulative and not alternative. Such remedies and rights may be exercised separately or in any combination or sequence, and the use of any remedy or right individually or in any combination or sequence shall be without prejudice to and shall not waiver any others. The exercise of any such remedy or right, including, without limitation, termination, shall not relieve Lessee of any liability or obligation under this Lease incurred prior to the exercise thereof.
. . . . .
"17. Miscellaneous
"(m) The Containers are maritime Containers, are supplied for use on and for the operation of a Vessel or Vessels, and shall be used only in international trade and in connection with contracts for the carriage of goods in ships. The Lessee undertakes that on each occasion it takes delivery of a Container it does so as an authorized agent of, and on behalf of a Vessel or Vessels. The Containers shall not be used for purposes of inland transport, save that they may be transferred from the shippers' premises directly to the port of exportation and from the port of importation directly to the primary destination or the Lessor's appointed depot.
"(n) Lessee shall be obliged, upon request by Lessor, to immediately specify in writing the Vessel(s) to which Lessor's Containers have been or are to be supplied. Lessee agrees that the supply of Containers to the Vessel or Vessels is essential and necessary for the service provided by those Vessels. The parties further agree that this lease is a Maritime Contract. The Lessee recognizes and grants to the Lessor an express maritime lien against the Vessels and their pending freight to secure all obligations running from the Lessee to the Lessor under this Lease. The Lessor may execute its maritime lien on Vessels by appropriate process in any court of any country having general Admiralty and Maritime Jurisdiction."
[13]
The Federal Court of Canada in its admiralty and maritime law rôle, exercises equitable as well as legal jurisdiction:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R. 185, at p. 371 in the S.C.R. and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R. 661 (Audette, J.). At p. 277 of the S.C.R. in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Audette, J., is reported thus:
"It is true the Admiralty Court, as said by Lord Stowell, exercises an equitable jurisdiction. The court is not absolutely ministerial, and it is at liberty to hold its hand when it appears equitable to do so. See also
The Montréal Dry Dock and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  jurisdiction, it must not be expected to peddle small equities. The case presents equities on behalf of both sides and they seem equally balanced. The burden was upon the appellant to show a superior equity which I fail to discover on the facts before me."
Both of those authorities arose long ago, even before the
Statute of Westminster, 1931
, and there is no reason to think that this court has, in the meanwhile lost any of its equitable jurisdiction in administering Canadian maritime law:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and especially pp. 562-567  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and specifically, Ritchie, J., recorded at p. 565:
"It will be seen that I am, with all respect, unable to agree that the American doctrine should be applied in Canada or that s. 22(2)(a) of the
Federal Court Act
is to be so restrictively interpreted as to exclude from its ambit actions claiming specific enforcement of a contract entitling the claimant to 'title, possession or ownership of a ship'."
[14]
Now, the question is asked by the plaintiff's counsel "would it be equitable to let the "Nikolay Golovanov" sail, in these circumstances, and especially if it would sail off with some of the plaintiff's containers aboard?" He asserts that legally Textainer can invoke paragraphs 22(2)(c) - "a charge on a ship" - and (m) - "claim in respect of goods, materials or services wherever supplied to a ship for the operation ... of the ship", as well as subsection 22(1) of the
Federal Court Act
which is referable to subsection 43(2) indeed, all of Baltic's container ships which are all contemplated by subsection 43(8). By virtue of the lease, Baltic has pledged the credit of all its named container-carrying ships, including that quintessential and actual container-ship the "Nikolay Golovanov".
[15]
After all, equity imputes an obligation to fulfil an obligation, here, Baltic's obligation to pay rent, the arrears and the actual. It has pledged its ship against the payment of rent and offered the plaintiff an enforceable, executable lien on its ships, to be identified upon request. It is somewhat simplistically said that equity acts in personam, reasonable basis for subsection 43(3). Equity looks to intent, rather than form, in any event. The intent of the parties the mutual considerations upon which they dealt, is expressed in the leases. But Baltic comes into this court seeking relief, and it does not come with clean hands, for it is doubly in default both as to arrears of rent and actual rent.
[16]
For all the foregoing reasons together with any omitted arguments made to the court by the plaintiff's counsel, the court will not strike the in rem portions of the statement of claim and will not release Baltic's container ship from arrest without bail being posted.
[17]
Accordingly the defendant Baltic's motion is dismissed with costs in the cause.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/saf
[End of document]