[1]
MacKay, J.
: By telephone conference call on March 24, 1992, I heard this application to stay proceedings of an inquiry constituted pursuant to s. 27 of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended, concerning a report to the respondent Minister that the applicant was a person other than a Canadian citizen or permanent resident, who has engaged in employment contrary to the
Immigration Regulations, 1978
. That inquiry was initiated February 20, 1992, when it was adjourned to March 4, continued on March 16, and was scheduled to resume on April 1, when this application was heard.
[2]
Previously filed on behalf of the applicant were applications for leave to commence proceedings for judicial review pursuant to s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
, and for an extension of time to amend that application and to file documents in relation to it. The original application for leave, filed February 13, included requests for various orders, including one that the inquiry now sought to be stayed and then scheduled to commence on February 20 be prohibited pending consideration of the application for leave. It also requested that the application for leave be heard by personal appearance, which application (request) was dismissed by Order of Madame Justice Reed dated February 21, 1992, specifically "without prejudice to the applicant's right to move for a stay of any deportation order which might issue".
[3]
An earlier inquiry concerning the applicant's continuing presence in Canada, commenced in June 1989 but not then concluded, was quashed by decision of Mr. Justice Muldoon (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[4]
After hearing submissions of counsel, I dismissed the application to stay proceedings of the inquiry then underway for reasons then outlined orally. Counsel for the parties each indicated that there was no need for their purposes to provide written reasons. Thus, these reasons are set out primarily for compliance with s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 as amended.
[5]
As a preliminary matter counsel for the respondent questioned whether the application for a stay was properly before the court, in light of the decision of Mr. Justice Strayer in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] holding that leave is required to bring an application for a stay in immigration proceedings pursuant to s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
. For the applicant, it was submitted that
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), acknowledged the inherent jurisdiction of the court to deal with an application for a stay in appropriate circumstances without the necessity of applying for leave. Admittedly, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was decided before the coming into force of s. 82.1 of the
Act
. Having decided to hear the matter, I ruled that if leave were considered essential, it was granted. In my view, s. 18.2 of the
Federal Court Act
, in force February 1, 1992, providing authority to issue interim orders in relation to matters before the court, is sufficient authority to consider the application for a stay which in this case is interrelated with the application for leave to seek judicial review of the basis and proceedings of the inquiry sought to be stayed.
[6]
On the issue of whether the applicant raised a serious issue to be tried, while there may be serious issues raised for consideration in relation to the application for leave to seek judicial review, a matter not directly before the court at this stage, it was less clear that a serious issue was directly raised by the application for a stay itself. Nevertheless, for consideration of that latter application, I was prepared to assume that there was a serious issue before the court, not yet determined, which warranted consideration of the application for a stay.
[7]
I was not, however, persuaded that the matter was one of urgency. In my view, the application was premature. There was not evidence of irreparable harm at least at this stage. The concern of the applicant was that if the inquiry were not stayed, it would proceed and a deportation order could be anticipated. If a stay were not now granted and the applicant were left to apply for a stay following issue of a deportation order, that together with other proceedings now before the court would create even greater financial hardship for the applicant. For the respondent, it was urged that the scenario portrayed by the applicant was not the only outcome of the inquiry now under way, which might result in a departure notice, rather than a deportation order, if the applicant were found to be disentitled to remain in Canada. As I understand the respondent's normal process, even if a deportation order should issue, it would be enforceable only after a preremoval review of any humanitarian or compassionate considerations that might warrant an application for permanent residence to be submitted by the applicant from within Canada. The applicant's concern about possible bias, or inappropriate evidence, in proceedings before the inquiry is a matter for consideration in relation to the application for leave to seek judicial review, but it is not evidence of irreparable harm which would warrant exercise of the court's discretion to order a stay. In all the circumstances, the concerns of the applicant about the outcome of the inquiry are speculative and are not evidence of irreparable harm.
[8]
In submissions concerning the balance of convenience counsel for the applicant urged that there was a public interest in ensuring fairness in the immigration proceedings involving his client and that this outweighed any inconvenience to the respondent if proceedings of the inquiry were stayed pending consideration of the application for leave to seek judicial review, and if leave be granted pending outcome of the application for judicial review. For the respondent, counsel referred to the decision of Lord Goff of Chieveley in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), especially at pp. 228, 229, where the learned law lord said in part:
"... particular stress should be placed upon the importance of upholding the law of the land, in the public interest, bearing in mind the need for stability in our society, and the duty placed upon certain authorities to enforce the law in the public interest. This is of itself an important factor to be weighed in the balance when assessing the balance of convenience ...
. . . . .
"... In the end, the matter is one for the discretion of the court, taking into account all the circumstances of the case. Even so, the court should not restrain a public authority by interim injunction from enforcing an apparently authentic law unless it is satisfied, having regard to all the circumstances, that the challenge to the law is, prima facie, so firmly based as to justify so exceptional a course being taken."
Having found no evidence of irreparable harm in this case, it was unnecessary to decide the balance of convenience, but I concluded that in the circumstances of this case, that balance clearly favoured the position of the respondent, that is that a stay of the immigration proceedings here in issue should not be granted. The public interest in permitting continuance of those proceedings, carried on pursuant to statute and regulations whose application at this stage has not been found to be invalid or unfair, is not here outweighed by the interests of the applicant.
[9]
For the reasons outlined, the application for a stay of proceedings of an inquiry constituted under the
Immigration Act
was dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David C.R. Olmstead/sms
[End of document]