The Facts
[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review of a decision, dated May 17, 1996, issued by Eugène C. Léger. Mr. Léger is the Director of the Superannuation Directorate (hereinafter the "Director"). The decision dismissed the applicant's objection to the application for division filed by the respondent Jocelyne Lepage (hereinafter the "respondent") under the
Pension Benefits Division Act
, S.C. 1991, c. 46, Schedule II (hereinafter "the
Act
"). [see footnote 1]
[2]
This is not the first application for judicial review by the applicant concerning the division of his pension benefits. The roots of this litigation can be found in a divorce judgment between the parties pronounced by Michaud, J., of the Quebec Superior Court on June 17, 1991 (as amended on June 21, 1991):
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  judgment ordered a division between the applicant and the respondent of the pension benefits accumulated by the applicant under the pension plan for federal public service employees (the "pension plan").
[3]
On November 4, 1994, the respondent filed with the Superannuation Directorate an application for division pursuant to section 4 of the
Act
. The "Regulatory Impact Analysis Statement" provides a succinct analysis of the
Act
: see
Pension Benefits Division Regulations
, SOR\94-612. The
Act
, which came into force on September 30, 1994, anticipates an application for division if a court has already ruled to that effect in the context of a divorce settlement or separation. Division is also possible if the couple have entered into a written agreement. The
Act
effectively provides that the Minister approves the division and allows payments directly from a federal pension plan. Section 2 of the
Act
, defining the "Minister", states that this term "for the purposes of applications and other matters pertaining to a particular pension plan under this
Act
, means such member of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada as is designated by the Governor-in-Council to act as the Minister for the purpose of those applications and matters".
[4]
Pursuant to the
Act
as well, however, the applicant objected to the respondent's application.
[5]
Section 7(3)(e) of the
Act
states:
"7(3) The Minister shall refuse to approve the division of the pension benefits if
. . . . .
(e) the Minister is satisfied, based on evidence submitted to the Minister, that it would not be just to approve the division."
[6]
In his first notice of objection, the applicant submitted some evidence for the purpose of convincing the Minister that it would not be just to approve the division. On May 24, 1995, the Superannuation Directorate dismissed the objection to division and refused to examine the evidence and rule on whether or not the division was unjust. This prompted the applicant's initial application for judicial review.
[7]
In a judgment dated March 18, 1996, Nadon, J., overturned the Superannuation Directorate's decision:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) (hereinafter " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "). Nadon, J., concluded, at p. 182, that the officer who rendered the decision erred because "the Minister must consider whether it would in the circumstances be unjust to allow Michaud, J.'s, order to be enforced. That in [his] view is the question the officer should have asked".
[8]
The applicant subsequently filed a further notice of objection to the respondent's request for division. On May 17, 1996, the Superannuation Directorate again dismissed the applicant's objection to the division of the pension benefits. The relevant provisions of the decision read as follows:
[Translation] "Pursuant to the judgment pronounced by the Honourable Mr. Justice Marc Nadon on March 18, 1996, the Department has reviewed the submissions advanced in support of the allegation that a division of his pension benefits would be unjust to Mr. Dubé. Two major arguments were presented: [see footnote 3]
1. It is argued that Mr. Dubé's pension represents his only source of income; that if this pension is reduced as contemplated, he will be forced to return to Canada to try to find work; that he could have some difficulty finding a job; and that his wife cannot accompany him because of immigration restrictions. It is also stated that the particulars concerning Ms. Lepage's income and employment are not known, but that it is thought that her standard of living is acceptable.
. . . . .
"Paragraph 7(3)(e) of the
Pension Benefits Division Act
authorizes the Minister to refuse the division of the pension benefits if he is satisfied, based on the evidence submitted, that it would not be just to approve the division. The application to refuse the division of the pension benefits is denied for the following reasons:
1. I have carefully considered the information concerning Mr. Dubé's financial situation. In considering such a request, it is necessary to keep in mind the purpose of the
Act
, which is to give effect to the division of pension benefits as provided in an agreement or a judgment. Accordingly, the division will be refused only in rare circumstances, where evidence of a compelling nature is presented. I recognize that circumstances may have changed since the date of the judgment but I am not satisfied that the division is unjust owing to the financial repercussions on Mr. Dubé."
Issues
[9]
In his originating motion, the applicant raises the following points:
[Translation] "(a) The officer who made the decision is not a person who, within the department in question, has the appropriate capacity to act in place of the Minister;
"(b) Assuming that the officer in question did have the appropriate capacity, the Minister has failed to issue any such guideline or directive to his officer as would maintain a power of review and supervision over that officer;
"(c) Furthermore, the officer failed to take into consideration some important factors that were put before him since his decision is based solely on the financial consequences resulting from the approval of the division;
"(d) Assuming that the officer did take into consideration all the evidence that was submitted to him, his decision amounts for all practical purposes to an indirect refusal to apply section 7(3)(e);
"(e) Finally, the officer added to the Act a condition that does not appear therein by requiring the presence of a rare circumstance."
Analysis
A. Lack Of Jurisdiction
[10]
The applicant suggests that the Director, the individual who rendered the decision in this case, is not someone with the appropriate capacity to act in place of the Minister. However, he submits that
only an Advisory Officer
has the appropriate capacity to decide, pursuant to s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
, whether or not the division is unjust. The applicant relies for support on the previous decision of the Superannuation Directorate. This decision, dated May 24, 1995, was signed by Mr. Bernard Boudreau, with the title "[Translation] Advisory Officer, Advisory Services Division" (Exhibit A, Applicant's Record).
[11]
In my opinion, this argument must be rejected. There is no doubt that the advisory officer lacks the appropriate capacity to act in place of the Minister, but this does not mean that
the Director
lacks similar or equivalent jurisdiction.
[12]
In the first place, it should be noted that were are not referring here to the exercise of the authority by the Minister himself. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Nadon, J., found that the Minister had not personally reviewed the evidence submitted by the applicant in relation to s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
. This finding is consistent with the case law on the administrative delegation of powers. Nadon, J., cited at p. 12 of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , an extract from
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 8 N.R. 47 (hereinafter " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "). Dickson, J., writing on behalf of the Supreme Court of Canada, commented as follows at pages 245 and 246  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"... Although there is a general rule of construction in law that a person endowed with a discretionary power should exercise it personally ('delegatus non potest delegare') that rule can be displaced by the language, scope or object of a particular administrative scheme. A power to delegate is often implicit in a scheme empowering a Minister to act. As Professor Willis remarked in 'Delegatus Non Potest Delegare', (1943), 21 Can. Bar. Rev. 257 at p. 264:
'... in their application of the maxim "delegatus non potest delegare" to modern governmental agencies the courts have in most cases preferred to depart from the literal construction of the words of the statute which would require them to read in the word "personally" and to adopt such a construction as will best accord with the facts of modern government which, being carried on in theory by elected representatives but in practice by civil servants or local government officers, undoubtedly requires them to read in the words "or any person authorized by it".'
"See also S. A. de Smith,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
, 3rd Ed., at p. 271. Thus, where the exercise of a discretionary power is entrusted to a Minister of the Crown it may be presumed that the acts will be performed, not by the Minister in person, but by responsible officials in his department:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  unreasonable to expect them to be performed personally. It is to be supposed that the Minister will select deputies and departmental officials of experience and competence, and that such appointees, for whose conduct the Minister is accountable to the Legislature, will act on behalf of the Minister, within the bounds of their respective grants of authority, in the discharge of ministerial responsibilities. Any other approach would but lead to administrative chaos and inefficiency. [footnotes omitted]"
[13]
Although the Minister need not personally exercise his authority, the
Act
does not expressly empower him to delegate that authority. I therefore reject the respondent's submission that the Director is a "delegate of the Minister". The respondent's argument in this instance is not very clear. She writes in her factum, "[Translation] Furthermore, the Director is a delegate of the Minister and therefore fulfils the requirements of s. 24(2) of the
Interpretation Act
..." The respondent does not specify the paragraph in s. 24(2) of the
Interpretation act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-21 in question. She further adds, in a clumsy sentence: "[Translation] The acts of a delegate who exercises a power delegated by a Minister authorized expressly will not be challenged by the courts". This is a misleading paraphrase of an extract from René Dussault and Louis Borgeat,
Administrative Law: A Treatise
, 2nd Ed., vol. 4 (Toronto: Carswell, 1990) (hereinafter "
Treatise
"), which is inapplicable to this case. Dussault and Borgeat write, at p. 164: "The acts performed by an officer exercising a power delegated by a minister
duly authorized
to delegate will not be questioned by the courts (emphasis added)".
[14]
But the Minister may act or decide by implicitly
subdelegating
that power to the officials of his department who have the appropriate capacity to do so. The term "appropriate capacity" comes from s. 24(2) of the
Interpretation Act
, supra, which reads as follows:
"24(2) Words directing or empowering a minister of the Crown to do an act or thing, regardless of whether the act or thing is administrative, legislative or judicial, or otherwise applying to that minister as the holder of the office, include
(a) a minister acting for that minister or, if the office is vacant, a minister designated to act in the office by or under the authority of an order-in-council;
(b) the successors of that minister in the office;
(c) his or their deputy; and
(d) notwithstanding paragraph (c), a person appointed to serve, in the department or ministry of state over which the minister presides, in a capacity appropriate to the doing of the act or thing, or to the words so applying."
[15]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Nadon, J., held that the officer who had made the decision had the requisite capacity. However, he did not provide a detailed explanation of the nature of this capacity. Moreover, he did not consider whether other officials in the Department also had this capacity. Nadon, J., did not state that only an advisory officer had the appropriate capacity. On the contrary, he wrote at page 13 of his decision, "Nothing in the
Act
bars the Minister from delegating a power to his or her
officials
(emphasis added)".
[16]
It is necessary to note the use of a general word like "official" in the context of the Minister's implied power of subdelegation. Because of the scope of his administrative duties, the Minister may subdelegate his power to any competent official. The record in this case does not contain an official description of the Director's duties [see footnote 4]. The applicant cites Dussault and Borgeat,
Treatise
, supra, vol. I at page 264, because the authors write, "However, a Minister will have to proceed by way of formal delegation if he or she wants to confer upon an official powers which do not come within that official's ordinary jurisdiction." This extract is not conclusive. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the Supreme Court stated at p. 245, that "it may be presumed that the acts will be performed, not by the Minister in person, but by
responsible
officials ... (emphasis added)".
[17]
There is no evidence on the record that the Director does not usually make the decisions under s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
. It can, however, be inferred from the official job description of an advisory officer that the Director supervises and directs the advisory officers and would thereby have the same jurisdiction. The merit of this conclusion is evident if one considers the alternative. According to the applicant, it is only the individuals with the title of "advisory officers" that may make the decision under s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
. This conclusion reflects a narrow and outmoded reading of administrative subdelegation based on titles: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra.
[18]
Furthermore, when one reads the official description of the duties of an Advisory Officer in the Department, one sees in the section on the principal activities that the officer shall "[Translation] assist the senior counsellors in policy recommendations and
the provision of advisory services
and information affecting ... the
Act
... (emphasis added). In other words, the Director may be considered a "senior counsellor". Thus the official description implies that the senior counsellors provide advisory services because it is the task of an advisory official to provide assistance to them.
[19]
I conclude, therefore, that the Director has the appropriate capacity in the Department in question to act in place of the Minister pursuant to s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
.
B. Lack Of Guidelines Or Directives
[20]
The applicant submits that the Director's decision is void because the Minister has not issued any guidelines or directives to his officers on how to exercise the discretionary authority under s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
. However, the respondent explains that there is no implied subdelegation in this case requiring the application of a standard, rule or test that could be used as a guide by the decision-maker.
[21]
In my opinion, both submissions misconstrue the cases and authorities. The applicant and respondent alike cite Patrice Garant,
Précis de droit des administrations publiques
, 3rd Ed. (Cowansville: Yvon Blais, 1995) as authority (hereinafter "
Précis
"). Notwithstanding the unequivocal statements of the parties, the state of the law in this area is not particularly clear. I am being asked to reply to a fairly precise question to which there is no obvious answer: Should a federal government Minister issue guidelines on the exercise of a power when the scope of the power does not require that it be exercised personally?
[22]
Patrice Garant sets down a number of rules that can serve as the legal system for delegation and subdelegation of powers, at pages 106-108 of the
Précis
. The two relevant rules for the purposes of this case state:
[Translation] "Third Rule.
"At the
ministerial
level of the Administration, the cases hold that an implied subdelegation of discretionary authority
by the Minister
to his or her officials is perfectly legal unless it appears from the
Act
and the regulations as a whole that the legislative authority intended to confer a broad discretionary authority to be exercised personally by the Minister (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [hereinafter ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> '];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [emphasis added].
"Fourth rule.
"At the
infragovernmental
level of the Administration, an implied delegation of a discretionary authority will be legal only if the
organ
to which the discretionary authority is granted ensures that this authority is exercised by its officers by establishing guidelines and maintaining a superintending and reforming power over these officers [emphasis added]."
[23]
The vocabulary used in these rules can be confusing. As Dussault and Borgeat comment in the
Treatise
, supra, vol. 1 at page 247, the term "ministerial" evokes powers bestowed upon a Minister of the Crown; we often refer in the same way to "ministerial" responsibility. Yet there is another, quite different meaning to the term "ministerial" that has nothing to do with the identity of the Minister of the Crown. This meaning characterizes the nature of a decision. As Dussault and Borgeat say at page 247 of the
Treatise
, there is little discretion in a
ministerial decision
because it is "the clearest embodiment of the mandatory power".
[24]
It is therefore evident that in the third rule cited above, Professor Garant is referring to the term "ministerial" in its first meaning, or "powers bestowed upon a Minister of the Crown". Here, the term "ministerial" describes the governmental Administration and not the nature of the decision. In other words, there is little or no discretion involved in a ministerial decision, but a decision at the ministerial level, that is, by the Minister, may be discretionary.
[25]
This is the opposite of the
"infragovernmental"
level of the Administration described in the fourth rule. Professor Garant, at page 25 of the
Précis
, assigns a special meaning to the term "infragovernmental":
[Translation] "By paragovernmental and infragovernmental Administration, we mean all the agencies or institutions that make up the public Administration but are not integrated within the governmental apparatus in the narrow meaning of the term, that is, the government and its departments. These include, on the one hand, government agencies created by law and vested by the legislator with their own mission and attributions. On the other hand, they include the local or regional administrations."
[26]
This specific meaning limits the scope of the fourth rule, which arose in the cases dealing primarily with the issue of whether a municipal council could delegate to one of its officials the power to issue permits:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Que.). In the fourth rule, Professor Garant explains that it is an "
organ
to which the discretionary authority is granted ...".
[27]
At first sight, the third rule is applicable to the case at bar since it involves the authority of the Minister or the ministerial level of the governmental Administration. But there is no discussion in the third rule of the Minister's obligation to establish guidelines or maintain a superintending and reforming power over his or her officers. It can be argued that this is unnecessary, given the Minister's distinct role within the constitutional system. Ministers are constitutionally responsible - the celebrated ministerial responsibility - for the duties delegated to their officials. This principle is summarized in the English judgment
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> judgment, supra.
[28]
Likewise, there is a recognition in the authorities that the Minister has this same exceptional capacity in matters of implied subdelegation of power. [see footnote 5] David J. Mullan writes, at p. 190 of
Administrative Law
, 3rd Ed. (Toronto: Carswell, 1996):
"b) Special position of Ministers of the Crown
A minister of the Crown is entitled to act through a responsible person in his or her department. This is not strictly a delegation, since the person exercising the power acts in the name of the minister or as the minister. The exercise of power by the ministerial official does not depend on the presence of any formal authorizing instrument. This rule, known as the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> doctrine, is founded on the principle of individual ministerial responsibility. The minister is accountable to the legislature, not the courts, for the actions of his or her subordinates ... [footnotes omitted]"
[29]
Professor Mullan does not explicitly discuss the problem of the Minister's implied subdelegation of power and the problem of the lack of guidelines. But he notes at page 195 that, generally speaking, "The delegation is more likely to withstand scrutiny ... particularly if the original authority in delegating specifies criteria that the delegate must take into account in exercising the power or imposes limitations on the exercise of the power.":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 241; 32 Admin. L.R. 211;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Gen. Div.).
[30]
It should, however, be noted that all the cases cited by Professor Mullan concern what Professor Garant, in the
Précis
, describes as the "infragovernmental" level of the Administration. The cases focus on the following question: Should the Minister personally exercise the power? The principle laid down in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , [see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] is that if the Act confers a broad discretionary power on the Minister, this constitutes a limit on the implied delegation of powers by the Minister. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Supreme Court concluded that in those circumstances the Minister should himself exercise the power.
[31]
As I noted earlier, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> held that the Minister need not personally exercise his power under s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the applicant raised the question, "Even if the power can be subdelegated, has the Minister established standards to be applied by his officers"? Nadon, J., did not answer this question in his judgment because his decision was reached on other grounds. However, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Nadon, J., characterized the nature of the power granted to the Minister in these words, at p. 182: "[T]he discretion conferred on the Minister under s. 7(3)(e) relates in my opinion
to the enforcement
of the order for division" (emphasis added). Nadon, J., rejected the argument that the Minister shall refuse to approve an application for division when the evidence provided demonstrates "the unjustness of the division".
[32]
At pages 181-182 of his decision, Nadon, J., discussed in greater detail the nature of the power conferred on the Minister:
"The English version of s. 7(3)(e) has a broader meaning than the French version. The English and French versions of s. 7(3)(e) read as follows:
'7(3) The Minister shall refuse to approve the division of the pension benefits if
. . . . .
(e) the Minister is satisfied, based on evidence submitted to the Minister, that it would not be just to approve the division.
'7(3) Le ministre refuse de donner son approbation dans les cas suivants:
. . . . .
(e) il est convaincu, d'après les éléments de preuve qui lui sont présentés, du caractère injuste du partage.'
"If read literally, the French version of paragraph 7(3)(e) seems to confer a discretion on the Minister to decide whether the division, that ordered by Michaud, J., in the case at bar, is unjust. The English version, on the other hand, does not seem to confer a discretion on the Minister to consider [Translation] 'the unjustness of the division'. It provides that the Minister must refuse to approve the division of the pension benefits if, on the basis of the evidence, it would not be just to do so. It is in my view clear that the English version does not require the Minister to consider the division itself. Rather, the Minister must consider whether approval of the decision 'would not be just'.
"In my view, the English version is preferable to the French version. I do not think Parliament intended to confer a discretion on the Minister to decide whether or not a division effected by a court of competent jurisdiction was just. Rather, I feel that Parliament's intention was to authorize the Minister to refuse to approve such a division if it would in the circumstances be unjust to approve it."
[33]
It may be argued that a discretion limited
to the performance
of the order is more restricted than a discretion dealing with the division itself. But the use of the word "
unjust
" in s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
creates some problems in relation to the exercise of the discretion. A participant in the pension plan who objects to the division would certainly not want the vital issue of injustice to be left to the unfettered discretion of a department official. Although it is not mandatory that the Minister spell out some criteria or standards to guide the official under s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
, this would be desirable.
[34]
In conclusion, the court must in my opinion take note of the relatively limited nature of the Minister's discretionary power under s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
, the expanded scope of the implied delegation at the ministerial level, and the failure of the decided cases to address this specific issue. Given these factors, the lack of guidelines to which the Director can refer in order to approve or not approve the division of pension benefits does not render his decision illegal.
C. Failure To Consider Certain
Important Aspects Of The Evidence
[35]
In addition to the issue of jurisdiction and subdelegation, the applicant submits that the Director committed some reviewable errors of law. First, he submits that the officer failed to consider some important evidence:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). In his notice of objection, the applicant referred to the potential immigration problems for his wife. The applicant is currently resident in the Dominican Republic with his wife, who is a citizen of that country. The applicant contends that if he is forced to return to Canada to try to get a job, he will run into some immigration problems for his wife.
[36]
The applicant argues that the decision is based solely on the financial consequences resulting from the approval of the division. In the letter dated May 17, 1996, the Director wrote, in a short paragraph, "I have carefully considered
the information concerning Mr. Dubé's financial situation
. ... I am not satisfied that the division is unjust
owing to the financial repercussions
on Mr. Dubé" (emphasis added).
[37]
Notwithstanding the applicant's contentions, I am satisfied that the Director considered all the important items in the evidence. Unfortunately, the record does not contain a copy of the notice of objection. We have only the description or a summary found in the Director's decision, which reads as follows: [see footnote 6]
[Translation] "It is argued that Mr. Dubé's pension represents his only source of income; that if this pension is reduced as contemplated, he will be forced to return to Canada to try to find work; that he could have some difficulty finding a job; and that his wife cannot accompany him because of immigration restrictions. It is also stated that the particulars concerning Ms. Lepage's income and employment are not known, but that it is thought that her standard of living is acceptable."
[38]
In my opinion, it is arguable that the immigration issue is actually a
financial consequence
simply described in other words. The evidence submitted by the applicant tends to resemble an entire
sequence of financial ideas
. The
potential
immigration restrictions will be effective only if one accepts the premise that, with the division, the applicant could not earn his living in the Dominican Republic with a reduced pension. If the immigration issue is a financial consequence, the officer did not fail to consider all the evidence.
[39]
The applicant submits as well that the financial consequences of the division are irrelevant in assessing whether the division is just or unjust. This argument, too, must be rejected. The applicant is right to say that the implementation of the division will always have some financial consequences. However, I think the supposed "[Translation] consequences other than financial" submitted by the applicant - a return to Canada and a return to the labour market - are financial consequences.
D. Indirect Refusal To Apply S.
7(3)(e)
[40]
The applicant submits that it is hard to imagine other plausible circumstances that would have the consequence of rendering the division unjust. The officer is indirectly refusing to exercise his jurisdiction, he says, and he refers enigmatically to the "[Translation] general conduct of the federal board, commission or tribunal", although he does not specify how or why such conduct is relevant to the application for judicial review, other than to say that the
Information Guide
to the
Act
contains no reference to consideration of whether the division is just or unjust in a reading entitled "On what grounds can an objection be based"? The applicant also contends that the Director should have asked for new evidence from the parties.
[41]
In my opinion, this submission too must be rejected. However, I agree with the applicant when he says that the Superannuation Directorate should revise the brochure for participants in a pension plan. This does not mean that the Director indirectly refused to apply the Minister's power under s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
. The brochure states: "In the event of any discrepancies between the content of this brochure and the
Pension Benefits Division Act
and its associated regulations, the latter will prevail". I am of the opinion as well that the onus of presenting the evidence remains with the parties and not the decision-maker. Finally, the applicant attempts to attack the Director's decision on its merits by emphasizing the apparent seriousness of his case.
E. Addition Of The Rare Circumstance
Criterion
[42]
Finally, the applicant submits that the Director added to the
Act
a condition that does not appear therein, by requiring the presence of a rare circumstance. The Director wrote in his decision: "Accordingly, the division will be refused only in rare circumstances, where evidence of a compelling nature is presented. I recognize that circumstances may have changed since the date of the judgment but I am not satisfied that the division is unjust owing to the financial repercussions on Mr. Dubé".
[43]
Although this submission by the applicant is valid, it must still in my opinion be rejected. First, it must be noted that s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
makes no mention of "rare circumstances". The applicant argues that when Parliament wishes a statutory provision to apply only in rare circumstances, it states this expressly.
[44]
Moreover, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , when describing the power of the Minister under s. 7(3)(e), Nadon, J., did not specify the need for rare circumstances. On the contrary, he focused on the unjust nature of the division. Nadon, J., wrote, at page 182, "Rather, I feel that Parliament's intention was to authorize the Minister to refuse to approve such a division if it would
in the circumstances
be unjust to approve it (emphasis added)". Similarly, Nadon, J., noted at page 16: "In other words, the Minister must consider whether it would
in the circumstances
be unjust to allow Michaud, J.'s, order to be enforced. That in my view is the question the officer should have asked". And finally, he commented at page 186, "As for
the circumstances
that might prompt the Minister to refuse to approve a division, I do not have to rule on this issue". The absence of the word "rare" will be noted in all of the above-quoted extracts from the judgment.
[45]
In my opinion, therefore, the Director erred in his interpretation of s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
, when he wrote that "the division will be refused only in rare circumstances. ..." However, this is a rather modest error and could have no effect on the result. I conclude, therefore, that, notwithstanding the error in law, judicial review is unwarranted in the case at bar. I refer to the principle laid down by the court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 376 (F.C.A.). MacGuigan, J.A., stated, at p. 395 [D.L.R.]:
"If a final word needs to be said, let it be that
an inconsequential error of law, or even a number of them, which could have no effect on the outcome do not require this court to set aside a decision
under s. 28(1)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), Hugessen, J.A., after setting out the test of s. 28(1), commented as follows:
'In my view, nothing in the words used makes them other than attributive of jurisdiction, they create the power in the court to set aside decision which offend in one of the state ways but do not impose a duty to do so in every case.
'This appears also, I would suggest, from the wording of section 52, which describes the dispositions which are open to the court on a section 28 application. The opening words are: "The Court of Appeal may ...". They are clearly permissive and nowhere is there a suggestion that the court must act whenever it finds an error of law.
'This is not to say that the court is entitled to decline to exercise the jurisdiction which is given to it by sections 28 and 52, but simply that there is nothing in the language of the statute obliging the court to grant the remedy sought where it is inappropriate to do so. While it can no doubt be argued that the statute creates certain rights for the litigant, it does so by granting powers to the court and the latter must remain the master of whether or not they are to be exercised in any particular case.'"
[46]
This court has consistently applied the principle cited above, that an inconsequential error of law that could have no effect on the outcome does not require the court to set aside a decision: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 242 (T.D.). Reed, J., also noted at p. 248 of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that this principle is applicable "not only in cases of procedural irregularity but also to cases involving an error of law on a substantive point".
[47]
In my opinion, the Director's error in law is an example of an inconsequential error that could have no effect on the outcome. The Director wrote in his decision that "I am not
satisfied
that the division is
unjust
owing to the financial repercussions on Mr. Dubé". In other words, notwithstanding the fact that the Director alluded to rare circumstances, the decision is based on the issue of whether or not the division was unjust. Furthermore, the words chosen by the Director appear to derive to some extent from the prior judgment on file. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Nadon, J., quoted at page 184 and 186 of the judgment an extract from the Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence of the Legislative Committee on Bill C-55 from June 4, 1991, on the subject of s. 7(3)(e) of that bill. Ms. Lee, the official responsible for explaining and defending the bill, said:
"A situation could come up, for example, where under the agreement one party was to do something in return for which the other party was to do another thing, and where the condition precedent, as it were, wasn't established. It was anticipated paragraph 7(3)(e) would not be used
except in very rare circumstances
and with very compelling evidence." (my emphasis)
[48]
It appears that it was from this extract from the Minutes of Proceedings that the Director drew the "rare circumstances" criterion. It will be noted that the Director's decision began with an explicit acknowledgement of Nadon, J.'s, previous judgment in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case. It is arguable as well that the use or borrowing of terminology reflecting Parliament's intention indicates that the Director did not act with unfettered discretion.
[49]
It will be noted as well that the Director's use of words is consistent with the authorities concerning statutory exceptions. It is important to keep in mind that s. 7(3)(e) of the
Act
is an exception, since the purpose of the
Act
is to allow the division of pension benefits. However, the applicant proffered the unexpected argument that s. 7(3)(e) is an exception from an exception. That is, in pension matters the rule is that benefits are immune from seizure -
Public Service Superannuation Act
,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  applicant argues that s. 7(3)(e) is really a "double negation" that must be broadly construed.
[50]
With respect, the applicant's argument is extremely imaginative, but in my opinion does not reflect the law. For example, s. 12 of the
Interpretation Act
states that "Every enactment ... shall be given such fair, large and liberal construction and interpretation
as best ensures the attainment of its objects
(emphasis added)". The extract from the Minutes of Proceedings quoted above in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case confirms the object of the
Act
. If we refer to an authoritative work,
Driedger on the Construction of Statutes
, 3rd Edition by Ruth Sullivan (Toronto: Butterworths, 1994) at p. 369, the message is similar:
"In keeping with the current emphasis on purposive analysis, modern courts are particularly concerned that exceptions and exemptions be interpreted in light of their underlying rationale and not be used to undermine the board purpose of the legislation. In the words of La Forest, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 197 (S.C.C.), an exception 'should not be construed more widely than is necessary to fulfill the values which support it'."
Conclusion
[51]
The application for judicial review is unwarranted. The powers conferred on the Minister pursuant to the
Act
were correctly exercised. In this case, the decision of May 17, 1996, was consistent with the requirements of the
Act
.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/slm
Footnotes
1.	In his originating motion, the applicant also named the Superannuation Directorate and Eugène C. Léger as respondents. On August 7, 1996, the Superannuation Directorate moved to have the name of the Superannuation Directorate removed from the application for judicial review and for Eugène C. Léger to be designated as mis en cause and not respondent. On September 27, 1996, the prothonotary, Richard Morneau, allowed the motion in part. He ordered that the Superannuation Directorate and Eugène C. Léger be removed from the style of cause of the application for judicial review. However, there is no designation of mis en cause. [see
Syndicat des journalistes de  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. On January 17, 1997, Pinard, J., dismissed an appeal from the prothonotary's order. [See 128 F.T.R. 241]
2.	On June 21, 1991, Michaud, J., corrected an error of form that had slipped into his judgment.
3.	The second argument submitted by the applicant in his notice of objection is not at issue in the present application for judicial review. To summarize, the applicant argued that the
Act
should not apply to divorce decrees issued prior to February 14, 1992, the date of enactment of the
Act
by Parliament. The Director rejected this argument on the ground that Parliament clearly intended to authorize the presentation of applications made in the context of previous orders or agreements, as is indicated in s. 7(5) of the
Act
. Furthermore, Nadon, J., held in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 10, that "the Minister must approve the division notwithstanding that the application is based on an order made before the day on which the
Act
came into force".
4.	In his originating notice of motion, the applicant only asked that the Superannuation Directorate convey to him a certified copy of the job description of an advisory officer.
5.	See also Dussault and Borgeat,
Treatise
, supra, vol. 4, at p. 163: "The courts on occasion do recognize an implicit statutory power of delegation,
especially where authority is conferred on a minister
...".
6.	In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Nadon, J., quoted the first notice of objection written by the applicant, at page 4 "[Translation] In view of the above facts, it is our view that our client would incur substantial injury were he required to endure a drop in his retirement benefits as the result of a division. First, our client would have to return to live in Canada. Second, our client would have to terminate his retirement and return to work. Third, he would have to leave his new wife, who cannot come to Canada".