[1]
Reed, J.
: On May 11, 1987, the Associate Chief Justice rendered reasons and an order with reference to a motion brought to vary the findings of a report made by the prothonotary, Mr. P.A.K. Giles [see paragraphs 20 to 31 below]. That report was dated October 23, 1986 and been prepared pursuant to an order of Mr. Justice Walsh dated November 2, 1982. That order required that any damages, which might arise from the defendant's infringement of the plaintiff's patent if infringement there be, were to be the subject of a reference after trial, pursuant to rule 500.
[2]
As a result of these various proceedings the issues now before me are: (1) whether the plaintiff should be entitled to recover, as part of the award of loss of profits, a prejudgment interest component and if so at what rate; (2) whether the plaintiff should be entitled to postjudgment interest at an amount greater than the 5% provided for in the Interest Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. I-18, s. 3; (3) what disposition should be made respecting the costs of the motions brought to vary the findings of the prothonotary's report. The defendant's participation, in the hearing before me, proceeded on the basis that it should not be taken, thereby, to be waiving any right to appeal the May 11 order of the Associate Chief Justice, should it wish in the future to do so.
[3]
With respect to prejudgment interest the plaintiff argues that the Referee's refusal to award such interest was based on (1) an erroneous finding of fact and (2) the misapplication or misstatement of a principle of law.
[4]
With respect to the first argument, it is alleged that the prothonotary proceeded on an erroneous finding of fact when he assumed that the plaintiff's original claim for profits had been calculated so as to include "investment profits". Reference was made to pages 12 and 13 of the report, particularly page 13 and the statement: "to calculate interest in the profits would be to allow for investment profits twice". The plaintiff's second argument is that while the prothonotary properly considered the awarding of prejudgment interest as a matter of discretion, he wrongly treated the defendant's inability to prove apportionment of profits as an equitable ground on which to deny the plaintiff any sums attributable to interest.
[5]
With respect to the first argument, counsel for the defendant did not make strong representations. I accept the plaintiff's argument. The calculation for loss of profits was done on a straight revenue minus expenditures basis, from audited financial statements. These statements related to the components of the apparatus being sold without any calculation for investment income. The prothonotary therefore erred in assuming that investment profits had already been included in the plaintiff's claim for profits.
[6]
With respect to the second argument, it is first of all necessary to review the nature of the patent which was declared to be infringed. The patent related to a metal frame mechanism for connecting rectangular sheet metal ducting. Ducting which is used for example, in air conditioning or forced air heating systems. The metal frame comprised several components; one was a corner piece. It was the defendant's corner piece which was declared to infringe the plaintiff's patent. Thus, in calculating the loss of profits which the plaintiff had suffered, an apportionment was made as between the profits attributable to the frame as a whole and the profits attributable to the corner piece. The defendant argued before the prothonotary, however, that a further apportionment should be made. It was argued that since it had been a particular aspect of the corner piece, the offset flange, which infringed the plaintiff's patent, an apportionment of profits as between that aspect and the corner piece as a whole should be made. The learned prothonotary seemed inclined to accept this argument but stated, at page 7 of his report:
"... the onus of proving the proper apportionment is on the defendant ...
"In this case the facts would appear to have made it difficult if not impossible to apportion the profits in any event. However the defendant refused to provide information on his business after infringement ceased which has eliminated the possibility of comparing profits with and without the use of the infringing offset should that have appeared a valid means of deciding an apportionment. That refusal has removed further the possibility of making a reasoned apportionment.
"That same refusal leads me to conclude that failure to apportion, while unjust would not be shockingly unjust ...
. . . . .
"I intend therefore to recommend that because the defendant has not discharged the onus of proving a particular apportionment the plaintiff should be awarded the profits from the corner piece without apportionment. I intend to take into account the evident, but not measurable, penalty I perceive to be an injustice, but not a shocking injustice, when considering the matter of interest as a component of profits."
[7]
Then, on page 13 of his report, the prothonotary concluded:
"... It is my view that while equity may require an award for investment profits in the post infringement period that equitable requirement is more than balanced by the inequity resulting from the inability to apportion profits. To find otherwise would be to compound the inequity of the failure to apportion. I will therefore recommend that no award be made for pre-judgment interest or investment profit ..."
[8]
The plaintiff argues that the defendant's inability, indeed unwillingness, to try to prove apportionment, as between the offset flange and the corner piece as a whole, should not be considered as an equitable ground for denying the plaintiff monies otherwise payable.
[9]
I think the plaintiff's argument is well founded. The obligation to prove that a particular apportionment should be made, is on the defendant. In this case, the failure, indeed unwillingness to try to do so should not be used against the plaintiff as a reason for decreasing the award it would otherwise have received. Indeed, the failure to be able to apportion and the impracticality of doing so is, in my view, some indication that in this case apportionment as between the offset flange and the corner piece as a whole is inappropriate. Whether the corner piece would have had any economic value at all without the offset flange is not proved. When a system is made up of several independent components, for example, (as is the case here with the rectangular frame) it may be appropriate to apportion profits as between the respective components, but I am less convinced that an apportionment can or should be made as between the offset flange of the corner piece and other characteristics of the corner piece component. I note also that the judgment of February 14, 1985 ordered that a reference as to damages or profits flowing from the infringement of the
corner piece
be determined, not merely those flowing from the offset flange.
[10]
Counsel for the defendant argues that the prothonotary's report, particularly those aspects which require an exercise of discretion by the prothonotary, should not be altered unless there has been an error which could be labelled one of principle. I think this occurred in the present case. The defendant's failure to prove apportionment should not be taken as an equitable reason to reduce the award otherwise payable to the plaintiff.
[11]
The defendant argues however, that no prejudgment interest is, in any event, awardable. The plaintiff argued before the prothonotary that such was payable in accordance with the decision and reasoning of Mr. Justice Addy in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . That case dealt with an accounting of profits in a patent infringement action. The particular patent was declared to have been infringed in a judgment rendered November 14, 1979. A reference to determine the accounting of profits payable to the plaintiff was held and argument thereon heard on January 5-8, 1982. Mr. Justice Addy's judgment referred to above, on appeal from the prothonotary's report of the reference, was rendered November 26, 1982. The plaintiff sought interest on the profits determined to be payable at the rate of 5% calculated from November 14, 1979, that is from the date of the judgment which found the defendant had infringed the plaintiff's patent but before there was any assessment of damages.
[12]
I would summarize Mr. Justice Addy's reasoning in the Teledyne case as follows. The plaintiff had a right to elect an assessment of damages or an accounting of profits. The remedy of an accounting of profits is an equitable remedy; it proceeds on the basis that all profits made by the defendant as a result of the infringement should be paid over to the successful plaintiff. The principle is that a person who appropriates the property of another (and infringement of a patent right is seen as a species of such appropriation) should not gain in any way, either directly or indirectly from that appropriation. The burden of proving what profits the defendant has made from the use of the plaintiff's property is on the defendant. If the defendant does not do so in a complete manner, certain assumptions will be made. One of those assumptions is that interest at the "going rate" was part of the profit governed by the defendant from the use of the plaintiff's property.
[13]
As I read the learned prothonotary's decision, the defendant did not prove all the profits which flowed to it as a result of the patent infringement. I understand the prothonotary to have concluded that the profits from the sale of the corner piece were plowed back into the defendant's business, thereby becoming part of the assets of the business. Thus, to determine the total profits garnered by the defendant it would have been necessary to ascertain the rate of return earned on the assets of the business as a whole; this was not possible because the defendant had refused to provide information respecting the assets and profits of the business during the prejudgment and postjudgment period. Thus, the prothonotary concluded that in this case, the application of the principle that a plaintiff was entitled to all profits, both direct and indirect, earned by the defendant, required the inclusion of a deemed interest amount in the calculation of the profits earned. He refused to take this step, as noted above, because of the defendant's failure to prove apportionment. Since, for the reasons given, I consider that refusal to have been inappropriate, an amount on account of interest shall be included in the calculation of profits. I consider it appropriate to be calculated on the basis of an interest rate of the prime bank rate plus one percent compounded semi-annually.
[14]
The defendant argues that there should be no inclusion of amount attributable to interest because the cases relied on in the Teledyne case all dealt with fact situations where the defendant misappropriated the plaintiff's property through fraud or a breach of trust:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  patent infringement can arise when there is no intention on the part of the defendant to appropriate the plaintiff's property. Secondly it is argued that there have been delays in this case which were not the responsibility of the defendant and the defendant should not bear the cost of those.
[15]
I have read carefully the cases referred to by Mr. Justice Addy in the Teledyne case and the decision of the English Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  clear that the principle enunciated in them is equally applicable to this case. An accounting of profits proceeds on the basis that the defendant is being treated as the plaintiff's trustee. In the text written by T.A. Blanco White entitled Patents for Inventions (4th Ed. 1974) at page 430 it is explained as follows:
"An account of profits (under which the defendant's business, so far as it relates to infringements of the patent concerned, is treated as having been carried on on behalf of the patentee) ..."
And, in Fisher and Smart on Patents (Canada Law Book, 1914) at page 228:
"... In electing to take such profits the plaintiff condones the infringement, and adopts what was done by the defendant, who may in the enquiry be regarded as the agent or trustee of the plaintiff. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .) ..."
[16]
As Mr. Justice Addy notes the remedy of an accounting of profits is an equitable remedy; the inclusion in the calculation of a deemed interest amount is a matter of discretion. If it were clear that the defendant's infringement of the plaintiff's patent had been by inadvertence, it might not be proper to include in the calculation of profits an amount attributable to interest, at least for the period of time prior to the date on which the defendant had notice of the plaintiff's patent. In some cases it might not be proper to include such an amount in the calculation at all; this will depend on the facts of the particular case. In this case the infringement was not by inadvertence and in my view the facts are not such as to render the inclusion of an amount on account of interest inappropriate or improper. With respect to the delays which have been neither the fault of the defendant nor the plaintiff, as between the two parties it is more appropriate that the defendant bear their costs.
[17]
The plaintiff based part of his argument for prejudgment interest on the Ontario Courts of Justice Act, 1984, S.O. 1984, c. 11 and the decision of Mr. Justice Addy in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Counsel for the defendant argued that this issue had not been raised before the prothonotary (the decision in the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  dealt with an assessment of damages, not an accounting of profits. Since I have found an amount on account of interest payable on the basis of the reasoning set out in the Teledyne case I do not need to deal with this argument.
[18]
Insofar as postjudgment interest is concerned all parties accept that s. 3 of the Interest Act applies when no award is made, but that the court has a discretion to set an amount at a rate higher than 5% ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)). In my view, in this case postjudgment interest should be calculated on the same basis as prejudgment interest. There is no reason for a different rate to apply. Also, to award an artificially low rate of interest (5% is admittedly less artificial now than it was a few years ago) means that the plaintiff bears a loss which more properly should be borne by the defendant. Postjudgment interest should be paid at the rate of the bank prime rate plus one percent, compounded semi-annually.
[19]
The plaintiff having been successful both before me and before the Associate Chief Justice, the defendant shall pay the cost of those motions. I would ask the plaintiff to submit a draft judgment in accordance with these reasons.
Appeal allowed.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  E. Dimock, for the plaintiff;
I. Goldsmith, Q.C., and Brian Edmonds, for the defendant.
Solicitors of Record:
Sim, Hughes, Dimmock, Toronto, Ontario, for the plaintiff;
McCarthy and McCarthy, Toronto, Ontario, for the defendant.
This motion was heard by Jerome, A.C.J., of the Trial Division of the Federal Court of Canada at Toronto, Ontario, on January 6, 1987. The decision of Jerome, A.C.J., was delivered on May 11, 1987.
[20]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This motion by the plaintiff and cross-motion by the defendant appeal from the report of Peter A.K. Giles, A.S.P. dated October 23, 1986 following a directed reference in this matter.
[21]
On November 2, 1982 Mr. Justice Walsh ordered that damages would be the subject of a reference after trial pursuant to rule 500. By judgment dated December 3, 1984 and amended February 14, 1985, Madame Justice Reed found that certain of the plaintiff's patents were invalid and void but that claims 1 to 8 inclusive of Canada Letters Patent 1,106,419 were valid and that they had been infringed by the defendant's Nexus corner pieces. The plaintiff's action was tried together with action T-889-82 in which the defendant claimed that this plaintiff had infringed claims 1 to 8 and 11 to 13 of Canadian Patent 113,627. Each of those claims was held valid and infringed. The reference took place August 18 and 19, 1986 and proceeded largely on the basis of an agreement between the parties as to:
(a) the defendant's total revenue from sale of its four-bolt duct connection system which included corner pieces incorporating the infringing element;
(b) certain deductions from the said revenue relating to the costs of generating that revenue, thus yielding an agreed upon "interim profit" figure;
(c) the dollar amount of certain further deductions which the defendant submitted were appropriate and which the plaintiff submitted were not; these are discussed further below; and
(d) the portion of the interim profit and unagreed-upon deductions that should be attributed to the corner piece portion of the defendant's four-bolt duct connection system.
[22]
Plaintiff's counsel had requested the Referee to recommend that the plaintiff recover a total of $159,024.00 on the reference plus postjudgment interest at prevailing rates. The Referee recommended in his report that the plaintiff recover a total of only $78,262.50 plus postjudgment interest at 5%.
[23]
The learned Referee recommended that the defendant be allowed to deduct from revenue its legal expenses, as well as interest paid on money borrowed for such expenses, relating to the defendant's action for patent infringement against the plaintiff. The plaintiff appeals this recommendation, suggesting that no such deductions should be allowed. The defendant cross-appeals, submitting that it should also be allowed to deduct its expenses and related interest associated with its defence of this action, which were disallowed by the Referee.
[24]
The learned Referee held that the legal expenses of protecting the defendant's patented aspect of the corner piece, that is, the expenses in association with Action No. T-8889-82 "... are as much a cause of producing that revenue from the defendant's corner piece as the cost of raw material and are equally deductible". The plaintiff had consented to the deduction by the defendant of legal costs relating to general corporate matters and the obtaining of the defendant's patent.
[25]
The plaintiff argues that the learned Referee erred in four particulars:
1) in allowing a deduction for legal expenses by the defendant;
2) in allowing a deduction for interest on money borrowed for the legal expenses;
3) in failing to award the plaintiff prejudgment interest; and
4) in failing to award the judgment interest at prevailing rates rather than at 5%.
[26]
It is the defendant's submission that the learned Referee erred as follows:
1) in failing to allow a deduction to the defendant for legal expenses incurred in defending the action for infringement of the plaintiff's patent;
2) similarly, in failing to permit a deduction of interest on money borrowed for the legal expenses; and
3) in awarding the plaintiff the costs of the reference including its expert accountants' preparation and appearance in court.
[27]
I can deal very quickly with the issue as to the allowance for deductions of this defendant's legal expenses. As might be expected, the learned trial judge in written reasons gave exhaustive consideration to submissions put forward on behalf of both parties on all issues. The question of costs, which of course rests on her discretion, was argued at considerable length. Her determination that each party was to bear its own costs was anything but a customary award following the event. It was a careful pronouncement on the way in which costs should reflect the conduct of the parties to the litigation. In awarding legal expenses to the defendant under the head of damages, the learned Associate Senior Prothonotary erroneously entered upon the area of costs reserved to the trial judge and made a determination that seems to me to have been directly contrary to a specific finding as to costs made by the presiding judge. I would therefore allow the appeal in respect to any award as to the defendant's litigation expenses and money borrowed for that purpose.
[28]
In a similar way, the issue of costs upon the reference does not present great difficulty. I find nothing inappropriate in the order as to costs upon the reference itself, which is surely best determined by the learned Prothonotary who presided over it.
[29]
Finally, the issue of interest both before and after judgment raises more difficult questions, both procedural and substantive about our practice in appeals from references, and about the jurisdiction and responsibility of the Referee. It has been suggested that the Referee ought to be confined to a quantum measurement of damages under heads of liability determined by the trial judge. If so, he would be confined in this case to a simple calculation of prejudgment and postjudgment interest under specific directions from the trial judge. Such a view has been expressed for example, in respect to punitive or exemplary damages. There are, however, several decisions that have expressed the opposite view - that a Referee's responsibility goes to a consideration of any claim for damages advanced by a successful party and might very well involve both questions of liability and quantum.
[30]
All of this raises a further question of our practice and indeed the rules of the Federal Court which provide for appeals from Referees and at the same time clearly contemplate an ultimate report to the trial judge. The specific reasons why I heard this appeal instead of the trial judge are, for the moment, unimportant. Appropriately, the Referee has recommended to the trial judge a certain position in respect to interest. I would consider it inappropriate to interpose a different recommendation since in any event the final decision will rest with the trial judge who is of course the only one who can sign judgment in this matter. I would observe that as a practice, it is preferable that such appeals be heard by the trial judge, but at the same time I will ask our Rules Committee to consider amendments which would have the effect of accomplishing the same purpose, perhaps through a motion for judgment in which both parties would have the same opportunity to take issue with the report that they have in the present appeal practice.
[31]
In any event, with specific reference to the Referee's report in this instance, it is my view that nothing could be served by interposing my opinion on the subject of interest which should be determined by the trial judge, presumably upon motion for judgment. I would also leave the matter of costs of this appeal to the trial judge.
Motion dismissed.
Editor: Eric B. Appleby/sms
[End of document]