 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 532)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Beaudry, J.
April 25, 2008.
Counsel:
Stephen L. Winchie, for the applicant;
Gordon Lee, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Stephen L. Winchie, Mississauga, Ontario, for the applicant;
John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Beaudry, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a Humanitarian and Compassionate (H&C) decision, pursuant to subsection 72(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2001, c. 27 (the Act), in which Immigration Officer Barriero (the Officer) determined that there was insufficient evidence that applying for permanent residence from outside of Canada would cause the applicant to experience hardships that are undue, undeserved or disproportionate.
ISSUES
[2]
The applicant suggests that several issues should be decided in the present case; however, I would simply reframe the issue as follows: did the Officer commit a reviewable error based on the evidence before her?
[3]
The respondent raises a second issue: should the application for judicial review be dismissed on the ground that the applicant does not come before the Court with clean hands? I will address both issues, beginning with the latter.
[4]
For the following reasons, the application for judicial review shall be dismissed.
FACTS
[5]
The applicant is a citizen of Jordan, born February 14, 1978. He entered Canada on December 24, 2000, and made a claim for refugee protection. The claim was denied by the Immigration and Refugee Board on June 24, 2002.
[6]
The applicant made a first application for permanent residence on H&C grounds on May 24, 2003, which was denied March 22, 2005. Leave to the Federal Court was denied on April 7, 2005.
[7]
The applicant completed the PRRA process in which it was determined that he would not be at risk if returned to Jordan. The applicant applied to the Court for a stay of removal, which was denied. The applicant ignored the Court order and did not present himself for removal. On September 16, 2005 a warrant was issued for his arrest, which remains open to this day.
[8]
The applicant went underground to avoid arrest and removal, and applied for permanent residence on H&C grounds a second time. The decision of the Officer regarding the second H&C application is at issue in the case at bar.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
[9]
The applicant's application for consideration on H&C grounds was rejected by letter, dated September 21, 2007. The letter and Field Operations Support System (FOSS) notes form the decision under review. The Officer provided the following reasons in support of her decision:
a) The Officer found that there was insufficient evidence that the applicant remained in Canada because of circumstances beyond his control. She noted the fact that the applicant ignored the removal order and remained in Canada illegally.
b) The Officer determined that the conditions in Jordan alleged by the applicant, namely that it is a "war prone environment" with "widespread terrorist activities", are faced by the general population. Because the applicant did not present any elements of personalized risk, the Officer declined to forward the case for a risk opinion.
c) The Officer considered several factors relating to the applicant's establishment in Canada. She considered the applicant's employment as a cook in a Middle Eastern restaurant, as well as his savings, salary, investment in a Canadian corporation, volunteer work, relatives, language skills and letters of support.
d) The Officer noted the applicant remained in Canada in violation of the immigration laws of the country, and that he purchased shares in the business in January 2005, when he knew his status in Canada was tenuous. She noted the absence of sufficient evidence supporting his allegation that his departure from Canada would negatively affect his investment.
e) The Officer found that the applicant's skill as a cook was transferable, and that he was employed in Jordan for 11 years prior to his departure. The Officer credited the applicant for his volunteer work. She noted that she was not satisfied that the loss of employment or volunteering opportunities in Canada would cause the applicant undue, undeserved or disproportionate hardship.
f) The Officer acknowledged the presence of the applicant's aunts and cousins in Canada, but determined that there was insufficient evidence to support the applicant's claim that his parents and seven siblings were no longer living in Jordan. She found it reasonable that the applicant would be able to locate some of his family members if he returned.
g) The Officer noted that the applicant had significant savings and would be able to secure accommodation in Jordan.
h) The Officer considered a medical letter from a Dr. H. Obaji attesting to the applicant's complaints of vomiting, heart burn, epigastric pain and insomnia for which the letter stated there was "no specific diagnosis". The letter further stated that the applicant was scheduled to attend an appointment for psychological counselling for anxiety and depression. The Officer wrote that there was insufficient evidence to support the fact that the applicant attended the appointment, or whether a specific diagnosis resulted from the process of psychological counselling. The Officer further rejected the submission from applicant's counsel stating that the applicant is "psychologically disturbed" and that his "mental condition is highly vulnerable", on the ground that counsel is not qualified to arrive at such a conclusion.
i) The Officer concluded by restating the fact that insufficient evidence was presented to demonstrate that the applicant remained in Canada because of circumstances beyond his control. She found that the applicant did not demonstrate that sufficient H&C grounds exist to warrant an exemption from the requirements of the Act, and that he provided insufficient evidence that he would experience undue, unusual or disproportionate hardships.
ANALYSIS
Standard of Review
[10]
This Court has previously held that the review of H&C decisions should be afforded considerable deference, and that the applicable standard was reasonableness
simpliciter
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  review of H&C decisions should continue to be subject to deference by the Court, and are reviewable on the newly articulated standard of reasonableness ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at paragraphs 47, 55, 57, 62, and 64).
[12]
For a decision to be reasonable there must be justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision making process. The decision must fall within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and the law ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at paragraph 47).
Applicant does not come to the Court with clean hands
[13]
The respondent submits that the application for judicial review should be dismissed without entertainment of the merits because the applicant has not come to this Court with clean hands. The respondent submits that the applicant has sworn a false affidavit. The respondent argues that the omission from the applicant's affidavit of his failure to appear for his removal, while claiming to be a law abiding individual during his time in Canada, constitutes a misrepresentation. The respondent notes that a warrant was issued for the applicant's arrest on September 16, 2005, which remains active.
[14]
The respondent refers the Court to the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Homex Realty and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in which Justice Estey, writing for the majority stated:
... The principles upon which
certiorari
, and now the modern order in judicial review, have been issued have long included the principle of disentitlement where a court, because of the conduct of the applicant, will decline the grant of the discretionary remedy.
[15]
The principle that the Court may exercise its discretion to dismiss an application because the applicant does not have clean hands has been applied in recent cases, specifically where an applicant evaded immigration authorities or an arrest warrant in order to delay or avoid removal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] F.C.J. No. 1812 at paragraphs 48 to 57;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] F.C.J. No. 530) at paragraphs 16 and 17).
[16]
I agree with the respondent's submission that the applicant's disregard for Canadian immigrations and law enforcement authorities, as well as for the order of this Court dismissing the stay of removal, demonstrate that the applicant does not come to the Court with clean hands.
[17]
However, the Federal Court of Appeal determined in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] F.C.J. No. 20, that though an applicant does not have clean hands, an application for judicial review may not be dismissed automatically on that ground. Rather the Court must assess certain factors in order to strike a balance between the need to prevent abuse of the judicial process and the need to protect an applicant's rights. Writing for the Federal Court of Appeal, Justice Evans opined:
[9] In my view, the jurisprudence cited by the Minister does not support the proposition advanced in paragraph 23 of counsel's memorandum of fact and law that, "where it appears that an applicant has not come to the Court with clean hands, the Court must initially determine whether in fact the party has unclean hands, and if that is proven, the Court must refuse to hear or grant the application on its merits." Rather, the case law suggests that, if satisfied that an applicant has lied, or is otherwise guilty of misconduct, a reviewing court may dismiss the application without proceeding to determine the merits or, even though having found reviewable error, decline to grant relief.
[10] In exercising its discretion, the Court should attempt to strike a balance between, on the one hand, maintaining the integrity of and preventing the abuse of judicial and administrative processes, and, on the other, the public interest in ensuring the lawful conduct of government and the protection of fundamental human rights. The factors to be taken into account in this exercise include: the seriousness of the applicant's misconduct and the extent to which it undermines the proceeding in question, the need to deter others from similar conduct, the nature of the alleged administrative unlawfulness and the apparent strength of the case, the importance of the individual rights affected and the likely impact upon the applicant if the administrative action impugned is allowed to stand.
[18]
It is my opinion that the balance of the above mentioned factors supports the exercise of discretion to dismiss the application in this case; however, in case I am wrong, I will examine the application on its merits.
No reviewable error
[19]
The applicant's argument raises only general grounds upon which he alleges the decision should be reviewed. It should be noted that the applicant submits that the Officer fettered her discretion and breached principles of procedural fairness; however, these allegations are made without reference to the decision, and are therefore without merit.
[20]
The applicant argues that the Officer erred in her assessment of hardship, and by her failure to make further inquiries to obtain more evidence from the applicant.
[21]
I find that the Officer's assessment of hardship was reasonable. She correctly ascertained that the hardship which the applicant might experience upon removal will not result from circumstances beyond his control. The Officer's conclusion rested upon a thorough evaluation of the applicant's circumstances, as well as the fact that his presence in Canada is a result of his disregard for Canadian laws.
[22]
The respondent contends that for hardship to be undue, undeserved or disproportionate, it must be fore than mere inconvenience or predictable costs associated with leaving the country; that he must sell assets, leave a job or his family is a consequence of the risk the applicant took by remaining in Canada without legal status (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> cited with approval in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] F.C.J. No. 1613).
[23]
The applicant also argues that the Officer had a duty to make further inquiries for additional evidence.
[24]
The applicant's argument is unfounded. The duty of the Officer is to consider the evidence before her, which she did in a justified, transparent and intelligible manner. It is trite law that the onus lies on the applicant to bring forward sufficient evidence to establish his claim (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2004] F.C.J. No. 158 (F.C.A.)). Paragraph 5.26 of the Immigration Manual IP 5 further supports the duty of the applicant to present any evidence that might support his claim:
5.26 Onus on applicant
Officers do not have to elicit information on H&C factors and are not required to satisfy applicants that such grounds do not exist. The onus is on applicants to put forth any H&C factors that they feel exist in their case.
Although officers are not expected to delve into areas that are not presented, officers should attempt to clarify possible H&C grounds if these are not well articulated by the applicants.
[25]
It is my opinion that the Officer's decision is eminently reasonable. The arguments submitted by the applicant seek to have this Court reweigh the evidence before the decision maker. This is not the role of the Court.
[26]
The parties did not submit questions for certification and none arise.
JUDGMENT
[27]
THIS COURT ORDERS that
the application is dismissed. No question is certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  d’une demande de contrôle judiciaire, déposée en vertu du paragraphe 72(1) de la
Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, L.C. 2001, ch. 27 (la Loi), d’une décision rendue au sujet d’une demande présentée pour des motifs d’ordre humanitaires (demande CH), dans laquelle l’agente d’immigration Barriero (l’agente) a conclu que la preuve ne permettait pas d’affirmer que le fait de présenter une demande de résidence permanente de l’extérieur du Canada causerait au demandeur des difficultés inhabituelles et injustifiées ou excessives.
LES QUESTIONS EN LITIGE
[2]
Le demandeur soutient que plusieurs questions doivent être tranchées en l’espèce; cependant, je reformulerais la question comme suit: l’agente a-t-elle commis une erreur susceptible de révision compte tenu de la preuve dont elle disposait?
[3]
Le défendeur soulève une deuxième question: la demande de contrôle judiciaire devrait-elle être rejetée au motif que le demandeur ne s’est pas présenté à la Cour avec une conduite irréprochable? Je trancherai les deux questions, en commençant par la dernière.
[4]
Pour les motifs suivants, la demande de contrôle judiciaire sera rejetée.
LES FAITS
[5]
Le demandeur est un citoyen de la Jordanie, né le 14 février 1978. Il est entré au Canada le 24 décembre 2000 et a présenté une demande d’asile. La Commission de l’immigration et du statut de réfugié a rejeté sa demande le 24 juin 2002.
[6]
Le demandeur a déposé une première demande de résidence permanente pour des motifs d’ordre humanitaire le 24 mai 2003, qui a été rejetée le 22 mars 2005. L’autorisation de contrôle judiciaire a été refusée le 7 avril 2005.
[7]
Le demandeur s’est soumis au processus d’ERAR au cours duquel il a été conclu qu’il ne courrait pas de risque s’il retournait en Jordanie. Le demandeur a déposé devant la Cour une demande de sursis à l’exécution de la mesure de renvoi, qui a été refusée. Le demandeur n’a pas respecté l’ordonnance de la Cour et ne s’est pas présenté pour son renvoi. Le 16 septembre 2005, un mandat d’arrestation a été émis contre lui, qui est toujours en vigueur à ce jour.
[8]
Le demandeur s’est caché pour éviter d’être arrêté et renvoyé et il a présenté une deuxième demande de résidence permanente pour des motifs d’ordre humanitaires. La décision de l’agente au sujet de la deuxième demande CH fait l’objet du présent contrôle.
LA DÉCISION À L’ÉTUDE
[9]
La demande d’examen des motifs d’ordre humanitaire du demandeur a été rejetée par lettre en date du 21 septembre 2007. La lettre et les notes du Système de soutien des opérations des bureaux locaux (SSOBL) constituent la décision à l’étude. L’agente a donné les motifs suivants à l’appui de sa décision:
a) L’agente a conclu que la preuve ne permettait pas d’affirmer que le demandeur restait au Canada en raison de circonstances indépendantes de sa volonté. Elle a noté le fait que le demandeur ne s’était pas plié à la mesure de renvoi et qu’il restait au Canada de façon illégale.
b) L’agente a conclu que la situation en Jordanie décrite par le demandeur, soit qu’il s’agissait d’un [traduction] « environnement sujet à la guerre » où il y avait [traduction] « des activités terroristes généralisées », était la même pour toute la population du pays. Comme le demandeur n’a présenté aucune preuve de risque personnalisé, l’agente a refusé de transférer la demande pour examen des risques.
c) L’agente a tenu compte de plusieurs facteurs au sujet de l’établissement du demandeur au Canada. Elle a tenu compte de l’emploi du demandeur comme cuisinier dans un restaurant qui sert de la cuisine du Moyen-Orient, ainsi que de ses économies, de son salaire, de ses investissements dans une entreprise canadienne, de son travail bénévole, de ses parents, de ses capacités linguistiques et de ses lettres de soutien.
d) L’agente a noté que le demandeur restait au Canada contrairement aux lois en matière d’immigration du pays et qu’il avait acheté des parts dans une compagnie en janvier 2005, alors qu’il savait que son statut au Canada était précaire. Elle a noté l’absence de preuve à l’appui de son allégation selon laquelle son départ du Canada aurait un impact négatif sur son investissement.
e) L’agente a conclu que les aptitudes du demandeur en cuisine étaient transférables et qu’il avait occupé un emploi en Jordanie pendant 11 ans avant son départ. L’agente a reconnu le travail bénévole du demandeur. Elle a noté qu’elle n’était pas convaincue que la perte d’emploi ou d’occasions de bénévolat au Canada lui causerait des difficultés inhabituelles, injustifiées ou excessives.
f) L’agente a reconnu la présence des tantes et des cousins du demandeur au Canada, mais a conclu que la preuve ne permettait pas de confirmer l’allégation du demandeur selon laquelle ses parents et ses sept frères et sœurs n’habitaient plus en Jordanie. Elle a conclu qu’il était raisonnable de croire que le demandeur trouverait certains des membres de sa famille à son retour en Jordanie.
g) L’agente a noté que le demandeur possédait d’importantes économies et qu’il serait capable de se trouver un logement en Jordanie.
h) L’agente a examiné une lettre du Dr H. Obaji, qui attestait les plaintes du demandeur quant à ses vomissements, ses brûlements d’estomac, ses douleurs épigastriques et son insomnie. La lettre déclarait qu’il n’y avait [traduction] « aucun diagnostic précis ». Il y était aussi écrit qu’il était prévu que le demandeur participe à une consultation psychologique pour son anxiété et sa dépression. L’agente a écrit que la preuve ne permettait pas d’affirmer que le demandeur s’était présenté à son rendez-vous, ni qu’un diagnostic précis avait été prononcé après la consultation psychologique. L’agente a aussi rejeté l’argument de l’avocat du demandeur selon lequel le demandeur est [traduction] « psychologiquement instable » et que son [traduction] « état mental est extrêmement vulnérable », au motif que l’avocat n’a pas compétence pour tirer de telles conclusions.
i) L’agente a répété le fait que la preuve présentée ne permettait pas d’affirmer que le demandeur restait au Canada en raison de circonstances indépendantes de sa volonté. Elle a conclu que le demandeur n’avait pas prouvé l’existence de motifs d’ordre humanitaire suffisants pour justifier une exemption aux exigences de la Loi et qu’il n’avait pas prouvé qu’il ferait face à des difficultés inhabituelles, injustifiées ou excessives.
ANALYSE
La norme de contrôle
[10]
La Cour a déjà soutenu que les décisions pour les demandes CH doivent faire l’objet d’une grande retenue et que la décision raisonnable
simpliciter
était la norme de contrôle applicable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  le Cour doit continuer de faire preuve d’une grande retenue à l’égard des demandes CH, et la norme de contrôle applicable est la décision raisonnable énoncée dans l’arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , aux paragraphes 47, 55, 57, 62 et 64).
[12]
Le caractère raisonnable de la décision tient principalement à la justification de la décision, à la transparence et à l’intelligibilité du processus décisionnel, ainsi qu’à l’appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 47).
Le demandeur ne se présente pas à la Cour avec une attitude irréprochable
[13]
Le défendeur soutient que la demande de contrôle judiciaire devrait être rejetée sans examen sur le fond parce que le demandeur ne se présente pas à la Cour avec une attitude irréprochable. Le défendeur soutient que le demandeur a menti dans son affidavit. Selon lui, le demandeur fait une fausse déclaration en omettant de mentionner dans son affidavit qu’il ne s’est pas présenté pour son renvoi, alors qu’il soutient avoir respecté la loi pendant son séjour au Canada. Le défendeur note qu’un mandat d’arrestation a été émis contre le demandeur le 16 septembre 2005 et que ce mandat est toujours en vigueur.
[14]
Le défendeur cite l’arrêt de la Cour suprême du Canada dans
Homex Realty and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , dans lequel le juge Estey, au nom de la majorité de la Cour suprême, a déclaré:
[...] Les principes en vertu desquels le
certiorari
et maintenant l'ordonnance moderne d'examen judiciaire sont accordés, comprennent depuis longtemps celui de la perte du droit au redressement lorsqu'à cause de la conduite du requérant, un tribunal refuse d'accorder le redressement discrétionnaire.
[15]
Le principe selon lequel la Cour peut exercer son pouvoir discrétionnaire pour rejeter une demande parce que le demandeur n'a pas une attitude irréprochable a été appliqué dans des affaires récentes, en particulier lorsque le demandeur a échappé aux autorités de l'immigration ou qu'il s'est soustrait à un mandat d'arrestation afin de retarder ou d'éviter le renvoi (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] A.C.F. n
o
1812, aux paragraphes 48 à 57;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] A.C.F. n
o
530, aux paragraphes 16 et 17).
[16]
Je conviens avec le défendeur que le fait que le demandeur n'a pas respecté les autorités de l'immigration et les forces de l'ordre du Canada, ni d'ailleurs l'ordonnance de la Cour rejetant la demande de sursis à la mesure de renvoi, démontre que le demandeur ne se présente pas à la Cour avec une attitude irréprochable.
[17]
Cependant, la Cour d'appel a conclu, dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] A.C.F. n
o
20, que même si un demandeur ne se présente pas à la Cour avec une attitude irréprochable, la demande de contrôle judiciaire ne peut pas être rejetée automatiquement pour ce motif. En fait, la Cour doit apprécier certains facteurs afin de trouver un équilibre entre le besoin de prévenir l'abus du processus judiciaire et le besoin de protéger les droits d'un demandeur. Pour la Cour d'appel fédérale, le juge Evans a écrit:
[9] À mon avis, la jurisprudence invoquée par le ministre n'appuie pas l'affirmation qui se trouve dans le paragraphe 23 de l'exposé des faits et du droit présenté par son avocat, et selon laquelle [traduction] « lorsqu'il semble qu'un demandeur ne s'est pas présenté devant la Cour les mains nettes, la Cour doit d'abord s'interroger quant à savoir si le demandeur a effectivement les mains nettes et, en cas de conclusion négative, la Cour doit refuser de juger la demande au fond ou de l'accorder ». La jurisprudence donne plutôt à entendre que, si la juridiction de contrôle est d'avis qu'un demandeur a menti, ou qu'il est d'une autre manière coupable d'inconduite, elle peut rejeter la demande sans la juger au fond ou, même ayant conclu à l'existence d'une erreur sujette à révision, elle peut refuser d'accorder la réparation sollicitée.
[10] Dans l'exercice de son pouvoir discrétionnaire, la Cour doit s'efforcer de mettre en balance d'une part l'impératif de préserver l'intégrité de la procédure judiciaire et administrative et d'empêcher les abus de procédure, et d'autre part l'intérêt public dans la légalité des actes de l'administration et dans la protection des droits fondamentaux de la personne. Les facteurs à prendre en compte dans cet exercice sont les suivants: la gravité de l'inconduite du demandeur et la mesure dans laquelle cette inconduite menace la procédure en cause, la nécessité d'une dissuasion à l'égard d'une conduite semblable, la nature de l'acte prétendument illégal de l'administration et la solidité apparente du dossier, l'importance des droits individuels concernés, enfin les conséquences probables pour le demandeur si la validité de l'acte administratif contesté est confirmée.
[18]
À mon avis, l'équilibre des facteurs susmentionnés demande que le pouvoir discrétionnaire soit exercé pour rejeter la demande en l'espèce; cependant, au cas où je ferais erreur, je tiens à examiner le bien-fondé de la demande.
Aucune erreur susceptible de révision
[19]
L'argument du demandeur ne soulève que des motifs généraux sur lesquels il fonde son allégation selon laquelle la décision doit être révisée. Il convient de noter que le demandeur soutient que l'agente a entravé l'exercice de son pouvoir discrétionnaire et a violé les principes d'équité procédurale; cependant, le demandeur présente ces allégations sans mentionner la décision. Les allégations ne sont donc pas fondées.
[20]
Le demandeur soutient que l'agente a commis une erreur dans son évaluation des difficultés et qu'elle aurait dû lui demander plus d'éléments de preuve.
[21]
Je suis d’avis que l'évaluation de l'agente quant aux difficultés était raisonnable. Elle a correctement conclu que les difficultés auxquelles le demandeur pourrait faire face à son renvoi ne seraient pas causées par des circonstances hors de son contrôle. La décision de l'agente était fondée sur une évaluation complète de la situation du demandeur ainsi que sur le fait que sa présence au Canada découle de son manquement aux lois du pays.
[22]
Le défendeur fait valoir que, pour que les difficultés soient considérées comme excessives, injustifiées ou inhabituelles, elles doivent constituer plus qu'un simple inconvénient ou coût prévisible associé au départ du Canada; le fait que le demandeur doive vendre des biens, quitter un emploi ou sa famille sont des conséquences du risque que le demandeur a pris en décidant de rester au Canada sans statut légal (voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] A.C.F. n
o
1613).
[23]
Le demandeur soutient aussi que l'agente avait l'obligation de lui demander des preuves additionnelles.
[24]
L'argument du demandeur n'est pas fondé. L'agente avait l'obligation d'examiner la preuve dont elle était saisie, ce qu'elle a fait de façon justifiée, transparente et claire. Il est bien établi en droit qu'il incombe au demandeur de présenter suffisamment d'éléments de preuve pour prouver sa prétention (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2004] A.C.F. n
o
158 (C.A.F.)). Le paragraphe 5.26 du Guide de l'immigration IP 5 confirme aussi l'obligation du demandeur de présenter tous les éléments de preuve à l'appui de sa prétention:
5.26 Fardeau de la preuve
L’agent n’a pas à découvrir les facteurs CH par des questions et n’a pas à convaincre le demandeur de la non-existence de ces motifs. Il incombe au demandeur de présenter tous les facteurs CH qu’il estime présents dans son cas.
Même si l’agent n’est pas tenu de creuser les points non soulevés à l’examen, il devrait essayer de clarifier tout point que le demandeur ne réussit pas à bien exposer.
[25]
À mon avis, la décision de l'agente est tout à fait raisonnable. En présentant ses arguments, le demandeur cherche en fait à ce que la Cour réévalue la preuve dont l'agente était saisie. Tel n'est pas le rôle de la Cour.
[26]
Les parties n'ont pas présenté de question à certifier et l'affaire n'en soulève aucune.
JUGEMENT
[27]
LA COUR ORDONNE
le rejet de la demande. Aucune question n’est certifiée.
[End of document]