[1]
Gibson, J.
: These reasons arise out of an application for judicial review of a decision of an immigration officer (the "visa officer") at the Canadian Consulate General, Detroit, Michigan, in which the visa officer denied the applicants' application for permission to come to Canada as permanent residents. The decision of the visa officer is dated the 6th day of January, 1995.
[2]
The applicants are a woman and her dependent son, citizens of Tanzania. They arrived in Canada as visitors on November 6, 1990.
[3]
In March 1991, while still in Canada, the applicants made a claim to Convention refugee status. It was rejected on October 6, 1993. An application for leave to commence a judicial review proceeding in respect of the rejection of their Convention refugee claim was denied on March 23, 1994. Conditional removal orders were issued against the applicants on June 13, 1993. Their application for admission as permanent residents was sponsored in 1994 by a daughter of the female applicant, who is a Canadian citizen.
Visa Officer's
Decision
[4]
The substance of the visa officer's decision is in the following terms:
"In May, 1994 your sponsor submitted an IMM1344 Undertaking of Assistance indicating her willingness and ability to provide for your needs and those of your accompanying son. However, you have been receiving welfare benefits in Canada for four years, and you declared at the interview on January 5, 1994 (sic) that you are still receiving this assistance.
"The long-term and continuing lack of support from your sponsor demonstrates that she is unwilling and/or unable to provide for the needs of you and your son and that both of you are persons as described in s. 19(1)(b) of the
Immigration Act
...
...
"I also believe that you may be a person as described in s. 19(2)(d) of the
Act
...
...
"Although you have immediate family in Canada, I do not believe that there are sufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds to overcome the preceding concerns."
[5]
The relevant portions of ss. 19(1) and 19(2) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, reads as follows:
"19(1) No person shall be granted admission who is a member of any of the following classes:
. . . . .
(b) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe are or will be unable or unwilling to support themselves and those persons who are dependent on them for care and support, except persons who have satisfied an immigration officer that adequate arrangements, other than those that involve social assistance, have been made for their care and support.
. . . . .
"(2) No immigrant and, except as provided in subs. (3), no visitor shall be granted admission if the immigrant or visitor is a member of any of the following classes:
. . . . .
(d) persons who cannot or do not fulfil or comply with any of the conditions or requirements of this Act or the regulations or any orders or directions lawfully made or given under this Act or the regulations."
Preliminary Issue
[6]
It was not disputed before me that the applicants' sponsor had a right of appeal from the decision of the visa officer to the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board under s. 77(3) of the
Immigration Act
. Section 77(3) reads as follows:
"(3) Subject to subs. (3.1), a Canadian citizen or permanent resident who has sponsored an application for landing that is refused pursuant to subs. (1) may appeal to the Appeal Division on either or both of the following grounds:
(a) on any ground of appeal that involves a question of law or fact, or mixed law and fact; and
(b) on the ground that there exist compassionate or humanitarian considerations that warrant the granting of special relief."
There was no evidence before me as to whether or not the applicants' sponsor has exercised her right of appeal.
[7]
This application for judicial review is brought by the applicants, not their sponsor, under s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, and does not require leave of the Trial Division of this court by virtue of s. 82.1(2) of the
Immigration Act
.
[8]
Counsel for the respondent argued that, in light of the statutory right of appeal vested in the applicants' sponsor, that right should be exhausted before any application for judicial review is entertained. That argument is certainly consistent with the principle of s. 18.5 of the
Federal Court Act
[see footnote 1], but that provision, by its terms, is explicitly limited to circumstances where there is an appeal to one of the enumerated bodies set out in that section. The Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board is not among those enumerated bodies.
[9]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Mr. Justice Noël dealt with a similar issue arising out of an application for review of a decision taken under s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
denying a humanitarian and compassionate grounds application for exemption from the visa requirements of s. 9(1) of the
Act
. He stated:
"The respondent raised a preliminary objection to the effect that the application ought not to be heard as there otherwise exists a right of appeal from the immigration officer's decision. The respondent relies on s. 77(3) of the
Act
, ..."
After quoting a portion of s. 77(3), Mr. Justice Noël continued:
"It is good law that where a statutory appeal lies judicial review will not proceed. However, the right of appeal conferred by s. 77 belongs to the sponsor, in this instance the applicant's wife, and not to the applicant. There is no authority which would allow me to conclude that a right of appeal belonging to one individual operates as a bar to a right of judicial review belonging to another individual. This preliminary objection must therefore be rejected."
I can find no basis on which to distinguish the reasoning and conclusion of Mr. Justice Noël in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . As in that matter, the preliminary objection taken before me is rejected.
Issues On The Merits
[10]
Counsel for the applicants argued that the visa officer erred in three reviewable respects: first, he argued that the visa officer exceeded her jurisdiction in denying the applicants permanent resident status in Canada on the basis of s. 19(1)(b) where another immigration officer had already reached the decision that adequate arrangements, other than those that involve social assistance, had been made for the care and support of the applicants; second, counsel argued that the applicants were not accorded the fairness that was due to them; and finally, he argued that the applicants had reasonable grounds for suspecting bias on the part of the visa officer as a result of her conduct during an interview to consider their application.
[11]
I am satisfied that this application must succeed on the first ground. The visa officer was here acting under s. 6(1) of the
Immigration Regulations
, SOR/78-172 as amended the relevant portions of which read as follows:
"6(1) Subject to subss. (1.1), (3.1), (3.2), (4), (5) and (6), where a member of the family class makes an application for an immigrant visa, a visa officer may issue an immigrant visa to the member and the member's accompanying dependents if
. . . . .
(b) the sponsor
(i) has given an undertaking,
(ii) is not in default in respect of any obligations assumed by him under any other undertaking given by him with respect to any member of the family class or assisted relative, and
(iii) will, in the opinion of an immigration officer, be able to fulfil the undertaking referred to in subparagraph (i);
. . . . ."
Here, the only inadmissible class of which the applicants were clearly found to be members is that described in s. 19(1)(b) quoted earlier in these reasons. Within the terms of s. 6(1)(b) of the
Regulations
, the applicants were sponsored, the sponsor had given an undertaking, there was no evidence before me that she was in default in respect of any obligations under any other undertakings given by her and there was an express opinion of another immigration officer that she would be able to fulfil the undertaking that she gave in respect of the applicants. The applicants' sponsor's undertaking, or more accurately a copy thereof, appears in the tribunal record that was before me. At the foot of that undertaking there is a portion of the form marked "Official use only". Within that portion of the form, the box "family class" is checked. There is a notation "Settlement arrangements met for two person(s)". In a box headed "Signature of immigration officer" there is a signature and I am satisfied that I am entitled to conclude that the signature is of an immigration officer. The signature is indicated as having been affixed on the 20th day of June, 1994.
[12]
The visa officer's interview with the applicant was conducted on January 5, 1995, incorrectly indicated in the visa officer's decision of January 6, 1995 to be January 5, 1994. Thus, the issue as to whether the applicants' sponsor had made appropriate settlement arrangements was determined by an immigration officer almost six months before the interview. For ease of reference, the relevant portions of s. 19(1) of the
Immigration Act
are quoted here again:
"19(1) No person shall be granted admission who is a member of any of the following classes:
. . . . .
(b) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe are or will be unable or unwilling to support themselves and those persons who are dependent on them for care and support,
except persons who have satisfied an immigration officer that adequate arrangements, other than those that involve social assistance, have been made for their care and support;
" (underlining added by me for emphasis
)
[13]
I can only interpret the notations at the foot of the applicants' sponsor's undertaking form as indicating that the applicants, on June 20, 1994, satisfied an immigration officer that they should fall within the exception which I have emphasized in the quotation immediately above. There is nothing on the face of s. 19(1)(b) which would lead to an interpretation that the immigration officer who has been satisfied must be the visa officer who is considering all aspects of the applicants' application for permanent residence. Nor is there anything on the face of the s. 19(1)(b) or any other provision of the
Immigration Act
or
Regulations
to which I was directed, including s. 6(1) of the
Regulations
, which would indicate in express terms, or even by necessary implication, that a visa officer has authority to override the previous satisfaction of an immigration officer even in circumstances, as here, where it is evident that the visa officer was in substantial disagreement with her colleague as to the adequacy of arrangements for support of the applicants other than through social assistance. As the applicants clearly came within the exception to s. 19(1)(b) noted above, the visa officer exceeded her jurisdiction in finding the applicants to be within that inadmissible class.
[14]
I turn then to the second substantive ground for judicial review argued on behalf of the applicants, that is, fairness. Counsel for the applicants argued that, when the applicants arrived for their interview on January 5, 1995, they were effectively "ambushed" on the issues of their long reliance on social assistance in Canada and their capacity, with the support of their sponsor, to effectively maintain themselves without resort to social assistance in the event that they were granted permanent residence. Counsel argued that the applicants should have been given specific notice of this concern and of the fact that it would be the focus of the interview. I cannot agree with the position of counsel for the applicants on this subject. Section 8(1) of the
Immigration Act
provides as follows:
"8(1) Where a person seeks to come into Canada, the burden of proving that that person has a right to come into Canada or that his admission would not be contrary to this Act or the Regulations rests on that person."
The applicants had been in Canada for a number of years prior to their interview on January 5, 1995. They had, for a significant period of time, been reliant on social assistance. The material before me indicated that they were aware that this was potentially a source of concern to immigration officials and they should have been prepared to deal with the issue at their interview, without special notice. They had an explanation for their situation. They should have been prepared to express it in all of its facets, with particular emphasis on how circumstances were about to change in a manner that would allow them to maintain themselves without resort to social assistance in the future. They obviously failed to do so to the satisfaction of the visa officer. That of itself does not amount to a breach of fairness. The onus was on the applicants. They simply failed to discharge it. No onus was on the visa officer to notify them of her concern in advance.
[15]
The applicants' final substantive argument arose out of the conduct of the interview of January 5, 1995. In notes prepared by the applicants' sponsor following the interview, the applicants' sponsor having been present at the interview, she wrote:
"Kim's (the visa officer's) voice had been cold and grew even colder as she continued questioning. I could feel the vibes from the tone of her voice all the way throughout the interview. ... She further said that mum had been living all this time out of her pocket, out of her tax money and 'our government's money'. She found it difficult to reconcile between the fact that she was accepting assistance for all this time and my readiness and willingness to support her now that I am going to a new job."
Counsel for the respondent acknowledged that the visa officer had been insistent in her questioning and perhaps had grown somewhat frustrated with the replies she was receiving but did not acknowledge use of the terminology reflected in the notes quoted above. I find no ground on which to conclude that the applicants had a reasonable apprehension of bias arising out of the tone and substance of the interview that took place on January 5, 1995. If the visa officer in fact used the terminology alleged, it was unfortunate. However, even assuming the terminology alleged was used, I am not satisfied that it would provide a basis for a reasonable apprehension of bias.
Costs
[16]
Counsel for both the applicants and the respondent requested costs of the application. Rule 1618 provides as follows:
"1618. No costs shall be payable in respect of an application for judicial review unless the court, for special reasons, so orders."
In light of my findings, I find no special reasons that would justify an order of costs.
[17]
Counsel for the applicants and the respondent were in agreement that this matter warranted certification of two questions pursuant to s. 83(1) of the
Immigration Act
. I provided time for counsel to consult as to the terms of the questions. In the result, they recommended questions in the following terms:
"Where a visa officer does not grant a sponsored application for landing by a member of the family class, and the sponsor has an appeal right to the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board under s. 77(3) of the
Immigration Act
, is the member of the family class barred from applying to the Federal Court for judicial review of the visa officer's decision?
"When an inland immigration officer approves an undertaking by a sponsor with regard to an application for landing by a member of the family class, does the visa officer still retain the right to refuse the application on the grounds of s. 19(1)(b), in the circumstances where the visa officer receives evidence that the visa applicant has been receiving social assistance in Canada?"
Counsel for the applicant proposes that the following sentence be added to the first question:
"If yes, what recourse if any does the visa applicant have if the sponsor elects not to appeal?"
Counsel for the respondent apparently does not support the addition and in this respect I am in agreement with counsel for the respondent. The addition offends against the guidance with respect to certification of questions provided by the Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[18]
With slight modifications, but without the additional question proposed by counsel for the applicant, the two questions recommended will be certified.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/saf
Footnote
1. Section 18.5 of the
Federal Court Act
reads as follows:
"18.5 Notwithstanding ss. 18 and 18.1, where provision is expressly made by an Act of Parliament for an appeal as such to the court, to the Supreme Court of Canada, to the Court Martial Appeal Court, to the Tax Court of Canada, to the Governor-in-Council or to the Treasury Board from a decision or order of a federal board, commission or other tribunal made by or in the course of proceedings before that board, commission or tribunal, that decision or order is not, to the extent that it may be so appealed, subject to review or to be restrained, prohibited, removed, set aside or otherwise dealt with, except in accordance with that Act."
[End of document]