[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an application for an order staying this action until resolution of a pending action between the plaintiff and Cummings Point (1989) Ltd., and for an order staying an order of Giles, A.S.P., dated October 30, 1989, which gave the parties until December 31, 1989, to agree on arrangements for examination for discovery of a representative of the defendant or, failing that, requiring the defendant to make available such a representative at a time and place set by an appointment obtained by the plaintiff.
[2]
The essential background facts do not appear to be in dispute. The present action was commenced on February 3, 1989, although the statement of claim was amended on October 31, 1989, to correct the name of the defendant. This action is for alleged infringement of a patent belonging to the plaintiff. The statement of defence was filed in this action on April 13, 1989. On June 21, 1989 the defendant company sold the assets of its "refractory division" in Welland, Ontario - the division which was employing the process which allegedly infringed the plaintiff's patent - to Cummings Point (1989) Ltd. According to an affidavit filed on its behalf, the defendant company no longer has personnel in its employ who are aware of the "gunning activities" carried out by the "refractory division" during the period when it belonged to the defendant, and the records of that division have been transferred with the sale of assets to Cummings Point (1989) Ltd. of June 21, 1989. Counsel for the defendant also stated, if I understood correctly, that the personnel who had been operating the refractory division are now employed by Cummings Point.
[3]
On December 1, 1989 the plaintiff commenced action against Cummings Point, alleging that it has used a process contravening the same patent in its operations, presumably since the purchase of the refractory division from the defendant in the present action, Combustion Engineering Canada Inc. Counsel advised that a statement of defence had been filed in the action against Cummings Point.
[4]
Counsel agreed that replies in both actions had been filed or were about to be filed, that discovery of documents would be made soon and that they were indeed in a position to proceed with examinations for discovery.
[5]
Counsel for the defendant brings this application for a stay of the present action, however, on the basis that it would be unnecessary and duplicative to proceed with this action until the results of the action against Cummings Point are known. According to the affidavit filed on behalf of the defendant
"The defendant company is prepared to bind itself to the legal consequences of any resolution on the merits of the action between the plaintiff and Cummings Point (1989) Ltd."
It is contended that because the defendant no longer has in its employ personnel who were involved with the allegedly infringing activity, and since all of its records have been transferred to Cummings Point, a representative of the present defendant could not provide any useful information on examination for discovery. At the same time, it is anticipated that in the action against Cummings Point the personnel of that firm who would be examined for discovery will be former employees of the present defendant and the present defendant is prepared to accept, as binding on it, information which those representatives may give concerning the operations of the refractory division when it belonged to the present defendant. The affidavit filed on behalf of the defendant in support of its motion for a stay of this action concludes as follows:
"To be required to proceed on discoveries and/or to trial in the present action will force both the plaintiff and defendant companies to incur costs which are redundant and unnecessary in view of the proceedings against Cummings Point (1989) Ltd."
Counsel for the defendant contends that, if the defendant does produce a representative for examination for discovery, such a representative will only be able to say that he has no knowledge of what was going on in the refractory division during the period of alleged infringement prior to the sale of that division, and that the defendant does not have any records or personnel from which or whom he can obtain the necessary information.
[6]
Counsel for the plaintiff, on the other hand, wants to preserve his right to an examination for discovery of a representative of the defendant in this action. He suggests, for example, that it might emerge that the processes employed by the present defendant prior to the sale of the refractory division were somewhat different from the processes employed by Cummings Point after its purchase of that division. He accepts, as I understand it, that he may well get more information from the former employees of this defendant when they are examined in the second action as representatives of Cummings Point. He concedes that it might be preferable to examine the Cummings Point representatives first, and then see to what extent he needs to ask further questions concerning Combustion Engineering Canada Inc. of its own representative (who will presumably be one of the present officers of that company).
[7]
I dismissed the application for a stay but indicated that I would alter the order of Giles, A.S.P., sufficiently to provide more time to arrange examinations for discovery which would, ideally, involve an examination first of representatives of Cummings Point in the second action and then thereafter - preferably immediately thereafter - make possible the examination of a representative of the present defendant. Counsel for the applicant requested that I provide written reasons which I am now doing.
[8]
It is well established in the jurisprudence that a stay should not be granted under s. 50 of the Federal Court Act unless it can be shown that (1) the continuation of the action would cause prejudice or injustice (not merely inconvenience or extra expense) to the defendant; and (2) that the stay would not work an injustice to the plaintiff [see footnote 1]. The onus is on the defendant who seeks a stay to establish that these conditions exist and the grant or refusal of a stay is within the discretionary power of the judge.
[9]
In the exercise of my discretion I refused the stay here because I am not satisfied that either of these criteria are met. Admittedly it may cause some additional expense and inconvenience for the present defendant to produce one of its officers to be examined for discovery about matters of which the company now has no direct information. Even assuming that it is true that no present officer of the defendant has any knowledge in this matter and that the company does not hold any records, that is not a sufficient reason for denying the plaintiff its right to discovery. First, it should be observed that when the defendant sold its refractory division in June 1989, it had full knowledge that it was being sued in respect of its activities involving that division. If it made no provision for access to records or personnel being taken over by Cummings Point, the purchaser, then it willfully deprived itself of the ability to answer questions on discovery which the plaintiff is entitled to put. Further, the affidavit filed by the defendant in its application for a stay does not anywhere attest that the defendant has reasonable grounds for believing that it cannot obtain this information from its former employees or that it cannot have access to the records which it turned over to Cummings Point pursuant to the sale. If the defendant has, as its counsel suggests, knowingly deprived itself of the ability to provide answers on discovery then all its representative can do when examined under oath is to demonstrate that it has no reasonable means of obtaining the information. The plaintiff may have to be satisfied with that, but it does not amount to "injustice" or "prejudice" to the defendant. The applicant has fallen far short of demonstrating by affidavit that its representative on discovery will not have reasonable access to the necessary information and even if that should be persuasively demonstrated at the time of discovery the result will be more one of frustration to the plaintiff rather than of injustice or prejudice to the defendant.
[10]
At the same time, I am in no way satisfied that a stay could be granted without an injustice being caused to the plaintiff. The fundamental point here is that a plaintiff is entitled to examination for discovery of a representative of a defendant. If he does not choose to waive that right, or substitute for it the examination of representatives of another defendant in another action, that is his right. The court would be loathe to determine in advance - certainly on the basis of such evidence as is before me - that there is nothing useful that a plaintiff could obtain in the examination for discovery of a defendant in an action duly brought by it.
[11]
It is regrettable that some sensible arrangement has not as yet been reached by counsel in this matter for the examination, consecutively, of the representatives of Cummings Point in the second action and then the representative of the present defendant. As there is no motion before me in respect of the second action involving Cummings Point, I am unable to make any order with respect to that action. I am however delaying for two months (from December 31, 1989 as specified by Giles, A.S.P., until February 28, 1990) the time allowed for counsel to arrange by agreement the examination for discovery of the present defendant. I am doing this in the hope that the extra time will allow common sense to prevail. If it does not, then it will be open to the plaintiff to compel the examination for discovery of a representative of the present defendant and it will then be for that representative to demonstrate that he has no relevant knowledge and no reasonable access to the information required, notwithstanding the knowledge by his company of this action prior to the sale of its refractory division to Cummings Point.
[12]
I might add that the whole case for a stay requested by the defendant in this action was essentially based on the unnecessary duplication and expense of another examination for discovery. Some other general submissions made concerning "duplication" of effort flowing from the two parallel actions were not very convincing. The pleadings are now completed in both actions and discovery of documents does not seem to present a serious problem. Indeed if what the defendant says is literally true, there will be few if any relevant documents of which the defendant has knowledge and none of which it has possession. Apart from the problem of examinations for discovery which has been discussed above, the remaining possibility for "duplication" would appear to arise if two separate trials are conducted. It will be open to the parties to apply to have these two actions tried together and if that were done it is hard to see how the continuation of the present action would be "duplicative". After all, while the plaintiff and the patent is the same in both cases, the alleged infringing activities relate to two different time periods and to the operations of two different companies. To the extent that the issues are identical they can be dealt with as such at a joint trial. To the extent that they are different, they can be dealt with separately with a modicum of additional time and effort.
[13]
For the foregoing reasons I have exercised my discretion in dismissing the application for a stay and in extending the time for arrangements for the examination for discovery of the defendant.
[14]
Costs are in the cause.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
Footnotes
1. See e.g.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 231 (F.C.T.D.); Reading &  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 36.
[End of document]