[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
: This is a motion requesting a lump sum for costs in addition to the costs already taxed by a taxation officer. The litigation involved a ship collision where I found that the defendants were not negligent. I therefore dismissed the plaintiff's action on August 19, 1994 [see 82 F.T.R. 127]. The costs of the litigation were subsequently taxed and a certificate issued. The defendants are now applying under rule 344 for further costs. This application is also supported by my reasons for judgment where I stated, "I ruled that the question of additional costs would be dealt with at a further hearing following the issuance of these reasons."
[2]
The bill of costs prepared pursuant to the tariffs amounted to $72,189.54. The taxing officer issued a certificate for $58,755.87 on November 25, 1994. Moreover, the defendants claim to have accumulated $281,925.16 in fees and disbursements. They request a lump sum of $200,000 in additional costs on top of the taxable costs they have already been awarded. Further, the defendants ask the court to reserve their right to apply for a court order condemning the Institute of Reinsurance of Brazil (IRB) to the payment of both the taxable costs and the lump sum in the event the said costs are not paid by the plaintiff.
[3]
As a preliminary matter, counsel for the plaintiff raises the question of the jurisdiction of this court to grant additional costs when the costs have already been taxed. Rule 344(4) provides for setting a lump sum of costs, in addition to taxable costs. It reads:
"(4) The court may fix all or part of the costs with or without reference to Tariff B and, further, it may award a lump sum in lieu of or in addition to any taxed costs."
There is no doubt from a simple reading of the subsection that the court has the jurisdiction in this case to award a lump sum even though taxation has already occurred.
[4]
The court must be cautious when awarding additional costs. It is not in the interest of the administration of justice, in my view, to bypass the tariff.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 376 (T.D.), at 379 [C.P.R.], MacKay, J., confirmed the conservative and exceptional approach to special directions enunciated by Cullen, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), stating:
"In the exercise of discretion in relation to directions to a taxing officer, my colleagues have recognized certain general principles. Included among these are that parties cannot expect to recover all their costs under the tariff relating to party-and-party costs and that exorbitant increases over the tariff items should not be countenanced for the court should not interfere lightly with the rules relating to sums intended to be allowed on a party-and-party basis:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 324-325, 21 C.I.P.R. 49; 12 A.C.W.S.(3d) 404 (F.C.T.D.), per  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 261, 34 F.T.R. 221 (T.D.), per Dube, J."
[5]
I find this statement equally persuasive in the context of lump sum awards. The defendants have asked for close to the entire amount of their fees and disbursements. Awarding them what they ask would amount to giving the defendants solicitor-client costs. I did not award costs on that basis at trial and will not do so now.
[6]
Moreover, even in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), where there were admitted and blatant illegal and illicit activities, Pinard, J., only awarded lump sum costs amounting to slightly more than half the value of the solicitor-client costs that would have been payable. Certainly any additional costs in the case at bar should be less than the proportion awarded when bad faith was at issue.
[7]
Having determined the costs parameters, considered the material filed, and reviewed the submissions of counsel, the only ground, in my view, that exists for awarding some additional costs in the case at bar is the attitude of the plaintiff. The plaintiff unnecessarily lengthened the proceedings, created the necessity of an incredible number of pretrial conferences (10), and an excessive number of motions. Further, due to the plaintiff's numerous delays and the snail-like pace at which the litigation was prosecuted, the costs are higher than they would have been otherwise. There is no excuse for the defendants having to push the plaintiff to move its own case along.
[8]
However, I do not find that the other grounds to which the defendant has referred give rise to additional costs. The defendant argues that the facts and documents establishing the absence of negligence on the part of the Federal Danube were known by the plaintiff as early as February, 1985. There is no doubt, when looking at the motion filed in February, 1985 by the defendants requesting that the securities requested from the defendants be limited to a sum equal to the tonnage limitation of the ship, that the pertinent facts concerning the liability issue were known. However, it was based on these facts that the plaintiff at trial was trying to persuade the court to apportion at least some liability to the defendants by proving
some
fault by the Federal Danube that could have contributed to aggravating the damages. On that basis, a finding of five percent liability would have represented a large sum of money. Therefore, I cannot conclude that pursuing the litigation was bound to be futile.
[9]
As to the complex issues, a large part of the work was due to the refusal by the defendants to make admissions with respect to the ownership issue, the quantum, and subrogation. Therefore, I cannot characterize the conduct of the solicitors for the plaintiff who sought these admissions as improper or vexatious.
[10]
Counsel for the defendants also submits that the expert on Brazilian law was unnecessary. As it happens, Quebec civil law is similar to Brazilian law, and it is true that the expert's help was largely superfluous. However, I am not prepared to say that the hiring of this expert was unnecessary. It is too easy in hindsight to know what evidence was useful and what was not. At least the Brazilian expert was beneficial by establishing the similarities between Quebec and Brazilian law.
[11]
I must now consider the amount to be awarded in this case. It is my opinion that a lump sum award of $20,000 is a fair amount. Therefore, in addition to the costs already taxed, I hereby order costs to the defendant in the amount of $20,000.
[12]
The defendants have asked that they be allowed to reserve their right to request that the IRB be held liable for costs in the event the plaintiff does not pay those costs. I cannot see how I can resolve this question. IRB is not a party to this action, and is not bound by my judgment or this order as to costs. Moreover, the
Federal Court Rules
provide a number of methods of approaching the problem of a party refusing to honour a court order as to the payment of a sum of money. I have set the amount of costs. That matter is at an end. It is now up to the defendants to take the necessary steps in order to collect the funds.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/sg
[End of document]