[1]
Joyal, J.
: This is an application by the defendants under rule 419 of the Federal Court Rules to strike out the plaintiff's statement of claim on the grounds that the claim discloses no reasonable cause of action and that this court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the proceedings.
[2]
The statement of claim discloses that the plaintiff is a Convention refugee currently residing in Richmond, B.C. He is of Chinese extraction and was born in the Philippines in 1940. He arrived in Canada on December 9, 1982, carrying a Costa Rica passport expiring one year later and a Canadian visa expiring on February 5, 1983.
[3]
On January 25, 1983, he attended at the Canada Immigration Centre in Vancouver in order to file a claim to Convention refugee status. His request was turned down. He was advised that such a claim could only be made at an inquiry and he could not be the subject of an inquiry while validly in Canada on a visitor's visa.
[4]
He applied again for refugee status after his visa had expired. An inquiry was duly held and the inquiry officer, after finding that the plaintiff was still in Canada after his visa had expired and that a removal order would likely be made against him, adjourned the inquiry pursuant to s. 45(1) of the Immigration Act, 1976, S.C. 1976-77, c. 52.
[5]
On July 7, 1983, the plaintiff was informed by the defendants that he was not a Convention refugee. As a result, he requested a redetermination of his status before the Immigration Appeal Board. On December 12, 1985, the Immigration Appeal Board allowed the plaintiff's appeal and found him to be a Convention refugee.
[6]
The plaintiff thereafter applied for a Minister's permit in Form IMM 1263 to enable him to be processed in Canada for a permanent resident status. The Minister refused to issue a permit and ordered the immigration inquiry to be resumed. Originally scheduled for February 3, 1987, the continuing inquiry was adjourned to April 8, 1987.
[7]
It was during this intervening period, namely on March 26, 1987, that the plaintiff filed his statement of claim in this court seeking declaratory relief as follows:
"(a) A declaration by this Honourable court that the plaintiff is entitled to a Minister's Permit in Form IMM 1263 as provided in paragraph 15 of this statement of claim;
"(b) A declaration by this Honourable court that the plaintiff is lawfully in Canada pursuant to s. 4(2) of the Immigration Act, 1976;
"(c) A declaration by this Honourable court that the plaintiff is entitled to apply for and be processed in Canada as a permanent resident of Canada;
"(d) A declaration by this Honourable Court that the plaintiff was entitled, before his visitor authorization had expired, to have his claim as a Convention refugee heard;
"(e) A mandatory injunction ordering the defendants or any one or more of them to issue a Minister's permit to the plaintiff to enable him to apply for, and be processed in Canada, as a permanent resident of Canada;
"(f) An interlocutory injunction preventing and restraining the defendants or any of them from ordering, resuming or holding any Immigration Inquiry or the making of any removal order or the issuing of any departure notice with respect to the plaintiff until trial of this action has been heard and concluded with respect to the plaintiff;
"(g) A permanent injunction preventing and restraining the defendants or any of them from ordering, resuming or holding an Immigration Inquiry with respect to the plaintiff;
"(h) An order prohibiting the resumption or holding of any Immigration Inquiry or the making of any removal order or the issuing of any departure notice with respect to the plaintiff until trial of this action has been heard and concluded;
"(i) Damages in the sum of $50,000;
"(j) Costs of this action on a solicitor and client basis;
"(k) Such further or other relief as to this court may seem fit."
[8]
The grounds alleged for the various forms of relief claimed may be summarized as follows:
1. The defendants improperly and illegally refused to consider the plaintiff's application for refugee status prior to the expiry date of his visitor's visa, the refusal being contrary to established policy in that respect.
2. The defendants improperly constrained the plaintiff to wait until the expiry of his visitor's status before making his Convention refugee claim.
3. The immigration inquiry officer had wrongfully and improperly made a finding that the plaintiff had remained in Canada after his visa had expired;
4. The defendants had improperly and unlawfully refused or neglected to issue to the plaintiff a Minister's permit IMM 1263.
5. The defendants had unlawfully misled and misinformed the plaintiff, had treated him unfairly and contrary to natural justice, had deprived him of his lawful rights, had denied him equality before the law and had caused the plaintiff to suffer great and irreparable harm and damage in being unable to become a permanent resident of Canada.
[9]
The application before me is to strike out the statement of claim on grounds that it discloses no reasonable cause of action. Pursuant to the Rules of this court, the allegations in the claim must be taken as true and no evidence is admissible on the application. On this assumption, the plaintiff would appear to be entitled to his day in court and to urge the court to grant him relief. It must be kept in mind, however, that the relief prayed for is not that the defendants acted unfairly, or adopted improper procedures or exceeded their jurisdiction, but it is for a declaration that the plaintiff has the right to an "in-status" refugee application, a right to a ministerial permit, a right to remain lawfully in Canada and a right to be processed as an immigrant.
[10]
The issue before me is a narrow one: has the plaintiff a reasonable cause of action, does he raise justiciable elements and is this court competent to deal with them?
[11]
The main thrust of the defendants' counsel, in his argument, is that the plaintiff has no "rights" except as provided in the Immigration Act, 1976 and that the issues raised are not justiciable. Counsel submits that:
1. the issue of a ministerial permit is exclusively a matter for the discretion of the responsible minister under s. 37 of the statute;
2. under s. 115, it is the exclusive prerogative of the Governor-in-Council to determine what persons may apply for and be processed in Canada as permanent residents;
3. under s. 47, the jurisdiction vests at first instance in an adjudicator to inquire whether a person is lawfully in Canada pursuant to s. 4(2) of the Act; s. 47 further provides that after there has been a determination on Convention refugee status, the adjudicator's inquiry must be resumed.
[12]
As a consequence of these statutory provisions, counsel submits that this court cannot substitute itself for the Minister and impose its own fiat on the whole process. Counsel argues that the court cannot declare that the plaintiff is entitled to a permit as the granting of a permit is within the exclusive prerogative of the Minister. Neither can the court declare the plaintiff to be lawfully in Canada, as such is the prerogative of an inquiry officer. As a corollary, neither can the court declare that the plaintiff is entitled to apply for and be processed in Canada as a permanent resident. Finally, counsel submits that the court has no jurisdiction to declare that the plaintiff was entitled to have his claim for refugee status considered or determined prior to the expiration of his visitor's visa.
[13]
The position taken by plaintiff's counsel is that the plaintiff dutifully followed the procedure and was successful in being granted refugee status. He must now face a continuation of the inquiry. As his visitor's visa has long expired, and absent a Minister's permit, an adjudicator could not do otherwise than to order him deported.
[14]
Counsel for the plaintiff argue that this is a discriminatory action by the defendants. Counsel refer to certain departmental guidelines allowing the processing of refugee status while an applicant is lawfully in Canada. The initial refusal of the defendants to let his application go forward while he still enjoyed visitor status is a matter which, according to counsel, invites the court's attention. Counsel suggest that "in-status" and "out-status" persons form part of a murky world where rights and obligations have not been hitherto defined and require judicial determination. Furthermore, counsel assert that it is wrong for the Minister not to grant a Minister's permit to a person who has been determined to be a Convention refugee when the current practice has been otherwise and if the effect of it, as I understand the argument, is to place such person in continuing jeopardy.
[15]
I should now make three observations which I believe to be pertinent to the issue before me. Firstly, I have always considered that a referral to a court on administrative and quasi-judicial decisions, whether by the prerogative writ route under s. 18 of the Federal Court Act, or by way of review under s. 28, can only be entertained when no other appeal procedure exists and when without a court's power of judicial "review", an impugned decision is final and conclusive. In the case before me, the Immigration Act, 1976, already provides a right of appeal in the event a removal order were issued against the plaintiff. This is found in s. 72 of the Act and confers a right of appeal to the Immigration Appeal Board on any question of fact or law or mixed fact and law or on compassionate grounds.
[16]
It would therefore appear to me that if a statute provides a process to hear and determine a person's right to remain in Canada and a right of appeal to a tribunal with an ultimate right of review to an appeal court, such process should be respected and any prior intervention by a court is premature.
[17]
My second observation is that in all of the several grounds of review available to anyone who feels himself aggrieved by the exercise of a discretionary authority, courts have been loath to substitute an impugned decision by their own. Courts will quash a decision on grounds of unfairness, of denial of natural justice, of lack of jurisdiction, on procedural errors or on errors of law, but the normal process is for the court to order the decision-maker to exercise his discretion according to law and not for the court to decide the issue on its merit.
[18]
The third observation is that with respect to any claim in court for a declaratory judgment, there must first be a justiciable issue to be tried. This is tantamount to saying that a plaintiff must come before a court for a determination of his legal rights. He cannot, under the cover of meticulous drafting, invite a court to make declarations of rights which are not legal rights or to lure a court into making orders which it has no jurisdiction to make.
[19]
These observations although falling far short of covering the whole subject matter of prerogative remedies under s. 18, or review under s. 28, or an action for declaratory relief, encompass, in my view, the various forms of judicial intervention with which superior courts are seized from time to time when any person wishes to grieve from the exercise of an administrative or quasi-judicial decision.
[20]
On the subject of declaratory rights, the Chief Justice of Nova Scotia in Attorney  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 20 A.P.R. 132; 72 D.L.R.(3d) 639, put it this way at page 646:
"Declarations may thus be granted to define or declare a legal right of a plaintiff, ...
"The obverse of that principle is that nonlegal matters of morality, politics, the propriety of administrative practices (where not illegal), or the wisdom or fairness of governmental action (where not illegal) cannot be the subject of a declaratory action or indeed of any traditional court action."
[21]
And later, the Chief Justice clearly states a principle which should always be kept in mind, namely that "a court of law is exactly that, a court of law".
[22]
This rule is a sensible rule. It is to impose a restraint on a court of law so that it should not become a court of policy. It is to assure the separation of the various institutions of government whether legislative, executive or judicial, and avoid the temptation of courts to usurp the functions of the executive branch in the administration of laws enacted by the legislature. The comments in that respect of Mr. Justice Marceau of the Federal Court of Appeal in Attorney General of Canada and David J. Vincer (1987), 82 N.R. 352, No. A-132-87 dated December 1, 1987, and where the court faced an obverse situation, are particularly pertinent to that issue.
[23]
In the case of prerogative writs in aid of impugned administrative decisions, the Supreme Court of Canada in Re Maple Lodge Farms Ltd. and Government of Canada et al. (1982), 44 N.R. 354; 137 D.L.R.(3d) 558, reasserted this principle when it said at page 562:
"... It is, as well, a clearly-established rule that the courts should not interfere with the exercise of a discretion by a statutory authority merely because the court might have exercised the discretion in a different manner had it been charged with that responsibility. Where the statutory discretion has been exercised in good faith and, where required, in accordance with the principles of natural justice, and where reliance has not been placed upon considerations irrelevant or extraneous to the statutory purpose, the courts should not interfere. ..."
[24]
In the "review" process under s. 28 of the Federal Court Act, the decision of the Supreme Court in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , merely states that an appellant before the Immigration Appeal Board is entitled to a hearing, a matter which obviously corrects a procedural error. However, the leading judgment of Madam Justice Wilson in that case is in no wise [way] an intervention by the court in what might be the ultimate disposition of the matter by the Immigration Appeal Board.
[25]
I should also cite the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the judgment of Marceau, J., dated July 11, 1986, is also relevant. His Lordship says at page 112:
"... The question here is of the total absence of a right of privilege, for I repeat, under the Immigration Act recognition of refugee status by the Department confers no right so long as the adjudicator has not found that the conditions in s. 4(2) exist."
[26]
Similarly, in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Urie, J., at page 263 said this:
"A Convention refugee, on the other hand, is not given the right to reside permanently in Canada nor, by being designated such, is he given the right to remain in Canada for a specific period of time. Presumably his right to remain is dependent upon his continuing to be a refugee from the country of his nationality. If for any reason, he no longer can fulfil the requirements to be characterized as a Convention refugee, he is subject to a removal or deportation order. The duration of this stay, as a Convention refugee, can only be fixed by a ministerial permit issued pursuant to s. 37 of the Act. If no such permit is issued then, if he is within an inadmissible class, he may be the subject of a removal or deportation order. The only rights accorded to a Convention refugee are first, not to be returned to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened, a right granted by virtue of s. 55 of the Act, and, second, to be able to appeal a removal order or a deportation order made against him on a question of law or fact or of mixed law and fact and "on the ground that, having regard to the existence of compassionate or humanitarian considerations" he should not be removed from Canada (ss. 72(2)9a) and (b) and 72(3))."
[27]
Madam Justice Wilson in commenting on Urie, J.'s, reasons in that case suggested that he had placed the position of a Convention refugee too low. Her Ladyship noted that a Convention refugee was entitled to require the Minister to exercise his discretion to give a permit under s. 37 fairly and in accordance with proper principles. The issue before me, however, is not to enquire if these ground rules have been respected, but to declare that the plaintiff has a right to a permit.
[28]
Counsel for the plaintiff pleaded the legal effect of certain guidelines issued by the Employment and Immigration Commission to its officers who have delegated authority under the Immigration Act to exercise ministerial discretion. In these guidelines, an immigration officer may deal with "in-status" or "out-status" claims and may grant Minister's permits. It is stated in the guidelines, however, that they are merely guidelines and are not to be interpreted as binding, the discretion of an immigration officer being unfettered.
[29]
This so-called restriction on discretionary action was the subject of enquiry in the case of Re Maple Lodge Farm Ltd. and Government of Canada, supra. The Supreme Court of Canada found that guidelines which are indicative of policy or issued to assure some conformity in the application of discretionary rules, could not sustain a successful attack on the exercise of discretionary authority. McIntyre, J., at page 561 of his judgment quotes with approval what had been said earlier at the Federal Court of Appeal level by Le Dain, J.:
"Le Dain, J., dealt with this question at some length and said, at p. 645 D.L.R., pp. 513-514 F.C.:
'The Minister may validly and properly indicate the kind of considerations by which he will be guided as a general rule in the exercise of his discretion (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 169-171; 36 C.P.R.(3d)1), but he cannot fetter his discretion by treating the guidelines as binding upon him and excluding other valid or relevant reasons for the exercise of his discretion (see Re Hopedale Developments Ltd. and Town of Oakville (1964), 47 D.L.R.(2d) 482; [1965] 1 O.R. 259).'"
[30]
Rouleau, J., in the recent case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , T-1672-87 dated November 20, 1987, when dealing with the enforcement of Fisheries Regulations, said at page 12:
"... The courts should not interfere with the exercise of discretion by a statutory authority where it has been exercised in good faith and is not based upon irrelevant or extraneous considerations. Barring flagrant impropriety, the court should not be interfering in the administration process of the Minister. ..."
[31]
I would readily agree that a Convention refugee enjoys certain rights. As was repeated by Lacombe, J., in the Brito case, supra, he has a right to a determination from the Minister based on proper principle as to whether a permit should issue to him to enter and remain in Canada; the right not to be returned to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened; and the right to appeal a removal order or a deportation order made against him.
[32]
In the action before me, however, his right to a determination from the Minister was respected. The Minister said "No". In the action, the claim is to declare that he has a right to a Minister's permit, which is obviously not the same thing.
[33]
With respect to the other rights, these are not asserted in the plaintiff's claim nor to this date have they been breached.
[34]
Any allegation of impropriety on the part of the defendant based on bad faith, irrelevant or extraneous considerations, or disrespect for procedural safeguards, in no way can create the kind of rights which the plaintiff wishes this court to declare. Further, the fact that formal statutory and judicial processes have permitted the plaintiff to remain in Canada over the past five years does not, in my mind, create an aperture through which declarations of rights sought in this court could be seriously entertained.
[35]
I must conclude that no legal rights have been breached and I cannot see where there are justiciable issues with which this court could deal. This court has no jurisdiction to declare that the plaintiff is entitled to "in-status" consideration, to declare that he is entitled to a Minister's permit, to declare that he is lawfully in Canada or to declare that he has the right to secure permanent landing. Neither, it follows, can the court deal with the consequential relief by way of mandamus or otherwise.
[36]
Whatever rights to be enjoyed by the plaintiff are already enshrined in the Immigration Act, 1976. He is entitled to be heard at the resumed enquiry. If he should feel aggrieved by the ultimate decision, the law provides him with a right of appeal to the Immigration Appeal Board and to further appeals if warranted. This court cannot be another avenue of redress nor has it the jurisdiction to rule on the issues raised in the pleadings. The statement of claim should be struck out.
[37]
Having found that this court has no jurisdiction or competence to deal with the issues, it matters little that a motion to strike be made earlier or later in the proceedings. No laches can apply to clothe this court with jurisdiction it does not possess.
[38]
I should make a final observation. Had the defendant not pleaded over to the plaintiff's statement of claim where, on the strength of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  would have had more than sufficient evidence to declare the action a frivolous and vexatious abuse of the process of the court.
[39]
The plaintiff's action is struck out, with costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/nmg
[End of document]