[1]
MacKay, J.
: These are the reasons for an Order dismissing an application for a stay of a deportation order issued against the applicant which was heard by telephone on an urgent basis on October 31, 1995. Counsel for both the applicant and the respondent were present at court premises in Toronto, with the court presiding from Ottawa. These reasons are filed pursuant to s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended.
[2]
An application for leave and for judicial review, was filed on October 20, 1995 with reference to the decision on behalf of the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, dated September 27, 1995 determining that the applicant is a person who constitutes a danger to the public in Canada and is, therefore, removable from Canada. Thereafter, on October 27, 1995 the applicant filed a notice of motion for a stay of a deportation order, pending the final determination of the application for leave and for judicial review. Deportation of the applicant to Iran was scheduled for November 1, 1995.
[3]
The applicant, Karim Bavi, a citizen of Iran, had been a member of the Iranian Armed Forces, but deserted in 1987. After fleeing to Iraq and remaining in an Iraqi refugee camp for a time, the applicant entered and was granted landing in Canada on February 7, 1990, having been determined to be a Convention refugee overseas. In August 1991 the applicant was involved in two robberies for which he was convicted of two counts of robbery and one count of forceable confinement and he was sentenced to a total of four years and three months in prison.
[4]
On August 18, 1993 a deportation order was issued against the applicant on the basis that he is a person described in s. 27(1)(d)(i) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 as amended (the "
Act
") which provides,
"27(1) An immigration officer or a peace officer shall forward a written report to the Deputy Minister setting out the details of any information in the possession of the immigration officer or peace officer indicating that a permanent resident is a person who
. . . . .
(d) has been convicted of an offence under any Act of Parliament for which a term of imprisonment of
(i) more than six months has been imposed,"
An appeal of the deportation order was dismissed on January 23, 1995 by the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board. In September 1995 the applicant was transferred from Joyceville Institute where he was serving his sentence, to Metro West Detention Centre where he continued to be detained until the hearing of this application.
[5]
By memorandum dated July 27, 1995 the Manager, Detention and Removals, CIC, recommended on the basis of the information in the applicant's file, that the applicant be found to be a danger to the public in Canada pursuant to s. 53(1)(a) of the
Act
which provides,
"53(1) Notwithstanding s. 52(2) and (3), no person who is determined under this Act or the regulations to be a Convention refugee, nor any person who has been determined to be not eligible to have a claim to be a Convention refugee determined by the Refugee Division on the basis that the person is a person described in s. 46.01(1)(a), shall be removed from Canada to a country where the person's life or freedom would be threatened for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion unless
(a) the person is a member of an inadmissible class described in s. 19(1)(c) or s. 19(1)(c.1)(i) and the Minister is of the opinion that the person constitutes a danger to the public in Canada ..."
By letter dated that same day the applicant was advised that the Minister had delegated his authority to the Deputy Minister for the purpose of determining whether he is a danger to the public under s. 53(1)(a) of the
Act
on the basis of his criminal record in Canada which caused him to be a member of an inadmissible class pursuant to s. 19(1)(c) of the
Act
, and he advised the applicant that he could make submissions in this regard. The applicant did not have counsel at this time because he was unable to obtain funding and he prepared his own submissions to the Minister.
[6]
By letter dated August 14, 1995 the applicant made written submissions setting out reasons why he should not be considered to be a danger to the public in Canada, including the fact that he had upgraded his education, had never physically hurt anyone and had community support now in place. In these submissions the applicant provided the names and addresses of persons who supported his submissions and his release into the community. He also stated that he would be executed should he be forced to return to Iran.
[7]
After reading the applicant's submissions the Director General of the Case Management Branch recommended to the Deputy Minister that he exercise his delegated authority under s. 53(1) of the
Act
and form the opinion that the applicant constitutes a danger to the public in Canada.
[8]
On September 27, 1995 in an "Opinion of the Minister Pursuant to s. 53(1)(a) of the
Immigration Act
", the Deputy Minister advised that the applicant constitutes a danger to the public in Canada within the meaning of s. 53(1)(a) of the
Act
. The applicant has received no reasons for that decision.
[9]
The test established for determining whether the court should grant a stay of a removal order is that set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 123 (F.C.A.).
[10]
For the applicant it was urged that the application for leave and for judicial review disclosed a serious issue to be determined by the court. It is the submission of the applicant that the Minister did not consider the positive factors outlined in his letter nor did the Minister contact any of the persons whom the applicant stated support his release into the community in Canada, both factors that would have led the Minister to view the applicant more favourably and perhaps to a different disposition of his case.
[11]
On behalf of the applicant it was urged that, at a minimum, procedural fairness requires that the Minister contact the persons named in support of his submissions and consider their representations.
[12]
Counsel for the applicant also urged that the July 27 letter, recommending he be found to be a danger to the public, had fettered the discretion of the author of the recommendation by stating that he believed the applicant to be a danger to the public in Canada, without having met with the applicant.
[13]
It was also urged for the applicant that his ss. 7, 10 and 12
Charter
rights are violated by the decision of the Minister; and further, that the applicant was not provided with counsel to make submissions to the Minister and finally, if sent back to Iran, he faces the possibility of torture and death.
[14]
In other applications for a stay, this court may be prepared to assume there is a serious or an arguable issue before the court raised by an application for leave and for judicial review even if the application raising the matter has not yet been considered. However, in this case I am not convinced that there is a serious issue to be heard by the court. As noted by counsel for the respondent the applicant was given opportunity to make representations to the Minister and he also had the opportunity to provide letters of reference to the Minister within 15 days. Yet, the applicant did not forward such references. I am satisfied that, in light of his convictions and sentences, it was the applicant who bore the burden of demonstrating to the Minister that he was not a danger to the public in Canada, and it was not the responsibility of the Minister to seek evidence in support of the applicant's submissions. The decision that his submissions did not establish that he was not a danger to the public in Canada appears reasonable in the circumstances.
[15]
I am not convinced that the applicant's submission establishes that the process of the Minister for deciding whether the applicant is a person described in s. 53(1)(a) is unfair. The applicant was made aware of the concerns of the Minister and given opportunity to respond to them.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) the court suggested that fairness pursuant to s. 53(1) requires only that the applicant be given opportunity to make written submissions.
[16]
In light of the decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada and Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 1,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 35 (F.C.A.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 165 (F.C.A.) I find that the applicant's rights under the
Charter
have not been violated.
[17]
Moreover, I find the applicant has not demonstrated that he will suffer irreparable harm if the stay sought is not granted and he is deported.
[18]
For the applicant it was submitted that failure to stay the deportation order would result in his return to Iran where he believes he will be executed. I was not satisfied on the basis of this belief of the applicant, and the documentary evidence relied upon by him, that it is established he would suffer irreparable harm in the form of execution or torture in the event that his removal from Canada proceeds. The Minister, in making the decision as to whether or not to deport the applicant, relied upon U.S. Country Reports to determine that the applicant could return home without facing these risks. It is not established that the decision on behalf of the Minister is perverse or without foundation in the evidence before him.
[19]
For these reasons I find that the applicant has not established that he will suffer irreparable harm in the event that he is deported from Canada.
[20]
Having found that irreparable harm to the applicant will not suffer if deported is not established, there is no need to deal at any length with the balance of convenience. I note only that, in my opinion, the balance of convenience favours the Minister here. The applicant has been found to be a danger to the public in Canada, and the Minister has a responsibility to ensure that he is removed as expeditiously as possible in order to eliminate that danger.
[21]
Thus, for the reasons outlined, I dismissed the applicant's application for a stay.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David Weir/ldl
[End of document]