[1]
Strayer, J.
: The plaintiffs sought an order from Giles, A.S.P., striking out the following paragraph in each of the statements of defence of the two defendants:
"9. The defendant further states, and the fact is that as a result of statements and submissions made to the Canadian Patent Office during the prosecution of the application for Canadian Patent 1,144,327 and to the United States Patent Office during prosecution of the counterpart United States Patents 4,374,798 and 4,756,946, and also statements contained in the specification of the patent, the plaintiffs are estopped from denying that each and every one of the steps of the method and of the parts or functions of the products are essential to the alleged invention. In particular, the plaintiffs are estopped from denying that the following are essential to methods and mesh structure claimed in Canadian Patent 1,144,327:
a) that the starting material for the method and product is a substantially uniplanar material;
b) that in the uniaxially stretched structure, the thickness of the internodal portions of the bar at the national tangent line is substantially more than the thickness of the junctions or nodes of the bar;
c) that in the uniaxially stretched structure, there is substantial orientation in the junction;
d) that in the biaxially stretched structure, the junctions have a minimum thickness of 75% of that of the mid-point of the strands; and
e) that in the biaxially stretched structure, orientation runs around the junction crotches which extend between adjacent pairs of strands."
Giles, A.S.P., refused to make such order,
on the grounds that no Canadian decision referred to me made it clear that the matter had been decided and it was therefore not plain and obvious that the paragraph should be struck out.
[2]
This decision was appealed before me. On March 1, 1991 I allowed the appeal without giving reasons and struck out paragraph 9 of each defence. The defendants then proceeded to file amended statements of defence including the following paragraph.
"9. The defendant further states, and the fact is that as a result of statements and submissions made to the Canadian Patent Office during the prosecution of the application for Canadian Patent 1,144,327 and to the United States Patent Office during prosecution of the counterpart United States Patents 4,374,798 and 4,756,946, and also statements contained in the specification of the patent, the plaintiff P.L.G. has represented to the public, including the defendant, that the following are essential elements of the methods and mesh structure claimed in Canadian Patent 1,144,327:
a) that the starting material for the method and product is a substantially uniplanar material;
b) that in the uniaxially stretched structure, the thickness of the internodal portions of the bar at the national tangent line is substantially more than the thickness of the junctions or nodes of the bar;
c) that in the uniaxially stretched structure, there is substantial orientation in the junction;
d) that in the biaxially stretched structure, the junctions have a minimum thickness of 75% of that of the mid-point of the strands; and
e) that in the biaxially stretched structure, orientation runs around the junction crotches which extend between adjacent pairs of strands.
"The defendant further states that it relied to its detriment upon such representations by P.L.G. in evaluation of the plaintiffs rights. The defendant says that as a result of the foregoing representation and detrimental reliance, P.L.G. and its licensee Tensar are estopped from asserting that the aforesaid aspects are not essential elements of the alleged invention."
The plaintiffs moved again to strike these paragraphs, arguing that they were essentially the same as those which I had already struck out.
[3]
Counsel for the defendants advised the Court that he had interpreted my decision allowing the appeal from the Associate Senior Prothonotary as being based on the proposition that one cannot rely on "file wrappers", i.e. evidence as to positions taken or information provided during the prosecution of a patent application, to construe the patent. But he assumed I had not addressed the issue of whether resort could be had to such evidence to establish estoppel. He supports the new paragraph 9 on the basis that it alleges estoppel in pais; that is, that the plaintiffs are estopped from denying that certain elements are essential to the invention because they have represented to the public during the prosecution of the patent that such elements were integral to the invention.
[4]
According to my notes, and recollection, of the argument on the prior motion heard on February 28, 1991, counsel for the defendants made essentially the same argument in support of the former paragraph 9. He distinguished between "file wrapper estoppel" which he was not relying on, and "common law estoppel" which he was relying on.
[5]
I allowed the appeal on March 1 and struck out the paragraph because I did not accept the defendants' arguments. I had particular regard to my own decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the prosecution of the patent application, and not the pleading of estoppel, it appeared to me that the rationale would equally apply to the latter situation. That is, I came to the conclusion in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that the patentee and potential infringers are both bound by the terms of the patent as issued. Just as a patentee could not have his patent broadened by showing his intention to claim a broader invention through evidence of what transpired during the prosecution of his patent application, neither should an alleged infringer be able to resort to such evidence to show it is narrower in scope than the patent states. To do so would be to override the words of the patent as issued which, in my understanding, are to be determinative of the scope of the patent. By the same token, in my view, an alleged infringer cannot excuse acts of infringement of the words of the patent by invoking other words submitted by the patentee in prosecuting his patent application. At law he is not entitled to rely on such "representations" in place of the very words of the patent.
[6]
Counsel for the defendants assured me there was Canadian authority for reliance on such "representations" by patentees in order to set up estoppel. However the authorities he has referred to, in my respectful view, do not support this proposition.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  patent, but only with respect to the characterization of the patent as involving a "chemical process", a distinction relevant to the application of then s. 41(1) of the
Patent Act.
[See footnote 3]. As I noted in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , it is not clear from the Supreme Court decision that the admissibility of such evidence was contested, nor does the court provide any rationale for resort to it.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  wrappers, not for the purpose of determining the scope of the patent but to indicate what prior art had been before the examiners. This was thought to have some relevance to determining the strength of the case required to rebut the presumption of validity. She also indicated, however, that such evidence could have little weight.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Canadian and U.S. patent applications, but only in relation to an allegation that the patent was void, pursuant to then s. 55(1) of the
Patent Act
, due to misrepresentation in the Canadian petition.
[7]
Taking the view that I do, that for determining the scope of an invention resort must be had only to the patent together with any expert evidence required to explain it, I am unable to accept that in Canadian law a patentee may be estopped by statements made by him in prosecuting his patent application. Nor do I understand how in law an alleged infringer can be heard to say that he was entitled to rely on representations made prior the issue of the patent in lieu of the words of the patent itself. The defendants have already launched an appeal from my order of March 1, 1991, and it is through such a process that they should continue to assert their position.
[8]
While both the paragraphs previously struck out and those now before me refer to "statements contained in the specification of the patent" as well as to those in the prosecution of the patent, no particular argument was addressed to those statements in defence of the impugned paragraphs.
[9]
Paragraph 9 in each amended statement of defence will therefore be struck out.
Motion granted.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slm
Footnotes
1.	(1984), 80 C.P.R.(2d) 59, at 86-87.
2.	(1968), 55 C.P.R. 111, at 116-117 (S.C.C.).
3.	R.S.C. 1952, c. 203.
4.	(1988), 19 F.T.R. 161; 20 C.P.R.(3d) 291, at 315-316.
5.	(1986), 64 N.R. 287; 8 C.P.R.(3d) 289.
[End of document]