[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an appeal by Hung Kwan Paul Cheung from a decision of a citizenship judge, R.M. Latta, who, on January 27, 1992 refused to approve the application of citizenship of the said Hung Kwan Paul Cheung on the ground that Mr. Cheung failed to satisfy the residency requirements of s. 5(1)(c) of the
Citizenship Act
. Section 5(1)(c) requires the accumulation of at least three years of residence in Canada within the four years immediately preceding the date of application for citizenship. That date was August 16, 1991. The citizenship judge found that the appellant had met all of the other requirements of s. 5 of the
Act
.
[2]
The citizenship judge, in the pertinent passages of his reasons addressed to the appellant, found as follows:
"- You initially came to Canada in February of 1985 as a visitor and you received your official landing status from Canada on July 20, 1986. You arrived in Canada with your family to start new lives for yourself and in this regard you purchased your home where you currently reside in July of 1986.
"- Prior to coming to Canada, you had been a purchaser and a fashion coordinator for a Hong King based company called, "Betty Clemo Ltd." As indicated on Question 7 of your Residence Questionnaire, you confirmed that you did now sever your ties with your previous employer and, in fact, retain your association with them to this day as a free-lance purchaser.
"- In December of 1986, you formed a Canadian company called, "Domani Fashions" and this firm has opened a boutique in the New Westminster Quay and is operated by your wife. You also informed me that in July of 1989, you purchased additional property in Vancouver for a future store, but this has not yet materialized.
"- Your absences from Canada are extensive, 1,054 days in the four year period prior to your date of application. In this regard, you were issued "Returning Resident Permits" from Immigration Canada covering the periods of January 1987 to January 1988 and from January 1988 to January 1989. A review of your passport indicates it has been stamped on numerous occasions as a Returning Resident.
"- While away from Canada, you confirmed that you travelled mainly alone, leaving your wife to maintain the household and your family. In this capacity, as a free-lance purchaser and a fashion co-ordinator for your previous employer, you told me you were paid a commission for your endeavours in Hong Kong currency; also you paid taxes to both governments. During this timeframe, you have maintained an active bank account, pay into a Provincial Medical Plan and own an automobile.
"- Upon questioning, you told me that your absences from Canada have been primarily for three reasons:
1. To look after an aging mother in Hong Kong;
2. To buy material for your wife's boutique, and
3. To maintain your business association with 'Betty Clemo Ltd.';
"Your estimation of time allotment was 25% to your mother; 50% buying for your wife's business and 25% devoted to your own employment. I must admit I am having trouble digesting this information, particularly as it relates to 50% of 1,054 days for acquiring garments for your wife's boutique. This statement lacks credibility.
"Federal Court jurisprudence indicates that absences from Canada will be supported where a particular mode of living has been established and maintained, professional and business ties have been severed from previous countries and where particular indicia have been established which would be expected of new immigrants.
. . . . .
"I have failed to recognize your severing of your professional business ties overseas and this is the reason that I am non-approving your application for citizenship."
[3]
The relevant provisions of the
Citizenship Act
are as follows:
"5(1) The Minister shall grant citizenship to any person who
. . . . .
(c) has been lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence, has not ceased since such admission to be a permanent resident pursuant to s. 24 of the Immigration Act, and has, within the four years immediately preceding the date of his application, accumulated at least three years of residence in Canada calculated in the following manner:
(i) for every day during which the person was resident in Canada before his lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one-half of a day of residence, and
(ii) for every day during which the person was resident in Canada after his lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one day of residence."
[4]
The
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, s. 24 to which the above refers, provides, under the title of
Loss of Status
, as follows:
"24(1) A person ceases to be a permanent resident when
(a) that person leaves or remains outside Canada with the intention of abandoning Canada as that person's place of permanent residence; or
(b) a deportation order has been made against that person and the order is not quashed or the execution thereof is not stayed pursuant to subsection 73(1).
"(2) Where a permanent resident is outside Canada for more than one hundred and eighty-three days in any one twelve month period, that person shall be deemed to have abandoned Canada as his place of permanent residence unless that person satisfies an immigration officer or an adjudicator, as the case may be, that he did not intend to abandon Canada as his place of permanent residence."
[5]
In that the present appellant left and returned to Canada on many occasions during the relevant time, I am satisfied that s. 25 of the
Immigration Act
may also be applicable:
"25(1) Where a permanent resident intends to leave Canada for any period of time or is outside Canada, that person may in prescribed manner make an application to an immigration officer for a returning resident permit.
"(2) Possession by a person of a valid returning resident permit issued to that person pursuant to the regulations is, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, proof that the person did not leave or remain outside Canada with the intention of abandoning Canada as his place of permanent residence."
[6]
The appeal from a decision of a citizenship judge is a trial de novo and I can consider all the evidence before me as if the application before me was being made for the first time with the exception that it is incumbent upon the appellant to show that the citizenship judge exercised his discretion on a wrong principle or on a complete misapprehension of the facts or for some other compelling reason requiring my interference in his decision.
[7]
In the citizenship judge's Reason for Decision, he states that appellant met all the requirements of s. 5 of the
Citizenship Act
with the exception of residency s. 5(1)(c) being short by 689 days. Counsel for the appellant states that the appellant is short by 606 days. Whether the shortage is 689 days or 606 days in the relevant period is immaterial.
[8]
Mr. Cheung came to Canada as a landed immigrant in July 1986. He had come to Canada in April or May 1986 and purchased a home. In July 1986, he came to live in Canada with his wife and two children. Both his children study in the United States. They, together with his wife, are Canadian citizens.
[9]
When Mr. Cheung came to Canada, he was and still is a one-third owner in a business in Hong Kong commonly known as "Betty Clemo Ltd.". He is the buyer for the said business. He states he is a "freelance buyer" for the business.
[10]
When the appellant and his family immigrated to Canada he and his wife opened a business "Domani Fashions" which operates a boutique in the New Westminster Quay. Mr. Cheung states that he is also the buyer for this business.
[11]
As I have stated, Mr. Cheung has two children who study in the United States. Mr. Cheung informed me that being a "freelance buyer" for "Betty Clemo Ltd.", a buyer for "Domani Fashions" and visiting his children in the United States, of necessity requires that he be out of the country (Canada) often. In addition, Mr. Cheung informed me that he has a mother in Hong Kong whom he regularly visits. Often when Mr. Cheung left and returned to Canada, he was issued with a "Returning Resident Permit". As the citizenship judge states "a review of his (Cheung) passport indicates that it was stamped as a 'Returning Resident' on several occasions".
[12]
The appellant has clearly shown that he had established residency in Canada in July of 1986. That his absences from Canada were only temporary absences to do "buying" or to visit his children or his mother.
[13]
I am satisfied that the appellant should be granted Canadian citizenship as he has clearly proven "residency" as it is defined in the
Citizenship Act
.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/lrz
[End of document]