[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: In an originating notice of motion, filed into the Federal Court on January 19, 1989, Canadian Wildlife Federation Inc., Gordon Geske and Joseph Dolecki request the issuance of an order in the nature of certiorari quashing and setting aside a licence issued by the federal Minister of Environment on June 17, 1988, to the Saskatchewan Water Corporation for permission to carry out works and undertakings in connection with the Rafferty Alameda Project in the Souris River Basin pursuant to the International River Improvements Act and for an order in the nature of mandamus requiring the federal Minister of the Environment to comply with the Environmental Assessment and Review Process Guidelines Order, S.O.R./84-467 in considering the application of the respondent Saskatchewan Water Corporation for a licence under the International River Improvements Act.
[2]
The present application, being made by the Souris Basin Development Authority (Souris), requests:
"1. An order joining the applicant as a party respondent or alteratively, granting status to it as an intervenor and to be considered in all respects as if it was an actual respondent in these proceedings.
"2. An order pursuant to rule 321.1 permitting the applicant to exclude from the Motion Record, the documents and reports marked as Exhibits 'B', 'D', 'BB', 'CC', 'DD' and 'EE' respectively to the affidavit of George N. Hood, sworn to on the 10th day of February 1989.
"3. If the applicant is added as a party respondent or alternatively, if status is granted as an intervenor, for leave to have the material filed in support of this application allowed as evidence on the return date of the application made by the Canadian Wildlife Federation Inc., Gordon Geske and Joseph Dolecki."
[3]
In support of the application, the applicant filed an affidavit of George N. Hood to which is attached a number of exhibits.
[4]
Immediately after the hearing, I expressed the view that I could not issue an order joining the present applicant as a respondent to the proceedings in that I am satisfied that the Federal Court would not have jurisdiction to try a case between the Canadian Wildlife Federation Inc. et al. and the Souris Basin Development Authority. The remaining issue is to determine whether the Souris Basin Development Authority should be granted intervenor status and if so granted, upon what conditions.
[5]
Mr. Justice Rouleau, in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  International Limousine Owners Association to participate in the proceedings and granted it intervenor status;
I was satisfied that it had an interest in the outcome and its rights could be seriously affected should I rule in favour of plaintiff
." (underlining is mine)
[6]
The evidence placed before me must be looked at to see if Souris has an "interest in the outcome" and if Souris' rights "could seriously be affected" should a decision be made in favour of the Canadian Wildlife Federation Inc. et al.
[7]
The issue to allow or not to allow a party to intervene is a matter of discretion for the court to exercise in accordance with the circumstances of the case ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (supra), Mr. Justice Strayer states, at page 510, after relating the facts concerning an application by a company, Jet Set Sam Services, to become a defendant, but in speaking of the issue of intervention:
"I would have doubts about this as a matter of law and, as a matter of discretion which I would in any event have to exercise, I would not be inclined to add it as an intervenor since I could not see how it would bring to the case a point of view different from that of the existing defendants."
[9]
Therefore, in looking at the evidence, one must not only look to see if Souris has an "interest in the outcome" and if its rights "could seriously be affected", but one must also look to see if, by adding Souris as an intervenor "it would bring to the case a point of view different from that of the existing respondents". It is not enough to allow Souris to intervene if it will simply make submissions to support those being made by the respondents.
[10]
The entire evidence submitted by Souris is to be found in the affidavit of George N. Hood together with the exhibits attached thereto.
[11]
Souris was established as a Crown Corporation in Right of the Province of Saskatchewan on March 6, 1986. It submitted, on August 4, 1987, to the Minister of Environment and Public Safety for the Province of Saskatchewan an Environmental Impact Statement respecting a proposed development of the Rafferty and Alameda dams together with associated works and undertakings. Souris has endeavoured to obtain wide public input and discussions with respect to the development of the Rafferty and Alameda dams and associated works. The Minister of the Environment and Public Safety for Saskatchewan gave approval to the project on February 15, 1988, the federal government was advised of the general nature of the project. The officials of the federal government, and in particular the Federal Department of the Environment were provided with information respecting the studies made. This information was given by Mr. Hood on behalf of Souris to the representatives of the federal government.
[12]
The applicant, Joseph Dolecki, sent a letter (attached to affidavit of Dolecki and marked Exhibit B) which was directed at the draft Environmental Impact Statement sent to the Federal Department of the Environment. Subsequently to the letter of Dolecki, officials of Souris and officials from the Department of Environment and Public Safety were in contact with the Federal Department of the Environment and it resulted in changes being made to the draft Environmental Impact Statement.
[13]
On February 23, 1988, Souris received approval to construct works for the respondent Saskatchewan Water Corporation. The Approval to Construct Works is Exhibit "M" to Mr. Hood's affidavit and is dated February 23, 1988. In paragraph 20 of the Hood affidavit, he states:
"20. That subsequent to the receipt of Exhibit 'M' hereto the Authority commenced the construction of a nonpermanent coffer dam in the spring of 1987."
[14]
I would assume that the words "commenced the construction of a nonpermanent coffer dam in the spring of 1987" should read "in the spring of 1988". Subsequent to June 17, 1988, when the Saskatchewan Water Corporation obtained a licence from the Federal Minister of the Environment pursuant to the International River Improvements Act, Souris entered into certain contracts calling for and incorporating certain permanent aspects of the project. There also exists a construction schedule respecting the Rafferty Dam. One of the planned usages of the water which will be held back by the Rafferty Dam is to provide coolant to the Shand Power Station project currently under construction by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Souris is required to obtain a sufficient interest in lands that will be directly affected and flooded by the project (Exhibit G to Hood affidavit lists the land acquired and the total consideration paid). Saskatchewan Power Corporation also acquired lands in respect to the Shand Power Plant Project.
[15]
Souris, as part of its obligations, was required, prior to December 31, 1988, to present a proposal with respect to monitoring the quality of the water in the Souris River Basin. Souris also prepared or had prepared, since the completion of the Environmental Impact Statement six further studies respecting the project. It also prepared a booklet entitled "Questions and Answers, Rafferty-Alameda Shand" as well as an analysis entitled "Saskatchewan/North Dakota Boundary Water Quality". Souris is now committed to a $350,000 three year study of "the white-tail deer and sharp-tailed grouse" population in the Souris River Basin.
[16]
As I have previously stated, the affidavit of George N. Hood and the exhibits attached to the said affidavit are the only evidence placed before me in regard to the application for intervention.
[17]
Counsel for Souris submits that "inasmuch as the dams in question are to be constructed in the Province of Saskatchewan, that the head office of the respondent, Saskatchewan Water Corporation, is situated in Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan and that the applicant, Gordon Geske, resides in the Province of Saskatchewan, it is appropriate, if required, to look to the practice and procedure presently in effect in Saskatchewan for the determination of the issue of when intervention should be permitted."
[18]
The rules applicable and in effect, according to counsel are rules 38(1), 38(2)(a) and (b), 37(4), rule 39(a)(b)(c), rule 667(1)(2)(3) under Part 52 entitled Judicial Review and rule 672.
[19]
In reading the rules above referred to, I am satisfied that all the rules, with the exception of rule 672, have little or no application. I have stated that Souris cannot be added as a respondent to the proceedings but can only be added as an intervenor if it shows it has an interest in the outcome, its rights could seriously be affected and it could bring to the case a point of view different from that of the existing respondents. Rule 672 of the Rules of Practice and Procedure does nothing more than say the same thing:
"672. Any person who desires to be heard in opposition to or in support of the application and who appears to have such interest as the court considers sufficient in the matter, may be heard, with leave of the court, on such conditions as the court considers appropriate, notwithstanding that he has not been served or named as a party."
[20]
The affidavit of George N. Hood clearly indicates that the Government of Saskatchewan, in creating a number of Crown corporations desires to ensure that studies concerning the environment would take place before construction is commenced for the project. Souris is one of the Crown corporations created, in part, to obtain lands and ensure that studies regarding the environment took place, that is, how the proposed project would affect the environment.
[21]
Is this sufficient reason, that Souris caused studies of the environment to take place, that Souris acquired lands, that it is committed to a study costing $350,000 regarding the white-tailed deer and the sharp-tailed grouse, to be allowed to intervene where the Wildlife Federation et al. seeks an order in the nature of certiorari quashing and setting aside a licence issued by the Federal Minister of the Environment to the Saskatchewan Water Corporation to carry on certain works or seeks a mandamus requiring the Federal Minister of the Environment to comply with the Environmental Assessment and Review Process Guidelines Order S.O.R./84-467?
[22]
I think not. I am satisfied that Souris certainly has an interest in the outcome of the originating motion and that it can be affected if the originating motion is allowed. I am also satisfied that Souris could add nothing to the case that cannot be submitted by the respondents in the originating motion. Souris would only be able to state its position and that is it is against the granting of certiorari or mandamus. It could bring nothing different to the case that the Federal Minister of the Environment or the Saskatchewan Water Corporation could bring.
[23]
The request for status as a respondent or as an intervenor by the Souris Basin Development Authority is denied, costs of the motion in favour of Canadian Wildlife Federation Inc., Gordon Geske and Joseph Dolecki.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]