 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Ignac Balogh, Gizella Bodi and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 216)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Blanchard, J.
February 15, 2012.
Counsel:
Roger S. Bhatti, for the applicants;
Jennifer Dagsvik, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Roger S. Bhatti, Surrey, British Columbia; for the applicants
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Blanchard, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of the April 7, 2011 decision by the Refugee Protection Division (the RPD) of the Immigration and Refugee Board refusing the Applicants' claim for refugee protection pursuant to sections 96 and 97(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2000, c 27 [IRPA]. The application is brought under subsection 72(1) of IRPA.
I.
Factual Overview
[2]
The Applicants, Ignac Balogh (Principal Applicant), his common-law spouse, Gizella Bodi (Associate Applicant), and their teenage son Ignac Tamas Balogh (minor Applicant), are ethnic Roma of Hungarian nationality. They allege a well-founded fear of persecution because of their ethnicity.
[3]
The Principal Applicant is trained as a bricklayer and the Associate Applicant is trained as a primary school teacher and a social worker for youth.
[4]
The Applicants advance the following incidents and allegations in support of their claim of persecution:
a. The Applicants allege that they cannot find work in their chosen field because they are Roma.
b. The Principal Applicant reports that he has been beaten severely in 1997, 2000 and 2003 and that his injuries required hospitalization. He states that reports were filed by the doctors with the police for the 1997 and 2000 incidents and no police investigation resulted.
c. The Principal Applicant claims he was assaulted on the basis of his ethnicity approximately 4 times per year. He states he did not report these incidents on his Personal Information Form (PIF) because his previous counsel advised him only to list the incidents where he had sustained bodily harm.
d. The Applicants allege that the Principal Applicant is more targeted than other Roma men because he had an altercation with a leader of a group of 'skin heads' in 1997 and that a member of the group had been present during two later assaults.
e. The Principal Applicant claims being detained 5 or 6 times a year for up to four hours at a time by the police for not carrying his ID. He was allegedly beaten by the police on one of these occasions.
f. The Associate Applicant alleges discrimination in the medical treatment she received in medical facilities in Hungary for Cirrhosis of the liver by reason of her ethnicity.
g. The minor Applicant was discriminated against in school by reason of his ethnicity. He was placed in a separate class that consisted of nine Roma children. These children allegedly suffered physical beatings from the teachers and were required to enter and exit from a different door than the ethnic Hungarian students. The Applicants' son was also allegedly attacked by a group of youths in a previous housing complex in which they lived.
h. The Applicants allege that in 2010, a neighbour set fire to the forest surrounding their property, which destroyed their barn, shed, and garden. The Applicants claim the fire department did not respond, claiming their equipment was busy and that the lives of the Applicants and their neighbours were not in danger. The Associate Applicant reported the incident to the police but was told that no report could be made without a report of the fire from the fire department.
II.
The Impugned Decision
[5]
The RPD rejected the Applicants' claim finding that the claimants did not have a well-founded fear of persecution on a Convention ground in Hungary and that state protection was available to them.
[6]
The RPD accepted that the Applicants suffered discrimination but found that it did not amount to persecution. The RPD found that the attacks and violence suffered by the Applicants were "acts of random violence committed by racists". It found, on the evidence, that the discrimination suffered by the Applicants "does not threaten their fundamental rights but rather affects the quality of their existence in their home country."
[7]
The RPD also found that state protection was available to the Applicants and they did not avail themselves of the protection and services offered by state agencies, including: the Equal Treatment Authority (ETA), the access to free legal aid for Roma offered by the Ministry of Justice and Law Enforcement in cases of discrimination based on ethnicity, labour centres that have special officers for Romani affairs focused on the needs of the Romani community, and the Independent Police Complaints Board (IPCB). The RPD relied on country documentation to find that the Hungarian government was making serious efforts to ensure that state protection is available to Roma. As a consequence, the RPD found that the claimants did not refute the presumption of state protection on clear and convincing evidence.
III.
Issues
[8]
The Applicants raise the following issues on this application:
a. Did the RPD err in law in finding that the denial of the Applicants to work in their respective chosen professions was discriminatory rather than persecutory?
b. Did the RPD err in law in failing to address the adequacy of state protection in light of evidence before the Panel that the Principal Applicant had suffered persecution from state actors?
c. Did the RPD err in law by misconstruing or ignoring evidence properly before it with respect to recent incidents of persecution and the Applicants' recent attempt to obtain protection from the state?
IV.
The Standard of Review
[9]
All three issues are fact-driven and relate to the weighing of evidence and as such are reviewable on the reasonableness standard (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . On state protection, see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
V.
Analysis
Did the RPD err in law in finding that the denial of the Applicants to work in their respective chosen professions was discriminatory rather that persecutory?
[10]
The Applicants argue that the RPD failed to conduct any meaningful analysis of whether their denial of the right to work in their chosen professions amounted to persecution. They argue that the RPD "did not appear to take any issue with the evidence from the Applicants in the hearing that they were repeatedly denied employment in their chosen professions, due to their ethnicity." The Applicants contend that the RPD did not adequately probe the Applicants on this issue. They also argue that the RPD failed to ask them what kind of protection they could have availed themselves to with respect to the denial of employment.
[11]
In support of their argument, the Applicants cite
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 15, 25 Imm LR (2d) 128 [
He
], for the proposition that actively denying an applicant the right to work in her profession was persecutory.
[12]
The Respondent contends that the RPD specifically referenced the Applicants' difficulties in finding employment and appropriately considered those circumstances in its decision. The Minister argues that there was only "vague and uncorroborated" evidence to find persecution due to discrimination in employment. The Respondent also argues that
He
does not apply in the circumstances because there is no evidence that the authorities took active steps to prevent the Applicants from obtaining employment.
[13]
I am of the view that
He
be distinguished on its facts. In that case, the applicant's job was terminated and her request for a state work permit was denied. The applicant was essentially forced by the state to become a farmer. In the case at hand, there was no evidence to support the contention that the Hungarian authorities took active steps to prevent the Applicants from obtaining employment in their respective professions.
[14]
A review of the RPD's reasons and decision at paragraphs 19-20 shows that the panel expressly considered the Applicants' allegations that they were unable to find work in their chosen professions and concludes that the claimants have suffered discrimination that affects the quality of their existence in Hungary. The RPD did consider the circumstances relating to Applicants' work history in Hungary. Reading the decision as a whole, I am satisfied that the RPD's finding that the Applicants' inability to find work in their respective professions did not amount to persecution was reasonably open to it on the record.
Did the RPD err by failing to adequately consider the evidence relating to the Principal Applicant's treatment by state actors in finding that state protection was available?
[15]
Since the third issue raised by the Applicants also deals with state protection, I will deal with both the second and third issue together.
[16]
The Applicants argue that the RPD erred in finding that state protection was available to them. They contend that the RPD failed to consider that the police were the primary agents of harm and did nothing when serious incidents were reported, and failed to consider whether the alleged violence by the police was persecutory. The Applicants further contend that the RPD failed to engage in a meaningful analysis of the Applicants' circumstances, in particular the allegation that the Principal Applicant had been detained by the police 5 or 6 times a year for failing to carry his ID. It is further argued the RPD did not consider the Principal Applicant's unwillingness to seek state protection because he is being persecuted by the state, namely the police. They argue that seeking such protection would be futile and cite
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in support of their argument.
[17]
The Respondent argues that the Applicant has failed to rebut the presumption of state protection. It is argued that the Applicants mistakenly conflate the police with the state as a whole. The Respondent argues that the RPD took the police action into account in its analysis and pointed to state agencies established by the Hungarian government to address corruption and discriminatory practices, including: 1) the Ministry of Justice and Law Enforcement; 2) the Independent Police Complaints Board (IPCB); 3) the Parliamentary Commissioner's office; 4) special officers for Romani affairs; and 5) the Equal Treatment Agency (ETA). The RPD found that the Associate Applicant did not approach these agencies and found not credible her claim that she had registered a complaint with the ETA.
[18]
The Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 50 confirms that a state is presumed capable of protecting its citizens. There is no dispute that the legal burden is on the Applicants to adduce clear and convincing evidence to rebut the presumption of state protection. The jurisprudence further teaches that state protection need not be perfect and the assessment of state protection requires a forward-looking analysis (
Canada (Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[19]
In its reasons for decision, the RPD did not expressly address the Applicants' allegations that the Principal Applicant would be detained by police 5 or 6 times a year for failing to carry his ID, or the allegation that he was once beaten by the police. In my view, this omission is not fatal to the decision. A review of the RPD's reasons for decision indicates that the panel was well aware of the alleged police discrimination. At paragraph 34 of its reasons, it states: "The claimant's [
sic
] have testified that they were routinely subjected to prejudicial behaviour by teachers, employers, and government workers including the police because of their ethnicity." In my view, the RPD turned its mind to the alleged discrimination by the state in coming to its conclusion. There is no requirement that every element of evidence be addressed in the reasons as long as "... the reasons allow the reviewing court to understand why the tribunal made its decision and permit it to determine whether the conclusion is within the range of acceptable outcomes". (
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[20]
With regard to Applicants' unwillingness to seek state protection given the alleged discrimination by state actors, the RPD notes at paragraph 52 of its decision that refugee protection is always forward-looking. The Applicants were aware that they had access to independent state agencies for assistance. One of those agencies
,
the IPCB, established in 2008
,
investigates violations and omissions by the police that substantively concern fundamental rights which are in essence the same kind of allegations made against the police by the Applicants. There is no evidence that these independent agencies were ineffective or corrupt. The Applicants did not file any complaints with any of these agencies or attempt to seek assistance. Further, there is no evidence that these agencies are in any way influenced by the local police. The RPD further acknowledged at paragraph 59 of its reasons for decision, that the protection by the Hungarian state was not perfect and that it required improvement in many areas. It also determined that the government of Hungary "is taking significant steps to ensure state protection is available to their citizens including those of Roma ancestry." The RPD also determined that the Applicants did not take reasonable steps to avail themselves of the state protection which was available to them. In my view, the above findings were reasonably open to the RPD on the record.
[21]
The Applicants further argue that the RPD erred by failing to adequately consider the evidence relating to the incident of the fire in finding that state protection was available to the Applicants. They contend that the RPD erred in finding the "neighbours lit a fire in the forest around their home to burn off dead grass." It is argued that the evidence shows that the fire was deliberately set with a wish or intention to set fire to the Applicants' home. The Applicants argue that this is important evidence that should have been expressly dealt with by the RPD and since is was not, an inference should be drawn that the RPD made its finding without regard to the evidence, thereby committing a reviewable error.
[22]
The Respondent contends that the evidence does not support the suggestion that the fire was purposely set to burn the Applicants' home and argues that the RPD properly characterized the incident in its reasons.
[23]
The following transcript of the hearing before the RPD reveals that the panel sought clarification of the incident from the Associate Applicant:
RPD: Who - who heard or who did this individual admit to that he lit the fire?
Associate Applicant: He let to know to the neighbouring - he let to know to the neighbouring Gypsies he was - he talked - talked about this on the bus with the neighbours and then - and then these people told me that this individual lit the fire and then I asked - and I asked him and he did not deny it.
RPD: Okay. When you say he did not deny it, what does that mean?
Associate Applicant: He said - he said that he lit that land in there so there are new grass could grow again but then when he said, "I wish your house would have been afire" that he wanted to lit everything, not just that land in there.
RPD: Okay. So he said he had lit the fire so new grass could grow and then he said that he wished that your house had burned as well. Is that correct?
Associate Applicant: Yes. Correct.
(p 326 of Tribunal Record)
In my view, the above passage read in context with the remainder of the transcript does not establish that the fire was lit with the intent to burn the Applicants' home. I am satisfied that the RPD's characterization of the incident was reasonably open to it on the record and as such it did not err in its consideration of the incident in its reasons for decision.
[24]
The RPD's finding that the Applicants did not discharge their burden of presenting clear and convincing evidence of the state's inability to protect them was reasonably open to it on the record. It is a finding that falls within the range of acceptable outcomes in all of the circumstances. The RPD committed no reviewable error in its assessment and determination on state protection. This conclusion is determinative of this application.
[25]
No question was proposed and none will be certified as a serious question of general importance pursuant to paragraph 74(
d
) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, [SC 2001, c 27.]
VI.
Conclusion
[26]
For the above reasons, the application will be dismissed.
JUDGMENT
[27]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The application for judicial review is dismissed; and
2. No question of general importance is certified.
.........................
Ignac Balogh, Gizella  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Cour est saisie d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire de la décision du 7 avril 2011 par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés (la SPR) de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié a rejeté la demande d'asile des demandeurs en vertu de l'article 96 et du paragraphe 97(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2000, c 27 [la LIPR]. La demande a été présentée en application du paragraphe 72(1) de la LIPR.
I.
Aperçu des faits
[2]
Les demandeurs, Ignac Balogh (le demandeur principal), sa conjointe de fait, Gizella Bodi (la demanderesse associée) et leur fils adolescent Ignac Tamas Balogh (le demandeur mineur) sont des Hongrois d'origine ethnique rom. Ils allèguent craindre avec raison d'être persécutés du fait de leur origine ethnique.
[3]
Le demandeur principal a une formation de briqueteur et la demanderesse associée a une formation d'enseignante au niveau primaire et de travailleuse sociale pour les jeunes.
[4]
Les demandeurs avancent les incidents et les allégations qui suivent à l'appui de leur crainte de persécution:
a. Les demandeurs allèguent qu'ils ne peuvent trouver du travail dans le domaine qu'ils ont choisi parce qu'ils sont Roms.
b. Le demandeur principal déclare qu'il a été battu sauvagement en 1997, 2000 et 2003 et qu'il a dû être hospitalisé pour ses blessures. Il affirme que les médecins ont produit des rapports à la police pour les incidents survenus en 1997 et en 2000, mais que la police n'a pas fait enquête.
c. Le demandeur principal allègue avoir été agressé environ quatre fois par année en raison de son origine ethnique. Il affirme ne pas avoir fait état de ces incidents dans son formulaire de renseignements personnels parce que son ancien conseil lui avait recommandé d'inscrire seulement les incidents où il avait subi des blessures.
d. Les demandeurs allèguent que le demandeur principal est plus ciblé que d'autres Roms parce qu'il a eu une altercation avec un leader d'un groupe de «
skinheads
» en 1997 et qu'un membre de ce groupe était présent les deux fois suivantes où il a été agressé.
e. Le demandeur principal prétend avoir été détenu par la police cinq ou six fois par année, pendant au plus quatre heures à chaque fois, parce qu'il n'avait pas de pièces d'identité sur lui. Il aurait été battu par un policier une fois lors de ces détentions.
f. La demanderesse associée allègue avoir été victime de discrimination dans le traitement médical qu'elle a reçu pour soigner une cirrhose dans un établissement de soins de santé en Hongrie, en raison de son origine ethnique.
g. Le demandeur mineur a été victime de discrimination à l'école du fait de son origine ethnique. Il a été placé dans une classe séparée qui se composait de neuf enfants roms. Ces enfants ont fait, paraît-il, l'objet de mauvais traitements de la part des enseignants et devaient emprunter une porte différente de celle utilisée par les élèves d'origine hongroise pour entrer et sortir de l'établissement. Le fils du demandeur aurait également été attaqué par un groupe de jeunes lorsqu'ils résidaient dans un autre complexe d'habitation.
h. Les demandeurs allèguent que, en 2010, un voisin a mis le feu à la forêt qui entourait leur propriété. L'incendie a détruit leur grange, leur remise et leur jardin. Les demandeurs allèguent que les pompiers ne sont pas intervenus, prétextant que leur équipement était utilisé ailleurs et que la vie des demandeurs et de leurs voisins n'était pas en danger. La demanderesse associée a signalé l'incident à la police, mais on lui a dit qu'aucun rapport ne pouvait être fait sans le rapport du service des incendies.
II.
La décision contestée
[5]
La SPR a rejeté la demande d'asile des demandeurs après avoir conclu qu'ils ne craignaient pas avec raison d'être persécutés en Hongrie pour un motif prévu par la Convention et qu'ils pouvaient bénéficier de la protection offerte par l'État.
[6]
La SPR a reconnu que les demandeurs avaient été victimes de discrimination mais elle a conclu que les actes en question n'équivalaient pas à de la persécution. La SPRa conclu que les agressions et la violence dont ils avaient été victimes étaient « des actes de violence aléatoires commis par des voyous racistes ». Elle était d'avis, compte tenu de la preuve, que la discrimination dont ils ont fait l'objet « ne menace pas leurs droits fondamentaux, mais nuit plutôt à leur qualité de leur vie dans leur pays d'origine ».
[7]
Le SPR a également conclu que les demandeurs pouvaient bénéficier de la protection offerte par l'État et qu'ils n'avaient pas eu recours à la protection et aux services offerts par les organismes de l'État, notamment l'Autorité pour l'égalité de traitement (l'ETA), l'aide juridique offerte gratuitement aux Roms par le ministère de la Justice et du Maintien de l'ordre dans les cas de discrimination fondés sur l'origine ethnique, les centres du travail où des fonctionnaires spéciaux chargés des affaires roms voient plus particulièrement aux besoins de la communauté rom et la Commission indépendante chargée d'examiner les plaintes contre la police (l'IPCB). La SPR s'est appuyée sur des documents concernant le pays pour conclure que le gouvernement hongrois faisait des efforts importants pour s'assurer que la protection de l'État est offerte aux Roms. Par conséquent, la SPRa conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas réfuté la présomption de protection de l'État par une preuve claire et convaincante.
III.
Questions en litige
[8]
Les demandeurs soulèvent les questions suivantes dans la présente demande:
a. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur de droit en concluant que le déni du droit des demandeurs de travailler dans la profession qu'ils ont choisi constituait de la discrimination, et non de la persécution?
b. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur de droit en n'examinant pas la question de la suffisance de la protection offerte par l'État au regard de la preuve dont le tribunal avait été saisi et qui démontrait que le demandeur principal avait été victime de persécution de la part des intervenants de l'État?
c. La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur de droit en interprétant incorrectement ou en écartant la preuve concernant de récents cas de persécution et la récente tentative des demandeurs d'obtenir la protection de l'État?
IV.
La norme de contrôle applicable
[9]
Les trois questions soulevées sont des questions de faits et concernent l'appréciation de la preuve. Par conséquent, elles sont susceptibles de contrôle selon la norme de la décision raisonnable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 63. En ce qui a trait à la question de la protection offerte par l'État, voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
V.
Analyse
La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur de droit en concluant que le déni du droit des demandeurs de travailler dans la profession qu'ils ont choisi constituait de la discrimination, et non de la persécution?
[10]
Les demandeurs allèguent que la SPR ne s'est pas livrée à une analyse suffisante de la question de savoir si le déni de leur droit de travailler dans la profession qu'ils ont choisis équivalait à de la persécution. Ils avancent que la SPR [Traduction] « n'a pas semblé s'opposer au témoignage des demandeurs à l'audience indiquant qu'on refusait constamment de les employer dans leur profession en raison de leur origine ethnique ». Les demandeurs soutiennent que la SPR n'a pas vraiment cherché à obtenir plus de renseignements des demandeurs sur cette question. Ils affirment également que la SPR ne leur a pas demandé de quelle nature aurait été la protection dont ils auraient pu se prévaloir relativement au déni d'emploi.
[11]
À l'appui de leurs arguments, les demandeurs invoquent la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 15, 25 Imm LR (2d) 128 [
He
], dans laquelle il a été reconnu que le déni constant du droit de la demanderesse de travailler dans sa profession constituait de la persécution.
[12]
Le défendeur soutient que la SPR a précisément fait état des difficultés des demandeurs à trouver un emploi et qu'elle a bien tenu compte de cette situation dans sa décision. Le ministre fait valoir que la preuve présentée pour amener la SPR à conclure à la persécution en raison de la discrimination dont ils faisaient l'objet pour le travail était [Traduction] « vague et non corroborée ». Le défendeur prétend également que la décision
He
ne s'applique pas en l'espèce parce que rien ne démontre que les autorités se sont activement employées à empêcher les demandeurs d'obtenir du travail.
[13]
Je suis d'avis que l'application de la décision
He
se distingue des faits de l'espèce. Dans cette affaire, il a été mis fin à l'emploi de la demanderesse et sa demande en vue d'obtenir une carte de travail de l'État a été rejetée. La demanderesse s'est vu essentiellement contraindre par l'État à cultiver la terre. Dans la présente affaire, il n'y a aucune preuve pour étayer la thèse suivant laquelle les autorités hongroises se sont employées activement à empêcher les demandeurs d'obtenir du travail dans leur profession respective.
[14]
L'examen des motifs de la SPRet de sa décision aux paragraphes 19 à 20 révèle que le tribunal a précisément tenu compte des allégations des demandeurs selon lesquelles il leur était impossible de trouver du travail dans la profession qu'ils avaient choisie et qu'il a conclu que les demandeurs d'asile avaient fait l'objet d'une discrimination qui nuisait à la qualité de leur vie en Hongrie. La SPR a tenu compte des circonstances liées à leurs antécédents de travail en Hongrie. Après avoir considéré la décision dans son ensemble, je suis convaincu qu'il était raisonnablement loisible à la SPR de conclure à partir du dossier que l'impossibilité pour les demandeurs de trouver du travail dans leur profession respective n'équivalait pas à de la persécution.
La SPR a-t-elle commis une erreur en ne tenant pas suffisamment compte de la preuve concernant le traitement réservé au demandeur principal par les intervenants de l'État dans sa conclusion suivant laquelle la protection de l'État était disponible?
[15]
Comme la troisième question soulevée par les demandeurs porte également sur la protection offerte par l'État, j'examinerai les deux dernières questions ensemble.
[16]
Les demandeurs allèguent que la SPR a commis une erreur en concluant qu'ils pouvaient bénéficier de la protection de l'État. Ils prétendent que la SPR n'a pas tenu compte du fait que la police était l'auteur principal du préjudice et n'avait rien fait lorsque des incidents graves lui avaient été signalés, et qu'elle ne s'était pas demandé si la violence dont aurait fait preuve la police constituait de la persécution. Les demandeurs ont de plus soutenu que la SPRne s'était pas livrée à une analyse suffisante de la situation des demandeurs, en particulier de l'allégation suivant laquelle le demandeur principal avait été détenu par la police cinq ou six fois par année parce qu'il n'avait pas de pièces d'identité sur lui. Il est également allégué que la SPR n'a pas tenu compte du fait que le demandeur principal était réticent à demander la protection de l'État parce qu'il était persécuté par l'État, à savoir par la police. Les demandeurs affirment que demander la protection de l'État serait inutile et ils invoquent
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  à l'appui de leur argument.
[17]
Le défendeur fait valoir que les demandeurs n'ont pas réussi à réfuter la présomption de disponibilité de la protection de l'État. Il est avancé que les demandeurs ont à tort confondu la police avec l'État dans son ensemble. Le défendeur soutient que la SPR a tenu compte dans son analyse de ce qu'avait fait la police et elle a fait mention des organismes établis par le gouvernement hongrois pour enrayer la corruption et la discrimination, notamment: 1) le ministère de la Justice et du Maintien de l'ordre; 2) la Commission indépendante chargée d'examiner les plaintes contre la police (l'IPCB); 3) le bureau du commissaire parlementaire; 4) les fonctionnaires spéciaux chargés des affaires roms; 5) l'Autorité pour l'égalité de traitement (l'ETA). La SPR a conclu que la demanderesse associée n'avait pas fait appel à ces organismes et n'a pas cru le fait qu'elle avait porté plainte à l'ETA.
[18]
La Cour suprême du Canada dans
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, au paragraphe 50, confirme qu'il y a lieu de présumer qu'un État est capable de protéger ses citoyens. Il n'est pas contesté qu'il incombe aux demandeurs de présenter une preuve claire et convaincante pour réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État. La jurisprudence nous enseigne de plus que l'État n'a pas à offrir une protection parfaite et que l'évaluation de la protection offerte par l'État exige une analyse prospective (
Canada (Ministre de l'Emploi et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[19]
Dans ses motifs de décision, la SPR ne s'est pas précisément prononcée sur l'allégation suivant laquelle le demandeur principal était mis en détention par la police cinq ou six fois par année parce qu'il n'avait pas de pièce d'identité sur lui ni sur l'allégation suivant laquelle il avait déjà été battu par la police. À mon avis, cette omission n'entraîne pas nécessairement l'annulation de la décision. L'examen des motifs de décision de la SPR révèle que le tribunal était bien au courant de la discrimination dont aurait fait preuve la police. Au paragraphe 34 de ses motifs, la SPR affirme: « Les demandeurs d'asile ont déclaré qu'ils subissaient régulièrement des préjudices de la part des enseignants, des employeurs et des employés du gouvernement, y compris les policiers, en raison de leur ethnicité. » À mon avis, pour en arriver à sa conclusion, la SPR s'est penchée sur la discrimination dont aurait fait preuve l'État. Rien n'oblige le tribunal à se prononcer sur chaque élément de preuve dans les motifs pourvu que « [...] les motifs [...] permettent à la cour de révision de comprendre le fondement de la décision du tribunal et de déterminer si la conclusion fait partie des issues possibles acceptables » (
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[20]
En ce qui a trait à la réticence des demandeurs à faire appel à l'État pour obtenir sa protection en raison du traitement discriminatoire que leur auraient fait subir les intervenants de l'État, la SPR souligne au paragraphe 52 de sa décision que la protection des réfugiés est toujours de nature prospective. Les demandeurs savaient qu'ils pouvaient obtenir de l'aide d'organismes indépendants de l'État. L'un de ces organismes, l'IPCB, qui a été créé en 2008, fait enquête sur des violations et des omissions de la police concernant principalement des droits fondamentaux qui sont essentiellement de la même nature que les allégations faites par les demandeurs à l'endroit de la police. Rien n'indique que ces organismes indépendants étaient inefficaces ou corrompus. Les demandeurs n'ont déposé aucune plainte auprès de ces organismes ni tenté d'obtenir de l'aide. De plus, il ne semble pas que ces organismes soient influencés d'une manière quelconque par la police locale. La SPR a de plus reconnu au paragraphe 59 de ses motifs de décision que la protection offerte par l'État hongrois n'était pas parfaite et que des améliorations étaient nécessaires dans nombre de secteurs. Elle a également conclu que le gouvernement hongrois « prend des mesures considérables pour s'assurer que la protection de l'État est offerte à tous ses citoyens, y compris ceux de descendance rom ». La SPRa également constaté que les demandeurs n'avaient pas pris de mesures raisonnables pour se réclamer de la protection que l'État leur offrait. À mon avis, il était raisonnablement loisible à la SPR de tirer ces dernières conclusions à partir du dossier.
[21]
Les demandeurs avancent de plus que la SPR a commis une erreur en ne tenant pas suffisamment compte de la preuve concernant l'incendie avant de conclure que les demandeurs pouvaient bénéficier de la protection offerte par l'État. Ils affirment que la SPR a commis une erreur en concluant que l'un « de leurs voisins a allumé un feu dans la forêt entourant leur maison afin de brûler de l'herbe morte ». Il est avancé que la preuve démontre que l'incendie a été allumé délibérément avec le désir ou l'intention de mettre le feu à la résidence des demandeurs. Ils soutiennent qu'il s'agit d'une preuve importante dont la SPR aurait dû discuter expressément et que, puisqu'elle ne l'a pas fait, il devrait en être déduit qu'elle a tiré sa conclusion sans tenir compte de la preuve, commettant ainsi une erreur susceptible de contrôle.
[22]
Le défendeur affirme que la preuve n'étaye pas l'affirmation selon laquelle l'incendie avait délibérément été allumé pour faire brûler la résidence des demandeurs et il avance que la SPR a bien décrit l'incident dans ses motifs.
[23]
La transcription suivante de l'audience devant la SPR révèle que le tribunal a cherché à obtenir de la demanderesse associée des éclaircissements sur cet incident:
[Traduction]
SPR: Qui -qui a entendu ce type ou à qui a-t-il avoué avoir allumé l'incendie?
Demanderesse associée: Il l'a laissé savoir au voisinage - il l'a laissé savoir aux Tsiganes du voisinage, il a - il a parlé - il en a parlé dans l'autobus avec les voisins et ensuite - et ensuite ces personnes m'ont dit que ce type avait allumé l'incendie et j'ai ensuite demandé - et je lui ai ensuite demandé et il ne l'a pas nié.
SPR: D'accord. Lorsque vous dites qu'il ne l'a pas nié, que voulez-vous dire?
Demanderesse associée: Il a dit - il a dit qu'il avait mis le feu à cette terre-là pour que de l'herbe nouvelle puisse y pousser, mais ensuite il a dit « j'aurais aimé que votre maison brûle », qu'il voulait mettre le feu à tout, pas seulement à la terre.
SPR: D'accord. Donc il a dit qu'il avait mis le feu pour que de l'herbe nouvelle puisse y pousser et ensuite il a dit qu'il aurait voulu que votre maison brûle également. Est-ce exact?
Demanderesse associée: Oui. C'est exact.
(p. 326 du dossier du tribunal)
À mon avis, ce passage lu en contexte avec le reste de la transcription ne permet pas d'établir que l'incendie a été allumé avec l'intention de faire brûler la maison des demandeurs. Je suis convaincu qu'il était raisonnablement loisible à la SPR de décrire l'incident comme elle l'a fait, compte tenu du dossier, et que, par conséquent, elle n'a pas commis d'erreur dans l'analyse qu'elle en a faite dans ses motifs de décision.
[24]
Il était raisonnable loisible à la SPR de conclure, compte tenu du dossier, que les demandeurs ne s'étaient pas acquittés de leur fardeau de présenter une preuve claire et convaincante de l'incapacité de l'État à les protéger. Cette conclusion fait partie des issues acceptables dans toutes les circonstances. La SPR n'a commis aucune erreur susceptible de contrôle dans son appréciation de la protection offerte par l'État et dans la conclusion qu'elle en a tirée. Cette conclusion est déterminante dans la présente demande.
[25]
Aucune question n'a été proposée aux fins de certification et aucune question grave de portée générale ne sera certifiée en vertu de l'alinéa 74
d
) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
[LC 2001, c 27.]
VI.
Conclusion
[26]
Pour les motifs exposés précédemment, la demande sera rejetée.
JUGEMENT
[27]
LA COUR ORDONNE
:
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
2. Aucune question de portée générale n'est certifiée.
[End of document]