[1]
Pinard, J.
: This is an application for an order
(i) quashing the decision of the Canadian Human Rights Commission ("C.H.R.C.") dated February 18, 1992, to dismiss the applicant's complaint of discrimination against the respondents; and
(ii) directing that the applicant's complaint of discrimination be remitted back to the C.H.R.C. for the appointment of a Human Rights Tribunal pursuant to s. 49(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6.
[2]
The applicant has been employed as a secretary by the C.H.R.C., one of the respondents, since July 1981. Between April 1982 and September 1988, she occupied the position of secretary to the Secretary-General of the C.H.R.C. While she was on maternity leave, Mr. John Hucker, the other respondent, was appointed Secretary-General of the C.H.R.C. On August 2, 1988, when the applicant returned from her leave, she started working for Mr. Hucker.
[3]
Since October 1987, as a result of anti-smoking policies, smoking is no longer permitted in the C.H.R.C.'s workplace. According to the applicant, around September 8, 1988, Mr. Hucker informed her that she would not be allowed to leave her desk to smoke, except during her scheduled breaks. She claims that she was the only employee to be placed under such restrictions.
[4]
Around September 19, 1988, the applicant provided Mr. Hucker with a copy of a first letter from her psychiatrist, Dr. Pierre Monpremier, requesting that the applicant not be prevented from taking smoking breaks in addition to scheduled breaks. In this letter, Dr. Monpremier stated that he had been treating the applicant since October 1982 and that preventing her from smoking could be harmful ("dommageable") to her because it would increase her level of stress. The doctor stated that the applicant's stress level would increase if she were not allowed to smoke because smoking relaxes her and because she would be subjected to more severe restrictions than those of her co-workers.
[5]
According to the applicant, Mr. Hucker disregarded the recommendations of Dr. Monpremier and, since around September 23, 1988, she was seconded in another section of the C.H.R.C., a less interesting and not permanent position. She claims that the secondment was initiated by Mr. Hucker. As well, the applicant alleges that Mr. Hucker had repeatedly asked her current supervisor for information about her efforts to seek employment outside the C.H.R.C.
[6]
Dr. Monpremier wrote a second letter, addressed "to whom it may concern" and dated November 22, 1989, stating that the applicant was suffering from bipolar cyclical endogenic depression, an illness caused by inadequate production of hormones in the brain and characterized, in the applicant's case, by depressive states and anxiety crises. The doctor further stated that the selective smoking restrictions placed on the applicant were directly related to a severe relapse of her illness because the restrictions caused a number of stressful events to occur.
[7]
On November 28, 1989, the applicant filed a complaint with the C.H.R.C. against the C.H.R.C. and Mr. Hucker, alleging harassment and discrimination on the basis of "disability (endogenous depression and dependence on tobacco)". Her complaint was based on ss. 7 and 14 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
.
[8]
On the initial filing of the applicant's complaint, it was recommended, by way of a "Report Prior to Investigation" dated March 28, 1990, that, pursuant to s. 41 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, the complaint be first dealt with by way of a grievance under the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-35. The applicant filed the complaint and the latter was dismissed by the C.H.R.C.'s Deputy Chief Commissioner, Michelle Falardeau-Ramsay, who could not conclude that the applicant had been harassed or discriminated against.
[9]
The C.H.R.C. then appointed Yves De Montigny, an outside investigator and a professor of law, to conduct an investigation of the applicant's complaint. Mr. De Montigny submitted a lengthy report to the C.H.R.C. recommending that the complaint be dismissed.
[10]
On February 18, 1992, the C.H.R.C. met to consider the complaint of the applicant and dismissed the complaint against the two respondents. Even though, for quorum purposes, the meeting was presided over by the Deputy Chief Commissioner, Ms. Falardeau-Ramsay, who was the sole full-time member of the Commission available at that time, Ms. Falardeau-Ramsay did not partake in the discussions and abstained from voting.
[11]
Invoking s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
and s. 44(3)(a) together with s. 49(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, the applicant submitted that a reasonable apprehension of bias, on the part of the C.H.R.C. which rendered the decision to dismiss the applicant's complaint, was created due to the following circumstances:
(i) the applicant's complaint of discrimination was against the C.H.R.C. itself and one of its senior administrative officers, Mr. John Hucker; and
(ii) the Deputy Chief Commissioner of the Commission, Ms. Falardeau-Ramsay, presided over the proceedings at which the applicant's complaint was dismissed after having already rendered a negative decision in respect of the applicant's complaint as part of the grievance procedure under the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
.
[12]
The applicant also submitted that the respondent C.H.R.C. erred in law in failing to address the issue of adverse effect discrimination when rendering its decision to dismiss the applicant's complaint.
[13]
In my view, the C.H.R.C. could consider and deal with the case of the applicant pursuant to s. 44 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, even though the latter was one of its own employees. Moreover, the Commission could do so without being required to automatically refer the complaint to a Human Rights Tribunal. Indeed, by virtue of ss. 2 and 40(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, employees of the C.H.R.C. have an absolute right to lay human rights complaints. Also, by the combined effect of s. 66(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, s. 2 and Part I of Schedule I of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, human rights complaints under the
Canadian Human Rights Act
can be made against the Commission as an employer. As the administration and implementation of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
have been vested exclusively in the C.H.R.C. (see ss. 26, 27, 40, 43, 44, 48 and 49 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
), there is no doubt that the C.H.R.C. has jurisdiction over its own employees even in cases where the complaint alleges discrimination through the act of one of its employees. I must emphasize that in such cases the
Canadian Human Rights Act
does not require the automatic referral of the complaint to a Human Rights Tribunal. Consequently, the
nemo judex
principle is excluded by the structure of an Act of Parliament, namely the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, the constitutionality of which, in the case at bar, is not in issue (see
Barry and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 241, at p. 309 S.C.R.).
[14]
With respect to the fact that the Deputy Chief Commissioner, who had previously dismissed the applicant's complaint under the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
's internal grievance to procedure, presided over the meeting determining whether the applicant had been subject to harassment and discrimination, I do not consider that this fact, in the particular circumstances of this particular case, gave rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias. The current test for establishing a reasonable apprehension of bias was adopted in
Committee for Justice and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 9 N.R. 115, at pp. 394-395 S.C.R., by the Supreme Court of Canada and read as follows:
"... the apprehension of bias must be a reasonable one, held by reasonable and right minded persons, applying themselves to the question and obtaining thereon the required information. In the words of the Court of Appeal, that test is 'what would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically -- and having thought the matter through -- conclude. Would he think that it is more likely than not that Mr. Crowe, whether consciously or unconsciously, would not decide fairly.'
"I can see no real difference between the expressions found in the decided cases, be they 'reasonable, apprehension of bias', 'reasonable suspicion of bias', or 'real likelihood of bias'. The ground for this apprehension must, however, be substantial and I entirely agree with the Federal Court of Appeal which refused to accept the suggestion that the test be related to the 'very sensitive or scrupulous conscience'."
[15]
Here, the Deputy Chief Commissioner of the C.H.R.C., who acted in total compliance with the
Canadian Human Rights Act
and the
Regulations
adopted thereunder, has abstained from taking part in the decision-making. She did not participate in the discussions and she did not vote. In my opinion, her brief answers to the few questions asked by the commissioners did not show any involvement of any significance. Her mere presence, which was required for quorum purposes only, cannot under the circumstances, appear to have influenced the decision of the C.H.R.C. made pursuant to s. 44(3)(b) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
. This is all the more so because this decision was made upon consideration of and in total accordance with the findings and the conclusions of an investigation made by an outside investigator. In my view, the above test for establishing a reasonable apprehension of bias has not been met and I cannot see any rules of procedural fairness, in this case, which could have been violated.
[16]
Finally, with respect to the issue of adverse effect discrimination, it appears, after reading the two complaint forms, that the applicant did not frame her complaint in terms of the adverse effect discrimination caused by the implementation of nonsmoking policies that discriminate against persons have a tobacco dependency. The applicant merely alleged harassment and differential treatment because Mr. Hucker supposedly enforced the nonsmoking policy in a more restrictive manner than other supervisors, without regard for her disability. The applicant cannot attempt now to introduce new elements into her original complaint (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[17]
For all these reasons, the motion must be dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/lrz
[End of document]