[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is an application by the plaintiff Glaxo Canada Inc. for an Order granting leave pursuant to rule 319(4) of the General Rules and Orders of the Federal Court of Canada to call Dr. Ian W.D. Henderson to testify in open court in relation to certain issues of fact raised by the plaintiff's Notice of Motion to be heard on May 27, 1987.
[2]
Dr. Henderson is employed in the Department of National Health and Welfare as Director of the Bureau of Human Prescription Drugs, Drugs Directorate, Health Protection Branch. He has held that position since November 1977. In that capacity he is responsible for the direction of a scientific staff that has direct responsibility under the Food and Drug Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 870, for the examination of a wide variety of drug submissions from the pharmaceutical industry in Canada and abroad for drugs that are under clinical investigation or are proposed for marketing in Canada.
[3]
Dr. Henderson was absent from his position from February 12 to 20, 1987, during which time Dr. Richard Graham who normally occupied the position of Assistant Director took over Dr. Henderson's position and became Acting Director. In the capacity of Acting Director, Dr. Graham was responsible for the personnel of the Bureau and the duties which they performed, including the review of the data in the New Drug Submissions submitted to the Department of National Health and Welfare pursuant to the Food and Drug Regulations. It was within his authority as Acting Director to decide whether to make a recommendation to the Director General, Drugs Directorate, as to whether a New Drug Submission complied or did not comply with the relevant provisions of the Regulations; a decision which determined whether a Notice of Compliance would issue.
[4]
On February 20, 1987, Dr. Graham advised the Director General, Drugs Directorate, that the New Drug Submission filed by the defendant Apotex, in respect of the drug Apo-Ranitidine complied with the requirements of the Food and Drug Regulations. This advice was based upon reports received from Mr. Peter Jeffs, Chief of the Pharmaceutical Evaluation, Non Anti-Infectives Division and Dr. Ken Michalko, Acting Chief of the Miscellaneous Drugs Division of the Bureau. Mr. Jeffs was responsible for the pharmaceutical, chemistry, manufacturing and quality controls evaluations of the Apotex New Drug Submission, while Dr. Michalko was responsible for the biological and clinical review of the submission. As a result of Dr. Graham's recommendation a Notice of Compliance was issued to the defendant Apotex on February 23, 1987.
[5]
The Crown defendants have filed affidavits of Dr. Richard Graham, Peter Jeffs and Dr. Kenneth Michalko and the plaintiff has had an opportunity to cross-examine these affiants. However, the Crown has not filed nor does it intend to file an affidavit sworn by Dr. Henderson and has refused the plaintiff's request to examine Dr. Henderson in aid of its injunctive relief motion. Accordingly, the plaintiff has brought this motion, pursuant to rule 319, for leave to permit Dr. Henderson to testify in open court.
[6]
Rule 319(4) of the Federal Court Rules provides as follows:
"319.(4) By leave of the court, or of a judge of the Court of Appeal, for special reason, a witness may be called to testify in open court, or before a judge of the Court of Appeal, in relation to an issue of fact raised by an application."
[7]
Under rule 319 all the facts on which a motion is based must be supported by affidavit evidence. It is only "by leave of the court" and "for special reason" that a witness can be called to testify in relation to an issue. There were no cases presented to me by counsel for the plaintiff nor am I aware of any case law which identifies the test as to what constitutes "special reason". In my opinion, this is a question to be decided on the facts of a particular case with the onus being on the applicant to prove the existence of "special reason" to the satisfaction of the court. What is clear from the jurisprudence is that leave will be granted by the court only in exceptional circumstances.
[8]
In this case the plaintiff maintains that there are special circumstances which would justify the court granting leave to have Dr. Henderson give viva voce evidence in open court. The plaintiff argues that had Dr. Henderson been on duty at the relevant time it would have been his responsibility to review the defendant Apotex' New Drug Submission and to make a decision as to whether a Notice of Compliance should issue. It is the plaintiff's contention that the obviously relevant and critical evidence which can be given by Dr. Henderson in this proceeding cannot be made available to the court by cross-examination of the deponents of the affidavits already filed on behalf of the Crown defendants. The plaintiff maintains that it is the evidence of Dr. Henderson which will allow the court to make a determination as to whether all of the requirements of the Food and Drug Regulations were met by the Apotex New Drug Submission.
[9]
The Crown's position is simply stated. It has produced all the witnesses which are pertinent to the case and the plaintiff could have obtained all the answers to its questions from the other Crown witnesses which were produced. The defendant Apotex maintains that Dr. Henderson was on leave at the time that the Apotex New Drug Submission was approved and there is no evidence that he participated in the decision-making process as to whether a Notice of Compliance should issue. Accordingly, he is simply not a relevant witness.
[10]
I agree with the defendant's arguments. The plaintiff has failed to satisfy me that any special reasons exist which would justify granting leave to have Dr. Henderson testify in open court. The plaintiff appears to me to be on a fishing expedition; it wishes to have Dr. Henderson secondguess his colleagues in this matter and to advise the court as to whether he would have taken the same course of action as Dr. Graham did in his absence. I fail to see the relevance of that evidence. Dr. Henderson was not involved in the Apotex New Drug Submission. There are sufficient allegations of fact contained within the affidavits of the other Crown witnesses to allow the court to make a determination of the issue at hand.
[11]
For the foregoing reasons, the plaintiff's motion is dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]