[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review of a decision by the Veterans Review and Appeal Board (VRAB) dated July 4, 2001. By that decision, the VRAB refused to reconsider its decision dated June 27, 2000.
[2]
The VRAB is an independent board established under s. 4 of the
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
, S.C. 1995, c. 18 (the
Act
). It has the authority to review and amend the decisions made by the Minister of Veterans Affairs relating to pensions and social benefits of veterans, members of the Canadian Forces and Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and their dependents.
[3]
The appeal process of the VRAB involves two steps. A person who is dissatisfied with a decision made by the Minister of Veterans Affairs based on the
Pension Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-6, may have it reviewed by the VRAB (s. 18 of the
Act
). A person who is dissatisfied with the decision made at the outcome of the review may appeal the decision to the appeal panel of the VRAB (s. 25 of the
Act
).
[4]
The decision of the appeal panel of the VRAB is final and binding (s. 31 of the
Act
). However, under ss. 23, 32, and 111 of the
Act
, the VRAB may, under the terms and conditions described therein, reconsider any decision made by it, and a new hearing can then take place.
[5]
On March 23, 1999, the Minister of Veterans Affairs decided that the applicant, Thérèse F. Gagné, was not entitled to receive a pension as the surviving spouse of a veteran.
[6]
The applicant filed an application for review of that decision with the review panel of the VRAB. On February 1, 2000, the review panel affirmed that the applicant was not entitled to a pension.
[7]
On June 27, 2000, the appeal panel of the VRAB heard the matter. Like the review panel, it affirmed that the applicant was not entitled to a pension.
[8]
In a letter dated January 30, 2001, the applicant applied for reconsideration of the June 27, 2000, decision. In her letter, the applicant stated that she wished to proceed by way of a hearing in order to present oral arguments.
[9]
In reply to the applicant's letter, John Brehaut, Director, Veterans Review and Appeal Board Professional Development & Advisory Services, indicated that under the VRAB's new policy, the applicant would be restricted, when applying for reconsideration, to presenting written arguments. If that application were granted, the applicant would then have an opportunity to present oral arguments.
[10]
The new policy of the VRAB in connection with applications for reconsideration may be summarized as follows: during the first step, the appeal panel considers only written arguments. If it decides not to reconsider the case, a written decision is issued. If it decides to reconsider the case, a date is set for a hearing during which written andéor oral arguments may be presented.
[11]
The applicant did not accept that response. She confirmed repeatedly that she wanted to proceed by making oral arguments before the appeal panel.
[12]
Despite her repeated requests, the appeal panel made a preliminary examination of the application for reconsideration on July 4, 2001, without giving the applicant an opportunity to make oral arguments. Moreover, the applicant had been notified that the preliminary examination would be held on July 5, 2001, and not July 4. The panel decided that there was no reason to reconsider its decision dated June 27, 2000. The applicant received that decision on September 27, 2001. On October 25, 2001, she filed an application for judicial review of that decision with the Federal Court.
RELEVANT LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
[13]
Section 3 of the
Act
states how its provisions must be construed:
"Construction
"3. The provisions of this Act and of any other Act of Parliament or of any regulations made under this or any other Act of Parliament conferring or imposing jurisdiction, powers, duties or functions on the Board shall be liberally construed and interpreted to the end that the recognized obligation of the people and Government of Canada to those who have served their country so well and to their dependants may be fulfilled."
[14]
Section 28(1) of the
Act
provides that in the course of an appeal before the appeal panel of the VRAB, an appellant may make a written submission to the appeal panel or may appear before it to present evidence and oral arguments:
"Written and oral submissions
"28(1) Subject to subsection (2), an appellant may make a written submission to the appeal panel or may appear before it, in person or by representative and at their own expense, to present evidence and oral arguments."
[15]
A privative clause is found in s. 31 of the
Act
. It reads:
"Decision of majority
"31. A decision of the majority of members of an appeal panel is a decision of the Board and is final and binding."
[16]
Section 32 of the
Act
nonetheless provides that a decision made by the appeal panel of the VRAB may be reconsidered. An application for reconsideration is made in accordance with s. 32 of the
Act
:
"Reconsideration of decisions
"32(1) Notwithstanding section 31, an appeal panel may, on its own motion, reconsider a decision made by it under subsection 29(1) or this section and may either confirm the decision or amend or rescind the decision if it determines that an error was made with respect to any finding of fact or the interpretation of any law, or may do so on application if the person making the application alleges that an error was made with respect to any finding of fact or the interpretation of any law or if new evidence is presented to the appeal panel.
"Board may exercise powers
"(2) The Board may exercise the powers of an appeal panel under subsection (1) if the members of the appeal panel have ceased to hold office as members.
"Other sections applicable
"(3) Sections 28 and 31 apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require, with respect to an application made under subsection (1)."
[17]
The
Act
provides that the proceedings before the VRAB should, as much as possible, be informal:
"Expeditious proceedings
"40. All proceedings before the Board shall be dealt with as informally and expeditiously as the circumstances and considerations of fairness permit."
[18]
The
Act
also provides that the VRAB may make rules governing its proceedings, practice and procedures:
"Rules
"44(1) The Board may make rules, not inconsistent with the regulations, governing the proceedings, practice and procedures of the Board.
"Quorum
"(2) A majority of permanent members in office constitutes a quorum for the purpose of making rules under subsection (1)."
RELEVANT REGULATORY PROVISIONS
[19]
Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Regulations
, SOR/96-67 (the
Regulations
), are also relevant:
"APPLICATION FOR REVIEW OR RECONSIDERATION AND APPEALS
"3. In any proceeding under the Act, other than an application for a compassionate award under subsection 34(1) of the Act, the applicant or appellant shall inform the Board whether they intend to proceed
(a) by written submission;
(b) by appearing personally, with or without making a written submission; or
(c) by having a representative appear, with or without making a written submission.
"RECONSIDERATIONS
"4. The review panel, appeal panel or Board, before convening a hearing to confirm, amend or rescind a decision, pursuant to subsection 23(1), 32(1) or 34(7) of the Act,
(a) shall inform the applicant or appellant of the facts and allegations in its possession; and
(b) shall provide the applicant or appellant with an opportunity to respond.
"NOTICE AND INFORMATION
"5(1) When the Board receives an application for review, an application for reconsideration referred to in subsection 32(1) or 34(7) of the Act, a notice of appeal or an application for a compassionate award under subsection 34(1) of the Act, or initiates a reconsideration pursuant to subsection 23(1), 32(1) or 34(7) of the Act, the Board shall
(a) notify the Minister; and
(b) retrieve from the Department of Veterans Affairs' records
(i) a copy of the decision, and
(ii) any relevant material, including
(A) all evidence submitted in the proceedings, and
(B) any recording or transcript of the proceedings.
"(2) The Board shall notify the applicant or appellant of
(a) its receipt of the material from the Department of Veterans Affairs' records; and
(b) the date on which the review, reconsideration or appeal shall be heard."
ANALYSIS
[20]
There is no doubt that the VRAB is a specialized tribunal and that its decisions deserve a great deal of deference. However, in this case, the issue is one of interpretation of the
Act
(i.e. does the term "in any proceeding" found in s. 3 of the
Regulations
involve the first step of an application for reconsideration) and not of application of the
Act
. This is a question of law, which is not within the tribunal's area of expertise. That is why the correctness review is the applicable standard of review, as Mr. Justice Evans stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at para. 41:
"That an issue falls towards the 'interpretation' end of the spectrum is an indicator that correctness review is appropriate because of the precedential value of the decision and the relevance of judicial interpretative skills for reaching the 'best' result. Conversely, an issue that has no or little significance beyond the facts of the particular case will tend to be characterized as one of application, and will attract judicial deference because its determination calls for an assessment of those facts, an exercise that is within the tribunal's area of expertise and does not require the expenditure of court resources for determining the 'correct' answer."
[21]
The applicant argued that the proceedings of the VRAB with regard to reconsideration are inconsistent with s. 28(1) of the
Act
and, more specifically, with s. 3 of the
Regulations
.
[22]
Even though s. 44 of the
Act
provides that the VRAB may make rules governing the proceedings, practice and procedures of the Board, and that it is reasonable for it to make rules aimed at alleviating its proceedings, those rules must be consistent with the
Regulations
. Section 3 of the
Regulations
provides that the applicant is entitled to make oral arguments
in any proceeding under the
Act
. Does an application for reconsideration constitute a proceeding?
[23]
Professor Driedger summarized concisely the principle of interpretation that is generally accepted today. He writes:
"Today there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an Act are to be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the
Act
, the object of the
Act
, and the intention of Parliament."
Elmer A. Driedger,
Construction of Statutes
, 2nd Ed., Toronto, Butterworths, 1983, at p. 87.
[24]
That passage has been cited a number of times by the courts and relatively recently by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 26.
[25]
That interpretation approach, known as modern or teleological, is codified in s. 12 of the
Interpretation Act
, R.S.C., 1985, c. I-21, which provides as follows:
"Enactments deemed remedial
"12. Every enactment is deemed remedial, and shall be given such fair, large and liberal construction and interpretation as best ensures the attainment of its objects."
[26]
The word "proceeding" or "procédure" in French is not defined in the
Act
or the
Regulations
. In the absence of a definition, reference should be made to the definitions that are found in the specialized dictionaries.
[27]
Black's Law Dictionnary
, 7th Ed., defines "proceeding" as follows:
"1. The regular and orderly progression of a lawsuit, including all acts and events between the time of commencement and the entry of judgment. 2. Any procedural means for seeking redress from a tribunal or agency. 3. An act or step that is part of a larger action."
[28]
"Proceedings" says
The Dictionary of Canadian Law
, 2nd  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 161; 29 C.P.R.(3d) 97, at p. 137):
"... should be given a large and liberal interpretation so as to cover any kind of proceeding, whether adjudicative or investigative. This would be consistent with the principle of
Charter
interpretation that we construe rights guaranteed in the
Charter
so as to provide maximum protection to the citizen ..."
[29]
In my opinion, a large and liberal interpretation is consistent with the intention of Parliament, which states in s. 3 of the
Act
that the provisions of this
Act
and the
Regulations
relating thereto conferring or imposing jurisdiction, powers, duties or functions on the Board shall be liberally construed and interpreted to the end that the recognized obligation of the people and Government of Canada to those who have served their country so well and to their dependants may be fulfilled.
[30]
Moreover, Parliament took the trouble to state that s. 3 does not apply to an application for a compassionate award under s. 34(1) of the
Act
. That exception is found in a self-contained list. This implies that s. 3 applies to any other proceeding under the
Act
.
[31]
In light of the interpretation approach mentioned above and the examination of the
Act
and
Regulations
, I am of the opinion that when Parliament used the term "in any proceeding" in s. 3 of the
Regulations
, its intention was to include the "screening process" prescribed by the Board in connection with an application for reconsideration. The applicant was entitled to present oral arguments before the VRAB made a decision affecting her rights.
[32]
That interpretation is consistent with the interpretation given by my colleague, Mr. Justice Teitelbaum, who stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.):
"... This restriction on the availability of an oral hearing flies in the face of Article 3 of the
Regulations
. Article 3 of the
Regulations
states that '
in any proceeding under the Act
' [my emphasis], it is at the applicant's choosing whether he or she proceeds by personal appearance and oral submissions.
"... There is no suggestion in the
Regulations
that oral submissions are granted only after an initial screening for relevancy. Indeed, s. 28(1) of the
Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act
is to a similar effect and states, 'Subject to subsection (2), an appellant may make a written submission to the appeal panel or may appear before it, in person or by representative and at their own expense, to present evidence and oral arguments'." <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at para 40. (Emphasis in the original)
[33]
The Board therefore erred in law by denying the applicant an opportunity to present her arguments in accordance with the broad interpretation that must be given to s. 3 of the
Regulations
.
[34]
As a result, the application for judicial review is allowed. The decision of the Board is set aside and the matter is referred back to a newly constituted review panel to be heard in accordance with the reasons of this decision, without costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/gs