[1]
Pinard, J.
: This is an appeal from the nonapproval of the appellant's citizenship application rendered by a Citizenship Judge at Ottawa, Ontario, on December 28, 1989. The appellant was represented by counsel. In addition, the Minister designated counsel who appeared as amicus curiae.
[2]
The only issue on appeal, as it was before the citizenship judge, is whether or not the appellant has satisfied the residence requirements enunciated in s. 5(1)(c) of the
Citizenship Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29, which states:
"5(1) The Minister shall grant citizenship to any person who
. . . . .
(c) has been lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence, has not ceased since such admission to be a permanent resident pursuant to s. 24 of the Immigration Act, and has, within the four years immediately preceding the date of his application, accumulated at least three years of residence in Canada calculated in the following manner:
(i) for every day during which the person was resident in Canada before his lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one-half of a day of residence, and
(ii) for every day during which the person was resident in Canada after his lawful admission to Canada for permanent residence the person shall be deemed to have accumulated one day of residence;"
[3]
Section 24 of the
Immigration Act
, to which the above refers, provides the following:
"24(1) A person ceases to be a permanent resident when
(a) he leaves or remains outside Canada with the intention of abandoning Canada as his place of permanent residence; or
(b) a deportation order has been made against him and such order is not quashed or the execution thereof is not stayed pursuant to subs. 75(1).
"24(2) Where a permanent resident is outside Canada for more than one hundred and eighty-three days in any one twelve month period, he shall be deemed to have abandoned Canada as his place of permanent residence unless he satisfies an immigration officer or an adjudicator, as the case may be, that he did not intend to abandon Canada as his place of permanent residence."
[4]
In the matter of
Re Nabila Saad el-Din Anquist
, [1985] 1 W.W.R. 562, at p. 565, Mr. Justice Muldoon reviewed and commented on the relevant jurisprudence as follows:
"In
Re Roberts
(1970), 92 D.L.R.(3d) 76, Mr. Justice Grant of this court, in October 1978, wrote (at pages 79 to 81):
'Until recently, s. 5(1)(b) was interpreted strictly. The decisions indicate that to accumulate the three years' residence in Canada required thereby to qualify the applicant was obliged to be physically in Canada for that period of time within the four years preceding his application. An illustration of this is
Re Citizenship Act and Khoury
, [1978] 2 F.C. 75, where it was held that the applicant could not be considered as resident within Canada within the meaning of this section during periods when he was, actually residing abroad because of his business assignments.
'In a more recent appeal from the decision of a citizenship judge, in the matter of
Re Papadogiorgakis
(1978), not reported, but found in No. T-872-78 [now reported 88 D.L.R.(3d) 243; [1978] 2 F.C. 208], Thurlow, A.C.J., determined that a student was resident in Canada within the meaning of such section during periods which he spent in attending a university in the United States. He was never employed outside of Canada in such period of time but was abroad during such interval only for the temporary purpose of pursuing his studies. The learned Associate Chief Justice points out in his reasons that under the new
Act
, the
Citizenship Act
, which applied to that case, there is no definition of "place of domicile" as there was in the former
Canadian Citizenship Act
under which many of the previous cases were heard. In such earlier
Act
"place of domicile" meant the place in which a person had his home or in which he resided or to which he returned as his place of permanent abode and did not mean a place in which he stays for a mere special or temporary purpose.
'In neither
Act
was there a definition of the words "reside" or "residence". It follows that such words should be given their ordinary meaning in the context in which they appear.
'In the
Papadogiorgakis
case his application was filed on December 6, 1977. Since then an amendment has been made to s. 5(1)(b) of the
Citizenship Act
by the statute law amendment, April 1978. It appears in the
Immigration Act
, 1976
, 1976-77 (Can.) c. 52, s. 128(2), as item 5 of the Schedule thereto which was proclaimed on April 10, 1978, and so was in force from that day. Such amendment reads:
. . . . .
[already recited above]
. . . . .
'It would appear the purpose of Parliament in making such amendment was to relieve persons seeking citizenship from the strict rule requiring complete physical presence of the applicant in Canada during the accumulation of the three years of residence required by the subsection. It is clear the amending legislation establishes a rule of computation that is more lenient towards the applicant than the previous form of the statute. Under s. 24(1) of the
Immigration Act, 1976
, as amended, the loss or retention of a person's status as a permanent resident depends on his intention in respect to such residence when he leaves or remains outside Canada.It is particularly applicable to the student who leaves only to attend a school of learning with full intention of returning to Canada during school vacations and on termination of his education there. It also covers the employee who is sent by his Canadian employer on company business to another country to perform temporary services and at the termination thereof intends to return. The determination as to whether the applicant had the required intention to retain his permanent residence in Canada is not left entirely to the applicant because of the presumption established by s. 24(2) that he has abandoned the same if he remains outside the country for more than 183 days in any one 12 month period. Such inference may be rebutted by him if he satisfies an investigation officer or an adjudicator as the case may be that he did not intend to abandon Canada as his place of permanent residence.'
"Again, in
Re Stafford
(1980), 97 D.L.R.(3d) 499, Mr. Justice Addy wrote (at pages 500 and 501):
'However, since that
Act
was replaced by the
Citizenship Act
, 1974-75-76 (Can.), c. 108, and even more emphatically since the latest amendments to s. 5(1)(b) found in 1976-77, c. 52, s. 128(2), the decisions of this court, with the possible exception of that of Mr. Justice Walsh in
Re Khoury and Citizenship Act
, [1978] 2 F.C. 75, seem to have consistently followed the more liberal interpretation afforded the concept of residence by the Associate Chief Justice of this court in the case of in
Re Papadogiorgakis
(1978), 88 D.L.R.(3d) 243; [1978] F.C. 208.
. . . . .
'These principles were followed in the following decisions which are as yet unreported:
Re Edmund Shiu Hung Ip
, decision dated October 12, 1978, Federal Court file T-2037-78;
Re Claud B. Noailles
, decision dated November 7, 1978, Federal Court file T-1033-78 [summarized [1978] 3 A.C.W.S. 371];
Re Robert Cooper
, decision dated November 22, 1978, Federal Court file T-2166-78;
Re Roberts
, decision dated October 16, 1978 Federal Court file Nos. T-2447-78 and T-2448-78 [since reported 92 D.L.R.(3d) 76], and
Re Gertrude Nelly Baumann
, decision dated October 18, 1978, Federal Court file T-1770-78 [summarized [1978] 3 A.C.W.S. 268].
'Were it not for the fact that all these cases have adopted the line of reasoning in the
Papadogiorgakis
case I would perhaps have been inclined to disallow the present appeal and follow the stricter interpretation adopted by my brother Walsh, J., in the above-mentioned
Khoury
case and also adopted in the cases which immediately followed the
Blaha
decision. However, consistency in decisions as to interpretation, especially at the appellate level, is of great importance to the proper administration of justice. As the more liberal interpretation does not appear to be fundamentally unacceptable nor inconsistent with any of the provisions of the
Citizenship Act
, as now is formulated, I am prepared to adopt what now appears to be the generally accepted view.
'In saying this, however, I wish to emphasize that residence still must be distinguished from domicile. Where a person is absent from Canada, in order to maintain Canadian residence as opposed to a provincial domicile which can be maintained by a mere intent to return, one must keep what might be termed some concrete and substantial form of residential
pied à terre
at some place of residence in Canada. One must also throughout that entire period, consider that particular place as one's home or residence and any absence as merely temporary.'
"The stricter interpretation certainly did no violence to the language of the legislation, but on the principle of stare decisis, it is, as Addy, J., noted, important to maintain consistency of interpretation. ...
. . . . .
"If the provisions of s. 5(1)(b) of the
Citizenship Act
required no more than compliance with the qualifying exception of s. 24(2) of the
Immigration Act
, then clearly the appeal would be allowed. But those provisions do require more. As Addy, J., said in the
Stafford
case, they require more than 'a mere intent to return'."
[5]
The citizenship judge, in her reasons for nonapproval addressed to the appellant, found as follows:
"I found that you met all of the requirements for citizenship set out in the
Citizenship Act
, except for the requirement of residence. According to the evidence on file, you applied for citizenship on July 7th, 1988. In the four years preceding your application for citizenship, you are short of 751 days of the required term."
[6]
The proceeding in this court is a trial de novo. The evidence before me shows that the appellant was born in Guyana on March 3, 1956. She left Guyana in 1977 to go and live in Saudi-Arabia with her parents. In 1981, she married there Mr. Aziz-Ur Rahman Shaw who has been a Canadian citizen since January 1975 but who, at the time, was also living in Saudi-Arabia. In 1982, she came to Canada where another ceremony was held with respect to her above-mentioned marriage. At that time, even though she was given landed immigrant status on August 17, 1982, it is clear that the appellant did not intend to reside in Canada before having completed her studies in Saudi-Arabia where she returned with her husband after a three to four month stay at her in-laws' house. On October 10, 1984, at the end of another visit to Canada, the appellant left again for Saudi-Arabia for a period of some 260 days to study Islamic Law at the Umm of Al-Kura University. The appellant and her husband now have three children, all Canadian citizens.
[7]
During the relevant years, while in Saudi-Arabia, the appellant lived with her husband and children in a rented apartment paid half by her father and half by herself. Her husband was also studying and working in Saudi-Arabia. During her visits to Canada, the apartment in Saudi-Arabia was maintained and personal belongings and furniture, although rudimentary, remained there for her return. During her stay in Canada, the appellant never rented an apartment. She stayed at her father-in-law's house where used furniture and appliances, in the basement, were made available to her. Even though such used furniture and appliances could be used by others when she was not there, she claims that they had been given to her by her sister-in-law. She also testified that she kept her precious books in that room. Finally, although the appellant remained in Canada during some school months, the children have never been enroled in school in Canada. During her absences from Canada, her husband and children always accompanied her.
[8]
In view of all those facts, I find that the appellant has not satisfied the residence requirements enunciated in s. 5(1)(c) of the
Citizenship Act
. Despite the evidence that during the relevant years, mainly the four years preceding her citizenship application of July 7, 1988, the appellant probably always intended to return to Canada at the end of her studies in Saudi-Arabia to settle permanently here and always arranged to maintain certain ties to this country, she was never able to maintain a residence here since she had never established one to begin with.
[9]
In
Mitha
(unreported judgment of Cattanach, J., on June 1, 1979, Federal Court No. T-4832-78), Cattanach, J., said the following:
"It seems to me that in determining whether physical absences from Canada are for such temporary purposes as will not break the continuity of residence there must first be a 'residence' established and that is a matter of degree with respect to how the person 'settles into or maintains or centralizes his ordinary mode of living which its accessories in social relations, interests and conveniences at or in the place in question' but residence should be distinguished as in ordinary speech 'from the field of stay or visit'."
[10]
The decisions in
Warnaars
(unreported judgment of the Federal Court of Canada, dated January 16, 1980, T-3896-79),
Leslie
(unreported judgment of the Federal Court of Canada, dated August 22, 1979, T-843-79) and
Ballhorn
(1982), 131 D.L.R.(3d) 505, are all essentially to the same effect.
[11]
Finally, in
Reza
(1988), 20 F.T.R. 188, the following observations of my brother Dubé, J., seem most applicable:
"The four year preparatory period prescribed by the
Act
is in my opinion a period for incorporation into Canadian life. If it were otherwise, the legislator would have provided for an automatic grant of citizenship to those who meet the other requirements.
. . . . .
"I fully understand that the very nature of Mr. Reza's work requires him to take positions abroad. I also accept that it is entirely natural for his family to go with him on his long absences elsewhere in the world. In such circumstances, it is of course extremely difficult for him to meet the requirements of the
Act
regarding three years of residence in Canada. Unfortunately, that is what the
Act
requires. This requirement by the legislator is quite understandable: Canadian citizenship is not always instantaneous. Those of us who obtain it automatically at birth are privileged. Others, though they may be welcome, must attain a certain degree of incorporation into our society before officially becoming Canadian citizens."
[12]
Accordingly, despite all the sympathy one may have for the appellant, I consider, like the amicus curiae, that the appeal must be dismissed and therefore, the decision of the citizenship judge maintained.
Judgment
[13]
The appellant's appeal is dismissed and the citizenship judge's decision dated December 28, 1989 is maintained.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]