[1]
Richard, J.
: The applicant is a citizen of the Federal Republic of Germany, but has been in Canada since August 1990. Prior to his arrival, he was convicted in Germany of numerous criminal offenses, most of which involved charges of fraud and breach of trust. On May 18, 1994, an immigration adjudicator determined that he was a member of the inadmissible class described in s. 19(1)(c) of the
Immigration Act
and ordered him to be deported. The applicant is seeking judicial review of this decision on the basis that the adjudicator erred by admitting into evidence certain documents, by compelling the applicant to testify at the inquiry, and by finding an equivalency between the German and Canadian offenses of fraud. The applicant is seeking the following relief:
(i) a declaration that the applicant is not a member of the inadmissible class described in s. 19(1)(c.1)(i) [see footnote 1] of the
Immigration Act
and, as a result, is not a person described in s. 27(2)(a) of the
Immigration Act
;
(ii) an order quashing the deportation order issued by the Immigration Adjudicator, Lynda Machie; and
(iii) such further and other relief as the court deems appropriate.
Facts
[2]
The criminal convictions at issue in this case include two counts of breach of trust and nine counts of fraud involving the failure to pass on employees' social security contributions. On May 6, 1987, the applicant was convicted of these offenses by the Regional Court of Kiel and sentenced to imprisonment for two years and a term of probation of three years. On February 8, 1990, the Regional Court of Munich issued convictions for the offenses of breach of trust, compulsion by threat or force, and fraud. That court imposed an aggregate term of imprisonment of three years and three months, which included the term of imprisonment imposed by the Regional Court of Kiel.
[3]
The applicant began his term of imprisonment in the prison of Landsberg on February 8, 1990. On May 19, 1990, he escaped and, eventually, made his way to Canada, arriving on August 16, 1990. The applicant came into Canada using a passport issued in the name of Werner Deutsh. He has not indicated an intention to claim Convention refugee status, nor has he obtained lawful permission to come into or to remain in Canada.
[4]
On April 30, 1992, the applicant's immigration inquiry began. In the end, the inquiry took place over the course of 30 separate hearings. During the course of the inquiry, the applicant raised a number of arguments regarding whether the inquiry should be conducted in camera, which allegations or convictions formed the basis for the applicant's removal, and whether the provisions of the
Act
requiring the applicant to appear and testify at his inquiry were constitutional. With respect to the latter issue, the adjudicator rendered an interim decision which was the subject of an application for judicial review, which was dismissed because it was abandoned by the applicant. However, prior to the dismissal of the application, Mr. Justice Strayer rendered a decision on a motion for a stay of the immigration inquiry which rejected the constitutional arguments. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.))
[5]
During the same period, the Department of Justice, on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany, began extradition proceedings in respect of the applicant. On March 5, 1992, a Warrant of Apprehension was issued for the purpose of arresting the applicant and holding an extradition hearing. These extradition proceedings are not the subject of the application before me. However, on December 7, 1993, counsel for the applicant obtained a subpoena compelling the production of the extradition file maintained by the Department of Justice. On December 8, 1993, counsel for the Department attended at the immigration inquiry and provided the applicant's counsel with access to and a copy of the extradition file.
Adjudicator's Decision
[6]
On May 18, 1994, the immigration adjudicator rendered her decision determining that the applicant was a member of the inadmissible class described in s. 19(1)(c). The focus of the inquiry was the convictions issued by the Regional Court of Kiel in respect of the two counts of breach of trust and nine counts of fraud. She determined that the convictions for fraud in Germany were equivalent to the offence described in s. 380(1) of the
Criminal Code
and punishable by a term of imprisonment not exceeding 10 years. With respect to the breach of trust convictions, she determined that the German offence was not equivalent to the criminal breach of trust offence provided for in s. 336 of the
Criminal Code
.
[7]
During the inquiry, there was considerable discussion regarding whether the convictions issued by the Regional Court of Kiel continued to exist. Counsel for the applicant argued that the cumulative sentence imposed by the Regional Court of Munich had the effect of cancelling or overturning the convictions issued by the Regional Court of Kiel. On this issue, the adjudicator concluded as follows:
"This issue became somewhat contentious, at least in part, because of two different statements authored by the Public Prosecutor in Germany, Mrs. Brigitte Pecher. Entered as exhibit C-18 is a letter dated 30 November 1993 from Mrs. Pecher to Murray Wilkinson of Canada Immigration. This letter is in the form of an 'Official Statement' from Mrs. Pecher. In it she sets out the specific convictions and sentences which occurred in Kiel on 6 May 1987 and in Munich on 8 February 1990 and discusses the combined sentence imposed. She closes by stating that the Kiel convictions still exist.
"Counsel argued that this information is in conflict with that provided by Mrs. Pecher to the Canadian Department of Justice lawyer, Brian Purdy, in a letter dated 3 September 1993. This letter was in reference to the Extradition proceeding then underway. Reference is made to a portion of that letter in an Affidavit of Georgina Obre entered as exhibit P-20. The entire text of the letter and the letter from Mr. Purdy which gave rise to Mrs. Pecher's response appear as attachments to a prior Affidavit of Georgina Obre entered as exhibit P-18 on 11 March 1994.
While the tenor of these two letters is somewhat different I do not see them as being contradictory.
In the letter of 3 September 1993, Mrs. Pecher says in part '... the former conviction is included' as we say, and a new cumulative sentence has to be imposed for all offenses together. The court, however, is bound to the convictions and the single sentences imposed for the different offenses by the former court'.
"
It would seem clear that the Kiel convictions have not been cancelled or overturned, only the Kiel sentence was set aside to permit a new cumulative sentence be imposed.
This is further confirmed by the 8 February 1990 'Statement' of Bechert, the presiding judge of the Regional Court Munich I, which is one of the attachments to the Campbell Affidavit filed as exhibit C-19." (Emphasis added) (Record, pp. 16-17)
[8]
Counsel for the applicant also objected to the admission of an affidavit sworn on March 3, 1993, by Mardie Campbell, a paralegal employed by the Department of Justice. On this issue, the adjudicator concluded as follows:
"The evidence relied upon to prove the fact of and nature of the German convictions was the 3 March 1993 Affidavit of Mardie Campbell with its lengthy attachments, all of which was entered as exhibit C-19, and the 30 November 1993 'Official Statement' of Brigitte Pecher, Public Prosecutor at the Regional Court Munich I.
"Mr. Anderson presented a written submission on 12 April 1994 asserting that the Campbell Affidavit was inadmissible. This he expanded upon in oral arguments that day. On 29 April 1994, I gave a preliminary ruling on the admissibility of the document indicating that I was admitting it because this tribunal is not bound by the formal rules of evidence and its contents were definitely relevant to these proceedings. I will now deal in more detail with some of the specific challenges to the admissibility and reliability of the document.
"
I agree that the Campbell Affidavit could have been more carefully crafted and it would have been preferable to have the original German documents included along with the English translations.
Additionally, it would appear that insufficient care was taken when the various documents were attached to the two page Affidavit. It appears to me that the final attachment, the translation of the 29 April 1992 'Official Statement' of Public Prosecutor Pecher should have come at the beginning of the package immediately following the Certification document dated 8 May 1992 and just prior to the 8 February 1990 Judgment of the Munich Court which she indicated was attached to her statement. Despite counsel's assertion to the contrary, this Judgment is also attached to or immediately following the Bechert 'Statement' in the package and as a result the translation of the Judgment appears in its entirety (all 32 pages) twice in the package.
Being translations, the Pecher and Bechert Statements are, understandably, not signed, nor is the referred to picture attached. However, there has also not been any assertion that the Hans Engel referred to in the documents is anyone other than the Hans Engel appearing before me or that the documents are not what they purport to be.
"The fact that some of the information may be correctly characterized as hearsay does not render it inadmissible, nor in the absence of any contradictory evidence do I see sufficient reason to consider it unreliable. Some time after disclosure of this package of documents to Mr. Engel and his counsel, Mr. Anderson, by a letter to Mr. Macdonald dated 2 November 1993 (found as an attachment to an Affidavit entered as exhibit P-13 on 15 November 1993), sought more specific information on the exact charges in Germany that the Immigration Department would rely upon together with the sentences attached to each.
It was open to counsel to, at that time, request the original German documents if he wished to verify the accuracy of the translations.
He could have sought Mr. Macdonald's assistance in this regard or proceeded by way of an Access to Information request regarding the original German documents which are apparently contained within the Extradition files at the Department of Justice. Additionally, having known for many months the documents on which the Minister's representative would be relying,
it has been open to counsel to obtain and present evidence to dispute the contents of the Campbell Affidavit. None has been presented
.
"Similarly, there was no request that Ms. Campbell, who I assume resides locally, be made available for cross-examination or be subpoenaed and requested to bring the original German documents or any other relevant information that may be available to her.
"Finally, after further reflection,
I continue to disagree with counsel's characterization of the translator, Brigitte Kogerer-Knoll, as an expert witness
. Nor have I been given any reason to doubt the accuracy of her translation. At the end of each translated document is her certification indicating that she is a 'sworn translator for the English language duly registered with the Regional Court Munich I ...' Her translations demonstrate a very good command of the English language. On the basis of the foregoing I consider the attachments to the Campbell Affidavit to be credible and trustworthy." (Emphasis added) (Record, pp. 14-16)
Issues
[9]
The issues before me are as follows:
1. Whether the adjudicator erred in admitting in evidence and relying upon certain documents;
2. Whether the adjudicator erred in compelling the applicant to testify; and
3. Whether the adjudicator erred in finding an equivalency between the German and Canadian offence of fraud on the basis of the materials before her.
Analysis
1. Evidence
[10]
The applicant challenges the adjudicator's decision to admit the following documentary evidence:
1) the affidavit of Mardie Catherine Campbell sworn March 3, 1993;
2) the English translation of the criminal proceedings against the applicant in Germany;
3) the English translation of a statement of the Presiding judge of the Regional Court of Munich; and
4) the English translation of the statement of Mrs. Pecher, the Public Prosecutor at the Regional Court of Munich.
[11]
In her decision, the adjudicator agreed that the Campbell affidavit could have been more carefully crafted and that it would have been preferable to have the original German documents included along with the English translations. However, she noted that there had not been any assertion that the Hans Engel referred to in the documents was anyone other than the Hans Engel appearing before her or that the documents were not what they purported to be. She also noted that the fact that some of the information may be correctly characterized as hearsay does not render it inadmissible nor, in the absence of any contradictory evidence, did she see sufficient reason to consider it unreliable. She further noted that counsel for the applicant had received full disclosure of this package of documents prior to the hearing and that it was open to counsel, at that time, to request the original German documents if he wished to verify the accuracy of the translations. Similarly, counsel for the applicant did not seek to cross-examine Ms. Campbell, who was employed at the time as a paralegal by the Department of Justice, Vancouver Regional Office, and likely available.
[12]
With respect to the documentary evidence, the applicant maintains that the adjudicator erred in two ways. First, in admitting into evidence and relying upon the Campbell affidavit, the adjudicator ignored its significant deficiencies: there is no indication that the affiant speaks or understands German, she does not identify or describe the exhibits, the exhibits are unsigned English translations of documents, and copies of the original German documents are not provided.
[13]
Secondly, the applicant claims that the English translation of the German documents should not be admitted because the qualifications of the translator had not been proven and copies of the original German documents were not provided. Specifically, the translator may be considered an expert and the record does indicate her qualifications. Counsel for the applicant also relied on the recent decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.S.R.(2d) 81; 380 A.P.R. 81. In that case, Chief Justice Lamer, speaking on behalf of the court, proposed a framework of analysis for determining the scope of the rights to interpreter assistance under s. 14 of the
Charter
(p. 979):
"First, it must be clear that the accused was actually in need of interpreter assistance ... Second, the claimant of the right must show, assuming it is not a case of a complete denial of an interpreter but one involving some alleged deficiency in the interpretation actually provided, that there has been a departure from the basic, constitutionally guaranteed standard of interpretation. For the purposes of this appeal, I define this standard as one of continuity, precision, impartiality, competency and contemporaneousness. Third, the claimant must establish that the alleged lapse in interpretation occurred in the course of the proceedings themselves when a vital interest of the accused was involved ... The onus with respect to these three steps for establishing a breach of s. 14 of the
Charter
falls on the party asserting the violation and the standard of proof is one of balance of probabilities."
[14]
An adjudicator's powers at an inquiry are governed, in part, by s. 80.1 of the
Immigration Act
, the relevant portions of which provide as follows:
"80.1(1) Subject to s. 40.2, an adjudicator has sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine all questions of law and fact, including questions of jurisdiction, that may arise in the course of proceedings that are required by this Act to be held before an adjudicator.
. . . . .
(4) An adjudicator shall deal with all proceedings as informally and expeditiously as the circumstances and considerations of fairness permit.
(5) An adjudicator is not bound by any legal or technical rules of evidence and, in any proceedings, may receive and base a decision on evidence adduced in the proceedings and considered credible or trustworthy in the circumstances of the case."
[15]
The Campbell affidavit and a certificate of Reinhard R. Weth, the civil servant responsible for extradition matters with Canada in the section of the German Federal Ministry of Justice dealing with International Criminal Law, make it clear that the documents accompanying the affidavit are the English translation of the extradition documents contained in the Department of Justice's extradition file regarding the applicant. They were transmitted through diplomatic channels and received in Vancouver from Ottawa on May 14, 1992.
[16]
At the foot of her translation, the translator affirms the following: "In my capacity as sworn translator for the English language, duly registered with the Regional Court Munich ..." Secondly, with respect to the quality of the translation, she affirms: "I confirm: Foregoing translation of the document, drafted in German language and presented to me in a certified copy, is correct and complete." The translator's seal appears on every page of the translation. The certificate of the German civil servant who transmitted the translated documents is signed in the original and affirms that the copies or translations into the English language satisfy the requirements of the Federal Republic of Germany within the meaning of the
German-Canadian Extradition Treaty
of July 11, 1977. There was no evidence that the translation was inadequate.
[17]
In my opinion, the adjudicator did not commit an error in admitting the Campbell affidavit and accompanying package of documents into evidence and in determining that such evidence was reliable. An adjudicator is given broad powers under s. 80.1(5) of the
Immigration Act
and is not bound by any legal or technical rules of evidence. This section specifically provides that the adjudicator, in any proceeding, may receive and base a decision on evidence adduced in the proceeding and considered credible or trustworthy in the circumstances. The credibility and trustworthiness of the evidence before an adjudicator is a question of fact within the particular jurisdiction of the adjudicator (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 283 (F.C.A.)). In this instance, the adjudicator's decision to admit the affidavit and accompanying documents and to consider them credible and trustworthy was proper in the circumstances.
[18]
As I indicated earlier, there was no evidence presented by the applicant to show that there was a deficiency in the translation. The translations found in the record are confirmed as to their accuracy. The translator states that she is a sworn translator, she refers to the original signatures in the translated documents and she translated exactly what appears, including the signature of the court employee. The applicant has not met the burden of challenging the precision or competency of the translation or the translator. (Chief Justice Lamer was very careful to limit the application of the Supreme Court's decision in
Tran
to the right of an accused in criminal proceedings (at p. 961)).
2. Equivalency
[19]
The adjudicator determined that the applicant's conviction by the Regional Court of Kiel on nine counts of fraud pursuant to s. 263 of the German
Penal Code
was equivalent to the fraud offence provided for in s. 380(1)(a) of the Canadian
Criminal Code
. In determining the content of the German offence, the adjudicator relied upon the English translation of s. 263 attached to the Campbell affidavit, which states as follows:
"Anyone who, with the intention to procure for himself or a third party an unlawful gain, damages the financial position of another person by causing or perpetuating an error on the basis of false pretences or on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of the true facts, shall be liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding five (5) years or to a fine."
Section 380(1)(a) of the
Criminal Code
provides as follows:
"Every one who, by deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means, whether or not it is a false pretence within the meaning of this Act, defrauds the public or any person, whether ascertained or not, of any property, money or valuable security,
(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding ten years, where the subject matter of the offence is a testamentary instrument or where the value of the subject matter of the offence exceeds one thousand dollars: or"
[20]
The applicant maintains that the adjudicator erred because she improperly relied upon an imprecise translation of the original German provision, there was no expert evidence provided regarding the content of the foreign law, the evidence before her related to the Munich charges not the Kiel charges, and the German offence of fraud is broader than the Canadian offence which requires subjective intent.
[21]
The test to be applied when determining equivalency was set out by Mr. Justice Urie in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at pp. 425-426:
"It is not sufficient, in my view, for the Adjudicator simply to look at the documentary evidence relating to a conviction for an offence under the foreign law. There must be some evidence to show firstly that the essential ingredients constituting the offence in Canada include the essential ingredients constituting the offence in the United States. Secondly, there should be evidence that the circumstances resulting in the charge, count, indictment or other document of a similar nature, used in initiating the criminal proceeding in the United States, had they arisen in Canada, would consitute (sic) an offence that might be punishable by way of indictment in Canada. Thus, it would seem that such a document would constitute the best, but not the only, evidence upon which the Adjudicator might base her decision.
. . . . .
"In summary, the necessity for the Adjudicator to determine whether the offence for which the applicant was convicted would constitute an offence if committed in Canada, requires, at least in circumstances where the scope of the offence is narrower in compass than that in the foreign jurisdiction, ascertainment of particulars of the offence for which the person concerned was convicted. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down in general terms the requirements applicable in every case."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 320; Mr. Justice Urie further stated that:
"This court in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case did not limit the determination of so-called 'equivalency' of the paragraph of the
Code
, there in issue, to the essential ingredients of any offence specifically spelled out in the statute being compared therewith. Nor is it necessary in this case. It seems to me that because of the presence of the words 'would constitute an offence ... in Canada', the equivalency can be determined in three ways: - first, by a comparison of the precise wording in each statute both through documents and, if available, through the evidence of an expert or experts in the foreign law and determining therefrom the essential ingredients of the respective offenses. Two, by examining the evidence adduced before the adjudicator, both oral and documentary, to ascertain whether or not that evidence was sufficient to establish that the essential ingredients of the offence in Canada had been proven in the foreign proceedings, whether precisely described in the initiating documents or in the statutory provisions in the same words or not. Third, by a combination of one and two."
Thus, the evidence before the adjudicator must indicate that the elements of the Canadian offence include the elements of the foreign offence and that the circumstances resulting in the conviction in the foreign jurisdiction would have constituted an offence in Canada had they arisen here.
[22]
With respect to the applicant's arguments regarding the evidence before the adjudicator on this issue, my reasons above apply: the adjudicator was entitled to rely upon the translation of the German offence. In
Hill
, the court required expert evidence regarding the content of foreign law "if available" and, in this instance, one can only assume that none was available or put before the adjudicator. Further, regarding any alleged confusion of the adjudicator between the Munich and Kiel convictions, in my opinion it is clear from a careful reading of her decision that the adjudicator had regard to the evidence of the circumstances surrounding the Kiel convictions.
[23]
Regarding the adjudicator's determination that there was equivalency between the two offenses, I am not persuaded that she committed a reviewable error. The adjudicator, in reference to the Supreme Court of Canada's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 1182, properly determined that the two elements of the Canadian offence of fraud are dishonesty and deprivation.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 184; 79 C.C.C.(3d) 449, the Supreme Court gave examples of dishonesty, such as negligent misstatements and sharp business practices, which would not suffice to found a fraud conviction because they lacked the subjective intent to defraud by fraudulent means required by the offence. While the adjudicator did not refer to the latter case, it is clear that she had a correct understanding of the elements of the Canadian offence, including the requirement of a subjective intent. The adjudicator found that under the German provision the accused must be found to have intentionally procured an unlawful gain. She also referred to the requirement in the German provision that the fraud be based upon a finding of false pretences, misrepresentation or omission of the true facts, and concluded that the provision implied "more than mere negligence". In my opinion, these conclusions reasonably support her finding of equivalency and demonstrate that she properly determined that one of the essential elements of the Canadian offence, subjective intent, was included in the essential elements of the German offence.
[24]
The applicant alleges that the Kiel convictions did not rest on a finding of intent and, therefore, would not constitute an offence under Canadian law. The Kiel convictions are reproduced in the Bechert statement. Ignoring those that the adjudicator disregarded because they involved a breach of trust rather than fraud and those not proceeded with, all of the remaining convictions state that the accused, the applicant in these proceedings, never intended to pay back the sums of money he obtained through fraudulent practices. The adjudicator referred to this evidence when she determined that the provisions were equivalent. In my opinion, it was open to the adjudicator to so find and her finding is reasonable on the basis of the record before her. The evidence before the adjudicator showed that the essential ingredients of the offence in Canada were included in the essential ingredients of the offence in Germany.
3. Compellability Of The Applicant
[25]
Finally, the applicant claims that the decision of the adjudicator to compel the applicant to testify at the inquiry infringes either s. 7 or s. 11(c) of the
Charter
. The respondent argues that Mr. Justice Strayer's decision on a motion for a stay of the applicant's inquiry have rendered the applicant's arguments on this issue res judicata. The respondent further submits that even if the question is not res judicata, Mr. Justice Strayer's reasons for his decision amply demonstrate that the applicant's arguments on this issue are without merit.
[26]
Without deciding whether the requirements of res judicata or issue estoppel have been met in the circumstances of this case, I am of the opinion that the applicant's arguments regarding a possible
Charter
infringement cannot be maintained.
[27]
I am in agreement with and adopt Mr. Justice Strayer's statement that:
"[T]here is no arguable issue raised by the applicant, having regard to the jurisprudence binding on me. Firstly, I note that the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  cannot be conceptualized as a deprivation of liberty or a punishment. This should be even more the case of deportation by reason of disentitlement to enter Canada due to the conviction of an offence in another country. Secondly, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  resident being deported following the commission for a serious offence in Canada:
'In such a situation there is no breach of fundamental justice in giving practical effect to the termination of their right to remain in Canada. In the case of a permanent resident, deportation is the only way in which to accomplish this.'
"At the very least, the same must apply to a person who is neither a citizen nor a permanent resident who was allegedly inadmissible at the time he originally entered Canada. Further, it is difficult to see what principle of fundamental justice is involved in requiring the applicant to testify at the hearing before the Adjudicator. This is a purely civil proceeding to determine whether the applicant was indeed inadmissible when he entered Canada. There is nothing to suggest that he is about to be prosecuted in Canada and that any evidence he might give could be used against him in such prosecution. His counsel hypothesizes that he could be prosecuted under s. 94(1)(b) or (h) of the
Immigration Act
for making representations or false statements in respect of his entry to Canada. His counsel relied in part on the Supreme Court decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  inconsistent with my present conclusions. The Ontario Court of Appeal had held in that case that s. 17 of the
Combines Investigation Act
, which provided for compelling evidence concerning matters that might subsequently be the subject of a prosecution under the
Act
, did not violate s. 7 of the
Charter
. The appeal from that decision was dismissed, the Supreme Court being divided on the issue of s. 7. In any event, if the applicant were subsequently prosecuted in Canada he could invoke s. 13, and perhaps s. 7, of the
Charter
to prevent his evidence in the Adjudicator's hearing being used against him.
"Counsel for the applicant further speculated on the use by German authorities in their country, for the purpose of subsequent prosecutions there of the applicant, of evidence which he might be compelled to give before the Adjudicator in Canada. Even if a Canadian court someday were to hold that evidence so compelled at a hearing before an Adjudicator could not constitutionally be used in the prosecution in Canada of the subject of that Adjudicator's inquiry, I do not think we can concern ourselves with what a German court might hold in respect of the use of such evidence there. As the Supreme Court said in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  determining whether to extradite. (It must be kept in mind at all times in the present case that there is no claim for refugee status involved)." (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  omitted)
Conclusion
[28]
For these reasons, the application for judicial review is dismissed.
[29]
Counsel for the applicant requested that I certify the following question:
"Whether in the circumstances that Mr. Engel found himself he was properly a compellable witness, or whether compelling him breached s. 7 of the
Charter
."
[30]
In my opinion, this is not a serious question of general importance and should not be certified.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/saf
Footnote
1.	Since the applicant's inquiry commenced on April 30, 1992, before the coming into force of the amendments in S.C. 1992, c. 49, the adjudicator properly determined the applicant's admissibility pursuant to s. 19(1)(c), as it read prior to the amendments, and issued the deportation order on May 18, 1994, on the basis of the provisions as they existed on the date of issuance, s. 19(1)(c.1)(i). As such, it is the adjudicator's application of s. 19(1)(c) which is at issue here, not s. 19(1)(c.1)(i).  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[End of document]