[1]
Reed, J.
: The plaintiff brings a motion to compel the defendant to file a list of documents and an affidavit certifying such list, pursuant to rule 448 of the Federal Court Rules. This request must be put in context.
[2]
The plaintiff's claim is for damages arising out of the rescinding of a $400,000 grant awarded to the plaintiff under the Industrial Regional Development Programme
1
or specific performance of the grant agreement. On August 13, 1986, counsel for the plaintiff wrote to counsel for the defendant forwarding a copy of the plaintiff's reply and suggesting that there be a timely exchange of affidavits of documents and the holding of discoveries in September. Counsel for the plaintiff anticipated having his affidavit of documents ready by August 25, 1986.
[3]
Tentative arrangements were, subsequently, made to allow discoveries to proceed on October 20, 1986 and while lists of documents pursuant to rule 447 had not been exchanged there seems to have been some sort of mutual assumption as of September 9, 1986, at least, that each party would allow the other inspection of their respective documents prior to the date of discovery. The plaintiff sought to have Mr. Sinclair Stevens named as the appropriate person to be produced by the defendant for discovery. The defendant resisted this request on the ground that the Minister was not the person most knowledgeable and in any event could not be produced for discovery since he no longer held the position of Minister. It is unclear as to exactly when the defendant provided the plaintiff with its rule 447 list of documents. On October 15 the plaintiff complained about the incompleteness of the defendant's production of documents. The discoveries scheduled for October 20 never took place. On November 4, 1986, the plaintiff forwarded its 447 list of documents to the defendant, although not in proper format as required by the Rules. (Counsel for the plaintiff has undertaken to provide a revised document to so comply.)
[4]
I would note in passing that much of the above "context" was provided by counsel for the defendant by way of argument before me and by handing to the court various pieces of correspondence. Technically, none of this evidence is on the record. If there are facts counsel consider relevant to a motion and which the court is asked to consider in coming to its decision these should be properly adduced, that is, by way of affidavit. In this case the affidavit in support of the plaintiff's motion was filed on November 17, 1986. There was ample time within which an affidavit in reply could have been filed. While I have taken into account the facts referred to by counsel for the defendant it must be recognized that the record is deficient with respect to a proper underpinning therefor.
[5]
The plaintiff now seeks a rule 448 order. It should first of all be noted that rule 447(2) provides:
"... a party shall, within 20 days after the pleadings in the action are deemed to be closed ... file and serve on ... [the] other party a list of the documents of which he has knowledge at that time that might be used in evidence
(a) to establish or to assist in establishing any allegation of fact in any pleading filed by him; or
(b) to rebut or to assist in rebutting any allegation of fact in any pleading filed by any other party."
[6]
Rule 448(1) provides:
"The Court may order any party to an action to make and file and serve on any other party a list of the documents that are or have been in his possession, custody or power relating to any matter in question in the cause or matter ..."
[7]
Counsel for the defendant resists the plaintiff's motion for a rule 448 order on the ground that: (1) it is really seeking to do indirectly what cannot be done directly and that is obtain discovery of the ex-Minister, Sinclair Stevens; (2) the affidavit filed by the plaintiff in support of its motion does not adequately identify any document which either has not already been produced to the plaintiff or about which the plaintiff knows but for which the defendant claims privilege (except one); (3) that the request sought by the plaintiff is too vaguely framed in that it asks the defendant for a listing of documents which could exist respecting deliberations of DRIE officers, Regional Executives, The Economic Development Board and others, relating to the approval of the original grant, the cancellation of the original grant, approval of the second grant, etc.
[8]
With respect to counsel for the defendant's first argument, the compelling of the making of a list of documents in the possession of, or formerly in the possession of the Crown, which relate to a question or matter in issue is not accomplishing indirectly the production of an ex-Minister as the officer of the defendant to be examined on discovery. An ex-Minister cannot be examined on discovery, because under the Federal Court Rules it is the party who is examined, not individuals who might be called as witnesses at trial. Accordingly, the individual called on discovery must be someone who can speak for the defendant, someone within the control of the defendant, someone who can make admissions for the defendant:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 567. An ex-Minister is not in that position because he is no longer part of the defendant's "organization". (In the same way, an ex-employee of a corporation is not the appropriate person to speak for a corporation on discovery.) A second reason why Ministers are not generally appropriate individuals to appear on discovery is that they usually do not have the most complete knowledge of the matters in issue. Usually, there will be someone else in the department, of lesser rank than Minister, who has the detailed knowledge required for purposes of discovery.
[9]
Thus, the reasons for declining to require a Minister or an ex-Minister to appear as a person to be examined as the officer of a party on discovery has nothing to do with protecting from disclosure information which he or she might be able to provide or protecting from disclosure information in the form of documents in the hands of the department which pertains to the matters in issue. Accordingly, the compelling of the making of a list of documents cannot be said to constitute indirect discovery of the Minister.
[10]
With respect to the defendant's second argument, that the plaintiff has not succeeded in identifying any document, save one, which has not been produced but which is in the possession of the defendant, this is true. To so conclude it must be noted that I must take into account the documents handed to the court informally by counsel for the defendant at the hearing of the motion and which are not embodied in an affidavit. Counsel for the defendant is right, also, when he says that the statement made by the president of the plaintiff that there must be at least 40 files in possession of the defendant dealing with the matter is not of much weight. This statement is purely speculative and relates to information which could not be within the knowledge of the plaintiff.
[11]
The defendant's argument, in essence however, on this point amounts to a proposition that in order to be able to obtain a rule 448 order a party must prove that the list of documents filed by the opposing side pursuant to rule 447 is incomplete. I do not find that requirement in the Rules, nor in the jurisprudence. The list filed pursuant to rule 447 is one relating to documents of which the party has knowledge at the time of close of pleadings, or within 20 days thereafter. It relates to documents which might establish or assist in establishing allegations of fact in the pleadings or rebutting such facts. There is no requirement that it be accompanied by an affidavit. Rule 448 is framed differently. It relates to all documents which are or have been in the possession, custody or control of the party and which relate to any matter in question in the cause. An affidavit verifying the list is required to be filed. It may be that if a party is satisfied that all documents have been disclosed in a 447 list no motion for a 448 order will be sought, but in my view that does not mean that a party seeking such order has to prove that the 447 list is incomplete. The identity or existence of the documents sought are all within the knowledge of the party refusing to disclose. It would be an intolerable burden to require the party seeking a rule 448 order to prove the existence of documents of which he or she could have no precise knowledge.
[12]
With respect to the defendant's third argument, that the claim is too vaguely framed, the wording to which counsel for the defendant refers is that found in a letter counsel for the plaintiff received from his client and which is appended as an annex to the affidavit filed in support of the plaintiff's motion. The client advised his counsel that in his view documents "which could exist" but had not yet been made available were those relating to
"Deliberation of DRIE Officers, Internal Board, Regional Executives, Economic Development Board, Associate Deputy Minister, Ministers for Small Business related to:
1. Approval of original Grant
2. Cancellation of original Grant
3. Approval of second Grant
4. Cancellation of second Grant
5. Approval of Third Grant
6. Cancellation of Third Grant"
[13]
But counsel for the plaintiff has not couched his motion in his clients' words. The defendant is not being asked to list documents which "could exist". Counsel's motion is framed in the wording of rule 448 (refer text of the notice of motion):
"... make, file and serve a list of the documents that are or have been in its possession, custody or power relating to all matters in question in this cause or matter ..."
It is that request to which the defendant is being asked to reply.
[14]
One last point remains to be considered. The defendant claims that some of the documents, of which the plaintiff has knowledge but which have not been produced, are privileged - for reasons of solicitor-client privilege. Copies of the documents in question were handed to the court and the relevant jurisprudence cited: Descôteaux et  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 834, 836, 837. The claims of privilege made with respect to the documents may indeed be justified but they are premature at this point. The plaintiff, at the moment, is not seeking the production of documents. All that is being sought is a list of documents by reference to their title, date, sender, addressee or other description identifying the document. Such list may appropriately identify which documents are considered to fall into the privileged category and which for that reason the party is not prepared to produce. Rule 449 sets out the requirement in this regard. If the opposing party subsequently seeks production of documents for which privilege is claimed, then, the issue of privilege becomes relevant. But reasons of privilege do not justify omitting those documents from a rule 448 list, nor do they justify the non-filing of a list.
[15]
For the reasons given the plaintiff is entitled to the order sought.
Application allowed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/kam
Footnotes
1. A program established pursuant to the Industrial and Regional Development Act, S.C. 1980-81-82-83, c. 160.
[End of document]