Reasons For Order
[1]
Rouleau, J.
: The applicant seeks a writ of certiorari quashing the decision of a visa officer in Hong Kong rejecting her application for permanent residence under the "retired persons" category and an order in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to process her application in accordance with the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the
Act
) and the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978 SOR/78-172 (the
Regulations
) as they existed at the time her application was originally submitted.
[2]
An application for permanent residence was submitted on December 31, 1990 under the "retired persons" category, notwithstanding the fact that the applicant would not turn 55 until March 29, 1992. The "retired" category was abolished by legislative amendment, effective midnight August 2, 1991.
[3]
It was reviewed on March 31, 1992. The visa officer determined that the applicant did not qualify as a "retired person"; that she had not met the age requirement at the time her application was submitted, nor at any time before the category was closed. Additionally, given her age and occupation, the visa officer determined that she could not achieve the required number of units of assessment pursuant to regulation 8 and schedule 1 and thus would be inadmissible as an "independent" immigrant. Further, given that she was a widowed housewife who had only visited Canada once, he determined that there was no basis for taking exceptional action in this case through the Governor-in-Council waiver process. By letter dated the same day, she was advised that her application for permanent residence had been refused. The applicant now seeks judicial review of this decision.
[4]
Several grounds were advanced in support of this application. Counsel submitted that she is entitled to the benefit of all regulations and policies in existence at the time that her application was filed along with the payment of the appropriate processing fee; that the respondents could not retroactively change the law once it had been accepted. I was referred to the decisions in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 265 (F.C.A.). Both of these decisions involved applications for permanent residence made under the "independent" category. In each case, the occupational units of assessment had been amended while the applications were in the backlog system awaiting processing. When their applications were finally processed, none of the applicants qualified because of the changes. Had their applications been considered on the date they had applied, they would have been accepted. In each case, the court held that the applicants were entitled to have their applications considered under the points system that existed on the date of filing of the applications. As Walsh, J., remarked in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at p. 14:
"I believe it can now be said that it is settled that it is the date of the application and not of the assessment which must be taken into consideration to determine the number of points to be awarded."
[5]
In the present case, the applicant filed and paid the requisite fee on December 31, 1990, when the "retired" provisions were still in force. It was submitted that this application was the complete, subject only to the 16 month waiting period before a visa officer could assess her file. Had the "retired persons" provisions not been revoked, the applicant would have qualified for admission under this category when her file was reviewed on March 31, 1992. It was then suggested that, according to <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the respondents erred in law in refusing to assess her application under the "retired" category.
[6]
Additionally, it was submitted that SOR/91-433, the Regulation revoking the retirement provisions, does not provide for retroactive application and that "the revocation did little more than disenfranchise post August 3rd, 1991 applicants from applying" and therefore, it should not affect this application. Counsel went on to submit that the notice published by the Hong Kong Commission on July 18, 1991 advising of the impending closure of the "retired" category, gave an incorrect interpretation of the law when it stated:
"In order to qualify for consideration in the retired category, an applicant must complete the formal application form and submit the correct fee to the Commission, and be 55 years of age,
all on or before the close of business on August 2, 1991
." (emphasis added)
[7]
It was further advanced that the applicant had a "legitimate expectation" that her application would be processed in accordance with the law as it existed prior to August 3, 1991 and that the respondents erred in that:
"... the applicant was denied procedural fairness when her application for permanent residence under the retirement category was categorically refused based on an inaccurate account of [sic] law set out as a policy by a visa post with not [sic] such jurisdiction to do so."
[8]
Finally, it was argued that an interview was mandated by para. 8(1)(e) of the
Regulations
insofar as a decision, relating to an applicant's ability to successfully establish himself or herself in Canada, cannot be properly made without the benefit of an interview;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 276 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 288. In the present case the respondents rejected the application without granting an interview and this, it was submitted, was unreasonable and procedurally unfair.
[9]
Dealing first with the argument that the regulation revoking the "retired" category did little more than disenfranchise post August 3, 1991 applicants and did not apply retroactively to this application; I have not been persuaded that the Commission in Hong Kong gave, or acted upon, an incorrect interpretation of the law. The Governor-in-Council enacted SOR/91-433 pursuant to the authority granted him under s. 114(1) of the
Act
. SOR/91-433 was subsequently published in the
Canada Gazette
on July 3, 1991. Subsection 114(3) of the
Act
provides:
"(3) No regulation made under paragraph (1)(a), (b) or (c) shall come into force until thirty days after it has been published in the Canada Gazette, and the text of every regulation so made shall be laid before Parliament as soon as practicable."
Accordingly, SOR/91-433 came into effect at 12:01 a.m. on August 3, 1991 and at that time the "retired" category ceased to exist; or it had been abolished as of midnight, August 2, 1991.
[10]
I am satisfied that SOR/91-433 does not provide for any retroactive application, however this is not the point in the present case. Subsection 2(1) of the
Regulations
which was revoked by SOR/91-433, defined a "retired person" as:
"'retired person' means an immigrant
who has attained at least fifty-five years of age
and does not intend to seek or accept employment in Canada." (emphasis added)
The applicant was not a "retired person" as of midnight, August 2, 1991, nor on the date of filing her application. The "age of the person concerned" is the only absolute determinant on which an application under the former "retired" category could be assessed. The applicant was not entitled to have her application considered under this category until such time as she had attained the required age. The effect of SOR/91-433 was to eliminate her right to have her application considered under this category upon her subsequently attaining the age of 55. It cannot be said that the respondents retroactively applied this amendment; that would only have been the case had the applicant reached the age of 55 prior to August 3, 1991.
[11]
The argument submitted that she was entitled to the benefit of those regulations and policies in existence at the time of filing her application also fails. The facts in the present case are distinguishable from those in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. As Mr. Richard Hetherington, an immigration counsellor for the Commission in Hong Kong, explained, the Commission has no authority to refuse any properly completed IMM8 which is accompanied by the correct fee. Notwithstanding the fact that her application had been filed by the Commission, it cannot be said that her application was complete. As Mahoney, J.A., remarked in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 311:
"It does seem to me, however, that
an application for an immigrant visa is made when it duly initiates the process leading to the issue or refusal of the visa
..." (emphasis added)
Since she did not qualify for consideration under this category, it cannot be said that the filing of her application had "initiated the process leading to the issuance or refusal of a visa" so as to give rise to a right to have her application considered in accordance with the retirement provisions as they existed on that date.
[12]
The applicant's submission that she had a "legitimate expectation" that her application would be processed in accordance with the law as it existed prior to August 3, 1991 also fails for the reasons given in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
[13]
Finally, the applicant's submission that she was entitled to an interview is also without merit. On the date that the application was reviewed, the retired category no longer existed. The visa officer did not have to address the questions posed by para. 8(1)(e) of the
Regulations
because these provisions were no longer in force.
[14]
The record does indicate that the visa officer did address the issue of whether there were humanitarian or compassionate grounds warranting the exceptional remedy afforded by s. 114(2); he determined that there were none. It is well established that there is no obligation to conduct an interview for humanitarian considerations;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R.(2d) 59 (F.C.T.D.).
[15]
Accordingly, this application is dismissed; costs to the respondents.
[16]
Having reviewed counsel's submissions concerning a serious question of general importance to be certified under s. 83(1) of the
Act
, I am satisfied that no such question arises out of this claim.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/rdw
[End of document]