[1]
Rothstein, J.
: The issues in this judicial review are:
1. Whether the Visa Officer erred in assessing the applicant under Schedule I of the
Immigration Regulations 1978
("the
Regulations
") by importing training and skill requirements into the description of "executive secretary" outside those contained in the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations ("CCDO") thereby concluding that the applicant should not be classified as an "executive secretary".
2. If the Visa Officer erred with respect to his assessment of the applicant as not eligible for classification as an executive secretary, whether such error could have affected the number of units he awarded the applicant for personal suitability.
[2]
The applicant, a citizen of Jamaica, applied at the Canadian Consulate in Buffalo, New York, for permanent residence status under the category of Independent-Skilled Worker. The applicant sought to be classified and assessed as an executive secretary. As an executive secretary she alleged that she met the independent criteria listed in Schedule I of the
Regulations
. She was awarded sixty three (63) units on a paper assessment. Having obtained more than sixty (60) units on a paper assessment, she was granted an interview with a Visa Officer. If she obtained an additional seven (7) or more units for the personal suitability factor, she would achieve the minimum seventy (70) units to qualify for the issuance of a visa.
[3]
The Visa Officer found that the applicant could not be issued a visa by virtue of s. 11(1) of the
Regulations
, because she did not have experience in the occupation of executive secretary. The Visa Officer found that the applicant lacked:
"... the requisite experience or training in the above occupations [executive secretary, secretary, administrative assistant] in that you have no experience or training in the operation of a personal computer; word processing, database and/or spread sheet software applications, facsimile technology, local area networks, electronic mail systems, electronic voice mail or office telephone networks, all of which are standard equipment and tools of a secretary, executive secretary or administrative assistant in a Canadian office setting."
[4]
The applicant says that the Visa Officer exceeded his jurisdiction by not adhering to the definition of an executive secretary as found in the CCDO.
[5]
The definition of executive secretary in the CCDO provides:
"performs secretarial and administrative duties for office executive; performs duties similar to those of 4111-10 secretary (clerical) utilizing secretarial experience and knowledge of office administration and public relations. Arranges conferences and other meetings and researches and compiles information for employer. Acts on routine matters affecting day-to-day operations of organization, in employer absence. May perform other duties including supervising office workers.
"GED; 4 svp;7 ..."
[6]
The definition of secretary (clerical) in the CCDO provides:
"GED;4 svp; 6 ...
"Schedules appointments, gives information to callers, takes dictation and relieves employer of clerical work and minor administrative and business details, performing any of the following duties: Reads and routes incoming mail. Locates and attaches appropriate file to correspondence to be answered by employer. Takes dictation in shorthand or on stenotype machine, and transcribes on typewriter from notes or voice recordings. Composes and types correspondence. Files correspondence and other records. Answers telephone and gives information to caller, or routes call to appropriate official, and places outgoing calls. Schedules appointments for employer and reminds him when they are due. Greets visitors, ascertains nature of business and conducts visitors to employer or to appropriate person. Compiles and types statistical reports. Records minutes of meetings. May keep confidential personnel records. May arrange travel schedules and reservations. May be designated according to type of work performed; for example, Appointments Secretary, Legal Secretary, Medical Secretary, Social Secretary."
[7]
Factor 2 of Schedule I of the
Regulations
provides in part:
"Specific vocational preparation ...
"To be measured by the amount of former professional vocational apprenticeship in plant or on job training specified in the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations printed under the authority of the Minister ..."
[8]
The skills mentioned by the Visa Officer in his refusal letter are not in the CCDO definition of an executive secretary. Rather, these appear to be requirements that the Visa Officer considered, based solely on his own idea of those skills which are required to be a successful executive secretary in the contemporary Canadian office environment.
[9]
The respondent says that the CCDO is meant to be used only as a guideline in assessing both Factor 2 (Specific Vocational Preparation) and factor 3 (Experience). However, the CCDO is specifically referred to in Schedule I of the
Regulations
under Factor 2. The words state that this Factor, Specific Vocational Preparation, is "to be measured by the amount of formal professional, vocational, apprenticeship, in-plant, or on-the-job training specified in the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations." In the CCDO there is precise reference to numerical applications for specified occupations for purposes of the assessment of units under Factors 2 and 3 in Schedule I. Schedule I is a code for assessing the number of units for immigration purposes. Application of the CCDO is specifically provided for. There is no room for a Visa Officer to import his or her own criteria into the requirements for a specified job.
[10]
The authorities submitted by the applicant support the proposition that the CCDO is a binding document.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that the applicant did not meet certain training requirements. However, as in the instant case, there was nothing in the CCDO which suggested these were necessary requirements or skills for the occupation in question. McKeown, J., states at page 223:
"There is nothing in the guidelines of the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations (CCDO) with respect to legal secretaries which contemplates any such training requirements. If there are requirements that an applicant to be assessed as a legal secretary must meet, fairness demands that this information must be provided to applicants."
[11]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), where the Visa Officer failed to consider the whole of the CCDO description, Gibson, J., states at pp. 7 and 8:
"In guidance to those such as the Visa Officer in this matter
who are required to use the Canadian Classification and Dictionary of Occupations ('CCDO') in assessing applications for landed immigrant status
, the following is provided:
. . . . .
"Having turned to the CCDO for guidance in this matter, the Visa Officer was
obliged
to take the whole of the occupation description into account and
interpret it appropriately
." (emphasis added)
Based on these authorities and the wording of Factor 2 of Schedule I, and the definitions in the CCDO, I find that the CCDO is not merely a guideline, but is, as the applicant submits, a binding system of classification and assessment.
[12]
The wording of the Visa Officer's decision indicates that the criteria outside of the CCDO which were considered were dominant in his decision. The skills he considered were not unreasonable in that they probably are skills required in the contemporary Canadian office environment. However, the Visa Officer is bound by the CCDO definitions. While it may be that there is a problem with outdated definitions provided in the CCDO, a Visa Officer is nonetheless not permitted to substitute his/her own criteria for a given occupation. Under the scheme of the
Immigration Act
and
Regulations
, that is for Parliament or the Governor-in-Council to address.
[13]
Had the Visa Officer applied the CCDO correctly, it appears he might have found the applicant to be qualified as an executive secretary. Had he done so, she would not have been ineligible for a visa under s. 11(1) of the
Regulations
. I therefore, find that the Visa Officer erred in taking into consideration skills in addition to those provided in the CCDO when assessing the applicant's visa application.
[14]
However, this does not complete the analysis. Having found that the Visa Officer erred in considering criteria in addition to the CCDO in classifying the applicant, it is now necessary to determine if this error affected the Visa Officer's overall assessment and the applicant's eligibility for a visa.
[15]
When the Visa Officer assessed the applicant's personal suitability, he gave her a score of five (5) out of ten (10) units. The respondent submits that this means that even if the Visa Officer assessed the applicant as an executive secretary and awarded her sixty-three (63) units therefore, she would not have qualified for a visa because with the five (5) units for personal suitability, she would still only obtain sixty eight (68) units, two short of the required seventy (70) units.
[16]
However, I am not satisfied that had the Visa Officer classified the applicant as an executive secretary, her score for personal suitability would have necessarily stayed the same. First, both the CCDO error and the personal suitability assessment occurred at the same interview. In one sitting, the Visa Officer reclassified the applicant from an executive secretary to a stenographer, and in the process lowered her units (exclusive of personal suitability units) from sixty-three (63) to forty-eight (48). He then awarded her 5 units for personal suitability. Second, in an assessment of an individual's personal suitability, a Visa Officer is required to consider economic establishment as it relates to the factors of adaptability, motivation and initiative. When economic considerations are at stake, it is reasonable to assume that the occupation in which one is classified is relevant to such an assessment. Therefore, I am not satisfied that the Visa Officer would have, but for the error in applying the CCDO, made the same personal suitability assessment. It is possible the applicant would have been awarded seven (7) or more units for personal suitability thereby achieving the minimum score of seventy (70) units required for visa eligibility.
[17]
For these reasons, the judicial review is allowed and the matter is remitted for redetermination by a different Visa Officer in a manner not inconsistent with these reasons. Counsel for the applicant was indifferent as to whether the proceedings should be on the same record. Counsel for the respondent requested that the redetermination proceed on the same record. The redetermination shall proceed on the same record.
[18]
Neither counsel requested certification of a question for appeal.
Application allowed.
Editor: Giovanni A. Merlini/slm
[End of document]