[1]
Dubé, J.
[TRANSLATION]: The co-plaintiffs ("the plaintiffs") submit that they have suffered damages as a result of the refusal of the officials of Her Majesty the Queen stationed in Manila to issue a landing visa to Mrs. Bombisky pursuant to a sponsorship application filed by her spouse.
[2]
The plaintiffs argue that the Crown's officials stationed at the Embassy acted in a hostile and discriminatory manner toward them; hostile in that the government's employees were discourteous, expelled the plaintiffs from the Embassy and refused to accept their telephone calls; discriminatory in that the same employees refused to communicate in French and treated the Quebecers and the Filipinos as liars.
[3]
The Embassy officials are alleged to have refused to give the plaintiffs any aid or assistance. The plaintiffs apprehended a blood bath in view of the elections that brought Corazon Aquino to power. Furthermore, the female plaintiff's family objected to the plaintiffs' marriage and kidnapped her to prevent her from leaving the country with the male plaintiff. The latter consequently asked to be exempted from returning to Canada in order to complete the sponsorship proceedings and that he be allowed to do so in the Philippines. Following his wife's kidnapping by her own family, Mr. Bombisky was refused assistance by the Canadian Embassy in his efforts to come to her aid.
[4]
It is further alleged that an Embassy official misled the female plaintiff and made her sign a false declaration. The declaration suggested that theirs was a marriage of convenience.
[5]
The plaintiffs indicate that they suffered damages in that the actions of the Canadian government officials caused them anxiety, entailed additional expenses and jeopardized their lives. They are claiming $142,535.30 in damages.
[6]
The evidence shows that the male plaintiff, a Canadian citizen, met the female plaintiff in a hotel in Naga City in late November or early December 1984, during a trip to the Philippines. They subsequently saw each other and took a trip together in that country. On March 4, 1985, the plaintiffs attended for the first time at the consular section of the Canadian Embassy in Manila to fill out a form entitled "Affidavit in lieu of Certificate of Legal Capacity to Contract Marriage for Canadian Citizens". Mr. Bombisky stated at that time that he had not previously entered into a marriage contract. The plaintiffs were married that same day and Mr. Bombisky left the Philippines to return to Canada the next day, March 5, 1985. Mrs. Bombisky was to await his return to the Philippines.
[7]
On March 11, 1985, Mr. Bombisky attended at C.I.C. Dorchester in Montreal and signed an application to sponsor his wife. He returned to the Philippines on May 6. He subsequently went back with his wife, on May 9, 1985, to the Canadian Embassy in Manila to continue the sponsorship proceedings. The permanent residence application form was received by the Canadian Embassy on May 31, 1985.
[8]
On June 24, 1985, Mrs. Bombisky attended at the Embassy for an interview and it was at this time that two officials of the Embassy are alleged to have induced her to compromise her sponsorship by means of a misleading declaration. On August 6, 1985, she was informed that her application for permanent residency had been rejected on the ground of marriage of convenience. This decision was appealed to the Immigration Appeal Board, and the appeal was allowed on April 10, 1986, in Montreal, Quebec.
[9]
According to the plaintiffs' version, Mrs. Bombisky was kidnapped and confined by members of her family because they objected to her marriage; Mr. Bombisky was not a Roman Catholic. The evidence indicates that she is the second youngest in a family of nine children. Her parents died and her eldest brother, a Catholic priest, became head of the family, all members of which were of the age of majority. It was the eldest brother in particular who objected to the marriage and he was the one who is alleged to have got some cousins to sequester Mrs. Bombisky. She was rescued by Mr. Bombisky when she eluded her cousins and was waiting beside a river. Mr. Bombisky himself gave a colourful account to the court of all the adventures and skirmishes that finally led him, after swimming across the river underwater, to the woman awaiting him. The rescue and return to Manila were accomplished by boat, then in an all-terrain vehicle driven by an Australian.
[10]
The plaintiffs continued to feel threatened by the members of Mrs. Bombisky's family. They sometimes wore wigs to avoid recognition. Yet the actual threat was limited to the eldest brother and a few cousins. Besides, two other brothers accompanied the plaintiffs to the Embassy for the interview on June 24.
[11]
According to Mrs. Bombisky, when her husband had to leave the Philippines to return to Canada she had to hide so as to avoid being located again by her family. She changed hotels and inns regularly in order to cover her tracks. This entailed additional expenses that the plaintiffs are seeking to recover through this action. On the other hand, she hid in the very region where the members of her family whom she was trying to avoid were living.
[12]
The plaintiffs are also demanding that the defendant repay expenses they incurred during these various proceedings, including a 1,200 kilometre trip to exchange travellers cheques in the Philippines (although Embassy officials exchange their paycheques in Manila banks). There is also an appointment with a Filipino dentist that Mr. Bombisky wished to keep at all costs, even if it meant not using the services of dentists in Montreal, where he was located. In addition, Mr. Bombisky, who had difficulty adjusting to the water and climate in the Philippines, was often overcome by illness.
[13]
The plaintiffs also describe a dangerous episode they experienced at sea when they were on board a ship. The ship had left port and the plaintiffs had to jump overboard into a sea infested with sharks. They survived.
[14]
I thought it necessary to report some of the many adventures related by the plaintiffs, in order to reconstitute the nature, characteristics and tone of the evidence presented during the trial. Mr. Bombisky chose to represent himself (Mrs. Bombisky was represented by counsel) and it was not always easy to get him to comply with the rules of relevance.
[15]
The plaintiffs sought to establish that the miseries and difficulties they suffered in the Philippines constituted damages arising from the actions of the Crown officials at the Canadian Embassy and elsewhere. Needless to say, before adding up the damages it is first necessary to prove the existence of a "délit", or offence.
[16]
The plaintiffs also alleged that Mrs. Bombisky had been insulted in that the Embassy officials had insinuated that she frequented a neighborhood in Manila that is known for its prostitution. The refusal on the part of the Embassy officials to use the French language is also alleged to have done [translation] "serious and irreparable wrong" to the plaintiffs. Furthermore, these officials are said to have stated that Quebecers and Filipinos were liars.
[17]
Apart from what the two plaintiffs themselves said, none of these allegations was corroborated at trial. As far as the prostitution allegation was concerned, this emerged from a comment by a receptionist at the Embassy. The plaintiffs called no witnesses, with the exception of a retired official of the Department of Immigration in Montreal, who was unaware of any of the plaintiffs' claims.
[18]
The defendant, on the other hand, called three officials of the Embassy in Manila. One was a francophone and one a bilingual anglophone, and all three appeared to be courteous and competent individuals. It should be kept in mind that Mrs. Bombisky does not speak French and her interviews were conducted in English with translation into Tagalog, her mother tongue, wherever translation was necessary. Both spouses communicated with each other in English. It appears that Mr. Bombisky spoke to the Embassy officials primarily in English. He also spoke in English with Mrs. Céline Fittes, a francophone who would, she says, have been happy to have spoken to him in his mother tongue.
[19]
As to the allegation of discrimination or insults, that is, that all Quebecers and Filipinos are liars, apart from the rather vague testimony by the plaintiffs there was no evidence presented on this matter.
[20]
Fundamentally, at the heart of this whole affair is the refusal to issue a landing visa to the female plaintiff.
[21]
On June 24, 1985, the plaintiffs attended at the Embassy in Manila. An interview took place, attended by Mrs. Bombisky, Mrs. Caroline Melis, the second secretary at the Embassy and Mrs. Aura Andrada acting as interpreter. In the course of this interview, and in the absence of Mr. Bombisky, Mrs. Bombisky signed a declaration that she had married Mr. Bombisky because she wished to get away from her brothers and sisters and that she would have married "anyone else if someone else would have proposed to me". Mrs. Bombisky was then refused a landing visa on the ground of a marriage of convenience.
[22]
The plaintiffs submitted that Mrs. Bombisky never signed such a declaration, but simply a blank sheet with, in the endorsement and above her signature, the words:
"And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing it to be true and knowing it is of the same force and effect as if made under oath."
[23]
According to the plaintiffs, the aforesaid declaration was then typed by the officials of the Crown on the reverse side of the sheet in the absence of Mrs. Bombisky.
[24]
I cannot grant any credibility to this claim. The two officials, Mrs. Melis and Mrs. Andrada, both testified at the trial and convinced me of their integrity and competence. Furthermore, they would have gained no benefit from such an intrigue. On the other hand, this confession by Mrs. Bombisky constitutes a formidable obstacle that must be overcome by the plaintiffs if they are to prevail.
[25]
The plaintiffs allege that even if this had, in fact, been a marriage of convenience, such a marriage cannot constitute a valid ground for refusing a visa. They base this claim on the case  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that resulted from it (IL 4). Even if this decision of the Court of Appeal confirmed the plaintiffs' claim, the Immigration Regulations, 1978 [see footnote 2], were subsequently amended and now reads:
"4(3) Paragraph (1)(a) does not apply to a spouse who entered into the marriage primarily for the purpose of gaining admission to Canada as a member of the family class and not with the intention of residing permanently with the other spouse."
[26]
The case law in relation to marriages of convenience prior to April 1, 1984, cannot help the plaintiffs. The defendant's officials thus had a duty to reject the application for landing by the female plaintiff if they thought she did not intend to reside permanently with her spouse.
[27]
The plaintiffs submit that there was misconduct in relation to s. 3 of the Crown Liability Act [see footnote 3], in view of the refusal to issue the landing visa (a refusal overturned by the Immigration Appeal Board) and the intolerable delays to which their application was subjected. They cite in support of their claims s. 3(c) and ss. 5(2) and 6(1) of the Immigration Act, 1976 [see footnote 4]. These statutory provisions are as follows:
"3. It is hereby declared that Canadian immigration policy and the rules and regulations made under this Act shall be designed and administered in such a manner as to promote the domestic and international interests of Canada recognizing the need
...
(c) to facilitate the reunion in Canada of Canadian citizens and permanent residents with their close relatives from abroad.
...
"5(2) An immigrant shall be granted landing if he is not a member of an inadmissible class and otherwise meets the requirements of this Act and the regulations.
...
"6(1) Subject to this Act and the regulations, any immigrant including a convention refugee, a member of the family class and an independent immigrant may be granted landing
if he is able to establish to the satisfaction of an immigration officer that he meets the selection standards
established by the regulations for the purpose of determining whether or not an immigrant will be able to become successfully established in Canada." (Emphasis added)
[28]
These provisions establish the general principles of Canadian immigration policy, but they in no way absolve the immigrant from the need to meet the regulatory selection standards.
[29]
Section 3(1)(a) of the Crown Liability Act must be assessed in light of the standard of the "bon père de famille". This follows from Jean-Louis Baudouin's definition of the concept of fault, in La responsabilité civile délictuelle at page 71 [see footnote 5]:
[TRANSLATION] "... the violation of the legal duty not to harm another unlawfully through conduct that is contrary to the conduct of a normally prudent and diligent person if placed in circumstances identical to those of the author of the damage at the time that the latter performed the act alleged against him or failed to perform the act he was required to perform."
[30]
The plaintiffs claim to have demonstrated the existence of a legal duty pursuant to the above statutory provisions, and a failure to perform that duty, since the desired visa was not issued.
[31]
However, it must be kept in mind that subsection 8(l) of the Immigration Act, 1976 imposes on a person wishing to enter Canada the burden of proof that he or she is entitled to enter the country:
"8(l) Where a person seeks to come into Canada, the burden of proving that he has a right to come into Canada or that his admission would not be contrary to this Act or the regulations rests on him."
[32]
The immigration officer was obliged to verify all the information and to ensure that Mrs. Bombisky met all the requirements of the Immigration Act, 1976. If the immigration officer was to be able to reach this conclusion, Mrs. Bombisky had the burden "of proving" that she met these requirements.
[33]
The evidence at trial indicates that the refusal to issue landing was taken after an examination of the file. This included, among other items, the interview in which Mrs. Bombisky was unwilling to state that she loved Mr. Bombisky and that she would have married the first one who came along, the brief period during which the plaintiffs had known each other before marrying, and Mrs. Bombisky's statement that she had some family in Canada to whom she could look for assistance. There was also the fact that Mr. Bombisky was now in his third marriage. All of this led the officers of the Crown to determine that Mrs. Bombisky did not intend to reside permanently in Canada with her husband.
[34]
The criteria that a visa officer is to examine were reviewed in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pages 367-368:
"... In subsection 4(3) of the Immigration Regulations, 1978 the visa officer is directed to have regard to two criteria: first, whether the marriage was entered into primarily for the purpose of gaining admission to Canada, and secondly whether the sponsored spouse has the intention of residing permanently with the other spouse. This regulation is legally binding on the visa officer ... Admittedly the application of these criteria raise difficult questions of fact, the more so because they involve the assessment of the intention of the sponsored spouse. But difficulties of proof should not be confused with absence of legislative standards, and questions of intention are by no means rare in official or judicial decision-making."
[35]
These criteria were applied by the officials, and in particular by the officer Melis, who was responsible for the file. It was therefore not a vindictive decision taken lightly or based on arbitrary, groundless conclusions. The conclusion drawn by the visa officer in the circumstances was a reasonable one.
[36]
Moreover, even if landing should have been granted at that time, which has not been established, this sole violation cannot de facto entail liability on the part of the defendant. The Supreme Court of Canada had the following to say on the matter in 1983, in Her Majesty the Queen in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 227 S.C.R.:
"The notion of a nominate tort of statutory breach giving a right to recovery merely on proof of breach and damages should be rejected, as should the view that unexcused breach constitutes negligence per se giving rise to absolute liability."
[37]
Regarding the unwarranted delays the plaintiffs complain of, it may be appropriate to reproduce s. 9(3) of the Immigration Act, 1976:
"9(3) Every person shall answer truthfully all questions put to him by a visa officer and shall produce such documentation as may be required by the visa officer for the purpose of establishing that his admission would not be contrary to this Act or the regulations."
[38]
The sole fact that one has not answered truthfully all questions in an interview does not in itself constitute sufficient ground to reject an application ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), but the fact that the male plaintiff's two previous marriages were not disclosed initially largely contributed to the subsequent delays. Mr. Bombisky cannot complain about his own negligence in this respect.
[39]
The plaintiffs also complain about the refusal to issue a visitor's visa to Mrs. Bombisky to enable her to come and testify before the Immigration Appeal Board. According to the cases, there is no automatic obligation to issue a visitor's visa to everyone whom a sponsor wishes to have testify at a hearing:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[40]
In Toor I myself had to examine an application to quash a decision of a Crown official who had refused to issue a visa, and I quoted (at page 6) an extract from the decision of Cullen, J., in Singh (Saran) to the effect that the presence of such a witness is not essential to the evidence before the Immigration Appeal Board:
"The applicant in this motion seeks to have Gill appear as a witness, arguing it is essential that he be present to enable the Board to test his credibility, and that cannot be done in any other way. I disagree and other options are possible."
[41]
On the other hand, I maintained that a refusal to issue a visa for the sole reason that the person wished to come to Canada to testify would be an error in law. But the officer had refused on the ground that the applicant did not meet other criteria provided by the Act and the Regulations.
[42]
Now, the evidence at trial indicates that the visitor's visa was refused not solely because Mrs. Bombisky wanted to come to testify before the I.A.B., but for all the reasons mentioned earlier.
[43]
The legal procedure to follow in such cases is to try to quash the visa officer's decision by way of certiorari. The plaintiffs made no attempt to that effect, preferring instead to get Mrs. Bombisky admitted to Canada on false pretences.
[44]
Lastly, the plaintiffs cite s. 2(e) of the Canadian Bill of Rights and s. 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. They indicate that their rights have been infringed in regard to their liberty to marry and the recognition of this right as well as their liberty to come to and move about in Canada. Further, they allege that they have been deprived of the security of their persons, given the danger they were exposed to in the Philippines. They also cite violations of the rules of natural justice ranging from the obligation of fairness to the rules audi alteram partem and nemo judex.
[45]
The plaintiffs claim that Mrs. Bombisky enjoyed the protection of the Charter although she was not a Canadian citizen and was physically situated in the Philippines. They base this claim on a judgment of the Supreme  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 422; 14 C.R.R. 13. Although it is true that Dickson, C.J., and Lamer and Wilson, JJ., acknowledged that the Charter applies to persons who were seeking refugee status but who were nevertheless physically in Canada, Beetz, J., (Estey and McIntyre, JJ. concurring), felt obliged to add, at pages 223-224 S.C.R.:
"Like my colleague, Madame Justice Wilson, whose reasons for judgment I have had the advantage of reading, I conclude that these appeals ought to be allowed. But I do so on the basis of the Canadian Bill of Rights. I refrain from expressing any views on the question whether the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms is applicable at all to the circumstances of these cases and more particularly, on the important question whether the Charter affords any protection against a deprivation or the threat of a deprivation of the right to life, liberty or security of the person by foreign governments."
[46]
It is therefore unnecessary for me to rule on whether or not the Charter applied to Mrs. Bombisky, who was still on Philippine soil. Since the claims of infringement apply equally to Mr. Bombisky, they will be examined from that point of view alone.
[47]
The plaintiff cannot claim that the defendant infringed his "freedom" to marry, since he did in fact get married and the Embassy staff assisted him in doing so. So far as recognition of the right to marry and the freedom to move about in and come to Canada is concerned, I adopt the words of my brother Strayer, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 363:
"In my view the term 'liberty' in s. 7 must be read in its context and is restricted to questions of bodily freedom. I do not think it is a constitutional guarantee of the right of any Canadian or permanent resident of Canada to choose anyone in the world as a marital partner and bring such person to Canada to live with them."
[48]
The alleged infringement of the plaintiffs' physical security is said to flow from the fact that the Embassy did not assist Mr. Bombisky in locating and rescuing his wife from her imprisonment, and the delays in examining their visa application, which are alleged to have endangered them since Mrs. Bombisky's family was at their heels. I have already examined these allegations. I will only add that the requested assistance must be situated within the limits permitted by international law: Diplomatic and Consular Privileges and Immunities Act, S.C. 1976-77, c. 31, Schedule I, article 3(1)(b). Neither the Canadian Embassy nor its officials have any jurisdiction to interfere in a criminal matter on foreign territory. Furthermore, the Embassy officials did a good job in discharging their obligations toward Mr. Bombisky by warning him of the serious risks involved in his rescue operation. Mrs. Bombisky, on the other hand, was not a Canadian national and the Embassy held no mandate with respect to her.
[49]
Section 2(e) of the Canadian Bill of Rights states that "no law of Canada shall be construed or applied so as to":
"2(e) deprive a person of the right to a fair hearing in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice for the determination of his rights and obligations."
[50]
It must first be emphasized that no alien has a right to enter Canada or to stay here:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 3 N.R. 484. The admission of an alien to this country is a privilege.
[51]
In Singh, supra, the Supreme Court of Canada also held that a distinction should be made between a determination process for which the litigant is entitled to a fair hearing in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice and a case "where a mere privilege was refused or revoked, such as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 3 N.R. 484, and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 6 N.R. 389" (at page 228) or, in my opinion, the present case.
[52]
While only Mr. Bombisky could invoke the principles of the Charter, only Mrs. Bombisky, in contrast, could avail herself of the provisions of s. 2(e) of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.R. 344 (F.C.A.). But there is a stream of cases holding that paragraph 2(e) does not apply in the case of a refusal to issue a visitor's permit to a sponsored person in order to testify before the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  supra, at page 364:
"It is contended that whether or not the guarantees of a fair process provided by s. 7 of the Charter and paragraph 2(e) of the Canadian Bill of Rights apply in this situation, there was a common law obligation of fairness which was not met. That is not apparent to me from the evidence put before me. It may emerge on appeal to the Immigration Appeal Board that such was the case, but in any view the applicants have failed to discharge the onus on them to show that the proceedings lack fairness. It is obvious from the material filed by them that Mrs. Horbas was interviewed on December 7, 1984, and that she was asked a number of questions concerning matters which appear to have been important considerations in the final decision that was taken .... I am therefore unable in these proceedings to conclude that there was any denial of fairness."
[54]
I see no need to linger on the principles of the audi alteram partem and nemo judex rules. The allegations that these rules were violated have for the most part been dealt with earlier. Furthermore, an examination of the facts in this case has convinced me that the plaintiffs were treated fairly. No doubt they would have preferred swifter solutions more in line with their expectations. Not to put too fine a point on it, in their impatience and anguish at the difficult situation in which they found themselves in the Philippines, they both made declarations that resulted in the rejection of their application. They cannot, therefore, lay the blame on Her Majesty's officials. Fortunately for them, they are now together in Canada.
[55]
For all of these reasons, the action is dismissed with costs.
Action dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
Footnotes
1. [1984] 1 F.C. 1104; 49 N.R. 195 (F.C.A.).
2. Immigration Regulations, 1978, SOR/78-172, amended by SOR/84-140, s. 1, which came into force on April 1, 1984.
3. R.S.C. 1970, c. C-38.
4. S.C. 1976-77, c. 52.
5. Les Editions Yvon Blais Inc., 1985.
[Please note that the remaining footnotes which appeared in the original French version of the reasons were incorporated into the body of the translated reasons by the court.]