[1]
Joyal, J.
: The court is seized of an action for declaratory relief to have a ministerial decision quashed. This is a decision in which the defendant Minister refused to process the plaintiff's applications for permanent landing while they continue to reside in Canada.
[2]
The action was instituted shortly after leave to filean application for prerogative relief was granted by my colleague, Teitelbaum, J., pursuant to s. 83.1 of the Immigration Act.
[3]
The plaintiffs' applications were founded on s. 114(2) of the Act. This is the section which deals with compassionate or humanitarian considerations as grounds to depart from the usual immigration rules and procedures. Section 114(2) is an exceptional remedy which authorizes the Governor-in-Council to process permanent visa applications made by illegal de facto residents, such as the applicants, without requiring them to return to their country of origin to obtain immigrant status in the normal way.
[4]
Although provisions involving humanitarian or compassionate considerations have been historically recognized in our immigration laws, residual or executive discretion exercisable thereunder has become much more current practice in recent years. This is by reason of specific administrative programs undertaken by the defendant Minister to clear the ever-accumulating backlog of illegal de facto residents in Canada whose status has remained uncertain over a number of years. During this time, these illegal residents have often become established in Canada, have married Canadian citizens, or have had Canadian children born to them. Administrative expediency as well as plainly humane considerations created a need to set up what has often been called a "quick-fix" program. That is, if an applicant satisfies an immigration officer that he has become well-established in Canada, that in fact if not in law, his residence is no longer abroad and that he would suffer hardship if he were required to leave Canada in order to seek a visa to return to Canada as a legal permanent resident, his application for permanent landing while in Canada may be authorized. Such was the claim of the plaintiffs before an immigration officer appointed for that purpose.
The Facts
[5]
The applicants, who are husband and  wife, are both citizens of the Philippines. Carlos Cabalfin is now 40 years old and his wife is 34 years old. They have two children, a son of 14 years and a daughter of 12 years.
[6]
The applicant Carlos Cabalfin came to Canada in October 1985 on a three-month visitor's visa. The stated purpose of his visit was to accompany his ailing father who was returning to Vancouver after a visit to his homeland. The husband overstayed his leave, did not report to the authorities and, in the context of immigration rules and procedures, went underground. In so doing, he availed himself of strong family support. Many members of his family were already established in Vancouver and enjoyed Canadian citizenship. These included his father and mother, two brothers, two sisters, a sister-in-law and a brother-in-law. He duly obtained employment and, in the absence of a ministerial work permit, saw fit to use his brother's SIN card. His earlier jobs were pretty menial but by sharing expenses with his family, he was well able to look after himself and his family. He has continued to do so to this date.
[7]
His wife Cynthia and their two children joined him in Vancouver in June of 1986. The wife had applied for a visitor's visa for the stated purpose of visiting Expo 86. In her visa application, she stated that her husband was residing and employed in Saudi Arabia. A few weeks after her arrival in Vancouver and with the assistance of her sister-in-law, she caused her children to be enrolled in school for the Fall term. And so it happened that thereafter, the family of four lived together with the husband's father and mother in the latters' home. The fathers worked, the children attended school and the wife stayed at home looking after her mother-in-law who suffers from a diabetic condition and poor eyesight.
[8]
It was early in October 1988, after Carlos Cabalfin had been a de facto resident in Canada for some three years, that he reported to the Vancouver Immigration Centre. He turned himself in, as it were. His applications, on behalf of himself and his family, were to be granted landed immigrant status while continuing to reside in Canada. He had reason to believe that he came within the ministerial guidelines set up under the program and that the record of his residency in Canada indicated that he and his family had become firmly established here and that compassionate and humanitarian grounds should apply.
[9]
The particular facts in this respect, which are not disputed, were that all but two of Carlos Cabalfin's family were permanently established in Vancouver. Of the two remaining brothers, one was in the United States and the other in the Philippines. The children were enrolled and doing well in school. The family had participated in church and community groups. The applicants enjoyed the strong support of other family members. Mr. Cabalfin was working with his father and doing well. The family had few, if any, remaining roots left in the Philippines. In fact, their roots were now firmly planted in Canadian soil.
[10]
It therefore appeared to the applicants that notwithstanding their illegal status in Canada, they could subscribe to the Minister's "quick fix" program and remain in Canada pending the processing of their immigration applications.
[11]
The immigration officer, Mr. Paul Banns, before whom the original disclosure of the plaintiffs' status was made on October 4, 1988, took note of the representation of facts submitted by Mr. Cabalfin in an affidavit dated that same day. The immigration officer requested additional documents relating to passports, report cards on the children's schooling, tax returns, the family tree and submissions in support of the applications. These were filed by the applicants' counsel on October 14, 1988, and listed some nine salient points to warrant a favourable consideration  of the applications on humanitarian and compassionate grounds.
[12]
The applications were left in abeyance for many months to enable the immigration officer to request from his colleagues in Manila all the information pertaining to the plaintiffs' original applications for visitors' visas. When this information was received, Mr. Banns reconvened the enquiry for June 8, 1989, and interviewed both Mr. and Mrs. Cabalfin. Mrs. Cabalfin was faced with the misrepresentation made in her Manila application to the effect that her husband at that time was employed in Saudi Arabia. She admitted to this misrepresentation. She explained that she acted out of fear. She felt that disclosure of her husband's presence in Vancouver would have seriously prejudiced her visa application.
[13]
At that enquiry, Mr. Banns apparently indicated to the plaintiffs' counsel that he regarded the Cabalfins as persons "who entered Canada and remained in Canada illegally through an organized plan" and purportedly stated that they were thereby excluded from consideration under the illegal resident policy.
[14]
The whole matter came to a head on July 12, 1989, when Mr. Banns, in deciding not to process the applications, wrote to the plaintiffs as follows:
"July 12, 1989
Mr. & Mrs. Carlos Cabalfin
2376 E. 49th Avenue
Vancouver, B.C.
V5X 1JL
Dear Mr. & Mrs. Cabalfin:
Re:
Your Request for Permanent Residence in Canada
This letter refers to your request to have your application for permanent residence processed from within Canada.
After a careful and sympathetic review of all the circumstances in your case, a decision has been made not to process your request. It is felt that insufficient compassionate and humanitarian grounds exist to warrant special consideration under illegal defacto resident criteria.
The reason for this is that we are of the opinion that you, your wife and children entered and remained in Canada illegally through an organized plan
and in addition to your and your children's violations of the Immigration Act your wife is reportable under subsection 27(2)(g), which states: 'a person who came into Canada or remains therein with a false or improperly obtained passport, visa or other document pertaining to his/her admission or by reason of any fraudulent or improper means or misrepresentation of any material fact, whether exercised or made by that person or by any other person'. (Underlining mine)
Because of this opinion I am required by law to forthwith submit a report to the Deputy Minister of Immigration or his delegated representative. This could result in your arrest, an immigration inquiry and your deportation from Canada.
Should you and your family decide to depart Canada voluntarily on or before 12 August 1989, it will be in your best interest to confirm departure by giving this letter to the Canadian Immigration Authorities at the port of departure who will inform me that you and your family have departed Canada.
Immigration legislation requires that an application for permanent residence be submitted by the prospective immigrant at a post abroad. Our refusal to process your application from within Canada does not affect your right to apply abroad.
It is essential that you submit an application for permanent residence  to a post abroad, failing which we must consider the matter closed.
Yours truly,
For Area Manager
Metro Vancouver"
[15]
Counsel for the plaintiffs later applied for administrative review of the immigration officer's decision but was unsuccessful. Hence the issue before me.
The Issue
[16]
The basic issue as alleged by plaintiffs' counsel is that the immigration officer failed to exercise his discretion in a proper manner and, in particular, that the immigration officer:
(1) concluded that the plaintiffs entered and remained in Canada pursuant to an organized plan in the complete absence of evidence which directly or inferentially supported the said conclusion;
(2) unreasonably interpreted the defendant's policy governing illegal de facto immigrants contrary to the plain meaning of the words of the policy;
(3) improperly applied the policy by considering irrelevant factors in priority to the compassionate and humanitarian circumstances of the plaintiffs' case;
(4) fettered his discretion by rigidly adopting a narrow aspect of the said policy to the exclusion of other relevant factors.
The Plaintiffs' Case
[17]
On the basis of the facts before the court, none of which are in dispute, plaintiffs' counsel reviewed at length the judicial principles applicable to the exercise of statutory discretion.
[18]
The first test, counsel submitted, is one of reasonableness and he quoted in support of the decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[19]
Counsel for the plaintiffs further submitted that the lawful exercise of statutory discretion must be determined by reference to the enabling statute and its object and scope in conferring discretionary authority. Counsel referred in this respect to the celebrated case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.).
[20]
The third argument was that the defendant Minister's guidelines, referred to in the Immigration Manual as IE 9 (Ex. D-7), have created an arbitrary and unreasonable distinction between excluded persons who are in Canada pursuant to an organized plan and all other kinds of illegal de facto residents.
[21]
As a corollary to the foregoing, counsel argued that the discretion may be exercised on the basis of the sufficiency of compassionate or humanitarian factors but must not be exercised on the basis of other considerations which have nothing to do with compassion or humanity.
[22]
Other variations of the main theme were argued by plaintiffs' counsel dealing with the vague and uncertain expression of "organized plan"; with the obligation on a decision maker to exclude all irrelevant considerations in his decision-making process; and with the immigration officer's adoption of a particularly narrow interpretation of the Minister's guidelines, thereby excluding a more generic approach to the humanitarian and compassionate principles expressed in s. 114(2) of the Immigration Act.
The Defendant's Case
[23]
The basic position taken by defendant's counsel was that the impugned decision contains no jurisdictional errors, that the immigration officer considered all relevant facts, that he discounted irrelevant ones and that his decision was made in accordance with the facts and the law.
[24]
Counsel for the defendant suggested that the decision is one with which the plaintiffs simply disagree. This is, of course, no ground to quash it and indeed the immigration officer had ample evidence before him to conclude that there were insufficient compassionate or humanitarian grounds to warrant exemption from the usual immigration process. In arriving at this conclusion, said counsel, there is no doubt that the immigration officer considered all material facts, including the plaintiffs' social and economic ties in Canada, the presence in Canada of family members, the children's enrolment in a Canadian school and similar factors.
[25]
Furthermore, the immigration officer had a perfect right to consider the element of deception which surrounded the plaintiffs' entry into Canada and their presence here and to conclude that this was accomplished through an "organized plan", as that term is used in the guidelines. He was entitled, according to counsel, to treat the plaintiffs' obvious intent to circumvent the law and normal immigration procedure as material to the compassionate or humanitarian issue before him.
[26]
Finally, argued defendant's counsel, the exercise of a statutory discretion which is vested in the immigration officer should not be subject to judicial intervention except in the clearest of cases. Counsel cited in support the decision of this court in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; and in particular, the following comments of the Associate Chief Justice in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 240:
"Whether I would have reached the same result or not is irrelevant. Section 18 applications are not an appellate review and in the absence of a denial of natural justice or an error of law, I cannot interfere with the visa officer's decision.
"There was evidence to support the visa officer's assessment, and I am not satisfied that there was an error of law, of jurisdiction or a denial of natural justice."
The Guidelines
[27]
The guidelines at issue are contained in a document of some 25 closely-typed pages. Until recently, they formed part of the Standard Immigration Manual and were commonly known as IE 9. I think it can safely be said from the outset that no reasonable person would cast a critical eye on the basic need for guidelines of this nature, which are meant to assist immigration staff in the exercise of their discretion. These guidelines help to ensure some semblance of uniformity and conformity in the way with which thousands of cases are dealt and to provide ostensible evidence that a particuarly harsh or a particuarly generous exercise of discretion in any given case is avoided. They are intended, as in the application of equitable principles, to fix to some extent "the length of the Chancellor's foot".
[28]
The guidance this document provides to immigration officers, however, is not without its risks. There is always the possibility that the wording or the sense which may be given to any particular guideline will be of a nature to fetter one's discretion or to invite one to consider extraneous elements or to discard more material ones or to be misdirected by a particular provision of the guidelines. In such a case, the application of the guidelines may be successfully challenged, as we shall see.
[29]
The provisions of the guidelines pertinent to this case are those dealing with so-called illegal de facto residents. Article 9.26(1)(a) of the guidelines defines the term as follows:
"9.26(1)(a) Illegal de facto residents are administratively defined as those persons who have not previously come to our attention and who, although they have no legal status in Canada, have been here so long and are so established that, in fact if not in law, they have their residence in Canada and not abroad. Such persons would have severed their ties with their home country and would undergo hardship if they were required to leave Canada in order to seek a visa to return (legally) as permanent residents;"
[30]
The guidelines then set out three eligibility criteria: such persons must be "underground", there must be a degree of social, financial and cultural establishment in Canada to the point that Canada is now their real home, and finally, undue hardship would be imposed on them or on their families if they were compelled to leave Canada and to seek permanent landing in the normal manner.
[31]
However, the guidelines then proceed to exclude certain classes of persons from the benefit of the quickfix process. In coming to terms with the plaintiffs' applications in the present case, the immigration officer had to contend with art. 9.26(3)(a) which states that:
"9.26(3)(a) Persons who entered and remained in Canada illegally
through an organized plan
and/or who are reportable under A27(2)(f), (g), (h), (i) or (k) will be excluded from consideration under these guidelines. Officers should, however, consider whether the person is described in other parts of IE 9, e.g., is the person married to a Canadian resident or is he/she a last remaining family member, before recommending a direction for inquiry;"
(Underlining mine)
[32]
This exclusion provision forms the crux of the present application for prerogative relief and, according to plaintiffs' counsel, warrants judicial intervention. To determine whether this is indeed the case, it is appropriate to first examine current case law on the subject.
The Case Law
[33]
In the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R. 264, the Federal Court of Appeal had to deal with a refusal by a visa officer to allow the plaintiff's application for permanent residence under the "entrepreneur" category. The visa officer, in his decision, had stated at p. 269 Admin. L.R. that:
"Your background and employment history have been evaluated and unfortunately you do not meet immigration selection criteria as an entrepreneur. This determination is based in part by the fact that you have always been an employee and have never owned, established or operated your own business. The Minister responsible for immigration has stated that only applicants with a proven track record in business are eligible for selection in this category."
[34]
After reviewing the regulations pertaining to the entrepreneurial class of immigrants, Stone, J.A., on behalf of the court, quashed the visa officer's decision. Relying on the cases of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , His Lordship found that "a proven track record" expressed as ministerial policy was not a criterion established under the pertinent regulations. In subscribing to that policy, the visa officer exceeded his jurisdiction. He was not entitled to introduce into his decision a requirement not authorized by the language of the regulations.
[35]
Similarly in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , my colleague Cullen, J., also found grounds to  intervene and to quash a decision refusing to process a permanent landing application under the De Facto Illegal Residents Program. His Lordship found in that case that ministerial guidelines must be read liberally and generously in the recognition that applicants have been on the run for some time and live in constant fear of being apprehended.
[36]
Cullen, J., found support for his approach in a ministerial directive identified as NHQ HULL CONCEM, dated January 31, 1986, which, on the subject of misrepresentations, reads as follows:
"It is also recognized that most persons who are in Canada illegally have come to this country with the intention of remaining permanently, whether they admit it or not. In addition, a certain amount of illegal activity, such as obtaining a SIN card, almost always accompanies the attempts of illegals to establish themselves in Canada. Officers are therefore encouraged to look at the
overall picture
when assessing evidence of misrepresentations in order to reach
a decision that is fair and humane
." (Cullen, J.'s, emphasis)
[37]
Another relevant and well-known case is that of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , which dealt with the undue fettering of administrative discretion accorded by s. 114(2) of the Immigration Act. It appeared to Associate Chief Justice Jerome that, notwithstanding any policy directives or guidelines with respect to any kind of exemption under s. 114 of the Act, the applicant, one of several Chinese citizens, was entitled to a full and fair review to determine the existence of humanitarian or compassionate considerations. After citing the Supreme Court of Canada decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and after referring to his own decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  F.T.R.:
"Even in a case, therefore, where it is evident that all other claims and applications advanced by the applicant are doomed to failure, the applicant's right to consideration on humanitarian and compassionate grounds may not be unduly restricted."
[38]
Quoting from the Sobrie case, the Associate Chief Justice added:
"Obviously, the purpose behind s. 115(2) [see footnote 1] of the Act is not merely to repeat the procedure of evaluating an immigrant on the usual grounds specified in the Act. The intention is to provide a fresh view of the immigrant's situation from a new perspective. It follows that for the Minister to fairly consider an application under this section, he must be able to direct his mind to what the applicant feels are his humanitarian and compassionate circumstances. These may have nothing to do with the facts contained in the file of his previous immigration proceedings."
[39]
As a result of the Yhap judgment, supra, the defendant Minister immediately brought forward new guidelines, which were issued on March 20, 1990. They are found in a communiqué from the Minister and were filed in evidence under Ex. D-15. The category of persons called illegal de facto residents is covered under that document and the definition of the term is substantially the one found in the former guidelines. It should be noted, however, that applicants who have entered and remained in Canada through an organized plan are no longer singled out for exclusion. At least the new guidelines no longer make any specific reference to this particular class of people. It would therefore appear that the existence of an element of misrepresentation or of an organized plan is no longer a bar to a determination of the existence of humanitarian and compassionate grounds under s. 114 of the Act.
The Findings
[40]
The whole field of judicial review of the exercise of administrative discretion is itself a matter of constant judicial review. Although the basic principles set out in decisions such as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , have now been clearly established, the particular combination of legal and factual issues before a court may force it to carefully scrutinize the wider or narrower limits of judicial intervention. That is, a wider field of judicial intervention can frustrate the intention of Parliament which has provided for administrative discretion and without which the complex and myriad sectors of public administration would grind to a halt. On the other hand, a narrower field can lead to an acknowledgement that the rule of law does not apply to administrative discretion and that such discretion may more often be wrongly exercised with impunity.
[41]
With respect to the issues before me, which are admittedly vexing, there is a need, in my view, to go back to the fundamental principles outlined in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and to analyze the whole scope and purpose of the defendant's program in providing for a s. 114(2) review of illegal de facto residents in Canada.
[42]
It is acknowledged by the parties that it is a matter of general principle, as set out in s. 9 of the Act, that persons wishing to come to Canada permanently must make their applications abroad. As IE 9 succinctly put it, "This requirement can be considered to be the cornerstone of Canada's immigration policy ..."
[43]
It is also acknowledged that the impact of that rule is tempered by other provisions of the statute, such as s. 3, which recognizes the need, inter alia, "to facilitate the reunion in Canada of Canadian citizens and permanent residents with their close relatives from abroad". It is further tempered by the decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 422; 14 C.R.R. 13; 12 Admin. L.R. 137, in which the Supreme Court of Canada held that every person physically present in Canada is entitled to Charter protection. It is again tempered by executive discretion as in ss. 38, 117, and 124 and more particularly by a recognition, as in s. 114, that public policy or humanitarian and compassionate considerations may be considered by the Governor-in-Council to facilitate a person's landing while resident in Canada. Finally, this rule is tempered by what has been admittedly a liberal approach to immigration policy in general and by an equally liberal approach to refugees in particular.
[44]
As I have previously noted in these reasons, the downside effect of all these constituent elements has been the accumulation of thousands of persons in Canada whose status has long remained in suspense. Administratively, it became impossible to deal expeditiously with refugee claimants who were arriving in Canada by the boatload and to monitor the presence in Canada of thousands of visitors who had overstayed their leave.
[45]
To clear this backlog, the defendant Minister entered into a series of programs. Refugee claimants were offered an opportunity to become permanently landed in Canada if they could show that they had become, or had the potential to become, successfully established in Canada. Illegal residents of Canada were offered an opportunity to obtain landing in Canada if they could show sufficient humanitarian and compassionate grounds. In particular, the Minister set out provisions in IE 9 for the processing in Canada of immigration visa applications for persons categorized as illegal de facto residents.
[46]
These guidelines requested officers to "make a distinction between persons who are simply long-term illegals and those who are genuinely de facto residents" based upon specified eligibility criteria, which have already  been cited above. Finally, these guidelines excluded from the benefit of the program, applicants who entered into or remained in Canada illegally through "an organized plan".
[47]
It is this last provision which causes me great concern because, at first blush, it appears to unduly fetter an immigration officer's discretion. That is, an illegal de facto resident who is here in Canada through an organized plan is apparently excluded from any further consideration on humanitarian and compassionate grounds, a term of seemingly wide and generic scope.
[48]
Furthermore, this provision appears to conflict with the NHQ HULL CONCEM ministerial directive dated January 31, 1986, which also dealt with the de facto illegal residents program and to which my colleague, Cullen, J., made reference in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  definition, in an illegal position and that their arrival in Canada was with the intention of remaining here permanently, such that they have almost invariably committed breaches of the Immigration Act from the beginning of their stay. This recognition, in my view, prompted Cullen, J., in the Johal case to state, at p. 166:
"The De Facto Illegal Residents Program provides an opportunity for illegals to come forward to make their case and probably to gain permanent residence status. I say probably rather than possibly because Parliament recognized an obvious problem, the growing number of illegals and an intention to do something about it - to grant permanent residence status to the vast majority of illegals. Also, Parliament must have been aware that the people who chose to come forward sincerely believed they qualified under the program and most if not all probably had legal advice before taking this monumental (for them) step. Naturally, if they didn't qualify action of one kind or another could be expected to be taken against them leading to eventual deportation."
[49]
To a jaundiced eye, the whole quick fix process might well be interpreted as the classic invitation by the spider to the fly to "come into my parlour ...". As was succinctly put by Cullen, J., in the Johal case, supra, an illegal de facto resident who decides to come out of the cold and report to the immigration authorities runs the risk of eventual deportation. While it could be said that such is the risk which an applicant assumes, it could also be said that the program constitutes a trap for the unwary when illegal measures taken to come to Canada are found by immigration officers to constitute an "organized plan".
The Conclusions
[50]
In light of the foregoing observations, the court must come to terms with the main issue, namely, is there cause for this court to intervene in the immigration officer's decision of July 12, 1989?
[51]
The key finding in the officer's decision is that the plaintiffs and their children entered and remained in Canada through an "organized plan", an expression not yet judicially defined. While the term might conjure up images of mass movements of illegals into Canada through the organized efforts of entrepreneurial third parties, it could also include a more private plan where the organization is restricted to that of "two or more persons having a joint or common interest" (see Black's Law Dictionary, Sixth Edition, p. 1099).
[52]
Therefore, on the evidence before him, I have no doubt that the immigration officer could have concluded that the plaintiffs had entered into Canada "through an organized plan" for the purpose of staying here permanently. It is not necessary in this regard to recite every particular piece of evidence upon which the immigration officer based his conclusion. It is sufficient to say that his conclusion was  one which the evidence could reasonably justify, at least in terms of the guidelines themselves.
[53]
It is true that one could reach a different conclusion as regards the husband's visit to Canada to accompany his ailing father; or the accommodation provided to the husband by his brother through the use of the latter's SIN card; or the fearful state of the wife in representing to Canadian authorities that her husband was in Saudi Arabia; or the early enrolment of the children in a Vancouver school through the intervention of the husband's sister. The point might be made that this sequence of events does not disclose an "organized plan" which had its beginnings in the Philippines when the husband applied for a visitor's visa. The evidence might be interpreted to mean that if there were an intention to come to Canada and to go underground, that intention crystallized into an "organized plan" only after the wife and children had joined the husband in Vancouver in June of 1986 when the decision was taken to enroll the children in school.
[54]
In any event, as I have noted earlier, it appears evident that illegal de facto residents covered by the Minister's program are statutorily criminalized under the provisions of s. 94 of the Immigration Act, which sets out a long list of offences leading to conviction by indictment or summarily. As well, in any event, I can imagine only a very few cases where illegal de facto residents have not participated to some degree in some kind of organized plan.
[55]
The problem in the present case, however, does not arise from the immigration officer's conclusion that the plaintiffs came to Canada by way of an organized plan, but arises from his decision that there were insufficient humanitarian or compassionate grounds to grant the plaintiffs landing because they had entered Canada through an organized plan and because the wife had made a misrepresentation when applying for her visitor's visa. In my view, the immigration officer considered that participation in an "organized plan" or the making of a misrepresentation bars consideration of the compassionate and humanitarian elements of a case. The immigration officer felt bound by the exclusion provision found in the guidelines with respect to illegal residents coming to Canada through an organized plan. The officer was obviously concerned with the possibility that these applicants fell within the scope of the exclusion provision from the outset. This was evidenced by his determination to obtain information from authorities in Manila regarding statements made by the plaintiffs in their applications for visitors' visas and by his willingness to wait several months for the results before deciding whether or not he would permit the plaintiffs to apply for their immigration visas from within Canada. Thus, notwithstanding a presumably wide area of enquiry to determine if sufficient compassionate or humanitarian grounds existed to grant landing to the plaintiffs, the immigration officer failed to consider these grounds because he concluded that there was an "organized plan".
[56]
There is, of course, no such restriction under s. 114(2) of the Act nor, as I view the total program which speaks of "de facto illegal residents", can it be said that such a restriction is warranted. The post Yhap guidelines do not contain this particular exclusion and indeed, as was found by the Federal Court of Appeal in the Hui case, supra, respect for or adherence to ministerial policy which is not found in a statute or regulation constitutes an excess of jurisdiction.
[57]
Furthermore, the policy itself, if it could be found to have legitimacy, conflicts with the NHQ HULL CONCEM directive which recognized that illegal activities often accompany the coming to Canada of de facto illegals but that immigration officers must nevertheless be encouraged "to look at the overall picture when assessing evidence of misrepresentations in order to reach a  decision which is fair and humane". I think that the terms of this directive apply to the wife's misrepresentation when she applied for her visitor's visa in the present case, so that neither this misrepresentation alone nor the finding of an organized plan by the officer would justify the latter's failure to look at the overall picture when attempting to reach a fair and humane decision.
[58]
Finally, such an exclusion, in my respectful opinion, cannot be justified when we remember that the whole purpose of the programs under s. 114 of the Act is to accord humanitarian and compassionate considerations to applicants whose continuing presence in Canada itself is but a perpetuation or continuation of illegal activity and who may be said to have repeatedly breached the various bona fide requirements of the Immigration Act.
[59]
Viewed in that light, there would be room to fear that the defendant's policy in applying humanitarian and compassionate considerations to illegal de facto residents is a message to the world that the circumvention of Canada's immigration laws carries no sanction or that Canada's humane approach is an attack on the credibility of the established system. Nevertheless, in my respectful view, the programme must rightfully cope with a problem the solution to which might often transcend the impact of statutory offences which might otherwise stigmatize the applicants in perpetuity.
[60]
It could also be argued that in excluding this category of applicants, the defendant is lawfully establishing narrower limits within which discretion is to be exercised. I would disagree. As I earlier stated, it is well for the defendant to issue guidelines, but these guidelines cannot impose a policy exclusion on a statutory provision which the language of that provision will not bear.
[61]
These observations are not meant to suggest that evidence of an organized plan or of questionable activity on the part of applicants to avoid the rules are excluded from an immigration officer's considerations as to whether sufficient humanitarian or compassionate grounds exist. In all such cases, it might be said that the darker side of human conduct is as material as the more commendable side. My finding is simply that such evidence should not and cannot be determinative of the issue.
[62]
In the result, I must conclude that the immigration officer in the present case committed a jurisdictional error. His decision must be quashed.
[63]
There shall be judgment to that effect and a declaration that the applicants are entitled to a new hearing of their applications for an exemption on compassionate or humanitarian considerations. This hearing will be before a different immigration officer who is to consider the applications in accordance with these reasons.
[64]
The plaintiffs are entitled to their costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
Footnotes
1. New section 114(2).
[End of document]