[1]
Rothstein, J.
: The applicants, by notice of motion, sought a number of orders. Among the orders sought was an order directing that Mr. Bernard Sherman re-attend on behalf of the respondent, Apotex Inc. (Apotex), at its expense for cross-examination by the applicants at a date, time and place to be agreed upon by the parties or upon further direction from this court, to respond to those questions and requests for production of documents which I will set out below.
[2]
The applicants also sought an order directing the respondent, the Minister of National Health and Welfare, to file in the Registry of the Federal Court and serve on the applicants, within ten days of the order accompanying these reasons, a certified copy of the new drug submission filed by 8 Apotex in respect of the medicine, norfloxacin. Norfloxacin was described by counsel who appeared before me as a drug used to fight bacterial infections of the kidney or bladder.
[3]
A brief background will help to put the issues in context.
[4]
The respondent, Kyorin Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., is the owner of Canadian Patents No. 1,178,961, granted December 12, 1984, and No. 1,214,466, granted November 25, 1986, relating to the medicine, norfloxacin.
[5]
Merck & Co. is the exclusive licensee of Patents Nos. 1,178,961 and 1,214,466. Merck Frosst Canada Inc. is the sole sub-licensee of Patents Nos. 1,178,961 and 1,214,466. Merck Frosst received notices of compliance, pursuant to s. C.08.004 of the
Food and Drug Regulations
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 870, as amended, from the Minister of National Health and Welfare for the medicine norfloxacin entitling it to sell and distribute the said medicine.
[6]
On October 15, 1991, Novopharm Limited (Novopharm) was granted a compulsory licence with respect to Patents Nos. 1,178,961 and 1,214,466. The compulsory licence specifies those activities which may be performed by Novopharm that would otherwise constitute an infringement of Patents Nos. 1,178,961 and 1,214,466.
[7]
Apotex and Novopharm entered into an agreement dated November 27, 1992. This agreement stipulated that where either party held a compulsory licence for a product which the other party did not, at the request of the unlicensed party, the licensed party would use its compulsory licence for the benefit of the other.
[8]
On April 19, 1993, Apotex issued a notice of allegation pursuant to paragraph 5(3)(b) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, SOR/93-133. The notice of allegation alleged that the making, constructing, using or selling of 400 mg. tablets of norfloxacin by Apotex would not infringe any claim for the medicine itself nor the use of the medicine with respect to the patents included in Merck Frosst Canada Inc.'s patent list, in this case, Patents Nos. 1,178,961 and 1,214,466.
[9]
By letter dated April 19, 1993, addressed to the Chairman of Novopharm, and presumably pursuant to the November 27, 1992 agreement, Apotex notified Novopharm that it intended to rely on Novopharm to sell to Apotex, pursuant to Novopharm's compulsory licence, any norfloxacin that Apotex may require, made according to the processes of Patent No. 1,178,761. (Although the letter of April 19, 1993, made reference to Patent No. 1,178,761, presumably, Apotex intended to refer to Patent No. 1,178,961.) The letter indicated that Apotex would advise Novopharm as to the quantities to be required, and the manufacturer from which the material should be purchased.
[10]
On June 1, 1993, the applicants filed an originating notice of motion seeking an order prohibiting the Minister of National Health and Welfare from issuing to Apotex, a notice of compliance for the medicine norfloxacin until after the expiration of Patents Nos. 1,178,961 and 1,214,466 because, in the view of the applicants, Apotex's notice of allegation did not include sufficient information from which it could be determined that the norfloxacin obtained by Apotex from Novopharm would not infringe Patents Nos. 1,178,961 and 1,214,466.
[11]
Mr. Barry Sherman, Chairman of Apotex, swore two affidavits in relation to the proceedings under the original notice of motion. The first is dated June 3, 1993, and the second is dated June 14, 1993. The June 14, 1993 affidavit is subject to a protective order issued on June 10, 1993, by McGillis, J.
[12]
On January 12, 1994, Mr. Sherman presented himself to applicants' counsel for cross-examination on his two affidavits. During the cross-examination, both Mr. Sherman and his counsel objected to certain questions and requests for production of documents made by applicants' counsel.
[13]
As a result, the applicants have brought this motion before me requesting an order that Mr. Sherman re-attend on behalf of Apotex, at its expense, for cross-examination. I will deal with each of the applicants' requests in turn as set out in their notice of motion.
I.
Questions pertaining to whether Mr. Bernard Sherman has, in the context of past legal proceedings, sworn, and been cross-examined on, affidavits, or testified in Court
.
[14]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C. Master), Senior Master Marriott set out the necessary requirements in order to make a question asked on a cross-examination on an affidavit a proper one. At p. 898, the Senior Master stated:
"(1) It must be relevant to the issue in respect of which the affidavit is filed or to the credit of the witness, and the fact that it may incidentally disclose evidence of the witness's case is not of itself sufficient to make it inadmissible.
"(2) It must be a fair question.
"(3) There must be a bona fide intention of directing the question to the issue in the proceeding or to the credibility of the witness."
The jurisprudence that counsel has cited to me indicates that the most important test in assessing whether an answer should be ordered is relevance. I also note, as Senior Master Marriott did in
Superior Discount Ltd.
, that there must be a bona fide intention of directing the question to the issue in the proceeding or to credibility. The issue in the proceeding brought about by the originating notice of motion is whether the court should issue an order prohibiting the Minister of National Health and Welfare from issuing to Apotex a notice of compliance for the medicine, norfloxacin. A related issue is whether Apotex will be infringing Patents Nos. 1,178,961 and 1,214,466.
[15]
Also, cases such as
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
(F.C.T.D.), suggest that where questions arise from statements volunteered within the four corners of an affidavit, they should be ordered answered. This appears to be an extension of the relevancy rule. There is some scope for such questions because it is the deponent who has put the subject matter in issue. But the scope is not unlimited because, at the end of the day, the court has to base its decision on what is relevant.
[16]
Under normal circumstances, a descriptive question about a deponent would be asked at the opening of an examination. There is nothing wrong with such questions that seek to identify a deponent or, indeed, shed some light on his or her background, providing the questioning party demonstrates the relevance of obtaining the background or that it is necessary in the context of the issue of credibility. It is not sufficient to say, "We want to know who he is," or "What is his litigation experience?". I have not been persuaded that there is a connection between the issues in this case and Mr. Sherman's litigation background and would therefore not order the question answered. I would observe, however, that litigation in which Apotex has been involved is public and if the applicants consider this information necessary for some reason not argued before me, it is available from public sources.
[17]
I would not order that this question be answered.
II.
Questions pertaining to the relationship between Apotex Inc. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) and Novopharm Limited ("Novopharm") as raised in an article published by Script Magazine of December 1993 (Exhibit BCS-A)
.
[18]
This article was produced before me. Certain portions were specifically pointed out which related to Novopharm and Apotex being fierce competitors and to there being no love between them. Counsel for the applicants suggests that the content of the article goes to demonstrating the difficult relationship between Novopharm and Apotex and whether Apotex has an enforceable agreement to obtain norfloxacin from Novopharm.
[19]
However, the fact that Novopharm and Apotex are fierce competitors or that there is no love between them is not relevant to the question, which is whether a prohibition order should be issued to prevent the Minister of National Health and Welfare from issuing a notice of compliance to Apotex in respect of the medicine, norfloxacin. That a magazine article notes that Novopharm and Apotex are competitors, and suggests that there may not be a warm relationship between them, is not a sufficient basis upon which to embark upon a line of questioning that presumably is intended to demonstrate that Apotex will not be able to obtain norfloxacin from Novopharm under an agreement between them.
[20]
I would uphold the objection and not order that this question be answered.
III.
Did Novopharm acknowledge in writing their receipt of a letter from Apotex dated April 19, 1993 (Exhibit BCS-4)
?
[21]
This letter was introduced into the material as the document that originated the proceedings. It is the notice of allegation, which is required pursuant to paragraph 5(3)(b) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
. While the relevance of this question was not demonstrated to me in detail, it is the type of preliminary question that counsel should be permitted to ask. The notice of allegation is a document that must be served on relevant parties. It is addressed to Merck Frosst Canada Inc. It was sent by registered mail and received April 22, 1993, by Merck Frosst. Novopharm is a relevant participant because the only way in which Apotex will be able to market norfloxacin is if it obtains the relevant substance pursuant to its agreement with Novopharm. I am of the view that whether or not Novopharm received such letter is a legitimate issue, at least at an early stage. Mr. Sherman should answer this question. I observe that counsel for the applicants may want to follow up with other questions depending on the answer provided, but the relevance of such follow up questions would have to be demonstrated.
IV.
Was there correspondence between Novopharm and Apotex pursuant to the reception of the letter of April 19, 1993 (Exhibit BCS-4)
?
[22]
There must be some relevance established before this type of inquiry can be embarked upon. This is a very general question relating to whether or not Novopharm will supply Apotex with norfloxacin. It presumably relates to the alleged breach of the Novopharm-Apotex supply agreement. I will deal with breach of the agreement shortly. However, at this point, there is an insufficient basis upon which to justify this type of inquiry. Perhaps specific questions directly to the point of whether Apotex expects to receive norfloxacin from Novopharm would be appropriate. But there is no foundation for a general inquiry fishing into what, at this point, is a private relationship between Apotex and Novopharm. I would not order that this question be answered.
V.
Are you aware that there are some contentions by Novopharm that this agreement of 1992 (Exhibit BCS-5) has been breached by your company
.
[23]
Whether or not the deponent is aware of contentions raised by Novopharm, to my mind, does not go to the question of whether or not the agreement is enforceable and whether Apotex can obtain norfloxacin from Novopharm. Whether or not the deponent is aware that Novopharm is contending a breach of the Apotex-Novopharm agreement does not relate to the issue of these proceedings.
[24]
I would not order that this question be answered.
VI.
Was agreement BCS-5 prepared by you, or the personnel of Apotex
?
[25]
Applicants' counsel says that this question relates to the interpretation of the agreement between Apotex and Novopharm. It has not been made clear to me why knowing whether Mr. Sherman himself or other personnel  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  prepared the agreement will assist in the interpretation of the agreement. Nor is it apparent how in these proceedings the court will be able to interpret the Novopharm-Apotex agreement. Finally, it has not been made clear why information relating to who prepared the agreement is relevant to the prohibition application.
[26]
I would not order that this question be answered.
VII.
Produce drafts of Agreement (Exhibit BCS-5)
.
[27]
This request again goes to the interpretation of the agreement between Novopharm and Apotex. Where contracts or agreements are unclear, the court can look at parole evidence or evidence outside the four corners of the contract to determine what it means and the rights and obligations under it. But these evidentiary conditions apply in disputes between two parties where the agreement is unclear. The relevance to the issues in these proceedings of such outside evidence, such as drafts, to interpret the Novopharm-Apotex contract, has not been demonstrated. Therefore, I would not order the production of drafts of the agreement.
VIII.
Is the letter of April 19, 1993 (BCS-4) to Novopharm the first time that either Novopharm or Apotex is availing itself of the opportunity of this mutual understanding (BCS-5)
?
[28]
Counsel for the applicants says that this question is relevant as it relates to the enforceability or breach of the agreement. I do not see that to be the case. I can envisage, in the broadest sense, that what happened previously can suggest an indication of the parties' future behaviour, but I do not think that this is an issue in these proceedings. It is true that Apotex can use norfloxacin only by virtue of this agreement. On its face, the agreement between Novopharm and Apotex is valid.
[29]
Counsel for the applicants says there may be a breach of the agreement. This is an issue between Novopharm and Apotex. It might lead to litigation between those parties. It is going far afield, however, for a third party, such as the applicants in this case, to request information with respect to the Novopharm-Apotex agreement. The question of breach of the Novopharm-Apotex agreement will require detailed proceedings between those two parties. I do not see how, in these prohibition proceedings, the court would be able to determine such an issue. If Novopharm is of the view that Apotex has breached the agreement, it may choose not to supply norfloxacin to Apotex or some other remedy. It may seek damages or it may settle the dispute. Whatever alternative Novopharm chooses, the applicants are not privy to that agreement and cannot themselves benefit from attempting to prove its breach.
IX.
Has Novopharm, under the agreement (BCS-5) asked Apotex to provide Novopharm with material under the compulsory license
?
[30]
The issue raised by this question goes to the enforceability of the agreement between Novopharm and Apotex. The comments that I made with respect to question VIII apply equally to question IX.
[31]
I would not order that the question be answered.
X.
Has Apotex already forwarded to HPB its New Drug Submission for Norfloxacin
?
[32]
Counsel for the applicants indicated that question X should be dealt with in conjunction with question XI. Question XI reads:
XI.
Does the New Drug Submission that would have been filed by Apotex either concurrently with the Notice of Allegation (BCS-3) or prior thereto, specify the source of the bulk Norfloxacin in terms of the manufacturer, its location, address and country
?
[33]
I will reserve dealing with questions X and XI until I deal with the second aspect of the applicants' motion, seeking an order directing the Minister of National Health and Welfare to produce a certified copy of Apotex's new drug submission.
XII.
Subsidiary questions flowing from question III above
.
[34]
My comments with respect to question III are dispositive of this issue. The relevance of any subsidiary questions must be demonstrated.
XIII.
Do you deny that Novopharm contends that through some acts, or activities, Apotex would be in breach of the agreement of November 27, 1992 (BCS-5)
?
[35]
My observations in respect of question VIII apply to question XIII. I would not order that this question be answered.
XIV.
An ongoing request until the hearing on the Originating Notice of Motion that copies of any correspondence between Apotex and Novopharm relating to the agreement of 1992 (BCS-5) and subsequent letters between the two companies, always in relation to Norfloxacin, or purported breach and enforceability of the agreement be provided
.
[36]
This request goes to breach and enforceability of the agreement between Novopharm and Apotex. My comments with respect to question VIII applies to question XIV.
[37]
I would not order that the documents be produced.
[38]
The second aspect of the applicants' motion seeks production of a certified copy of the new drug submission filed by Apotex in respect of norfloxacin, particularly the following:
Certified copy of all documents found in Part 2.1 of the Chemistry and Manufacturing portion of Apotex's New Drug Submission in relation to:
400 mg. tablets of Norfloxacin including any Drug Master files referred to, relied upon or incorporated into the said New Drug Submission, providing information as to -
(a) The Name Of All Materials, Whether Raw, Intermediate Or Bulk, From Which Is Obtained Norfloxacin;
(b) The Name Of The Sources For The Materials Listed Under (A) Whether Obtained In Canada Or Outside;
(c) Method Of Manufacture Of The Active Substance;
(d) Developmental Chemistry;
(e) The Physico-Chemical Properties Of All Materials Listed In A);
(f) The Reference Standard;
(g) The Specification And Test Methods Of All Materials Listed In (A);
(h) Results Of Representative Batch Analyses Of All Materials Listed In (A);
(i) Evidence Establishing Ability To Produce A Consistent Product, Namely Norfloxacin;
(j) Manufacturing Methods Of Those Dosage Forms Containing Norfloxacin;
(k) The Specification And Test Methods For The Final Dosage Form;
(l) Results Of Representative Batch Analyses Of Those Dosage Forms Containing Norfloxacin; And
(m) Evidence Establishing Ability To Produce A Final Dosage Form Containing Norfloxacin Of Consistent Quality.
[39]
Of some relevance to this portion of the motion is the December 24, 1993 decision of McKeown, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case, the applicants
Pfizer et al.
sought, by way of motion, an order requiring the Minister of National Health and Welfare to forward the new drug submissions of the respondent, Nu-Pharm Inc., relating to various dosage tablets of fluconazole, to the applicants. At page 7 of his reasons, McKeown, J., states:
"The onus is on Pfizer to demonstrate the relevance of the material sought. This is important in view of the nature of the proceedings before me. The
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
of March 12, 1993 were designed for a summary hearing and not to turn an application into a full action. There is no basis for a fishing expedition."
[40]
At page 10 [of original judgment], he states:
"Rules 1612 and 1613 were never intended to prolong a summary proceeding and I have already stated, in the circumstances of this case, they cannot affect a third party's rights without any notification. The applicants are on a fishing expedition to get parts of the NDS and all of the DMF. It is not essential to the main application for the applicants to obtain the sought after parts of the NDS and the DMF. The DMF belongs to a third party who is 'not even involved in this litigation and who could be wrongfully affected by the disclosure of such information'. See Rouleau, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 120. The procedure under the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
was never intended to be the same as an action for infringement of a patent."
[41]
In the proceedings before me, there was no express nor specific affidavit evidence indicating how the information sought would be relevant to the infringement which is the main issue before this court. The information is not relevant to the compulsory licence of Novopharm nor do the items sought appear relevant to the agreement between Apotex and Novopharm. If a party asks for a new drug submission to be produced, there must be strong evidence as to why it is necessary. A recitation of regulations as was contained in the affidavit material in this case is insufficient.
[42]
The type of information contained in a new drug submission relates to product development, product supply, and other commercially sensitive areas. According to counsel, a prime purpose of a new drug submission is to satisfy the government as to the safety and efficacy of a new drug. For a competitor to obtain such information could be commercially damaging.
[43]
I do not say that a new drug submission could never be relevant to a prohibition application based on infringement. However, the onus is on the applicant to show in strong terms that it is relevant and necessary. I note in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 63 F.T.R. 197 (T.D.), McGillis, J., states, at p. 305:
"The perceived confidentiality of information flowing from a drug manufacturer to the Department of National Health and Welfare is a cornerstone of the system pertaining to the processing of new drug submissions and the issuance of notices of compliance. For this system to function effectively, the confidential nature of the relationship ought to be honoured and maintained to the extent possible."
My approach, which would be to require the applicants to demonstrate, clearly and persuasively in the affidavit material, that production of the new drug submission is essential and relevant to the issue of infringement, is consistent with the dicta of McGillis, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  questions X and XI raised in the first part of the applicants' motion. It is appropriate to return to these questions now. They relate to the new drug submissions. For the same reasons that I refuse to order production of the new drug submission, I would not order that these questions be answered.
[45]
I would therefore deny the motion seeking disclosure of the new drug submission and, save for the exception to which I have referred, namely in respect to question III, I deny the applicants' motion to compel Mr. Sherman to provide the answers and documents sought.
[46]
Costs of this motion shall be in the cause.
Order accordingly.
Editor: David Weir/mdc
[End of document]