[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an application by the applicant, the Attorney General of Canada, firstly for an order quashing the decision of the Canadian Human Rights Commission (hereinafter the Commission) to deal with a complaint (No. H32128) by the respondent Ernest Boone (hereinafter Boone) pursuant to s. 41(e) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6 (hereinafter the
CHRA
), notwithstanding that it was time barred. In addition, the Attorney General of Canada is seeking a writ or an order of certiorari, and a writ of prohibition both directed against the Commission in order to suppress all current and future enquiry by it, or by the tribunal which it constitutes into the complaint.
[2]
The grounds for the application, as set out in the notice of motion, are as follows:
"(1) the Commission breached the rules of procedural fairness by:
(a) refusing to advise the Canadian Forces ('C.F.') why there was delay and refusing to provide information which would enable the C.F. to make informed submission with respect to the Commission's exercise of discretion under s. 41(e)
CHRA
(b) failing to follow its own guidelines on extending time under s. 41(e)
CHRA
;
(c) failing to investigate or consider the prejudice to the C.F. of proceeding with the complaint;
"(2) the Commission exceeded its jurisdiction or erred in law by;
(a) ignoring the statutory time limit provided by s. 41(e)
CHRA
and extending the time when there was no reasonable basis to do so;
(b) relying on irrelevant considerations to come to its decision to extend time pursuant to s. 41(e)
CHRA
;
(c) failing to apply s. 41(e)
CHRA
in a manner in which the French and English versions were given the same meaning;
"(3) that the Commission breached the rules of procedural fairness or acted contrary to law by its laches and extreme delay this matter subsequent to the filing of the complaint, thereby prejudicing the C.F."
Facts:
[3]
In September 1989, the respondent Boone was Commanding Officer of the Canadian Forces (hereinafter the "CF") Postal Unit in Lahr, West Germany, and a member of the Law Society of Upper Canada.
[4]
On September 4, 1989 Boone spoke with officers of the Legal Branch of the CF, known as the Judicial Advisory Group (hereinafter JAG), to inquire about transferring from the CF base in Lahr Germany to the JAG unit, as a Legal Officer. It was at this time that allegedly discriminatory remarks were first uttered to the respondent. According to the Human Rights Complaint Form, which was filed by Boone (Exhibit "A" to the affidavit of Lieutenant-Commander Holly MacDougall) he alleges that:
"I had met with Brigadier-General Robert Martin, one of the Board members, on September 4, 1989, to discuss the transfer and he brought up the subject of my age on several occasions. He had expressed concern about my having to work for and take direction from younger individuals than me. He had asked me how I felt about working for younger people. He asked me my age several times and how much time I had until 'compulsory release age'. When I indicated that I had eight more years, he replied: '... eight years is like tomorrow before you know it, it's gone by and you're retiring'. He then commented that they were interested in individuals from whom they could expect long term involvement."
[5]
Boone formally applied for the transfer to JAG on September 19, 1989 and, according to the CHRC Complaint Form, on January 10, 1990 Boone was informed by the CF the reason why his request for transfer had been denied (Exhibit "A" to the MacDougall affidavit).
[6]
By letter dated June 5, 1990 (Supplementary Application Record, Tab 1), Boone contacted the Commission and made a written request for information regarding discrimination on the basis of age:
"Dear Sirs:
It is my intention to file a formal complaint with the Canadian Human Rights Commission pursuant to s. 40(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, alleging discrimination on the basis of age by the Canadian Forces contrary to s. 3(1) of the
Act
.
Would you please advise me in what form the complaint ought to be presented to be acceptable to the Commission. I would also appreciate copies of (or reference to) written decisions by the Commission and Courts with respect to discrimination on the basis of age and any other relevant material that you may deem appropriate.
E. Boone
Major
Commanding Officer"
[7]
Subsequently, by letter dated August 13, 1990, Kelly Wandingham, a human rights officer responded to Boone's request and informed him that, "with respect to how to file a formal complaint we would ask you to supply us with a chronology of events leading up to the discrimination which you have experienced". (Supplementary Application Record, Tab 2.)
[8]
On November 30, 1990 Boone wrote two letters to K. Wandingham, the Human Rights Officer, Exhibit "B" to the Veillette affidavit, which were received by the Human Rights Commission on December 13, 1990. The pertinent facts contained therein are as follows:
"This letter is intended to constitute my formal filing of a complaint of alleged proscribed discrimination against me on the basis of age, contrary to subsections 3(1) and 7(a) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, perpetrated by the Department of National Defence/Canadian Armed Forces/Judge Advocate General
. . . . .
Enclosed is the official grievance about which I wrote to you last June. I apologize for taking so long to get it in but, as I am sure you will appreciate, I have been very preoccupied with my primary job which has become considerably more demanding of my time since we have become involved in the Persian Gulf situation.
. . . . .
I have many other documents in my possession that I would like to forward to you but I am unsure as to whether or not I first have to attain them through 'Access to Information' before I can turn them over to you ... I would appreciate your views and directions on this matter.
. . . . .
I also have other arguments that I will present to you in due course. I will try to submit them as soon as possible but with the Gulf crisis still at an uncertain stage I am unable to make any firm 'deadline dates'."
[9]
On March 11, 1991, fourteen (14) months after the denial of transfer and eighteen (18) months after the alleged initial discriminatory comments by Brigadier-General Martin were made, the Complaint Form was signed by Boone (Exhibit "A" to the MacDougall affidavit).
[10]
Subsequently, by letter dated March 26, 1991, Exhibit "B" to the MacDougall affidavit, Charles Théroux, the National Capital Regional Director of the Canadian Human Rights Commission, contacted the CF to inform them that a complaint had been filed and to that an investigator was appointed to submit a report on its findings to the Commission.
[11]
In response, on April 16, 1990, S.P. Hunter, the CF Human Rights Coordinator wrote to Mr. Théroux stating that it was the position of the CF that, because over one year had passed since the alleged discriminatory acts had occurred, no further action could be taken, in respect of the Boone complaint, until the Commission ruled in accordance with s. 41(e) of the
CHRA
(Exhibit "C" to the MacDougall affidavit).
[12]
As is evidenced by Exhibit "D" to the MacDougall affidavit, Mr. Théroux, Regional Director of Canadian Human Rights Commission, notified the Human Rights Coordinator of the CF, by letter dated June 5, 1991, that the Boone complaint would be submitted for consideration by the Commission on the recommendation that the complaint be dealt with pursuant to s. 41(e) of the
CHRA
. Enclosed was a copy of the material which was to be presented to the Commission for review. This included a copy of the Complaint Form; a summary of the allegation; and a copy of the Canadian Human Rights Commission's "Report Prior to Investigation" filed on May 10, 1991, which outlined the reasons why it was recommended that the complaint be dealt with under s. 41(e) of the
Act
:
"2. The complainant first contacted the Commission by letter dated November 30, 1990, and received by the Commission on December 13, 1990, within one year of the alleged discriminatory act.
The delay in filing the complaint is not attributable to the complainant and is not expected to prejudice the respondent.
"3. It is recommended that the Commission deal with the complaint even though the act complained of occurred more than one year before the receipt of the complaint." (My emphasis)
[13]
In addition, the CF was provided with an opportunity to provide submissions in regards to the issue of whether or not the complaint should be considered outside the one year time frame. The relevant portion of the letter states:
"... You are entitled to submit your comments to the Commission for its review when it considers the report. If you wish to do so, please send your submission to me at the address noted below.
Your submission must arrive within thirty (30) days of the date you received this letter. This 30 day time limit will be strictly adhered to in order to expedite the completion of this complaint. Material received more than 30 days after receipt of this letter may, therefore, not be presented to the Commission when a decision is made."
[14]
On July 31, 1991, the CF via Mr. S.P. Hunter formally filed a request with the Commission, Exhibit "E" to the MacDougall affidavit, for an explanation of the delay in filing the complaint. Here, the CF submitted that it "cannot make informed comment on this matter because all the necessary information has not been passed to the 'respondent' for review." In particular, pursuant to the Commission's "duty to be fair" as it applies to administrative decisions, the CF requested disclosure of Boone's letter dated November 30, 1990 and the reasons why it took between December 13, 1990 and March 13, 1991 to file the complaint.
[15]
By letter, dated August 14, 1991, the CF request for more information was denied by the Commission (see Exhibit "F" to the MacDougall affidavit).
[16]
As I understand the evidence, what followed was a series of letters by Meg Kinnear, counsel for the CF to the Commission, dated October 9, 25 and December 6, 1991 and January 3 and 24, 1992 (Exhibits "G" through "K" respectively, of the MacDougall affidavit) reiterating the CF's request for information explaining the delay in filing the complaint and requesting a copy of the Canadian Human Rights Commission's policy on extensions of time under s. 41(e).
[17]
On January 27, 1992, Mr. William Pentney, Counsel for the Commission, responded and advised, at Exhibit "L", why no further information would be disclosed and the reasons for the delay in filing the complaint:
"The Report which your client has received is headed 'Report Prior to Investigation'. It is not the final investigation report that will be prepared following the investigation of the complaint. Rather, it deals with the issue of timeliness of the complaint under paragraph 41(e) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
.
With respect to your demand for access to the letter of the complainant ... I am informed that Mr. Hunter has been apprised of the relevant information in that letter, and that there is really no other relevant information to provide as to the delay in completing the complaint intake process.
The complainant was in Germany at the time, which created a certain amount of delay, and there were delays in Headquarters in dealing with this intake.
" (My emphasis)
[18]
By letter dated March 4, 1992, counsel for the Commission provided Ms. Kinnear with a copy of the Commission's policy with respect to complaints filed after the one year time limitation specified in s. 41(e). It is here that Mr. Pentney outlined the facts that the Commission would be considering before it would make its decision:
"... The facts that will be before the Commission when it makes its decision will be the facts disclosed in the Report Prior to Investigation, and the facts disclosed by both parties in their submissions on this Report. That is what the duty of fairness requires, and I am at a loss to understand what other information your client requires in order to comment upon this matter."
[19]
In the result, on March 17, 1992, counsel for the CF submitted a written response to the Commission, in regards to the recommendation that the Boone complaint be dealt with outside the limitation period for filing a complaint (Exhibit "O" to the MacDougall affidavit).
[20]
By letter dated April 29, 1992 the CF was informed by Lucie Veillette, Secretary to the Commission, that the Commission had reviewed the submissions of the parties and had decided to exercise its discretionary power to extend the time limit within which the complaint may be filed. On this basis the Commission held:
"... [T]he Commission has therefore decided pursuant to paragraph 41(e) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, to deal with the complaint even though the act complained of occurred more than one year before the receipt of the complaint by the Commission."
[21]
As a result of the Commission's decision to extend the time to file the complaint, the CF filed a Notice of Motion, on May 22, 1992, with the Federal Court of Canada and hence the present proceedings.
Applicant's Submissions
[22]
The applicant submits that the Commission failed to comply to the rules of procedural fairness during its investigation and consideration of the complaint.
[23]
In support of this allegation the applicant contends that the Commission failed to provide the CF with any explanation for the delay in the filing of the complaint and as such, the CF was denied the right to make meaningful submissions to respond to the recommendation to extend the time to file the complaint, pursuant to s. 41(e) of the
CHRA
.
[24]
Moreover and in the alternative, the applicant states that the Commission exceeded its jurisdiction or committed an error in law by extending the time to file the complaint, pursuant to s 41(e)
CHRA
, being that the Commission made its decision based on irrelevant considerations and erroneous findings of fact.
[25]
It is the position of the CF that s. 41(e) of the
Act
is intended for cases with extenuating circumstances, where the delay is caused by factors beyond the control of the parties, but is not intended to be used in cases, such as the one at bar, where the complainant and the Commission were both capable of acting within the time limit but failed to do so for no good reason.
[26]
Moreover, the CF submits that institutional delay on behalf of the Commission is not a legitimate excuse for delay in filing a complaint and cannot be a basis upon which the Commission exercised its discretion under s. 41(e)
CHRA
.
[27]
Counsel for the applicant submits that the Commission did not consult its internal guidelines which govern the exercise of its discretion under s. 41(e)
CHRA
. The applicant suggests that the failure to follow these guidelines is evidence of the absence of procedural fairness. Furthermore, it is contended that, based on the internal guidelines which govern when it is reasonable to extend the time to file a complaint, it must be concluded that the Commission had no tenable basis upon which to exercise its discretion under s. 41(e).
[28]
In addition, it is submitted that the delay caused by the Commission should not be used to deprive the CF the protection of a statutory time limit enacted by Parliament. The applicant's position is that s. 41(e) of the
Act
refers to a statutory limitation for the filing of a complaint which Parliament intended as a "benefit" to the employer. As such, the applicant's counsel states that, with respect to the issue of prejudice caused to the CF, the deprivation of a statutory limitation is prima facie a prejudice and that it was incumbent on the investigator to determine whether this presumption has been rebutted.
[29]
Lastly, counsel for the applicant submits that the extension of time does prejudice the CF given that the officer who is alleged to have made the remarks, which form the basis of the discrimination complaint, is no longer a member of the CF.
Respondent's Submissions
[30]
At first instance, the respondent submits that the complaint was made within the one year limitation period. The Commission states that the allegedly discriminatory acts did not occur until January 10, 1990 when Boone was officially notified that his transfer was denied. As such, oone had until January 10, 1991 to issue his complaint. Therefore, being that Boone made written submissions to the Commission on November 30, 1990, it was wholly within the one year prescription period that the initial complaint was made.
[31]
The respondent submits that the Commission complied fully with its duty of procedural fairness. The CF was provided with all the necessary details and sources of information that the Commission had before it in considering whether or not to extend the time to file the complaint. In addition, the CF was provided with an opportunity to make informed submissions to the Commission and that these submissions were considered by the Commission prior to its decision to handle the complaint.
[32]
Moreover, it is maintained that the CF was apprised of a summary of the reasons why there was a delay in the filing of the complaint, from the date the intake file was created, being November 30, 1990 until March 11, 1991 when the complaint form was signed.
[33]
Finally, the respondent asserts that no prejudice would arise to the CF if the complaint was heard. Here, the Commission submits that the relevant witnesses are available irrespective of the fact that they are no longer employed by the CF.
Issues:
[34]
This application raises the following issues:
"A. What is the role of the Commission on judicial review of its own decision?
"B. Was there a breach of procedural fairness in failing to give the CF an explanation of the delay?
"C. Did the Commission commit an error in law or exceed their jurisdiction in extending the time to file the complaint pursuant to s. 41(e)
CHRA
?
(i) Was the decision to extend based on irrelevant considerations?
(ii) Was the decision based on erroneous findings of fact?
"D. Moreover and in the alternative, was the post complaint delay unreasonable thereby prejudicing the CF?"
Relevant Statutory Provisions
[35]
The relevant provisions of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6, as amended by R.S.C. 1985, c. 31 (1st Supp.), are as follows:
"41. Subject to s. 40, the Commission shall deal with any complaint filed with it unless in respect of that complaint it appears to the Commission that
. . . . .
(e) the complaint is based on acts or omissions the last of which occurred more than one year, or such longer period of time as the Commission considers appropriate in the circumstances before receipt of the complaint. 1976-77, c. 33, s. 33.
"43(1) The Commission may designate a person, in this Part referred to as an 'investigator', to investigate a complaint ...
"44(1) An investigator shall, as soon as possible after the conclusion of an investigation, submit to the Commission a report of the findings of the investigation.
. . . . .
"44(3) On receipt of a report referred to in subsection (1), the Commission
(a) may request the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel to appoint a Human Rights Tribunal in accordance with s. 49 to inquire into the complaint to which the report relates if the Commission is satisfied
(i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is warranted, and
(ii) that the complaint to which the report relates should not be referred pursuant to subsection (2) or dismissed on any ground mentioned in paragraphs 41(c) to (e); or
(b) shall dismiss the complaint to which the report relates if it is satisfied
(i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is not warranted, or
(ii) the complaint should be dismissed on any ground mentioned in paragraphs 41(c) to (e)."
[36]
The relevant provisions of the
Federal Court Act
are as follows:
"18(1) Subject to s. 28, the Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction
(a) to issue an injunction, writ of certiorari, writ of prohibition, writ of mandamus or writ of quo warranto, or grant declaratory relief, against any federal board, commission or other tribunal; and
(b) to hear and determine any application or other proceeding for relief in the nature of relief contemplated by paragraph (a), including any proceeding brought against the Attorney General of Canada, to obtain relief against a federal board, commission or other tribunal.
"18(2) The Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine every application for a writ of habeas corpus ad subjiciendum, writ of certiorari, writ of prohibition or writ of mandamus in relation to any member of the Canadian Forces serving outside Canada.
"18(3) The remedies provided for in subsections (1) and (2) may be obtained only on an application for judicial review made under s. 18.1. [S.C. 1990, c. 8, s. 4]
"18.1(3) On an application for judicial review, the Trial Division may
. . . . .
(b) declare invalid or unlawful, or quash, set aside and refer back for determination in accordance with such directions as it considers to be appropriate, prohibit or restrain a decision, order, act or proceeding of a federal board, commission or other tribunal.
"18.1(4) The Trial Division may grant relief under subsection (3) if it is satisfied that the federal board, commission or other tribunal
(a) acted without jurisdiction, acted beyond its jurisdiction or refused to exercise its jurisdiction;
(b) failed to observe a principle of natural justice, procedural fairness or other procedure that it was required by law to observe ..."
Analysis:
The Role Of The Commission When Its
Decision Is Under Judicial Review
Before The Court:
[37]
Counsel for the applicant and the respondent Commission were heard on the preliminary issue of the capacity and status of the Commission to appear before this court when its decision is under judicial review. On this matter I have been asked to render judgment.
[38]
The role of a board, tribunal or commission before a court of law, in such instances, has been considered in the earlier case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 449; 7 Alta. L.R.(2d) 370; 89 D.L.R.(3d) 161, where Estey, J., for a unanimous court said at page 708-709 S.C.R.:
"The Board has a limited status before the court, and may not be considered as a party, in the full sense of that term, to an appeal from its own decisions. In my view, this limitation is entirely proper. This limitation was no doubt consciously imposed by the Legislature in order to avoid placing an unfair burden on an appellant who, in the nature of things, must on another day and in another cause again submit itself to the rate fixing activities of the Board. It also recognizes the universal human frailties which are revealed when persons or organizations are placed in such adversarial positions ...
"Such active and even aggressive participation can have no other effect than to discredit the impartiality of an administrative tribunal either in the case where the matter is referred back to it, or in future proceeding involving similar interests and issues or the same parties. The Board is given a clear opportunity to make its point in its reasons for its decision, and it abuses one's notion of propriety to countenance its participation as a full fledged litigant in this court, in complete adversarial confrontation with one of the principals in the contest before the Board itself in the first instance."
[39]
Similarly, in the more recent Federal Court of Appeal decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 699; 43 Admin. L.R. 18, Madame Justice Desjardins assessed the capacity and status of boards and tribunals to appear before courts when their decisions are under judicial review. Desjardins, J.A., cited, with approval, both the reasoning of Estey, J., in
Northwestern  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and the latest Supreme Court of Canada decision on this matter in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 437; 89 C.L.L.C. 14,050; [1989] 6 W.W.R. 673; 40 Admin. L.R. 181. With respect to the decision of La Forest, J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of Canada Ltd.
, supra, Desjardins, J.A., said, at page 297 N.R.:
"There, La Forest, J., for the majority, stated the limited role of a board before a court of law in the following way (at p. 31):
'... the Industrial Relations Council has standing before this court to make submissions not only explaining the record before the court, but also to show that it had jurisdiction to embark upon the inquiry and that it has not lost that jurisdiction through a patently unreasonable interpretation of its powers.'"
[40]
I have examined the above decisions. I am satisfied that, in the present instance, the Commission has limited standing before this court to make submissions explaining the record, and also to show it had jurisdiction to make the decision in question and that it had not lost jurisdiction through a patently unreasonable interpretation of its powers. However, in light of the jurisprudence, I am of the view that the Commission is not entitled to be heard on the merits of its decision.
Administrative Function
And Procedural Fairness
[41]
In her submissions and in the course of the hearing in this court, counsel for the applicant submitted that the Commission functioned as an administrative body in rendering its decision to extend the time to file the Boone complaint, pursuant to s. 41(e) of the
Act
, and did so in violation of its duty of procedural fairness.
[42]
Before proceeding any further, a brief overview of the process followed by the Commission, in the present case, is important. The Commission was required to consider whether the Boone complaint should be dismissed on the basis of extraneous grounds, as enunciated in s. 41. Here, the Commission had appointed an investigator, who was responsible for preparing a "Report Prior to Investigation" on whether or not the Commission should hear a complaint that is time barred, irrespective of its merits. The Commission then considered the findings of the report and the submissions of the respective parties, before concluding that the complaint should proceed to the second stage, being a hearing before a tribunal.
[43]
As a result of the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 671; 78 C.L.L.C. 14,181, it is a clear principle of law that tribunals exercising what is administrative or executive functions are required to have a duty to accord procedural fairness. This entails a limited requirement that the tribunal comply with the audi alteram partem rule.
[44]
Determination of the function of the Commission, in the context of the present case was the subject of consideration by the Supreme Court of Canada in
Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Here, Justice Sopinka, rendering the decision for the majority of the court, held at page 899, that:
"It is not intended that this be a determination where the evidence is weighed as in a judicial proceeding but rather the Commission must determine whether there is a reasonable basis in the evidence for proceeding to the next stage. It was not intended that there be a formal hearing preliminary to the decision as to whether to appoint a tribunal. Rather the process moves from the investigatory stage to the judicial or quasi-judicial stage if the test prescribed in s. 36(3)(a) is met.
Accordingly, I conclude from the foregoing that, in view of the nature of the commission's function and giving effect to the statutory provisions referred to, it was not intended that the Commission comply with the formal rules of natural justice. In accordance with the principles in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, however, I would supplement the statutory provisions by requiring the Commission to comply with the rules of procedural fairness.
" (Underlining is mine)
[45]
In addition, I am mindful of the decision of Madame Justice L'Heureux-Dubé who, in delivering her dissenting judgment in
S.E.P.Q.A.
, supra, summarized the various extraneous grounds on which the Commission may dispose of a complaint, pursuant to the former s. 33 (now s. 41) of the
Act
. In the words of L'Heureux-Dubé, J., at page 911 S.C.R.:
"The combined effect of these provisions is to enable the Commission to sift through the complaints and remove a number of them from the time consuming process of investigation.
The power to bar certain complaints from proceeding any further regardless of their merits reflects Parliament's overriding commitment to considerations of administrative efficiency and to specific policy objectives.
" (Underlining is mine)
[46]
On the basis of the above stated jurisprudence, I believe the decision of the Commission, in regards to this matter, constitutes a decision which is administrative in nature and thus requires that the Commission comply with the rules of procedural fairness in carrying out the investigation and in considering the complaint pursuant to s. 44 of the
CHRA
.
[47]
In considering the question of what constitutes the duty of procedural fairness I need look no further than the findings of Sopinka, J., in
S.E.P.Q.A.
, supra, who states, in obiter, at page 902 S.C.R.:
"It is therefore appropriate to observe that had I determined that the decision of the Commission was reviewable, I would have concluded as Marceau, J., did that the Commission committed no reviewable error. I agree with the reasons of Marceau, J., that the Commission had a duty to inform the parties of the substance of the evidence obtained by the investigator and which was put before the Commission. Furthermore, it was incumbent on the Commission to give the parties the opportunity to respond to this evidence and make all relevant representations thereto.
"The Commission was entitled to consider the investigator's report, such other underlying material as it, in its discretion considered necessary and the representations of the parties. The Commission was then obliged to make its own decision based on this information. All this was done."
[48]
Similarly, the Federal Court of Canada has considered the meaning of procedural fairness in several judgments.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Mr. Justice Pinard was required to determine whether the Commission observed the rule of procedural fairness in that it gave the complainant disclosure of all relevant information enabling the party to make submissions relating thereto. Here Pinard, J., considered the documents which the Commission examined before rendering its decision to dismiss the complaint on the grounds that it was unsubstantiated. Pinard, J., rules that the Commission acted fairly by both providing the complainant with a copy of the investigative report, as well as by considering all relevant facts. His Lordship, at p. 213 F.T.R., states:
"Devant tous ces faits, après avoir pris connaissance de tous les documents pertinents et entendu les procureurs des parties, j'estime qu'il s'agit ici d'un cas où on a dûment respecté les règles d'équité procédurale telles qu'elles sont définies par M. le juge Sopinka, dans l'arrêt de
S.E.P.Q.A.
ci-dessus. Il était en effet suffisant que le rapport d'enquête soit communiqué à la requérante avant la prise de décision par la Commission; il n'était donc pas nécessaire que les observations du Service correctionel du Canada relatives à ce rapport le soient aussi ...
"Enfin, les propos suivants de mon collègue M. le juge Dubé, dans la cause
Jean Morisset et Commission canadienne des droits de la personne et Gendarmerie Royale du Canada
[jugement du 20 Septembre 1991, Cour Féderale du Canada no. T-1937-91, aux pages 5 et 6] m'apparaissent fort pertinents:
'The
Act
provides a procedure to remedy discriminatory acts in certain area within federal legislative jurisdiction. The first stage of the procedural requirements is the filing of the complaint. If the complaint does not fall under one of the exceptions mentioned in s. 41, the Commission may either appoint an investigator under s. 43 or a Tribunal under s. 49. In the first case, the investigator prepares a written report for members of the Commission containing an account of the relevant facts conclusions. This is exactly what occurred in the case at bar.
'The
Act
does not require that members of the Commission examine the complete record of the investigation. The
Act
does not provide for an oral hearing in the case of an investigation, but provides for written observations, unlike the investigation by a Tribunal, where the hearing takes the form of an adversary proceeding. The members of the Commission must decide based on the material before them whether the evidence provides reasonable justification for proceeding to the next stage ... The Supreme Court has held that this is a purely administrative decision [see
S.E.P.Q.A.
, at p. 899].'"
[49]
In the present case before me, counsel for the applicant submitted that the failure of the Commission to provide reasons for the delay in filing the Boone complaint constituted a breach in the rules of procedural fairness. Counsel for the applicant put great emphasis on the fact that the January 27, 1992, letter by Pentney (Exhibit "L" to the MacDougall affidavit) gave only a two line explanation of the reasons for the delay. Moreover, it was submitted that there was nothing in the Report Prior to Investigation which put the CF on notice of the reason for the delay and thus it was impossible for the CF to make meaningful response to the issue of delay.
[50]
On this basis it was suggested that the explanation for the delay, as stated in the documentation provided to the CF, did not meet the test of procedural fairness as enunciated in
S.E.P.Q.A.
, supra, being that the CF was denied the ability to make informed and meaningful submissions to the Commission.
[51]
I have weighed the applicant's submissions and examined the evidence presented. Unfortunately, I am unable to agree with the applicant's position. In light of the jurisprudence, I believe that the CF was afforded its full rights of procedural fairness. The Commission was not required under the rules of procedural fairness to provide the CF with the entire content of the documents before it.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at pages 60-61, Mr. Justice Muldoon applied the principle of law enunciated in
S.E.P.Q.A.
, supra, to facts which are wholly similar to the case at bar and held that it was sufficient that the CF be provided with the substance of the relevant facts before it, and not necessarily every detail.
[52]
It must be recalled that by a letter dated June 5, 1991, Mr. Théroux, the Regional Director of the Commission, informed the CF that the Boone complaint would be submitted to the Commission for consideration pursuant to s. 41(e). As is evidenced by Exhibit "D" to the MacDougall affidavit, the CF was provided with a copy of the necessary documentation. Here the CF received a copy of the complaint form, a summary of the allegation and a copy of the "Report Prior to Investigation" which contained the reasons why the delay in filing had occurred. Furthermore, the CF was accorded the opportunity to make submissions to the Commission, which it did.
[53]
Therefore, on the facts as outlined, I am satisfied that the Commission abided by the law's provisions in fairness to the person against whom the complaint was lodged.
Exceeding Its Jurisdiction, Per
Paragraph 41(e), By Relying On
Irrelevant Considerations Or
Erroneous Facts
[54]
Counsel for the applicant submitted that the Commission erred in failing to exercise the discretion given to it, pursuant to s. 41(e) of the
Act
. It was counsel's position that, based on the Commission's decision it was apparent that the circumstances surrounding this case were not fully considered, and that since the Commission is required to examine and inquire into all those relevant circumstances, failure to do so constituted an error going to jurisdiction.
[55]
As I understand the law, the Commission must exercise its discretion to extend the time to file a complaint beyond the one year statutory limit based on probative grounds.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Mr. Justice Muldoon, at page 64, considered the question of when the Commission fails to exercise its jurisdiction as it is bound to do under s. 41(e) of the
Act
:
"It is clear that a proper and necessary evocation of the Commission's powers is still very far removed even from its expressing its reasons for such evocation. Reasons are another matter.
In failing to evince some deliberate exercise of power by its resolution, the Commission simply does not exercise the power accorded to it under s. 41(e).
"
[56]
In the present instance, I am unable to accept the submissions put forward by counsel for the applicant that the Commission made its decision based on irrelevant considerations.
[57]
It suffices to say that the Commission, when it rendered its decision to extend the time to file the Boone complaint outside the one year time bar, did so based on a relevant consideration of the evidence before it. According to paragraph 3 of the Veillette affidavit, and as evidenced by Exhibit "B" to the said affidavit, the Commission had an opportunity to consider and examine the following documentation:
"-	a report Prior to Investigation dated May 10, 1991;
-	a complaint form dated March 11, 1991;
-	a chronology;
-	a letter from S.P. Hunter to Charles Théroux dated March 20, 1992;
-	a letter from Meg Kinnear to William Pentney dated February 3, 1992;
-	a letter from Meg Kinnear to William Pentney dated January 24, 1992;
-	a letter from Meg Kinnear to William Pentney dated January 3, 1992;
-	a letter from Meg Kinnear to William Pentney dated December 6, 1991;
-	a letter from S.P. Hunter to Charles Théroux dated April 16, 1991;
-	a letter from Meg Kinnear to Charles Théroux dated October 9, 1991;
-	a letter from Meg Kinnear to Charles Théroux dated October 25, 1991;
-	a letter from S.P. Hunter to Charles Théroux dated July 31, 1991;
-	a letter from William Pentney to Meg Kinnear dated March 4, 1992;
-	two letters from Ernest Boone to Kelly Waddingham dated November 30, 1990."
[58]
A perusal of the material before the Commission indicates, to me, that it made its decision having regard to all the relevant circumstances. The Report Prior to Investigation, Exhibit "D" to the MacDougall affidavit, states that "the delay in filing the complaint is not attributable to the complainant and is not expected to prejudice the respondent". Moreover, as I previously indicated, the applicant was afforded full opportunity to make submissions, in regard to the issue of timeliness of the complaint under s. 41(e). In the March 4, 1992, letter by Mr. William Pentney, of the Commission, to Meg Kinnear, counsel for the CF, it states that the Commission's decision concerning this matter would be made based on all the facts disclosed in the Report Prior to Investigation and the facts disclosed by both parties in their submissions on this report. I believe it was at this point, as evidenced by the letter of March 17, 1992 (see Exhibit "O" to the MacDougall affidavit) that the CF raised any relevant facts, such as the availability of an alternative grievance process or the prejudicial impact the CF would suffer if the Commission allowed the complaint to proceed.
[59]
Thus, when the Commission's decision is considered in the context of the Report Prior to Investigation's recommendation, the submissions of the parties, and all the other material before the Commission, I am satisfied that the Commission did exercise the discretion vested in it on proper principles having considered all relevant circumstances and correct facts.
The Post-Complaint Delay And
Prejudice To The CF
[60]
Counsel for the applicant has contended that the 13-month delay between the date the complaint was first filed, being March 11, 1991, and the decision of the Commission on April 29, 1992, to proceed with the investigation of the complaint is unjustifiable and thus contrary to the doctrine of laches and breaches the rules of procedural fairness.
[61]
With respect to the question of laches and the breach of procedural fairness, as a result of the Commission delay in proceeding with the complaint, I am compelled to cite the decision of Walsh, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.E.L. 201; 50 Admin. L.R. 222, where the court considered an issue which is squarely on all fours with the present case.
[62]
Here, Walsh, J., considered an application by the employer to quash a decision of the Commission to proceed with a complaint that was filed outside the one year time bar. I am of the view that the decision in this case is highly applicable to the present facts at bar in that Walsh, J., concluded that the Commission will not breach the rules of procedural fairness by its laches and delay in handling a complaint subsequent to its filing where the delay is not unreasonable and handling the complaint will not prejudice the party against whom the complaint is lodged. Of most significance is the reasoning of Walsh, J., in regards to what constitutes unreasonable delay. At page 220 F.T.R., Walsh, J., states:
"In fairness to the Commission it must be stated that they are quite possibly overworked and short staffed, but the delay in proceeding with this matter, not only the initial decision to entertain the complaint notwithstanding the delay in bringing it, but thereafter by change of investigator, and indecision within the bureaucracy of the Commission itself as to whether the complaint should be entertained or not, is extraordinary and unacceptable."
[63]
Applying the foregoing analysis to the present case, if I take the date of the allegedly discriminatory acts to be the date Boone was notified that his transfer was denied, being January 10, 1990, then Boone made initial contact with the Commission within the one year time period. He therefore had until January 10, 1991 to file his complaint. In the present instance, the complaint would have been filed a mere 60 days outside the time limitation. As such, I have great difficulty in finding that this constitutes an unreasonable delay.
[64]
Moreover, it is recognized by the decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, that institutional delay, where reasonable, is acceptable grounds for delay in filing a complaint. Finally, I am unable to find based on the evidence that the Commission acted unreasonably from the moment the complaint was signed by Boone. The CF was promptly notified of the complaint, by letter dated March 26, 1991 (Exhibit "B" to the MacDougall affidavit). Later, by letter dated June 6, 1991 (Exhibit "D") the CF was informed of their right to make submissions.
[65]
Even if I were to conclude that the post-complaint delay was unreasonable, it is still necessary that I find, based on the evidence, that the applicant was prejudiced by the delay.
[66]
The main submission made by the applicant, if I properly understand it, is that if there is a complaint filed and it is filed more than one year after the incident, then the employer, in this case the CF, does not have to show a prejudice as there is a presumption that there is a prejudice if the complaint is allowed to proceed.
[67]
I do not follow this reasoning.
[68]
The law states that all complaints filed with the Commission must be investigated by the Commission. Pursuant to s. 41 there are only four cases when the Commission
may
refuse, not shall refuse, to continue with the investigation. One of the reasons is found in s. 41(e).
[69]
Section 41(e) states, as I interpret the subsection, that if the complaint if filed more than a year after the incident complained of occurred, then the Commission, before proceeding with the complaint, must hold a "hearing" and with the discretion afforded to it, may decide to continue to investigate the complaint.
[70]
In order for the Commission to make such a decision, it must allow the "employer" to make submissions as to why the Commission should not continue with the investigation. That is, procedural fairness requires the Commission to consider the submissions. After this is done, the Commission, considering all the evidence put before it, decides that it is in its discretion whether or not to allow the investigation to continue.
[71]
One may therefore say that the applicant is correct in saying that a complaint filed outside of the year stipulated in the
Act
is presumed to cause a prejudice to the employer, but since this is a rebuttable presumption the Commission holds a hearing, considers all the relevant evidence put before it and decides to investigate or not.
[72]
In the case before me this is what happened. The facts clearly show that there was a preinvestigation report. There was, as well, a submission by the employer. I do not accept it was an uninformed submission. By reading the submissions, found in Exhibit "O" to the MacDougall affidavit, it is obvious that the applicant had all the relevant facts, including the reason for the late filing. The Commission considered all this evidence and decided as it did.
[73]
In addition, the only evidence of prejudice to the applicant as a result of the post-complaint delay was that two key witnesses were no longer employed by the CF. However, there was no evidence presented to suggest that these witnesses were not available to testify.
[74]
Therefore, I find that even if the post-complaint delay was unreasonable, which I do not believe was the case, the applicant has not demonstrated that the delay subsequent to the filing of the complaint in any way prejudiced the CF.
Conclusion
[75]
With respect to the above analysis, in my opinion, the applicant was accorded its full rights of procedural fairness in that the Commission put the applicant on notice of the reasons for the delay in filing the complaint, and accorded the applicant an opportunity to make informed submissions, with regards to the Commission's discretion to extend the time to file, pursuant to s. 41(e).
[76]
In addition, I am satisfied that the Commission exercised its discretion, under s. 41, accordingly. The Commission's decision to allow the complaint to proceed was not based on irrelevant considerations or erroneous findings of fact. The applicant provided submissions to the Commission, which the Commission did consider, and the fact that the Commission did not find grounds to dismiss the complaint does not indicate that its discretion, pursuant to s. 41(e), was inappropriately exercised.
[77]
Finally, I am of the belief that the Commission did not breach the rules of procedural fairness or act contrary to law by its laches and post-complaint delay. The delay was not unreasonable and did not prejudice the applicant.
[78]
I would therefore dismiss the application and uphold the decision of the commission to proceed with the Boone complaint, pursuant to s. 41(e) of the
CHRA
.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]