Background
[1]
Gibson, J.
: These reasons arise out of an application for judicial review of a decision or order made, or a matter arising, under the
Immigration Act
[see footnote 1] in the form of a communication from an immigration officer (the "removal officer") to the applicant indicating that he would be removed from Canada on the 5th of May, 1997 via Amsterdam to Delhi, India. The communication (the "destination decision") is dated the 29th of April, 1997.
[2]
The factual background giving rise to the destination decision is essentially not in dispute and can be summarized as follows.
[3]
The applicant is a citizen of India. He was a member of the All India Sikh Student Federation. In 1984, pursuant to a plan formulated by that organization, he participated in the hijacking of an Air India passenger flight from India to Pakistan. The applicant was apprehended, convicted and sentenced to death in Pakistan. His sentence was later commuted to life imprisonment. He served 10 years and then was released on parole in Pakistan. Following his release on parole, he was ordered to leave Pakistan. He arrived in Canada without status. He has relatives in this country.
[4]
In September of 1995, the applicant was apprehended by immigration authorities. Since that time he has been held in immigration detention.
[5]
A conditional removal order was issued against the applicant. That order did not determine the date of removal or place of destination on removal. The applicant made a claim to Convention refugee status in Canada based on an alleged well-founded fear of persecution if required to return to India. Before the applicant's refugee claim was determined, the applicant received notice that the respondent was considering issuing a "danger to the public in Canada" opinion ("danger opinion") against him pursuant to s. 46.01(1)(e)(i) of the
Immigration Act
. The applicant was invited to make submissions. A delegate of the respondent determined the applicant to constitute a "danger to the public in Canada". In the result, he became ineligible to have his claim to Convention refugee status determined.
[6]
The respondent agreed to reconsider the danger opinion. Following reconsideration, despite extensive submissions on behalf of the applicant regarding the risk that he might face if returned to India, the danger opinion was confirmed.
[7]
The conditional removal order made against the applicant became a valid and subsisting deportation order that could be executed at any time.
[8]
The applicant again made extensive submissions to the officials responsible for removal arrangements in the respondent's ministry, as to the risk that he might face if removed to India. It was not in dispute before me that removal officers, such as the immigration officer who made the destination decision in respect of the applicant, do not have jurisdiction to evaluate and determine risk prior to making removal arrangements. There is no indication that the removal officer varied from the established practice and jurisdiction to evaluate and determine risk in this case, despite the voluminous material before her or him.
[9]
The applicant applied for leave and for judicial review of the danger opinion issued on behalf of the respondent against him. Leave was denied.
Issues
[10]
The applicant raised a number of issues, including the constitutional validity of ss. 48 and 52 of the
Immigration Act
when read together with ss. 7 and 12 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
[see footnote 2] and against the factual background of this matter. Before turning to the
Charter
submissions, I will first consider the following questions:
1. was a risk assessment and determination necessary before the removal officer made the destination decision;
2. were the applicant's materials addressing risk properly part of the record before the removal officer;
3. was an appropriate risk assessment conducted and determination made in this case; and
4. if no appropriate risk assessment was carried out and determination made, did the removal officer commit a reviewable error in failing to consider whether or not to exercise discretion to delay the applicant's removal pending the conduct of such an assessment and appropriate consideration of the result.
Analysis
[11]
The factual background to this matter, and the argument presented on behalf of the applicant, are substantially similar to those that were before me in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  are the following. Mr. Farhadi had been determined to have a "credible basis" to a refugee claim in Canada, as against Iran and was landed on that basis. Thus, unlike the applicant here, he had status in Canada. Further, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , I had both the destination decision and the danger opinion decision before me for judicial review.
[12]
Counsel for the applicant relied extensively on <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> for the proposition that a risk assessment had to be conducted and evaluated before the destination decision could be made against this applicant. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> does not, in my view, stand for the proposition that a risk assessment and determination is always required before a destination decision flowing from a valid deportation order can be made involving removal to a country in which persecution is feared. The ruling in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> pertained, rather, to unique circumstances in which the applicant therein had made out a credible allegation that he would confront torture upon removal to Iran, had a "credible basis" refugee claim as against Iran and was landed in Canada. On those facts, I found that a risk assessment and determination was necessary, and that the danger opinion did not incorporate such an assessment and determination.
[13]
The applicant herein has similarly raised before the removal officer an allegation that he will be tortured or otherwise suffer persecution if returned to India, and that no risk assessment has been carried out or determination made. On the distinct, but similarly narrow and unusual facts of this case, I find that a risk assessment and determination are required.
[14]
As earlier indicated, the applicant filed before the removal officer extensive submissions as to the risk he might face if removed to India, including the representations made in advance of the danger to the public redetermination. Those submissions are now before this court as a part of the certified tribunal record, despite what is acknowledged to be the limited jurisdiction of the removal officer. The question then arises whether the removal officer had discretion to consider the risk submissions and, by implication, whether those submissions are properly before this court on this judicial review application.
[15]
As noted earlier in these reasons, it was not disputed that removal officers do not have jurisdiction to conduct risk assessments and make risk determinations in the course of making destination decisions. The options open to removal officers in making destination decisions are circumscribed by s. 52 of the
Immigration Act
, which leaves them little, if any, discretion unless there is a voluntary departure or unless removal to a country as provided in subs. (2) of that section cannot be made. In such circumstances, with the approval of the respondent, or on the respondent's initiative, any destination country may be selected. There is no discretion to take into account risk under s. 52 of the
Act
.
[16]
However, under s. 48 of the
Immigration Act
, removal officers have a discretion to delay the execution of a deportation order. Section 48 provides:
"48. Subject to sections 49 and 50, a removal order shall be executed as soon as reasonably practicable. Sections 49 and 50 are not applicable on the facts of this matter."
[17]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  paragraph 9:
"What is clear, however, is that removal officers have some discretion under the
Immigration Act
concerning, among other things the pace of the removal once they become involved in making deportation arrangements. This is so because the May Affidavit indicates in paragraph 8 that removals are to be carried out as soon as 'reasonably' practicable. This language is also found in s. 48 of the
Immigration Act
.
In my view, this language covers a broad range of circumstances which might include a consideration of whether it would be reasonable to await a pending decision on a H&C application before removal
." (emphasis added)
[18]
Similarly, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  12:
"I accept that removal officers have, in certain circumstances, authority to defer execution of a removal order (certainly if an applicant was ill, or if the scheduled flight was cancelled, such must exist)."
Although Madame Justice Reed did not comment on whether a removal officer had discretion to delay removal to await the determination of a humanitarian and compassionate grounds application, I conclude that she acknowledged, in principle, that a removal officer has discretion in such circumstances. [see footnote 6]
[19]
I conclude that the "broad range of circumstances" that Madame Justice Simpson found to be contemplated by s. 48 of the
Immigration Act
includes discretion to consider whether it is reasonable to defer the making of removal arrangements pending a risk assessment and determination. Accordingly, it follows that a removal officer may have regard to cogent evidence of risk in removal to a particular destination and as to whether or not an appropriate risk assessment has been conducted and evaluated, solely for the purpose of informing his or her exercise of discretion regarding deferral.
[20]
Based on the foregoing considerations, I conclude that the applicant's materials in respect of risk filed before the removal officer were properly before that officer, but
only
for the limited purpose of determining whether or not an appropriate assessment had been conducted and evaluated and whether or not a delay in making removal arrangements is warranted. As such, the representations in respect of risk and the alleged lack of an appropriate assessment and evaluation that were placed before the removal officer properly constitute a part of the certified record filed before me in this matter.
[21]
In this regard, the facts here are distinguishable from those in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case, certain of the evidence as to risk that was placed before me was not before the federal boards, commissions or other tribunals the decisions of which were under review. The evidence was introduced for the first time on the judicial review application. In deciding that case without regard to the new evidence filed on judicial review, I stated:
"It is trite law that a reviewing court is bound by the record filed before the federal board, commission or other tribunal the decision of which is under [review]."
By contrast, the evidence as to risk in this matter was before the decision-maker whose decision is under review. The applicant's evidentiary submissions as to risk, including material that was before the respondent's delegate charged with arriving at a danger opinion decision, are therefore properly before me. [see footnote 7]
[22]
I turn then, to the third issue enumerated above, that being whether an appropriate risk assessment was, in fact, conducted and determination made in this case. The applicant argued that no such assessment had been conducted or determination made.
[23]
By contrast, the respondent essentially took the position that the danger opinion effectively addressed risk of return, it then being "known" to the parties that removal, if effected, would be to India. The relevant portion of the summary prepared for the respondent's delegate who rendered the danger opinion specifically noted that the applicant feared persecution upon return to India. As such, it was urged, an appropriate risk assessment had been conducted and determination made. All of this evidence, counsel for the respondent pointed out, was before the removal officer.
[24]
On the record before me, I find nothing to satisfy me that an appropriate risk assessment had been conducted or determination made. Moreover, nothing on the relevant facts here is distinguishable from <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> on whether the danger opinion process incorporated an appropriate risk assessment and determination procedure. Clearly, it did not. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , I wrote:
"The issues before the respondent's delegate under s. 46.01(1)(e)(iv) and s. 70(5) of the
Act
, were clear: whether or not, in the respondent's opinion, the applicant constitutes a danger to the public in Canada. This was the
sole
issue before the delegate. In making the danger to the public determination, the delegate was authorized to consider, although he or she was not required in law to do so, material other than that relating strictly to danger to the public in Canada, including material that speaks to a risk assessment.
. . . . .
"I conclude that counsel for the applicant is correct in his submission that there is no decision or final conclusion on the issue of risk to the applicant in the decision of the respondent's delegate. The decision of the delegate is merely to the effect that, in the Minister's opinion, the applicant is a danger to the public in Canada; nothing more.
. . . . .
"
I am satisfied that the danger opinion process simply did not amount to a risk assessment and determination
and that, if it did, it provided insufficient attributes of natural justice and fundamental justice, given the potential implications of a risk assessment decision adverse to the applicant." (emphasis added)
Conclusion
[25]
Accordingly, I can only conclude in the affirmative on the issue of whether the removal officer erred in failing to consider whether or not to exercise his or her discretion to delay the applicant's removal. It must be presumed that the removal officer had regard to all of the material before him or her. [see footnote 8] That material indicates no appropriate risk assessment was done or determination made. The material discloses no evidence that exercise of discretion to delay was considered. In my view, the removal officer's failure to consider whether or not to exercise his or her discretion under s. 48 of the
Immigration Act,
pending the conducting of an appropriate risk assessment and the making of a risk determination, constituted a reviewable error in the nature of a failure or refusal to exercise jurisdiction.
[26]
For the foregoing reasons, this application for judicial review will be allowed. In light of the above analysis, it is unnecessary and, indeed, undesirable, to consider the constitutional issues raised. [see footnote 9]
Certification Of A Question
Or Questions
[27]
At the close of the hearing of this matter, I reserved my decision and undertook to distribute draft reasons to allow counsel to consider the reasons and make further submissions if considered appropriate and to make recommendations regarding certification of a question or questions. Draft reasons were distributed under cover of a letter from the Registry of the Court dated May 28. Brief further submissions in written form were received from counsel for the respondent. An acknowledgement was received from counsel for the applicant without further submissions.
[28]
On the 25th of June, 1998, the court received from counsel for the respondent a proposal for certification of three questions in the following form:
1. Where a person has made a claim that the person faces a risk of torture or death in the person's country of origin, and faces removal to that country without the risk that he or she faces on removal having been assessed in a manner that respects the principles of natural justice and fundamental justice, may a court that is conducting a judicial review of the removal decision affecting the individual have regard to evidence respecting such risk that was before the federal board, commission or other tribunal that made the removal decision?
2. Where a person has made a claim that the person faces a risk of torture or death in the person's country of origin, is a risk assessment and determination conducted in accordance with the principles of natural justice and fundamental justice a condition precedent to a valid determination to remove the individual to that country? If so, on the facts of this matter, did the process by which the respondent formed the opinion that the applicant constitutes a danger to the public in Canada constitute or incorporate such a risk assessment and determination?
3. When an immigration officer is making removal arrangements for a person under removal order and the person being removed claims that he/she is at risk of torture or death in the country to which he/she will be removed, must the immigration officer consider whether a risk assessment has been done? If yes, what is the extent of the Officer's obligation to decide whether an appropriate risk assessment has been conducted?
[29]
During a teleconference held on the 26th of June, some modifications to the proposed questions was discussed and the court advised that modifications would be made. The modifications, generally speaking, are technical in nature. The most important, perhaps, is the deletion of the second sentence in the proposed third question. In the opinion of the court, that sentence represented a request for legal advice rather than a proposal of a question that would be determinative on an appeal from the Order herein.
[30]
Accordingly, the following three questions will be certified.
1. Where a person has made a claim that the person faces a risk of torture or death in the person's country of origin, and faces removal to that country without the risk that he or she faces on removal having been assessed and determined in a manner that respects the principles of natural justice and fundamental justice, may a court that is conducting a judicial review of the destination decision affecting the individual have regard to evidence respecting such risk that was before the federal board, commission or other tribunal that made the destination decision?
2. Where a person has made a claim that the person faces a risk of torture or death in the person's country of origin, is a risk assessment and determination conducted in accordance with the principles of natural justice and fundamental justice a condition precedent to a valid determination to remove the individual to that country, without delay to allow for such an assessment and determination? If so, on the facts of this matter, did the process by which the respondent formed the opinion that the applicant constitutes a danger to the public in Canada constitute or incorporate such a risk assessment and determination?
3. When an immigration officer is making removal arrangements for a person under a removal order and the person being removed claims that he/she is at risk of torture or death in the country to which he/she will be removed, must the immigration officer consider whether a risk assessment and determination has been carried out?
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/klf
Footnotes
1.	R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2.
2.
Constitution Act, 1982
(R.S.C. 1985, Appendix II, No. 44), being Schedule B to the
Canada Act 1982
(U.K.) c. 11.
3.	[1998] F.C.J. No. 381 (Q.L.); 144 F.T.R. 76 (T.D.). Notice of Appeal filed 26 March, 1998 to the Federal Court of Appeal; A-201-98.
4.	[1995] F.C.J. No. 1785; 116 F.T.R. 4 (T.D.).
5.	[1998] F.C.J. No. 338; [1998] F.T.R. Uned. 135 (T.D.).
6.	See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1997] F.T.R. Uned. 683 (T.D.).
7.	I note, however, that there is also evidence before this court which appears to not have been before the removal officer: see, for example,
Applicant's Application Record
, Tab 3, page 6. For the reasons set out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, I have not had regard to such material in deciding this matter.
8.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
9.	See generally, P. Hogg,
Constitutional Law of Canada
(Carswell: Toronto, 1992) at 56-18;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.S.R.(2d) 1; 403 A.P.R. 1; 124 D.L.R.(4th) 129; 98 C.C.C.(3d) 20; 28 C.R.R.(2d) 1, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 321; 11 C.C.C.(3d) 481; 9 D.L.R.(4th) 161; 8 C.R.R. 193.
[End of document]