[1]
Joyal, J.
: The court is seized of an application for judicial review of a decision by the Attorney General of Canada refusing consent to prosecute the National Research Council (N.R.C.) for certain alleged offenses under s. 59 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6.
[2]
Section 59 makes it an offense to take retaliatory action against anyone who files a compliant with the Canadian Human Rights Commission. Section 60(4), however, requires that no criminal proceedings be instituted without the consent of the Attorney General.
The Background
[3]
The issue arises from a lengthy inquiry before a Human Rights Tribunal which, after some 26 sitting days, found that the N.R.C., through a number of its employees, had engaged in discriminatory practices against the plaintiff, Dr. Chander P. Grover, a research scientist with the N.R.C., on grounds of his race, colour and national origin, the whole contrary to s. 7 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
.
[4]
In the course of the hearings before the Tribunal on the discrimination issue, hearings which stretched over a period of one and a half years, between January 1990 and June 1991, the respondent N.R.C. issued to Dr. Grover a six month notice of layoff effective May 13, 1991. On May 28, 1991, by way of an agreement between the parties, the notice of layoff was rescinded and Dr. Grover was reinstated in his position.
[5]
That circumstance, was well as other incidents which occurred while the Tribunal was holding its hearings and which were allegedly retaliatory in nature, prompted the applicant Paul Winn, a friend of Dr. Grover, to write to the Attorney General, at that time the Honourable Kim Campbell, requesting the latter's consent to launch criminal proceedings against the N.R.C. on grounds of breach of s. 59.
[6]
In this letter dated November 12, 1991, the writer expressed the opinion that the Attorney General would be in a conflict position if consent were refused. It was the Attorney General's Department which had represented the respondent before the Tribunal and any refusal would be seen as a further defence of the N.R.C.'s reprehensible action. It was expected, therefore, that the Attorney General would grant her consent.
[7]
Casting aside the somewhat peremptory and premature opinion expressed by Mr. Winn, the Attorney General nevertheless advised him by letter dated March 19, 1992, that in the circumstances of the case, an outside counsel in the person of Mr. David Wakefield, a well-known member of the Criminal Bar in Ottawa, had been consulted to study the facts and advise her accordingly. In his report, Mr. Wakefield suggested that on the facts of the case, it would not be appropriate to provide the consent. The Attorney General further stated, however, that the issue of consent would be reassessed after the Human Rights Tribunal had reached its decision and had made findings of fact on the whole of the case.
[8]
When several months later, the Tribunal issued its decision and made a finding that as far as it was concerned, the acts complained of were retaliatory in nature, the Attorney General was asked again by Mr. Winn to give leave to prosecute. On October 1, 1992, Mr. Winn was told that Mr. David Wakefield had again been retained to reconsider his earlier opinion in the light of the Tribunal's decision.
[9]
On May 10, 1993, the newly-appointed Attorney General, the Honourable Pierre Blais, informed Mr. Winn that Mr. Wakefield had further reassessed the matter and that in all the circumstances of the case and on the advice of Mr. Wakefield, it would not be appropriate to provide the required consent.
The Issue
[10]
The applicants now seek an order of this court quashing the Attorney General's decision of May 10, 1993, and ordering the Attorney General to grant his consent. In the alternative, the court is asked to order the Attorney General to apply to the Federal Court of Canada for the appointment of a judicially-supervised and impartial person to give to the Attorney General a decision to grant or refuse the consent required under the
Canadian Human Rights Act
.
Applicant's Position
[11]
The grounds advanced by the applicants cover the whole gamut of law, doctrine and jurisprudence on the subject of judicial review in the exercise of administrative or executive discretion. The essential points raised may be summarized as follows:
1. As a premise, the exercise of statutory discretion conferred on the Attorney General is reviewable.
2. The request is not to have the Attorney General institute criminal proceedings but simply to consent to those proceedings being instituted by a third party.
3. The insufficiency of the evidence to gain a conviction, as disclosed in the investigation conducted by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, is irrelevant to the matter of consent to launch proceedings.
4. The principles and policies found in s. 2 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
must be considered and executive discretion must be exercised in a manner commensurate with the avowed purposes and intent of the statute.
5. There is obvious bias in the situation when the Attorney General, a defendant on behalf of a government agency, namely the N.R.C., is called upon to consent to prosecution against that same agency.
6. The Attorney General has breached his duty to act fairly and cannot objectively deal with the issue of consent in such circumstances.
7. The appointment of outside counsel to review the case and advise the Attorney General does not overcome the problem.
8. The decision fails to meet the well-known test of reasonableness and correctness.
The Respondent's Position
[12]
In defence, the respondent Attorney General first of all raises the status of both the Professional Institute of the Public Service and the Minority Advocacy and Rights Council to be joined as applicants in the proceedings for judicial review. In the eyes of the respondent, they are mere busybodies, do not contribute to the case and ought not to be parties to the application.
[13]
On more substantive grounds, the respondent states as follows:
1. There is no evidence of actual or perceived bias affecting the Attorney General. The dual capacity of any person holding that office is not, by itself, a source of illegality. It does not constituted impermissible bias.
2. Any Attorney General is bound by his oath of office to exercise truly and faithfully his duties and function to the best of his skill and knowledge.
3. The facts of the case, including the R.C.M.P. investigation, were entrusted to a third party, namely Mr. Wakefield, whose opinion, absent any evidence of impropriety or flagrant disregard of his professional obligations, was accepted by the Attorney General.
4. The scope of judicial review of prosecutorial discretion has traditionally been a closed door to the courts. In recent years, that doctrine of non-reviewability has been qualified, but only in the clearest of cases when violation of the principle of fundamental justice or abuses of the court's process are made evident.
5. In the case at bar, reviewability on grounds of fundamental justice or abuse of process can certainly not attach to the applicant Winn. His life or security is not at risk. A "fortiori", therefore, should the decision be closed to review, absent any evidence of malice, vindictiveness, bad faith or abusive conduct on the part of the Attorney General.
6. Whatever might be the duties statutorily imposed on the Attorney General to defend the respondent N.R.C., the former cannot shrink from his or her other duties when dealing with the matter of consent. The Attorney General is bound to act "ex necessitate".
7. In any event, as the applicable limitation period renders impossible the proposed prosecution, the issue before the court is now moot.
Findings
[14]
As a preliminary observation, the court should note the increasing tendency to judicialize everything by way of judicial review. It is true that courts cannot or should not avoid their responsibilities as guardians of the rule of law whenever they are faced with an impugned decision where some kind of illegality is alleged. Courts should be loathe, however, to extend their supervisory role over matters of law, as outlined for example in s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
, or assume an interventionist posture wherever fault may be found, no matter how trivial its nature or how inconsequential it might be to the very substance of the impugned decision. Especially in matters where statutory discretion is being exercised on a purely administrative basis must a court submerge its own opinion as to the wrongness of the decision and always remember that "the discipline of the law" imposes its own well-known and well-justified restraints on a court. To do otherwise effectively undermines the authority of Parliament, which has under full public glare delegated to individuals and boards the power to make decisions.
[15]
A reaffirmation of this principle of judicial restraint was expressed by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 437; 89 C.L.L.C. 14,050; [1989] 6 W.W.R. 673; 40 Admin. L.R. 181, where L'Heureux-Dubé, J., said at p. 1033:
"I agree [...] courts must defer to the judgment of administrative tribunals in matters falling squarely within the area of their expertise. It is now well-established that an administrative tribunal exceeds its jurisdiction because of error only if: (1) it errs in a patently unreasonable manner in respect of a question which is within its jurisdiction; or, (2) it commits a simple error in respect of a legislative provision limiting the tribunal's powers."
[16]
If such should be the doctrine when reviewing decisions of an adjudicative nature, all the more is it applicable when the decision is purely discretionary and the statute does not provide any directions or limitations as to when, how and to what extent that discretion should be exercised.
[17]
In the case before me, counsel for the applicants eloquently and forcefully detailed the myriad grounds on which judicial intervention was warranted, all of them gleaned of course from decided cases.
[18]
The applicants cite
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), to argue that the power of consent be exercised by considering the principles and policies expressed in the statute.
[20]
The well-known case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 671; 78 C.L.L.C. 14,181, is relied upon to impose a duty of fairness on a decision maker.
[21]
The maxim of "nemo index in causa sua debet esse" is also ground for argument on the bias issue.
[22]
There is the added element of conflict inherent in the Attorney General refusing to consent to prosecute an agency of government which the same Attorney General has defended before the Canadian Human Rights Commission.
[23]
Further, the applicants contend that the absence of any reasons in the Minister's decision, as to consideration which were analyzed or adopted in the process, makes the decision reviewable as lacking in justification.
[24]
Also, the decision of the Minister being sufficiently uninformative, the court should infer that the matter of public interest was not considered and the decision is therefore bad on its face.
[25]
In spite of a fairly thorough investigation by the R.C.M.P., which concluded that there was insufficient evidence to launch criminal proceedings, the applicants rely on the findings of the tribunal that there was retaliation, contrary to s. 59 of the
Act
, and rely on the direction of the tribunal that its finding be referred by the Canadian Human Rights Commission to the Attorney General for review and prosecution.
[26]
I need not recite the other arguments advanced by applicants' counsel on the judicial issues or on their submissions as to the righteousness of their cause, except to suggest that a court, on judicial review, is not a people's forum and that the political impact of a high profile case, such as the one before the tribunal, might be more of a matter for political rather than legal debate.
[27]
As I have already suggested, the thrust of the applicants' case, couched as it is under an undulating veil of law, precedent and policy, might have a persuasive strength on political or policy grounds, but I respectfully suggest that a court is the wrong forum to entertain it.
[28]
The response of respondent's counsel to all of this is of course to underline the historical and traditional role of the Attorney General to decide unilaterally and in his or her exclusive discretion any matter relating to criminal prosecutions. In this field, the Attorney General is only accountable to Parliament and not to a court of law. This is old law, found in
Ex parte Newton
(1855), 119 E.R. 323;
The Queen, on the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.).
[29]
It is also more current law, as found in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 81; 15 W.A.C. 81, the Supreme Court of Canada, in a unanimous judgment delivered by Madame Justice L'Heureux-Dubé, restated the doctrine of prosecutorial discretion and, with several authorities and precedents in support, made it quite clear that the Attorney General exercises a broad discretion in deciding to prosecute or not to prosecute and that such a decision is "particularly ill-suited to judicial review" (p. 761). The court quoted with approval, at p. 760, Monnin, C.J.M., of the Manitoba Court of Appeal in
Re. Balderstone and The Queen
(1983), 23 Man.R. (2d) 125; 4 D.L.R.(4th) 162, at p. 169:
"If a judge should attempt to review the actions or conduct of the Attorney General -- barring flagrant impropriety -- he could be falling into a field which is not his and interfering with the administrative and accusatorial function of the Attorney General or his officers."
[31]
Ancillary to that doctrine is the statement of La Forest, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 1; 45 C.C.C.(3d) 57; [1989] 1 W.W.R. 97; 66 C.R.(3d) 97, at p. 410, that such a discretion does not constitute an affront to the principles of fundamental justice under the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. His Lordship said:
"[...] Discretion is an essential feature of the criminal justice system. A system that attempted to eliminate discretion would be unworkably complex and rigid. Police necessarily exercise discretion in deciding when to lay charges, to arrest and to conduct incidental searches, as prosecutors do in deciding whether or not to withdraw a charge, enter a stay, consent to an adjournment, proceed by way of indictment or summary conviction, launch an appeal and so on."
[32]
On the bias issue, respondent's counsel refers to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 373, where the Federal Court of Appeal, as an answer to that particular exigency, stated that in effect, where by reason of institutional structures, i.e., judges hearing cases involving judges, the function must be performed "ex necessitate". It would appear to me that if a statute gives to the Attorney General the discretion to consent or refuse consent to prosecution, the seeming conflict or bias must give way to the need to have the statute respected and the discretionary function exercised.
[33]
Another case cited by respondent's counsel in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 269; 365 A.P.R. 269 (S.C.C.), a Supreme Court of Canada judgment rendered as recently as April 14, 1994 (Court File No. 23566), where at p. 19, Madame Justice L'Heureux-Dubé, on behalf of the majority, states:
"That courts have been extremely reluctant to interfere with prosecutorial discretion is clear from the case law. They have been so as a matter of principle based on the doctrine of separation of powers as well as a matter of policy founded on the efficiency of the system of criminal justice and the fact that prosecutorial discretion is especially ill-suited to judicial review."
[34]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  a judgment of Mr. Justice Rutherford of the Ontario Court of Justice (General Division), dated February 17, 1994, His Lordship refused to authorize the issuance of a subpoena against a former federal Minister of Labour who had granted leave to prosecute under the
Canada Labour Code
. The court's grounds are clearly stated that in the absence of clear and unmistakable evidence of abuse of powers and privileges given to an Attorney General, a decision of that nature is not reviewable by the courts.
[35]
Finally, on the issue of conflict of interest, there is quoted the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), where Huband, J.A., of the Court of Appeal of Manitoba said as follows at p. 307:
"The Attorney General is in a unique position, quite unlike that of a member of the private Bar. She is responsible for the prosecution of criminal cases within this jurisdiction. She also represents the Government of Manitoba for forensic purposes in civil suits. It is no answer, beyond political window dressing, to retain outside counsel. Whoever her agents may be, whether her permanent staff or outside special appointments, they must function under the Attorney General's direction. And the Attorney General must be allowed to fulfill the responsibilities of that office unless and until circumstances arise which would compel the court to interrupt the fulfillment of those responsibilities. No such case has been made out."
[36]
The court went further and adopted the following statement from Crown counsel in that case (also at p. 307):
"In summary [...] it is submitted that no conflict of interest arises in this case. There is no relationship between the Attorney General and A.D.J. that would impose a privilege of confidentiality on their communications. Further, no apprehension of bias arises out of the multiple responsibilities of the Attorney General in the conduct of civil and criminal litigation. It is not enough to simply suggest that conflicting duties imposed by legislation will create a perception of bias. There is presumption that the Attorney General will carry out her duties in good faith which is supported by the common law, legislation, policy and constitutional convention. There is no evidence, or even a suggestion that the exercise by the Attorney General of her discretion was for an oblique motive."
[37]
I should also traverse reply arguments advanced by applicants' counsel to the effect that the doctrine applicable to prosecutorial discretion is of no assistance when the issue is one of consent to prosecution. Counsel states that in the latter case, no information has been laid, no charges have been made, and the more simple issue is whether or not one Paul Winn may be given leave to launch a private prosecution. Behind this move, says counsel, is the clear statement of the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal that the respondent was in breach of s. 59 of the
Act
and in effect that prosecution should follow. In the circumstances, the exercise of prosecutorial discretion should be circumscribed and the criteria of judicial review should apply as in any other case. With respect, I disagree with counsel's argument on this. It merely raises a distinction without a difference.
Conclusions
[38]
It is evident from my findings that this application should be dismissed. In the circumstances, I need not rule on the respondent's submission that, in any event, the issue is moot on the grounds that the prescriptive period to institute criminal proceedings has expired.
[39]
Neither do I have to rule on the status of the applicants Professional Institute of the Public Service and Minority Advocacy and Rights Council. I frankly do not see what they add to the obvious interest of Mr. Winn and Dr. Grover, but as no request was made to hear separate argument on their behalf, a request I would have refused, no harm has been done. I should simply let them continue to have their names forever inscribed in the style of cause.
[40]
As is often the case, issues involving challenges under the discrimination provisions of the human rights legislation take on a life of their own. Much of the argument advanced by the applicants rested on the extremely sensitive political aspect of an agency of government, through some of its servants, being engaged, as the tribunal expressed it, in callous, humiliating, demeaning and devastating conduct towards a fellow employee. Much of the argument raised issues of public opinion, of political taint, and of indignation at being denied full retribution by way of criminal prosecution and at the sanctioning and condoning of such scandalous conduct. I was invited to eschew a doctrinaire approach to case law, that I should assume a bolder and more courageous mantle and clear, grub and grade a new road to reach loftier heights of justice. To do otherwise might categorize me, as the House of Lords once remarked in another case, as a timid, unimaginative and pusillanimous purveyor of justice. Perhaps.
[41]
The application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/saf
[End of document]