[1]
Simpson, J.
[orally]: Zoya Turanskaya (the "Applicant") was found by a panel of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "Board") to be a stateless person. Cuba and the Ukraine were her countries of former habitual residence. The Board concluded that the Applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution regarding Cuba, but not with respect to the Ukraine. 	The respondent concedes that the Board erred in law in requiring the Applicant to demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution in respect of both countries of former habitual residence (the "Error"). In law, once the Applicant satisfied the Board of her fears in relation to Cuba she was entitled to Convention refugee status.
[2]
The Applicant's two children were found to be Convention refugees based on the Cuban situation and there is no doubt that, but for the Error, the Board would have found the Applicant to be a Convention refugee. Accordingly, I am asked by the Applicant's counsel to refer the matter back to the Board with a direction that it declare the Applicant to be a Convention refugee. (the "Specific Direction").
[3]
On these facts, two issues arise. One is the question of whether I have jurisdiction to give the Specific Direction and the second concerns the appropriate exercise of any such jurisdiction.
Jurisdiction
[4]
The respondent asked me to disagree with the decision reached by  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). In that case, Her Ladyship noted that, under (former) s. 52(c)(II) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, the Court of Appeal had the power to refer back with directions and that, in appropriate cases, it referred matters back with directions which were so specific that they predetermined the Board's decision. She therefore concluded that the Federal Court, Trial Division operating under identical language in s. 18.1(3)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
is also entitled to direct the Board to reach specific conclusions.
[5]
The respondent says, however, that s. 52(c)(II) appeared in a different context in that the section also allowed the Federal Court of Appeal to substitute its own decision for one made by the Board. As the Federal Court of Appeal decided in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , that power is not given to the Federal Court Trial Division. Accordingly, the respondent submits that the Trial Division has no jurisdiction to give the Board directions which compel a specific result.
[6]
I accept that there will sometimes be situations in which, by giving specific directions, this Court will be able to accomplish indirectly what it is not authorized to do directly. It will be able to compel the Board to reach a specific conclusion thereby, in effect, substituting its decision for that made by the Board.
[7]
However, in spite of this fact, I agree with Justice Reed that specific directions may be given. In view of the Court of Appeal's practice of giving specific directions, had Parliament wished to forestall such a practice in the Trial Division, it would have imposed limitations on the nature of directions which the Trial Division could give. No such restrictions have been imposed.
[8]
Further, given the present context in which we find ourselves with limited public resources, it seems practical to interpret s. 18.1(3)(b) to allow directions to be made which will avoid rehearings in appropriate cases.
[9]
Accordingly, I conclude that I have the jurisdiction to make the Specific Direction sought by the Applicant.
Discretion
[10]
The respondent did not seek judicial review of the Board's decision. However, it now takes the position that the Board may well have erred when it concluded that the Claimant is stateless. There appears to be some evidence on which the Board could have found the Applicant to be a national of the Ukraine. Indeed, that was the Board's initial view but, in its decision, it changed its mind and determined that she was a stateless person.
[11]
The respondent submits that when, considering whether to give the Specific Direction, I should look beyond the Board's decision to the proceeding as a whole. Accordingly, if I conclude that there is evidence about statelessness on which another panel of the Board might reach a different conclusion, I should not give the Specific Direction. In short, I should exercise my discretion in the context of the entire proceeding.
[12]
The Applicant, on the other hand, says that the question before me is a narrow one which focuses only on the Error and which asks "but for the Error, would the decision necessarily be the one which the Applicant seeks by way of the Specific Direction?".
[13]
I have concluded that I should exercise my discretion in the context of the Board's decision and that I should not go behind that decision on matters unrelated to the Error brought forward on judicial review.
[14]
In this case, the Board concluded that the Applicant had a well-founded fear of persecution in relation to Cuba. I am satisfied that, but for the Error which caused the Board to require the Applicant to demonstrate a well-founded fear in respect of the Ukraine as well, the Board would have declared the Applicant to be a Convention refugee based on her Cuban situation.
[15]
Accordingly, an order will go directing the Board to declare the Applicant to be a Convention refugee.
Certification
[16]
The following question is accepted for certification: Does the Federal Court Trial Division have jurisdiction to direct the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board to declare an Applicant to be a Convention refugee pursuant to s. 18.1(3)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
?
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/vem
[End of document]