[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.:
By this application heard at Edmonton, Alberta on January 5, 1995, the defendant seeks:
"(a) to strike out the statement of claim in part by reason of failure to disclose a cause of action;
"(b) to obtain summary judgment on the remainder of the statement of claim by reason of expiry of a limitation period; and
"(c) if any part of the statement of claim should remain, to allow an appeal from the learned Prothonotary and to order particulars of the allegations in the statement of claim.
"
[2]
Following initial submissions, I directed written argument which was filed by the defendant on January 27, 1995 and by way of reply on March 2, 1995 and by the plaintiff on February 17, 1995. In oral reasons on December 15, 1995, I ruled that the limitation period had not expired for the purposes of this application and I confirmed the order of Mr. Hargrave dated June 14, 1994. I also indicated that these written reasons would be filed as soon as possible and that the parties may apply for a conference call for any directions they think are required.
[3]
The plaintiff, Donna McMillan, was hired by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (the "R.C.M.P.") on March 7, 1975. The plaintiff completed her recruit training and served for five years in the Province of British Columbia. In 1980, the plaintiff was transferred and served in Morinville, Alberta and Fort Saskatchewan, Alberta. The plaintiff filed her resignation in April of 1990 and resigned on May 19, 1990.
[4]
By statement of claim filed May 15, 1992, the plaintiff alleges that her resignation was precipitated by acts of sexual harassment inflicted by her colleagues and unchecked by her supervisors. This conduct is alleged to have commenced sometime in 1980 and continued until she resigned from the R.C.M.P. The plaintiff claims to have suffered harassment in the form of:
"a) the downgrading of her assessments;
b) a failure to apply the same rules for transfers to the plaintiff as were applied to male members of the R.C.M.P.;
c) the conducting of internal investigations of the plaintiff when they were not conducted in like circumstances for male members of the R.C.M.P.;
d) a general form of ostracism and harassment.
"
The plaintiff claims that the aforementioned harassment caused her health to deteriorate to such an extent that she was forced to resign.
[5]
The plaintiff further alleges that such harassment was inflicted knowing that it would cause the plaintiff harm and with the intention of forcing her to resign. The negligence of the defendant is described as the failure to control members of the R.C.M.P. from harassing the plaintiff as well as encouraging such harassment.
[6]
The plaintiff claims that by permitting harassment causing serious pain, suffering and the loss of enjoyment of life, the defendant breached the terms of the employment contract. It is the contention of the plaintiff that it was an implied term of the contract of employment that she be permitted to work without harassment and that she be treated in the same manner as were male members of the R.C.M.P. Finally, the plaintiff claims that the defendant breached its duty pursuant to the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
to treat her fairly and without discrimination based upon her sex.
[7]
The plaintiff claims the following relief:
(a) General damages and negligence in the amount of $250,000.00;
(b) General damages for breach of contract for employment in the amount of $250,000.00;
(c) General damages for pain and suffering in the amount of $100,000.00;
(d) For violation of her rights under the
Charter of Rights
- $250,000.00;
(e) Special damages in an amount to be proven at the trial of this action;
(f) Costs;
(g) Interest.
[8]
The defendant by way of amended statement of defence rejects the allegations of the plaintiff and pleads in part the following:
"5. The statement of claim discloses no reasonable cause of action. Termination of service with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police does not give rise to a cause of action in the civil courts for alleged wrongful dismissal or breach of contract. The defendant pleads the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. R-10, as amended.
"6. Further, by virtue of sections 3 and 10 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-50 as amended, no proceedings lie against the defendant because the acts or omissions complained of in the statement of claim do not make out, or in the alternative would not give rise to, a cause of action against individual servants of the defendant.
"7. Further, as regards the allegations of harassment expressed in the statement of claim, there is no common law tort of harassment. The plaintiff's remedy for complaints that her rights were adversely affected was to have recourse to the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6.
"8. Further, the plaintiff's action is statute barred in whole or in part by operation of the
Limitation of Actions Act
of Alberta, R.S.A. 1980, c. L-15.
"
Limitation Period
[9]
The moving party seeks summary judgment of the actions in tort on the basis that tort actions in Alberta have a two year limitation period. According to section 3 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act,
S.C. 1990, c. 8:
"The Crown is liable in tort for the damages for which, if it were a private person of full age and capacity, it would be liable
a) in respect of a tort committed by a servant of the Crown; or
b) in respect of a breach of duty attaching to the ownership, occupation, possession or control of property.
"
The prescriptive period is dealt with in the same
Act
under Part II-Proceedings:
"32. Except as otherwise provided in this Act or in any other Act of Parliament, the laws relating to prescription and the limitation of actions in force in a province between subject and subject apply to any proceedings by or against the Crown in respect of any cause of action arising in that province, and proceedings by or against the Crown in respect of a cause of action arising otherwise than in a province shall be taken within six years after the cause of action arose."
The laws of Alberta apply because the action arose in that province. The relevant provisions of the
Limitation of Actions Act
, R.S.A. 1980, c. L-15,
are s. 4(1)(c)(ii) and ss. 51 and 52.
"4(1) The following actions shall be commenced within and not after the time respectively hereinafter mentioned:
(c) actions
i) for the recovery of money, ... whether recoverable as a debt or damages or otherwise, ... on a simple contract, express or implied, ...
within six years after the cause of action arose;
"
Thus an action framed in breach of contract must be commenced within a period of six years from the date of the cause of action. However, ss. 51 and 52 of the
Act
provide the following exception:
"51 Except as otherwise provided in this Part, an action for
(b) trespass to the person, assault, battery, wounding or other injury to the person, whether arising from an unlawful act or from negligence or from breach of a statutory duty,
may be commenced within two years after the cause of action arose and not afterwards.
"52 This Part applies to every action in which the damages claimed consist of or include damages in respect of injury to the person, whether the action is or may be founded on tort, breach of contract or breach of statutory duty."
[10]
These provisions have been recently interpreted by Forsyth, J., of the Alberta Court of Queen's Bench in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.C.(2d) 315 (Q.B.), at 319-320
C.P.C.:
"I turn now to a plain consideration of the words of s. 52. Clearly if it had been intended to have limited application to only some sections contained in Part 9 it would have said so and specified those sections. The language of s. 52 is clear in providing that Part 9 applies to actions of the nature before the court, namely an action in which damages are claimed in respect to an injury to the person founded on breach of contract. ... Section 4(1)(c) speaks in general terms of recovery of damages for breach of contract whereas s. 51 is specific in speaking of injury to the person, and s. 52 is even more specific [in] speaking of damages in respect of injury to the person founded on breach of contract."
Accordingly, the plaintiff's action must not have been commenced more than two years after the cause of action arose.
[11]
In the present case the plaintiff is not seeking recovery for one particular incident but rather for the alleged harm caused by discrimination over a ten year period. In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), I treated a situation similar to the case at bar as a continuing tort. I found it preferable to proceed to trial where the arguments could be considered more fully. Similarly, in the case at bar, I will not disallow the plaintiff's application on the basis that it was brought too late. The plaintiff would have known that she had a cause of action on May 19, 1990, the day of her resignation. Since the plaintiff's action was commenced on May 15, 1992, within the two year limitation period prescribed by the
Limitation of Actions Act
, the defendant's request for summary judgment must be denied.
Order For Particulars
[12]
The defendant complains that the aggregate of the particulars provided to date fail to comply with the order of Mr. Justice Noël dated January 18, 1994. The defendant argues that the order for further particulars of Prothonotary John A. Hargrave of June 14, 1994 [see 80 F.T.R. 127] is inconsistent with the order of Noël, J., and that it was based on an erroneous principle or a misapprehension of the facts.
[13]
The chronology of the demand for particulars unfolded as follows. By letter dated September 15, 1993, the defendant sought particulars of the impugned conduct alleged to have been committed by the R.C.M.P. Specifically, the Department of Justice requested:
"[A] brief description of each and every incident of harassment complained of including the date of the alleged harassment, the location of the alleged harassment, and the identity of the person(s) alleged to have committed the harassment complained of.
. . . . .
"[A] brief description of each instance in which it alleged that the Defendant failed to control members of the RCMP from harassing the plaintiff including the date(s), location(s) and circumstances surrounding the said failure.
. . . . .
"[A] brief description of the circumstances of each and every incident in which it is alleged that the Defendant allowed or encouraged the alleged harassment of the plaintiff, including the date(s) of the alleged encouragement, the location(s) of the alleged encouragement and the identity of the person(s) alleged to have committed the said encouragement.
. . . . .
"[T]he date on which the alleged contract was formed, the terms of the contract, the identity of the person(s) on behalf of the Defendant alleged to have negotiated, executed or concluded the alleged contract, and (if the contract is in writing) a copy of said writing.
. . . . .
"[A] further identification of the specific rights said to have been violated."
[14]
This request was not complied with so the defendant sought an order for particulars. On January 18, 1994, Noël, J., ordered the following:
"UPON AN APPLICATION on behalf of counsel for the Defendant for an order to compel particulars asked for in the Demand for Particulars filed September 15, 1993 pursuant to rule 415 of the
Federal Court Rules
, and served on counsel for the plaintiff;
"The Application is allowed on consent. The particulars sought shall be provided by March 18, 1994.
"No order as to costs."
[15]
On March 29, 1994, the plaintiff provided a four page summary of some two dozen incidents of alleged harassment mostly of an ongoing nature taking place between 1980 and 1990. On June 14, 1994, the defendant sought further particulars based upon the position that the Crown nominee for examination for discovery required assistance in his role as deponent of the Affidavit of Documents and so that he might make reasonable inquiry of twenty-two past and present members of the R.C.M.P. Mr. Hargrave ordered the plaintiff to provide an enumerated list of fourteen particulars which for the most part consisted of the relevant dates and names. However, in his interpretation of the six functions of particulars as set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 52 N.R. 282 (F.C.A.), Mr. Hargrave found that many of the further particulars requested by the defendant were in fact evidence going to how the harassment would be proven and that such evidence was best explored on examination for discovery. Mr. Hargrave states at page 131:
"The purpose of these further particulars are to enable Peter Wlodarczak to narrow down dates during which harassments took place both for the purposes of locating documents and for interviewing the individuals named by the plaintiff in the previous consent particulars. It is my view that any further particulars would not be in the nature of delineation of issues, but rather in the nature of evidence going to prove harassments."
The plaintiff answered the demand of the defendant for further and better particulars on July 25, 1995, by providing the relevant names and dates, as ordered by Mr. Hargrave.
[16]
While I would agree that the issues could be further narrowed by more open disclosure I am also aware that without production of those documents in the care and possession of the Crown, the plaintiff cannot be expected to remember minute details and dates of what she has described as continuous and general harassment.
[17]
I find no error in the interpretation of Prothonotary John A. Hargrave nor do I find that it was based on an erroneous principle or a misapprehension of the facts. Furthermore, the order of Mr. Hargrave is not at odds with the order issued by Mr. Justice Noël. I am of the opinion that the amended particulars as filed provide adequate disclosure of the relevant names and incidents so that the issues may be appropriately narrowed and the defense may make the necessary inquiries to prepare its case.
Motion To Strike
[18]
The moving party contends that the statement of claim discloses no reasonable cause of action for breach of contract nor under s. 15 of the
Charter
. The burden on the applicant under rule 419(1)(a) is heavy since the court will only strike out portions of pleadings if it is clear that the claim cannot be amended to show a proper cause of action (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).)
Breach Of Contract
[19]
The plaintiff submits that, as an implied term of her contract of employment, she was entitled to work in a harassment free environment and be treated in the same manner as male members, however it is not settled law that members of the R.C.M.P. have entered into an employment contract.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), cited by the plaintiff, Mr. Justice Dubé was called upon to address a similar issue. In his reasons for judgment, he quoted Mr. Justice Décary of the Federal Court of Appeal who noted the "special and ambiguous status of members of the R.C.M.P. in the ordinary law" (ibid. at 343 F.C.). Décary, J.A., was referring to the fact that members of the R.C.M.P. fall somewhere between ordinary citizens who are eligible to benefit from the protection of contract law in their employment relationships, and members of the Armed Forces, who are not eligible for such benefits, serving as they do at the pleasure of the Crown.
[20]
It would be inappropriate to rely on
Clark
to either support or deny the application of contract law to the terms of employment of members of the R.C.M.P. Dubé, J., did not resolve the issue, preferring to rule that the particular facts of the case did not justify recourse to wrongful dismissal. However, there may be other issues of contract law which could apply to members of the R.C.M.P. The plaintiff should have the opportunity to lead evidence at trial of unofficial discrimination in her former workplace. This issue should be decided after full discovery and argument based upon the merits of the case.
Subsection 15(1) of the Charter
[21]
The defendant alleges that the plaintiff's statement of claim does not disclose a cause of action under subs. 15(1) of the
Charter
. Subsection 15(1) reads as follows:
"15(1) Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination and, in particular, without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability."
The plaintiff asserts that she was subjected to sexual harassment in her workplace and that this constitutes sex discrimination, which is prohibited by subs. 15(1).
[22]
Recently, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 1, the Supreme Court of Canada had to consider the impact of the
Charter
in an action for damages for defamation. The plaintiff's allegation was that she suffered as a result of actions of government employees. The factual background is set out at page 1141  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"As in all actions for libel, the factual background is extremely important and must be set out in some detail. At the time the defamatory statements were made, Casey Hill was employed as counsel with the Crown Law Office, Criminal Division of the Ministry of the Attorney General for the Province of Ontario. He had given advice to the Ontario Provincial Police ('OPP') regarding a warrant obtained on March 1, 1983 which authorized a search of the premises occupied by Scientology. During the execution of the search warrant on March 3 and 4, 1983, approximately 250,000 documents, comprising over two million pages of material, were seized. These documents were stored in some 900 boxes at an OPP building in Toronto."
At pages 1213-1214  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"First, however, in order to dispel any possible confusion regarding the applicability of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
to the common law, I note that this issue can be easily summarized in the following two principles, both of which were first articulated by McIntyre, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
1. The
Charter
does not directly apply to the common law unless it is the basis of some governmental action.
2. Even though the
Charter
does not directly apply to the common law absent government action, the common law must nonetheless be developed in accordance with
Charter
values." (To the same effect, see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 125; 68 C.C.C.(3d) 289;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 81; 94 C.C.C.(3d) 289; 25 C.R.R.(2d) 1, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 241; 97 W.A.C. 241, per L'Heureux-Dubé, J.)
[23]
Not surprisingly, however, there was an extensive statutory scheme within which the plaintiff's superiors were to function. The
R.C.M.P. Act
contained the following disciplinary provision:
"25. Every member who
(b) abuses or maltreats any other member who is inferior in rank or over whom he is in authority,
(f) overholds any complaint,
. . . . .
(o) conducts himself in a scandalous, infamous, disgraceful, profane or immoral manner,
is guilty of an offence, to be known as a major service offence, and is liable to trial and punishment as prescribed in this Part."
In 1986, the
R.C.M.P. Act
was amended. (
An Act to amend the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act and other Acts in consequence thereof
, R.S.C. 1985, c. 8 (2nd Supp.).) The provisions on discipline were replaced and the Governor-in-Council was granted discretion to establish a Code of Conduct to govern the conduct of members (ibid. at s. 38). Consequently,
Regulations
were drawn up which set out this Code. Section 48 of SOR 88-361 stated that "[a] member shall respect the rights of all persons". This rule was subsequently clarified with the adoption of a second subsection which reads:
"(2) Without restricting the generality of subsection (1), a member shall not by words or actions exhibit conduct that discriminates against any person in respect of that person's race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age, mental or physical disability or family or marital status (SOR 94-219, s. 19)."
The defendant argues that the policy of the R.C.M.P. throughout the years has been to promote a discrimination-free work environment. Everyone on the Force was empowered by statute to contribute to this environment. When those who oversaw the duties of the plaintiff acted in contravention of the Code of Conduct and other rules of similar intent, they were acting outside of their statutory authority. Thus, they cannot be considered to have been acting on behalf of the Crown. Consequently, the
Charter
has no application to the actions they committed at that time. In keeping with the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada noted above, I must find that they were acting on their own behalf and that their actions cannot be construed as "government action".
[24]
The plaintiff would not succeed at trial if she were to allege that the discrimination of which she complains is prohibited by the
Charter
. Consequently, the
Charter
argument should be struck from her statement of claim. In addition, she should be given the opportunity, pursuant to rule 427, to amend her statement of claim as a result of these reasons.
[25]
For the reasons outlined above, the defendant's application for summary judgment is dismissed because the plaintiff's claim is not barred by the
Limitation Of Actions Act
. The defendant's application for an appeal of the order of the prothonotary is dismissed. The defendant's motion to strike the plaintiff's statement of claim is dismissed in part. It is hereby ordered that only that portion of the plaintiff's statement of claim which alleges an infringement of her
Charter
rights shall be struck. In addition, the plaintiff should be given 60 days to amend her pleadings, pursuant to rule 427.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Jean Merlini/slm
[End of document]