Introduction
[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an application under s. 44 of the Access to Information Act, S.C. 1980-81-82-83, c. 111, for a review of a decision of the respondent Minister to disclose part of a record consisting of material originally submitted to the respondent Minister by the applicants (who constitute the Canadian Football League and are referred to herein compendiously as "the C.F.L.").
[2]
I have concluded that the application should be dismissed but in giving these reasons I will, as required by s. 47 of the Act, "take every reasonable precaution" to avoid disclosure of such information as would render academic any possible appeal from my decision. I think it reasonable to note at the outset that the material in question consists of a brief submitted to the Government of Canada by the applicants, in which certain information about the Canadian Football League was conveyed to the Government and certain proposals were made for governmental action possibly involving legislation or appropriations or both. Most of this information as to the nature of the material in question can already be ascertained from that part of the court record which is public. To the extent that it cannot, I feel I must reveal such information in order to provide meaningful reasons.
Background Facts
[3]
On October 9, 1986, the Minister of State for Fitness and Amateur Sports received a request pursuant to the Access to Information Act, for, inter alia,
"any and all reports, and or studies, and or analysis regarding the Canadian Football League ... I request information since Sept. 1984."
On April 1, 1987, the Acting Access to Information Coordinator for the Fitness and Amateur Sports Programme advised Mr. Douglas H. Mitchell, Commissioner of the Canadian Football League, that such a request had been received and that the only document so far identified that might be released pursuant to this request was a brief submitted by the C.F.L. to the Minister dated April, 1986. On April 20, 1986, counsel for the C.F.L. advised the Access to Information Coordinator that it was strongly of the view that this brief should not be disclosed to the requesting party in whole or in part. The Coordinator advised Mr. Mitchell on September 30, 1987, that the relevant officials had considered the representation by counsel, had reviewed the brief and the Act, and had decided that the brief should be released except for certain portions which the government was prepared to delete. A copy of the brief was sent with the proposed deletions highlighted. On October 15, 1987, the C.F.L. filed this application for review. There then ensued a long period in which nothing appears to have been done by the C.F.L. to further this application. The matter was finally brought on before the Associate Chief Justice on May 16, 1988, by means of a notice of motion filed by the respondent Minister seeking an order directing that the record in question be filed in a sealed envelope and seeking directions and a date for a hearing of the application for review. On that date the Associate Chief Justice issued an order for the filing of the record on a confidential basis and directing the applicants to serve on counsel for the respondent on a confidential basis, within thirty days, the affidavit material upon which the C.F.L. intended to rely. The order indicated that the C.F.L. could then seek an order to preserve the confidentiality of such affidavit material in Court and for directions for the hearing of the matter. While I understand there were then communication between counsel for the C.F.L. and the Minister as to the contents of such an affidavit, the C.F.L. did not come back to the Court for further directions nor did it present an affidavit for confidential filing until December 13, 1988. In the meantime, as the C.F.L. had taken no steps to bring the matter on for hearing, counsel for the respondent Minister wrote to the Court on September 21, 1988, asking for a hearing date to be fixed. On October 18, 1988, a hearing date was fixed for December 15, 1988.
[4]
Also in the meantime, Mr. David Shoalts, a journalist employed in the sports department of the Globe and Mail newspaper in Toronto, made a request on May 5, 1988, to the Government of Canada for records under the Access to Information Act. While that request was very lengthy, it will suffice to say that the document considered by the Minister to be relevant to that request was the same brief to whose disclosure the C.F.L. had already taken objection as noted above. On August 23, 1988, Mr. Shoalts gave notice that he intended to participate as a party in this review proceeding. The other parties have not objected to his participation, apparently treating him as a person entitled to participate pursuant to s. 44(3) of the Act.
[5]
I might add that although an order was given on October 18, 1988, setting this matter down for hearing in Toronto on December 15, 1988, the C.F.L.'s motion record was not filed until December 13th, two days before the date fixed for the hearing, notwithstanding the requirement of rule 321.1 that such records be filed ten days before the hearing date. Further, the record as filed was incomplete in that it did not contain a concise statement of the facts and law to be relied on by the C.F.L. This latter portion was not provided until December 19th, and then only because I was obliged to adjourn until December 21st the hearing scheduled for December 15th. I granted that adjournment at the request of the C.F.L., but only on certain conditions one of which was that the C.F.L.'s record be completed by December 19th.
Issues
[6]
The C.F.L. contends that its brief should not be disclosed on the following grounds: (a) it is not a "record under the control of a government institution"; (b) its disclosure is precluded by s. 20(1)(b) of the Act because it contains financial and commercial information of a confidential nature; (c) its disclosure is precluded by s. 20(1)(c) of the Act because it contains information whose disclosure could be expected to result in financial loss or prejudice to the competitive position of the applicants; and (d) although the respondent Minister has indicated that portions will be deleted before the remainder of the brief is disclosed, the remaining passages are not reasonably severable as required by s. 25 of the Act.
Is this a "record under the control
of a government institution"?
[7]
Section 2(1) of the Access to Information Act provides as follows:
"2(1) The purpose of this Act is to extend the present laws of Canada to provide a right of access to information in records under the control of a government institution in accordance with the principles that government information should be available to the public, that necessary exceptions to the right of access should be limited and specific and that decisions on the disclosure of government information should be reviewed independently of government."
Section 4(1) gives a general right to Canadians and permanent residents to "access to any record under the control of a government institution", subject of course to other provisions of the Act.
[8]
The C.F.L. contends that because the document in question here was marked "confidential" and its confidential nature was stressed to the government at the time of its presentation to the government, which presentation was voluntary and not mandatory, the document is not "government information" within the stated purpose of the Act in s. 2(1) nor is it "under the control of a government institution" as referred to in ss. 2(1) and 4(1).
[9]
The plain meaning of the language employed in the Act does not suggest that "information", "government information", or "record under the control" of the government must be limited by some test as to how and on what terms the information or record came into the hands of the government. That is the kind of qualification which the C.F.L. is asking me to create. I can find no basis for doing so. The plain meaning of ss. 2(1) and 4(1) as quoted above is that the Act gives access, subject to many exceptions, to any record, or information in a record, which happens to be within the custody of the government regardless of the means by which that custody was obtained. That is surely the interpretation which is also most consistent with the purpose of the Act. The interpretation advanced by the C.F.L., on the other hand, appears to be inconsistent with s. 20(1)(b) which it also relies on: that paragraph obviously assumes that "confidential information supplied to a government institution by a third party" is prima facie within the definition of "record" to which access would otherwise be available were it not for the possible protection of this paragraph. In other words, this exception proves the rule that confidential material supplied by a third party to the government can form all or part of a "record under the control of a government institution". It will be noted that the word "supplied" in s. 20(1)(b) is not modified by any terms such as "under compulsion".
Possible exemption under s. 20(1)(b)
[10]
This section requires that the head of a government institution refuse to disclose any record that contains
"(b) financial, commercial, scientific or technical information that is confidential information supplied to a government institution by a third party and is treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party;"
The C.F.L. contends that the brief in question contains financial or commercial information of a confidential nature. The burden of proof of that allegation is, of course, on the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.))
[11]
I have grave doubts that what remains in the expurgated version of this document which the Minister proposes to release can be said in any serious way to amount to financial or commercial information.
[12]
I need not decide that question, however, as I am satisfied that the applicants have not met the burden of proof that this is "confidential information". This is a matter which must be determined objectively by considering whether the information is by its nature confidential. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)) I am unable to see much in the expurgated version which would not be known in at least a general way by any sports fan or indeed by almost any reasonably alert resident of Canada. Although invited to do so, counsel for the C.F.L. was unable to identify any particular passage of this nature. Instead, he argued that the very facts of the submission being made and of its general nature (calling as it does for legislation or the expenditure of public funds or both) were the inherently confidential aspects of the censored version of the brief which the Minister intends to disclose.
[13]
I am satisfied that when individuals, associations, or corporations approach the government for special action in their favour, it is not enough to state that their submission is confidential in order to make it so in an objective sense. Such a principle would surely undermine much of the purpose of this Act which in part is to make available to the public the information upon which government action is taken or refused. Nor would it be consistent with that purpose if a Minister or his officials were able to exempt information from disclosure simply by agreeing when it is submitted that it would be treated as confidential. (There is no evidence that any such express commitment was made in this case.)
[14]
Applying the "reasonable man" test which the applicants have invited me to do, I fail to see how a reasonable man can expect the very fact of his private approaches to government for special governmental action in his favour to remain forever confidential, particularly when what is sought would involve the approval by Parliament of legislation or appropriations. There may well be some facts communicated during such approaches, such as those concerning personal or corporate finances, that may by their nature be confidential, but I fail to see anything of that kind here nor does the C.F.L. really identify any such material in the expurgated brief.
Possible exemptions under s. 20(1)(c)
[15]
This section requires the government to refuse disclosure of any record that contains
"(c) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to result in material financial loss or gain to, or could reasonably be expected to prejudice the competitive position of, a third party; ..."
The Federal Court of Appeal has held that an applicant to invoke this paragraph must establish "a reasonable expectation of probable harm". (Canada Packers case, supra note 2 at 13.) The only evidence I have of such prejudice is an affidavit of Douglas H. Mitchell which describes in the most general way certain consequences that "could" ensue from disclosure of the brief. Such evidence falls far short of meeting the burden of proof on the C.F.L. It is also seriously brought into question by evidence of numerous articles published in the Globe and Mail which have already portrayed most of the problems referred to in the brief. It is difficult to believe that much additional injury could be causally linked to the disclosure of the expurgated version of this brief which, if it occurs in accordance with this judgment, will not happen until nearly three years after its submission to the government.
Severability under s. 25
[16]
This section provides that where the head of an institution is authorized to refuse to disclose a record because it contains information which the Act requires not to be disclosed, he is authorized to disclose any part of that record that does not contain such material if it "can reasonably be severed from" the protected material. The applicants contend that the portion of the brief which the Minister proposes to disclose in this case cannot reasonably be severed from those portions which he does not intend to disclose. It is argued that the material which is left for disclosure is misleading by reason of the absence of key passages which have been expurgated. It is said that portions of the remaining material, particularly where they follow a blank space where material has been deleted, will give rise to harmful speculation as to what was not disclosed. I have reread the entire brief including the passages which are not to be disclosed and I am unable to agree that such a severance would be unreasonable. I believe that what remains is meaningful without the deleted passages and does not distort the sense of the original brief. Therefore the severance is permitted by s. 25. This is not affected by any fear, whether reasonable or not, of speculation in the media as to what has not been disclosed. That is a possibility where any partial record is disclosed but is an inherent part of the system prescribed by the Act.
Conclusion
[17]
The application will therefore be dismissed. The affidavit of John Horricks sworn May 4, 1988 and filed on a confidential basis pursuant to the order of Jerome, A.C.J., of May 16, 1988, shall remain under seal and not form part of the public record of the court. I directed on December 21, 1988 that the supplementary motion record of the applicants containing the same affidavit of John Horricks and a supplementary affidavit of Douglas H. Mitchell sworn November 10, 1988, be filed on a confidential basis and retained in that form subject to further order. Although requested by the respondent Shoalts to release at least some of the contents of the supplementary affidavit of Douglas H. Mitchell, I am not going to do so. It appears to me that there are some references in the affidavit and in its exhibits to aspects of the brief which the Minister does not propose to disclose. Having regard to the court's responsibility under s. 47 of the Access to Information Act to take every reasonable precaution to avoid disclosure of material which the Minister is required not to disclose, and having regard to the fact that this application is in respect of the disclosure of the brief itself and not of these other materials, I am not going to attempt to sever this material. This, of course, does not preclude the intended release by the Minister of the expurgated version of the brief which also appears as Exhibit C in Mr. Mitchell's supplementary affidavit.
[18]
I will suspend the operation of my order for thirty days to allow the applicants to consider whether they wish to appeal.
Costs
[19]
Costs will be payable by the applicants, the C.F.L. As I outlined in the facts above, the C.F.L. has not acted in a diligent manner in bringing this matter on for hearing. There was apparent inaction on its part from October 1987 to May 16, 1988, when it was brought before the court by the respondent Minister. On that date it was ordered to serve on counsel for the Minister within thirty days any affidavit it intended to rely on and then to seek further direction as to its filing on a confidential basis and with respect to the hearing. That affidavit (slightly over two pages) was not sworn until November 10, 1988 and it was not filed until December 13th. Further, although the hearing date of December 15th was fixed by the court on October 18th, the C.F.L. failed to file any record for that hearing by the deadline prescribed by rule 321.1, namely at least ten days prior to the hearing. When it did file a record two days prior to the hearing date the record was incomplete. The main explanation which counsel has given for this course of action is, first, that much of this time was spent in negotiation with counsel for the respondent Minister and then with counsel for the respondent Shoalts after the latter entered the proceeding in August; and, secondly, that he did not file a memorandum of fact and law as required by the Rules because he thought it inappropriate having regard to the confidentiality of his arguments. But it was open to him at all times to seek directions from the court with respect to the filing of any affidavits on a confidential basis and with respect to the form of his application record. These he declined to seek.
[20]
Orders are made to be respected, as are the Rules of the court. The failure to file a proper record is a particularly serious matter since it is prejudicial to opposing parties who do not know the nature of the case they are supposed to meet, and it is at the very least inconvenient and inefficient for the court not to have such a document in a timely fashion as required by the Rules. The requirements of rule 321.1 are not something which may be unilaterally ignored or even modified by agreement of all counsel. If further directions on the content or manner of filing were required having regard to the confidential aspects of the case, these could have been obtained on a formal or informal basis. Since very little of the argument of the C.F.L. was related to the document in question, I find it difficult to understand why a meaningful statement of fact and law could not have been filed on a nonconfidential basis as was in fact finally done pursuant to my order of December 15th.
[21]
In some cases it may be an appropriate sanction, where the requirements of rule 321.1 have not been met, simply to adjourn the hearing until they are met. But that would not have been a suitable remedy in this case because it would only cause more of the delay which has been to the advantage of the applicants by postponing further the possibility of publication of the brief. In such circumstances the appropriate remedy must be found in costs.
[22]
Having regard to the foregoing I will order that the costs for both the Minister and David Shoalts in respect of the adjournment of December 15th and in respect of the hearing on December 21st are to be paid on a solicitorclient basis by the applicants.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]