[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
[Translation]: The court has before it an application for judicial review seeking to quash a decision by the Convention Refugee Determination Division on October 26, 1993 in which it found that the applicant was not a Convention refugee as there was no objective basis for his fear.
Facts
[2]
The applicant was born in 1973, is a citizen of Pakistan and arrived in Canada on March 3, 1993. On the same day he claimed refugee status on account of his religion and membership in a particular social group, based on the following facts.
[3]
Essentially, the applicant is of the Ahmadi religion and alleges he was persecuted on that account. In this regard the applicant mentioned the promulgation of legislation in September 1974 directing that Ahmadis would be regarded as a non-Muslim minority in Pakistan. Further, in 1984 the government promulgated ordinance No. 20, according to which Ahmadis on pain of imprisonment no longer possessed the right to call themselves Muslims and preach their religion. On account of the legislation the applicant said he was subject to a social boycott and experienced serious problems throughout his school years.
[4]
In March 1986 when the applicant was passing by the Majlise Kithme Nabwoot mosque, an anti-Ahmadi organization, Ashraf Ali and three of his acolytes accosted him and demanded that he renounce his religion. When he refused the applicant was insulted and beaten, causing him serious injury. Following this incident the applicant's parents filed a complaint with the police, but they refused to take action. The applicant was 13 years old at the time.
[5]
Subsequently, in February 1988, two years after the 1986 incident, when the applicant was playing cricket in the schoolyard, four students of the Islamic Jameat Tulba (hereinafter "the I.J.I.") approached the captain of the team and asked why a non-Muslim was playing on the school team. He replied that the applicant was the best player on the team. The boys were not satisfied with this reply and beat the applicant so badly that his mouth was bleeding and one of his teeth was broken. The students also told the applicant they would no longer permit him to play on the team. On this occasion the applicant's parents reported the conduct to the police and the school principal but their efforts met with no success.
[6]
In 1988 the applicant was admitted to college. The atmosphere was not good, however, and the applicant was subject to harassment on account of his religion. In March 1991 three I.J.I. students insulted him and beat him, in addition to making threats to him. The school principal's reaction to this incident was to deny him protection. The police refused to consider the complaint.
[7]
Finally, in December 1992 when the applicant was shopping, a group of four members of the I.J.I. threatened him with death and beat him. This time the applicant received serious injuries to his head and his left eye and his clothes were torn. The police still refused to take any action.
[8]
The applicant subsequently received messages telling him that if he continued to attend college he would be killed. Accordingly in 1992 the applicant was unable to complete his final year of studies on account of his religion. In view of all these problems the applicant's parents decided it would be best for him to leave the country. They therefore contacted someone who was able to provide the applicant with false papers and send him to Canada.
[9]
Accordingly, it was not until age 13, in 1986, that the applicant was for the first time involved in an incident because of his religion. In 1988 was he involved in another incident when he was playing cricket but religion was only indirectly the cause.
[10]
Further, in 1988 the applicant was admitted to college as a student. For three years the applicant was not involved in any incident related directly or indirectly to his religion other than being the victim of harassment. In 1991 he was insulted and beaten by three I.J.I. members. In 1992, when the applicant was shopping, a group of four I.J.I. members again beat the applicant and made death threats to him.
Refugee Division's Decision
[11]
While indicating that it did not question the veracity of the applicant's testimony and his subjective fear, the Refugee Division stated that, for the following reasons, he had not shown the existence of any objective basis for his fear.
[12]
First, the Refugee Division found that the applicant was able to practice his religion despite the position of Ahmadis in Pakistan. Only the incident with the Mulvi and three of his helpers interfered with the practice of his religion. According to the Refugee Division, although the Mulvi's attitude was inexcusable and was an act of discrimination and harassment, it was an isolated act which could not be regarded as persecution since the applicant was not subsequently prevented from practising his religion.
[13]
This appears to be true since there is no evidence to indicate that the applicant could not
practice
his religion or was prevented from doing so.
[14]
Second, the Refugee Division found that the other incidents in which the applicant was involved when he was studying could not be regarded as persecution. Though the attitude taken by the principal and by the police was reprehensible, the fact remains that the applicant was able to pursue his studies and obtain his degrees. Further, the seriousness of the discrimination suffered by the applicant may be questioned in view of the fact that despite his non-Muslim identity he was allowed to attend Muslim courses of study. In these circumstances the Refugee Division concluded that there was no basis for the applicant's objective fear (sic).
Applicant's Position
[15]
According to the applicant the Refugee Division erred, first, in concluding that the March 1986 incident was an isolated occurrence. In the applicant's submission the Refugee Division should have considered this occurrence together with the other similar incidents in which he was involved in 1988, 1991 and 1992 and which took place in other locations and with other people. The applicant further argued that the members of the Division should have considered s. 53 of the
Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status
indicating that cumulative grounds may in some circumstances justify a valid fear of persecution. Additionally, the applicant argued that the Refugee Division erred in concluding that the events in which he was involved at school could not be regarded as persecution. In this regard the applicant noted that the Refugee Division did not consider the acts of discrimination he encountered as a student, including the fact that he was expelled from the cricket team and was never able to complete his studies in 1992. Accordingly, as appears from ss. 54, 55, 71, 72 and 203 of the
Handbook
, these discriminatory measures caused prejudicial consequences for him. Finally, the applicant submitted that the Refugee Division should have taken into account the fact that he was not able to obtain the necessary protection from the authorities.
Respondent's Position
[16]
In response the respondent argued that under
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 1; 20 Imm. L.R.(2d) 85, a claimant must be able to prove that his fear has an objective basis. In the case at bar the respondent submitted that the applicant had not discharged his burden of proof. According to the respondent, following the March 1986 incident the applicant proceeded to practise his religion. Accordingly, the respondent considered that the Refugee Division was entitled to conclude, in accordance with the rule laid down in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), that such an act did not constitute persecution. Additionally, the respondent noted that the Federal Court of Appeal had discussed the distinction between persecution and discrimination or harassment in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Division could reasonably conclude that the problems the applicant encountered at school were discrimination and harassment and could not be regarded as persecution. In this connection the respondent noted that in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), in which this court held that the experiences of an Ahmadi in Pakistan simply constituted discrimination. Finally, the respondent argued that under
Ward
, supra, a presumption exists that a government is capable of protecting its citizens and that in the absence of clear and convincing evidence that it is not, the presumption applies.
Analysis
[17]
According to the statements by each party, it appeared that the issue turned first on the distinction between discrimination and persecution, and second on the State's ability to protect its citizens.
(i)
Distinction Between Discrimination And Persecution
[18]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 153 (F.C.A.), at p. 155, it was held that the objective aspect must be considered in determining the justification for the applicant's fear of persecution. In that case the Refugee Division held that the applicant had not discharged his burden of proof in this regard.
[19]
As Marceau, J.A., held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  this connection, the court said the following:
"The incidents recited by the appellant in her testimony were no doubt unfortunate as they constituted in all appearances incidents of discrimination or even possibly harassment; but both members, in their respective reasons, make it clear that for them they were
not serious or systematic enough to be characterized as persecution, or to lead to a conclusion that there was a serious possibility of persecution in the future
.
"It is true that the dividing line between persecution and discrimination or harassment is difficult to establish, the more so since, in the refugee law context, it has been found that discrimination may very well be seen as amounting to persecution. It is true also that the identification of persecution behind incidents of discrimination or harassment is not purely a question of fact but a mixed question of law and fact, legal concepts being involved.
It remains, however, that, in all cases, it is for the Board to draw the conclusion in a particular factual context by proper balancing of the various elements contained therein, and the intervention of this court is not warranted unless the conclusion reached appears to be capricious or unreasonable.
"
[20]
Further, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 863, the Supreme Court of Canada said the following:
"There is no doubt that the Board found as a fact that,
while there was evidence to support discrimination against the appellant
because of his religious beliefs,
there was no evidence on which he could reasonably found a fear of persecution
on grounds of his religious beliefs or political opinions.
These were findings which it was open to the Board to make on the material before it
."
[21]
It can be seen from reading these comments that the distinction between persecution and discrimination rests entirely on the evidence presented to the Refugee Division and that the latter is empowered to draw its conclusions on the evidence as a whole. Further, the intervention of this court is only justified if the conclusion appears to be capricious or unreasonable.
[22]
Moreover, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  "persecution". The definitions applied by this court read as follows:
"To harass or afflict with repeated acts of cruelty or annoyance; to afflict persistently, to afflict or punish because of particular opinions or adherence to a particular creed or mode or worship ...
"A particular course or period of
systematic inflictions of punishment
directed against those holding a particular (religious belief); persistent injury or annoyance from any source ..."
[23]
These principles indicate that in certain circumstances systematic harassment may constitute persecution, as indicated in
Retnem and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 69; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). However, the occurrences must be
serious or systematic enough
to amount to a reasonable fear of persecution. The seriousness of an act is certainly a question of fact and of weighing the evidence, as Denault, J., observed in
Saddouh
, supra, and as appears in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  clearly within the powers of the Refugee Division. Accordingly, in the case at bar it could be concluded that the occurrences which involved the applicant were periodic rather than systematic and were at the hands of a small group of students.
[24]
On the evidence in the record the Refugee Division's decision cannot be characterized as capricious or unreasonable. As the judge of fact the Division considered the evidence before it and drew its own conclusions. Further, evidence existed in support of its conclusion that the problem encountered by the applicant was in the nature of discrimination and not persecution. The applicant was able to continue with his studies and even to take a course in Muslim studies. In doing this (
sic
) I consider that the Refugee Division's decision is reasonable.
(ii)
Protection By State
[25]
Even before considering a State's ability to protect a national, the latter must show that he has a subjective fear of being persecuted and that it is objectively justified. See as to this
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 1; 20 Imm. L.R.(2d) 85. I am persuaded in the case at bar that the Refugee Division has sufficient evidence before it to conclude as it did. As that decision was not unreasonable, I do not have to decide the question of State protection.
Conclusion
[26]
I am persuaded that the Refugee Division drew the correct inferences from the evidence presented in the case at bar. Accordingly, the court's intervention is in no way justified. It is still open to the applicant to show that he is a refugee under s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
. In the case at bar the applicant has simply not discharged his burden of proof.
Butt
, supra, cited by the respondent, supports this conclusion.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/saf