[1]
Muldoon, J.
: These proceedings comprehend an amended originating motion by the applicant; and an interlocutory motion by the respondent seeking to strike out the applicant's originating motion, or alternatively to strike out the deponent, Moishe Smith's affidavit in support of those paragraphs alleged to be based on information and belief, or alternatively directing a trial of the matters in issue, or alternatively to permit witnesses to testify viva voce in these proceedings pursuant to rule 319(4), and other, ephemeral relief. Next, one should examine the originating motion and then return to the expressed grounds for the respondent's motion in its alternatives. By order of Mr. Justice Cullen, with the parties' consent, the respondent's motion is to be dealt with first.
[2]
The basic text of the applicant's curiously
*
worded amended originating notice of motion runs thus; for
"1) certiorari quashing the instruction of the respondent precluding the selection of individuals from peacekeeping duties on the appearance
*
that ethnic racial or religious considerations could cause significant difficulties in the peacekeeping theatre concerned,
"2) an injunction, enjoining the respondent from precluding the selection of individuals for peacekeeping duties on the appearance
*
that ethnic, racial or religious considerations could cause significant difficulties in the peacekeeping theatre concerned,
"3) prohibition prohibiting the respondent from precluding the selection of individuals for peacekeeping duties on the appearance
*
that ethnic, racial or religious considerations could cause significant difficulties in the peacekeeping theatre concerned,
"4) mandamus ordering the respondent to allow individuals to be selected for peacekeeping duties without regard to the appearance
*
that ethnic racial or religious considerations could cause significant difficulties in the peacekeeping theatre concerned,
or for such further order as may be just.
The Grounds For The Motion Are
"1) the aforementioned instruction of the respondent deprives Jews and Moslems [sic]
1
of equality before and under the law and equal protection of the law;
"2) the aforementioned instructions of the respondent is not a bona fide occupational requirement;
"3) the aforementioned instruction of the respondent is not a reasonable limit prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society;
"4) the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, s. 1, 15, 27;
"5) the
Canadian Multiculturalism Act
, S.C. 1988, c. 31
... and in support ... will be read the affidavit of Moishe Smith ...."
*
The apt expression is surely: "assertion".
1
The generally accepted spelling is: "Muslim".
[3]
Now, the respondent's grounds for seeking to thwart, wholly or partially, the applicant's originating motion are expressed in this manner:
"1. The applicant lacks standing to bring the within Originating Notice of Motion.
"2. The affidavit filed in support ... does not comply with rule 332(1) ... int hat it is not confined to such facts as the witness is able of his own knowledge to prove.
"3. The applicant's ... motion raises issues under the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
which will require factual evidence to answer. Such evidence is better presented orally at trial than through affidavits.
"4. The respondent relies upon rules 319, 321, 321.1, 327, 332 and 419 ...."
[4]
It may seem strange to some that in this virtually secular state at this era of history anyone in the Canadian Forces or the Department of National Defence should be concerned about the religious or ethnic background of Canadian citizens who, members of the Canadian Forces, might be selected for peacekeeping duties. Canada can aptly be described as a secular state, because of its constitutional values and imperatives. Having entrenched in the Constitution as the supreme law of Canada, the freedoms of conscience, religion, thought, belief, opinion and expression, and the rights to equality without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour or religion, among others, it must be obvious to any thoughtful person that Canada is emphatically not a theocracy. Because of the events of Canada's confederation history, certain educational guarantees based on religion were constitutionally entrenched, but no further religious distinctions or guarantees were entrenched prior to the above recited rights and freedoms expressed in the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. It must also be obvious to any thoughtful person that the very secularity of Canada's Constitution is precious because it extends standard protection to all.
[5]
When one puts any new religious symbol in or among historic, public, national symbols, one to that extent dilutes the secularity of the State. No one dilutes the secularity of the State by the private practice or visible symbolic manifestation of his or her own religion, so long as such practice and manifestation do no objective harm to others, but the State ought to avoid the giving of unique preference or precedence to religions or religious personages per se, lest it impair its own secularity. In such manner, Canadians may enjoy and even assert their special configuration of freedoms and rights. These are important justiciable considerations if only because recent events in Europe and in the Asiatic parts of the Soviet Union seem to demonstrate that religious sentiments, beliefs and philosophies (perhaps astonishingly) cannot be eradicated in the human species, even after decades of the official and rigid, if not brutal, imposition of atheism. So, Canada's Constitution appears at once to liberate and to civilize religion among the people by asserting the norm of State secularity, where no religion is accorded hegemony in dictating the values, opinions, beliefs or expressions of society whose multicultural heritage is also constitutionally guaranteed.
[6]
There are, no doubt, religions, philosophies and cultures whose practitioners' and adherents' values are inimical to the imperatives of Canada's Constitution. Sometimes those great discrepancies create mistrust, danger and violence, including hostage taking, aiding, abetting and counselling assault, murder and terrorism. The foregoing are all offences denounced in the
Criminal Code
and they are prosecutable and punishable in Canada. However, it is of sufficient notoriety for judicial notice that not all other countries share or respect Canada's constitutional imperatives and social values. Some such countries are recipients of Canadian peacekeeping missions. Given the foregoing, how far may the respondent go to protect, on racial or religious considerations, individual members of the Canadian Forces abroad and their missions in such countries? Herein resides the matter in issue in this litigation. This matter is of such extensive dimensions that (in the absence of emergency, not here demonstrated) it is really not apt for summary disposition. Such, at least, appears to be the respondent's position.
[7]
The applicant, a body corporate, is evidently not seeking extraordinary relief for itself, and so, in essence that which it seeks must be in the nature of a declaration, that is judicial declaratory relief. No individual member of the Canadian Forces, who and whose mission would be at risk in a distant land, comes forward to join the applicant in this originating motion. In such circumstances, it is apparent that the applicant, having no personal interest, but only a kind of representational interest, and self-appointed too, would want an order in the nature of a judicial declaration.
[8]
Of outstanding utility in sorting out most of the interlocutory issues here is the recent judgment of the Appeal Division in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Despite the configuration of the citation, the Canadian Council of Churches was the respondent on the cited appeal. After lobbying against enactment of extensive amendments (the new
Act
) to the
Immigration Act
, 1976, R.S.C. 1985, Chap. I-2 (the old
Act
), the respondent, in January, 1989, started an action by way of a statement of claim, seeking a declaration that most of the operative provisions of the new
Act
, and several provisions of the old
Act
, too, plus one provision of the
Immigration Regulations, 1978
, were unconstitutional as being contraventions of certain provisions of the
Charter
and the
Canadian Bill of Rights
, R.S.C. 1985, Appendix III. The Crown applied, [1989] 3 F.C. 3; 27 F.T.R. 129, pursuant to rule 419(1) for an order to strike out the statement of claim and to dismiss the action. It did so upon the bases that the respondent council lacked the requisite standing to seek declarations of the invalidity of legislation, and moreover that the statement of claim disclosed no reasonable cause of action. The Crown's motion was dismissed and the Crown appealed.
[9]
Now, it is to be observed that in the
Canadian Council of Churches
(hereinafter:
Council of Churches
) case, the litigation was not started by an originating motion, as was the case at bar. This is one of the respondent's bones of contention, in arguing that relief by way of the prerogative writs (or orders to the same effect) is inappropriate. In effect the
Council of Churches
case had the potential and gave the promise of a trial with pretrial discovery and with witnesses testifying in open court subject to direct-, cross-, and reexamination. It was not a summary procedure.
[10]
Counsel for the applicant rightly asserted that his client is not one of those notional "busy-bodies" who should be filtered out and prevented from inflicting litigation for litigation's sake upon the government of the day and the judicial system. The applicant is a respected institution in Canada. At the risk of failing to capture Mr. Justice MacGuigan's precise meaning from his exact words, the court will set out passages from the reported headnote of the
Council of Churches
case, which of course dealt with another respected institution. One must not lose sight of the distinctions as well as the similarities, for although the Council of Churches brought a suit, by statement of claim, for declarations, it sought them in regard to the impugned validity of various statutory provisions. Here, what amounts to seeking declarations for and about members of the Canadian Forces, is instituted as s. 18 applications in regard to departmental policy said to be directed to safeguard certain members of the forces and certain peacekeeping missions of the forces from undue jeopardy, both personal and operational. Since the applicant has no directly or immediately personal or corporate interest it, like the Council of Churches, must be seen to be asserting the status of a public interest litigant.
[11]
Here are pertinent passages from the
Council of Churches
case, [1990] 2 F.C. 534; 106 N.R. 61, at pp. 535-537:
"Public interest standing is a matter of judicial discretion. To be entitled to public interest standing, a litigant must establish that: (1) there is a serious issue; (2) the plaintiff has a genuine interest as a citizen in the validity of the legislation; and (3) there is no other reasonable and effective manner in which the issue may be brought before the Court.
"As to the respondent's corporate status, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  litigation of the nonprofit public interest corporation. Carthy, J.A., expressed the Court's view that those seeking to bring significant issues before the courts should not be deprived of the expertise and resources needed for effective presentation. There should not be an absolute rule of exclusion. If an action by a corporation offers the only effective means for judicial review of an issue, it is within the reasonable exercise of judicial discretion to allow that action. The first and second criteria were met as the very comprehensiveness of the action laid prima facie claim to the raising of a serious issue, and the respondent's motivation is a public interest one, based upon a profound concern for the public welfare.
"As to the third criterion, the principles set out in the cases are clear: public interest standing will be allowed only where there is no directly affected group which could itself raise a challenge to the legislation or where, although such a group exists, no member of the group is thought likely to do so, or the group directly affected is not affected as to the greater public issue. In order to determine the advisability of public interest standing, it was necessary to look closely at the legislation. In addition to refugee claimants themselves, others who might be affected by the legislation are Canadian citizens and residents who might become liable to prosecution for their work in assisting refugee claimants. This group could include church members and members of the legal profession. However, even these other persons would be affected in relation to refugee claimants, who constitute the group overwhelmingly affected by the legislation. The appellants argued that the new Act is a regulatory statute which is certain to produce an abundance of real cases. In
McNeil
, where standing was granted to challenge legislation although others were more directly affected by its regulatory nature, they were not affected in relation to the broadest public interest at stake. Here, the broad public interest asserted by the respondent is the same as that brought forward by the directly affected group. Although
Borowski
indicated that public interest standing can be recognized even if there is someone with a more direct interest, that can be so only where the Court, as in
Borowski
, believes that challenges from the more directly affected group are unlikely. Judicial notice had to be taken that challenges were coming forward daily.
. . . . .
"Upon an examination of each of the allegations is the statement of claim, it appeared that standing should be granted where it would be difficult for claimants to challenge the provision because they were on their way out of the country or the time limits imposed by the legislation may be inadequate to instruct counsel. Such provisions gave rise to a claim for public interest standing and constituted a reasonable cause of action. Although the criminal sanctions imposed for aiding and abetting the entry into Canada of persons not in possession of required documents may constitute a denial of the right to counsel (by deterring lawyers from advising undocumented refugees) and could found a right of standing, it could not constitute a reasonable cause of action since the claimants affected would all be noncitizens with no claim to admission to Canada and therefore beyond the scope of the
Charter
."
[12]
The court will exercise its discretion in this matter by striking out, and thereby dismissing, the applicant's motion with leave to commence an action by way of statement of claim, the least problematical of the proceedings, in accordance with the dicta articulated by MacGuigan, J.A., for the Appeal Division of this court in the above cited
Council of Churches
.
[13]
The basis for this exercise of discretion resides, first in the notion that proceedings in which declarations are sought ought normally to be brought by statement of claim:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and int he same volume
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the
Council of Churches
case, that there is no other reasonable and effective manner in which the issue herein may be brought before the court, is not met. It could well be met if someone, a member of the Canadian Forces, whose personal safety would putatively be in jeopardy, would be the applicant. The court may take judicial notice that members of the Canadian Forces personally are not at all so difficult about seeking redress in this court as the applicant's counsel contends:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.R. 217;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Indeed, the court's discretion might have been otherwise exercised if the applicants here had been a woman, a Jew and a Muslim, all members of the Canadian Forces who were otherwise eligible for peacekeeping posting, but diverted from it on the asserted grounds. Indeed, even if not so diverted, such members of the Forces, who could merely possibly be facing the alleged special jeopardy from which their commanders would safeguard them, would make a far more compelling application.
[14]
The court's discretion is further exercised upon the ground that the affidavit of Moishe Smith is deficient in terms of the personal knowledge exacted by rule 332(1), quite apart from exhibits in the public domain. Indeed with exhibits which themselves would not be admissible on production, such as the human rights investigator's annexed reports, how could the respondent's counsel conduct a fruitful cross-examination of Mr. Smith? Rule 332(1) is regularly enforced:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T-522-90, October 18, 1990, under appeal: A-926-90).
[15]
The foregoing constitute the principal bases for the court's exercise of discretion in striking out by dismissing the applicant's originating motion, but reserving to the applicant the right to bring an action by statement of claim. Such exercises of discretion may be thought by the court to be utterly foreseeable, but not always by the litigants. Therefore only one half of the costs will follow the event, payable after taxation by the applicant to the respondent.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/gas
[End of document]