[1]
Rouleau, J.
: I have now had an opportunity to read the transcript of the proceedings before McGillis, J., held at Ottawa, June 8th and 10th, 1993. I gather from the file that the issue of a "question of law" respecting onus together with the imposition of directions were both dismissed and are now under appeal. The presiding Justice was of the view that the matters in dispute should be resolved by way of the judicial review process in light of s. 7(2)(b) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, SOR/93-133, which refers to a declaration by the court.
[2]
In an order dated July 19, 1993, I imposed an accelerated schedule on the parties with respect to the matters under appeal and reserved all other issues submitted in the motion. Except for that which I have already ordered, I am dismissing all other aspects of the motion that came before me in light of the complexity of the issues. I am nevertheless staying any effect of Madame Justice McGillis' orders until the matters have been disposed of by the Federal Court of Appeal.
[3]
From a reading of the new
Regulations
governing patent medicines and the complex issues raised with respect to the applications of these
Regulations
, it is more than evident to me that it will be almost impossible for the Federal Court Trial Division to expeditiously dispose of these matters within the proposed thirty-month period, proceeding by way of judicial review. I will now reproduce regulations 5, 6, and 7:
"5(1) Where a person files or, before the coming into force of these Regulations, has filed a submission for a notice of compliance in respect of a drug and wishes to compare that drug with, or make a reference to, a drug that has been marketed in Canada pursuant to a notice of compliance issued to a first person in respect of which a patent list has been submitted, the person shall, in the submission, with respect to each patent on the patent list,
(a) state that the person accepts that the notice of compliance will not issue until the patent expires; or
(b) allege that
(i) the statement made by the first person pursuant to paragraph 4(2)(b) is false,
(ii) the patent has expired,
(iii) the patent is not valid, or
(iv) no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by that person of the drug for which the submission for the notice of compliance is filed.
"(2) Where, after a second person files a submission for a notice of compliance, but before the notice of compliance is issued, a patent list is submitted or amended in respect of a patent pursuant to subs. 4(5), the second person shall amend the submission to include, in respect of that patent, the statement or allegation that is required by subs. (1).
"(3) Where a person makes an allegation pursuant to paragraph (1)(b) or subs. (2) the person shall
(a) provide a detailed statement of the legal and factual basis for the allegation; and
(b) serve a notice of the allegation on the first person and proof of such service on the Minister.
"Right of Action
"6(1) A first person may, within 45 days after being served with a notice of an allegation pursuant to paragraph 5(3)(b), apply to a court for an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance until after the expiration of one or more of the patents that are the subject of an allegation.
"6(2) The court shall make an order pursuant to subs. (1) in respect of a patent that is the subject of one or more allegations if it finds that none of those allegations is justified.
"6(3) The first person shall, within the 45 days referred to in subs. (1), serve the Minister with proof that an application referred to in that subsection has been made.
"6(4) Where the first person is not the owner of each patent that is the subject of an application referred to in subs. (1), the owner of each such patent shall be made a party to the application.
"Notice of Compliance
"7(1) The Minister shall not issue a notice of compliance to a second person before the latest of
(a) the expiration of 30 days after the coming into force of these Regulations,
(b) the day on which the second person complies with s. 5,
(c) subject to subs. (3), the expiration of any patent on the patent list that is not the subject of an allegation,
(d) subject to subs. (3), the expiration of 45 days after the receipt of proof of service of a notice of any allegation pursuant to paragraph 5(3)(b) in respect of any patent in the patent list,
(e) subject to subss. (2), (3) and (4), the expiration of 30 months after the receipt of proof of the making of any application referred to in subs. 6(1), and
(f) the expiration of any patent that is the subject of an order pursuant to subs. 6(1).
"7(2) Paragraph (1)(e) does not apply if at any time, in respect of each patent that is the subject of an application pursuant to subs. 6(1),
(a) the patent has expired; or
(b) the court has declared that the patent is not valid or that no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed.
"7(3) Paragraphs (1)(c), (d) and (e) do not apply in respect of a patent if the owner of the patent has consented to the making, constructing, using or selling of the drug in Canada by the second person.
"7(4) Paragraph (1)(e) ceases to apply in respect of an application referred to in subs. 6(1) if the application is withdrawn or is finally dismissed by the court.
"7(5) A court may shorten or extend the time limit referred to in paragraph (10(e) in respect of an application where the court has not yet made an order pursuant to subs 6(1) in respect of that application and where the court finds that a party to the application failed to reasonably cooperate in expediting the application."
[4]
Pursuant to ss. 6 and 7 of the new
Regulations
, all challenges to applications for notices of compliance effectively prohibit the Minister from issuing a notice until such time as the patent expires or that the court declares either that the allegations submitted are not justified, or, under s. 7(2)(b), declares that "no claim for use of the medicine would be infringed".
[5]
It is apparent to me that the Minister of Health will remain aloof and will more than likely not proceed, as expeditiously as would be required, to evaluate any proposed or submitted generic drug application seeking a notice of compliance. That being the case, I find no jurisdiction or process that would permit the Federal Court of Canada to press the Minister into assessing or evaluating, on an expedited basis, any applications. The department, nevertheless, expects the Federal Court of Canada to render decisions on the invalidity of a patent; or, to determine if an alternative process submitted by a generic is non-infringing. It seems apparent to me that the judicial review process is hardly the proper method by which to determine these applications. There is no doubt in my mind that each situation will require lengthy trials and viva voce evidence.
[6]
A patentee by simply filing an application obtains an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance for an interim period of 30 months. This has the effect of issuing an interlocutory injunction. This court can deal with interlocutory injunctions in an expeditious fashion but, the motions judge does not deal with the ultimate merits. This is resolved after a full blown trial. These
Regulations
contemplate that this court, on affidavit evidence only, should be able to resolve the validity or invalidity of a patent in medicine or in the alternative determine if an application submitted by a generic as to its manufacture and process, is non-infringing.
[7]
Although the
Regulations
contemplate proceeding by way of judicial review, I am satisfied that it would be appropriate to direct that these applications proceed by way of an action in accordance with s. 18.4(2) of the
Federal Court Act
.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/slm
[End of document]