[1]
Dubé, J.
: The defendants ("Office Depot") seek to dissolve the interlocutory injunction granted by Mr. Justice Rouleau on May 17, 1993 ("the Ontario injunction") restraining Office Depot from using the name "Office Depot" in connection with the business of selling office supplies and related services in Ontario. The motion is based on two grounds: delay and change of circumstances.
1. Delay
[2]
Office Depot claims that the plaintiff ("Business Depot") after having obtained the interlocutory injunction did nothing to advance the case from that date until July 1994. There were formal settlement negotiations from July 1994 to July 1995 but those negotiations were not intended to be at the expense of moving the case forward. From July 1995 to May 1996, the parties exchanged some correspondence regarding discoveries. On October 1, 1996, the parties agreed that the October 10 and 11, 1996 discoveries be cancelled due to merger negotiations. From July 1995 to October 1996, Business Depot took no step to advance the action. On September 10, 1998, Office Depot specifically notified Business Depot that it had an obligation to proceed with the action in a diligent manner. There were further settlement negotiations but again, according to Office Depot, not at the expense of proceeding with the action. The first discovery took place on May 31, 1999. Thus, according to Office Depot's calculations, there were 52 months or four years and four months of delay.
[3]
Finally, while discoveries started in May 1999, and the first round has now been completed, on December 6, 1999, Business Depot amended its pleadings, changing its case from a passing-off case over its name to include passing-off over its store colour (red). According to Office Depot, this new allegation substantially changes the case and necessitates a whole new round of documentary and oral discoveries. Consequently, the case is not close to being ready for trial.
[4]
On the other hand, Business Depot states that since Madame Justice Simpson's April 8, 1999 order, the parties have worked assiduously to prepare for trial and for the instant motion. The pleadings have been amended. All that remains to be done is for the court to dispose of the plaintiff's motion to compel answers to about 70 questions refused by Office Depot and the defendants' motion to compel answers to about 31 questions refused by Business Depot. Documentary production is now complete (subject to refusals) and examinations for discovery of all parties are complete (subject to refusals). In summary, this action is essentially ready for trial, according to Business Depot.
[5]
In my view, both parties have, at different times and for their own reasons, not been particularly interested in advancing the case to trial. Of course, there is a duty upon a plaintiff who has obtained an interlocutory injunction to pursue its case in the court with reasonable dispatch. Failure to do so may result in the dissolution of the injunction [see footnote 1]. But, where both parties are satisfied over a significant period of time to conduct their respective businesses within the confines of an existing interlocutory injunction, it does not sit well for one of the parties to suddenly blame the other party's procrastination when the circumstances have so developed that the interlocutory injunction no longer suits its purposes.
[6]
Moreover, in my view, Office Depot has not been prejudiced by the passage of time because it now alleges for the first time that the "Business Depot" and "Office Depot" trademarks are no longer confusing. In October 1999, Office Depot delivered its amended statement of defence and counterclaim and pleaded that since "at least as early as March 1999" the "Office Depot" and "Business Depot" trademarks were no longer confusing.
[7]
Consequently, in my view, delay in these circumstances is not a valid ground for dissolving the interlocutory injunction, but a good reason for moving more diligently in preparation for trial.
2. Change Of Circumstances
[8]
Office Depot points out that the court may vary the terms of an injunction where the facts and circumstances have changed since the time of the earlier disposition and where the facts relied upon are no longer valid [see footnote 2]. Office Depot alleges that in the instant case, the circumstances have changed drastically over the past six years and that the factual underpinnings of the 1993 injunction are no longer valid. These changes in circumstances would include the following:
(1) The Office Depot name has now become known in Ontario. The defendant now has a reputation and goodwill in the Office Depot trademark in Ontario.
(2) The word Depot has fallen into descriptive and common use and has no trade-mark significance, per se.
(3) The plaintiff has changed it own mark to Staples and Staples Business Depot throughout most of the country.
(4) It is now clear that there is no likelihood of confusion between Office Depot and Business Depot.
(5) The plaintiff will not suffer irreparable harm if the defendant is permitted to use its Office Depot trademark in Ontario, as it does in western Canada.
[9]
However, Business Depot argues that there is now actual evidence of confusion between the trademarks "Business Depot" and "Office Depot", whereas there was none in May 1993 when Rouleau, J., issued his "quia timet" interlocutory injunction. The learned judge said at p. 237 "there has not been a date any evidence of confusion or the likelihood of confusion". Since that time, numerous instances of confusion have taken place, even though Office Depot operates its stores in Ontario under the name and mark of "Office Place". Consequently, the very foundation of interlocutory injunction has been strengthened. Business Depot has filed affidavits showing instances of confusion.
[10]
Both sides have filed contradictory survey evidence showing degrees of confusion or lack of confusion. Manifestly, the best forum to deal with such survey evidence is a trial where the presiding judge can test the credibility and competence of the expert witnesses and the validity of the questions asked.
[11]
Finally, the burden of proof to vary or to dissolve an interlocutory injunction is very heavy. The moving party must establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the true facts are substantially different from the facts upon which the original order was given, or that the facts have changed so dramatically that the factual underpinnings of the earlier order is simply no longer valid [see footnote 3]. In my view, Office Depot has not met that test.
3. Alternative Remedy
[12]
As an alternative, Office Depot seeks to enjoin Business Depot from using the "Business Depot" trade-mark in Western Canada, should this court find that there is a likelihood of confusion as between "Staples Business Depot" and "Office Depot" trademarks in that area of the country. That alternative was not pressed with much enthusiasm at the hearing. In any event, David Campbell, the Regional Vice-President of Office Depot, stated that the trademarks "Office Depot" and "Staples Business Depot" can co-exist without confusion. In its amended statement of defence and counterclaim Office Depot alleges that there is no likelihood of confusion between the trademarks "Office Depot" and "Staples Business Depot". Business Depot has accepted this admission in its amended reply and defence to counterclaim. Consequently, there is no need for a Western injunction, as claimed in the alternative.
4. Disposition
[13]
It follows that this application for the dissolution of the interlocutory injunction granted by Rouleau, J., is denied. However, both parties are directed to proceed with all due dispatch in the production of documents, the completion of discoveries and a joint application for time and place for trial. Should a party be found to be lacking in diligence, the other party may move the court for a drastic resolution of the issue. Costs will be in the cause.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/saf
Footnotes
1.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 428 and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 85 D.L.R.(3d) 446.
2.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 254 (T.D.), at p. 257 [C.P.R.].
3. See Teitelbaum, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), at pp. 199-200.
[End of document]