[1]
Rouleau, J.
: In one of two orders dated March 30, 1993, Madam Justice Reed granted the following: leave to use in other proceedings, the name and location of the manufacturer of Fluoxetine Hydrochloride as identified in Exhibit "A" to the affidavit of Bernard Sherman, sworn January 15, 1993. Her Ladyship did not provide any reasons for the order.
[2]
On April 2, 1993, the defendants (appellants) appealed against the order. In this application, they now seek to stay the order until the appeal has been disposed of by the Federal Court of Appeal.
[3]
The relevant facts are as follows.
[4]
Following the commencement by the plaintiffs of an action for patent infringement in late 1991, an Anton Pillar order was granted by Denault, J., on December 17, 1991, directing search, seizure and the delivery up of material and documents as well as interim injunctive relief. By order dated January 16, 1992, I conducted a partial review of the Anton Pillar order and among the provisions of my order I directed a confidential and preservation order particularly directed to certain exhibits to affidavits sworn by Keith Yates on January 15, 1992 and by B.C. Sherman also sworn on the same date; that they be kept sealed but available for cross-examination. I further ordered a complete review of the directive of Denault, J., and set a date for the proceeding.
[5]
A further protective order was issued on consent of the parties by Peter A.K. Giles, the Associate Senior Prothonotary, on January 30, 1992. In his order, referring to the affidavits of Messrs. Keith and Sherman, he included the following:
"3. Counsel and each person to whom the confidential information is disclosed shall not use such confidential information for any purpose other than in connection with this action and subject to the provisions of this order.
"4. The documents containing such information so designated when filed with this court shall not form part of the public record and shall be filed sealed in envelopes to be opened by the court. The registry of this court shall not make such documents available to the public.
"5. The terms of this order shall not apply to information which is or becomes public knowledge by means not in violation of the provisions of this order.
"6. This order shall be without prejudice to the right of any party to apply to the court at any time to have some or all of the confidential information excluded from the provisions of this order, to vary the persons to whom the confidential information may be disclosed or to otherwise vary or terminate the effect of this order."
[6]
The Sherman affidavit, which was sealed and made confidential, included in its Exhibit "A" the name of the defendants supplier of Fluoxetine Hydrochloride as well as a description of the process.
[7]
In March 1992, Mr. Justice Teitelbaum refused to grant the plaintiffs' request for injunctive relief restraining the defendants from alleged infringement. During the course of this application on March 11, 1992, the defendants filed a "Supplementary Statement of Fact and Law" relating to the infringement. I assume this brief was given to the plaintiffs as well as the presiding Justice in order to support their argument of noninfringement. The name of the foreign supplier was revealed in this brief as well as a partial description of its manufacturing process. Inadvertently, this Supplementary Statement of Fact and Law was handed to the Registrar at the close of proceedings. The court official then mistakenly filed it in the main court file. It should be noted also that during these proceedings no one had suggested that this Supplementary Statement of Fact and Law should be kept confidential.
[8]
A motion was launched by the plaintiffs in March 1993, approximately one year later. In their affidavit material submitted before Madam Justice Reed, they suggested that the confidential information (name and address of foreign supplier contained in the sealed Sherman affidavit) had already been made public in the "Supplementary Statement of Fact and Law" filed with the court at the hearing before Mr. Justice Teitelbaum; that this specific information was now available for use by the plaintiffs in other proceedings.
[9]
As a result of this motion being launched, the defendants filed a cross-motion requesting the court to seal the Supplementary Statement of Fact and Law which had apparently inadvertently not been sealed in the court file. It is alleged by the defendant/applicants that the information contained in the Supplementary Statement referred to the confidential information only in an oblique fashion, and, as such, did not render it public.
[10]
Madam Justice Reed granted the order permitting the plaintiffs the use in other proceedings of the name and address of the supplier. This is now under appeal. As well she issued a second order which I paraphrase. She directed the sealing of the Supplementary Statement of Fact and Law relating to the infringement and found that it should be kept confidential in accordance with the order of Giles, A.S.P., dated January 30, 1992 and ordered it removed from the public court file, subject to the following provisions:
(1) any third party who has obtained a copy of the documentation, or obtained knowledge thereof during the time Supplementary Statement of Fact and Law Relating to Infringement ("the document") was on the public record is not in breach of the court orders respecting confidentiality, either in obtaining the information or communicating it to others;
(2) the plaintiff, counsel for the plaintiff and others covered by the confidentiality order shall not be precluded from using the information contained in the document if they received that information from a third party who had access to it when the document was on the public court file.
[11]
The defendants immediately filed an appeal of Madam Justice Reed's order and this application for a stay of her first order.
[12]
There is no doubt that this court has the discretion to stay an order until such time as it has been disposed of by the Court of Appeal. However, this discretion is exercised only in very special circumstances.
[13]
It is suggested that when determining whether or not to stay an order pending an appeal the court should apply what is commonly referred to as "the balance of convenience test". In the alternative, it is submitted that the court's discretion should be exercised in favour of granting a stay where failure to do so will result in "irreparable injury" to the party seeking the stay.
[14]
The defendants/applicants argue that in the event that a stay is not granted and the order of Madam Justice Reed is reversed by the Court of Appeal, the appeal would be rendered nugatory in that the defendants, having had knowledge of the foreign suppliers' name and place of business, could have already commenced proceedings against the supplier in another jurisdiction. This would contravene paragraph 3 of Giles, A.S.P.'s confidentiality order which provides:
"... shall not use such confidential information for any purpose other than in connection with this action ..."
The result would be irreparable harm to the defendants notwithstanding their success in the appeal.
[15]
A further affidavit of Dr. Sherman sworn March 22, 1993 was filed in the proceeding before Madam Justice Reed. In this affidavit, Mr. Sherman, President of the defendant Apotex, swore that the defendant acquired medical raw material from various sources located throughout the world and that in many instances the material supplied is represented to be manufactured by a process which is not infringing of the process contained in patents held in Canada. To permit the plaintiffs to utilize the name of the supplier outside the context of this litigation would permit the plaintiffs to do indirectly what they presently cannot do. In other words, although the plaintiffs may not use the information as to the process by which the drug is manufactured by being able to use the name of the supplier, they will be in a position to commence legal proceedings against the foreign supplier, and perhaps they will be able to restrain it from providing the material to Apotex until such time as this issue has been completely disposed of. Thus they will be able to prevent the defendants from continuing the sale of the alleged infringing medicine by interfering with the source of supply of the medicinal raw material.
[16]
Dr. Sherman further states that there is agreement among suppliers and their clients that there be anonymity and confidentiality of trade secrets so as to ensure that the suppliers do not become the targets of litigation elsewhere in the world. Also, these foreign suppliers or others rely on companies such as Apotex to protect their confidentiality. In paragraph 9, he swore "throughout these dealings, it was understood and agreed that the suppliers and its trade secrets would be maintained by Apotex on a confidential basis and that Apotex would take all necessary steps to protect the confidentiality". He further affirms that the supplier would likely refuse to deal with Apotex, not only with respect to Fluoxetine Hydrochloride, but also with respect to other products. Consequently, the defendant could be extremely prejudiced as its ability to obtain active medicinal raw materials and the manufacture of its drug products will be put in jeopardy.
[17]
A confidential cross-examination of Mr. Sherman was conducted on March 26, 1993 and I am satisfied that his evidence, though in some areas sketchy, essentially substantiates what he has sworn in his affidavit.
[18]
In reply to the Sherman affidavit, the applicant/plaintiffs filed the affidavit of one John R. Rudolph at the hearing before Madam Justice Reed. It is interesting to note that his paragraph 3 states as follows:
"I am informed by Mr. Peter Stringer, Senior Foreign Patent Advisor at Eli Lilly & Company, and do verily believe, that the only information that Eli Lilly and Company has been able to obtain that identifies the 'foreign' manufacturer as a source of fluoxetine hydrochloride, is the information which it has been able to obtain through the course of this action. (I have removed the name of the originating country of the supplier and used the word 'foreign')."
[19]
There was evidence before me that the plaintiffs have already instructed their foreign agents to direct a letter to the supplier in which they advise that they will be commencing proceedings within 30 days of their letter unless the supplier agrees not to infringe their patent rights.
[20]
In their submissions, counsel for the plaintiffs, respondents in this proceeding, suggests that they are entitled to use this information, the name of the foreign supplier, since it is no longer confidential because it was disclosed in the Statement of Fact and Law filed with the court which is now in the public domain. They admit that their knowledge of the source of supply was obtained only in these proceedings and that Eli Lilly and Company wish to enforce their rights against the supplier in the foreign country. They also contend that there was no implied undertaking not to use information obtained in these proceedings. They also refer to the order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary Giles which excluded from its terms any information that was obtained through public knowledge. Furthermore, his directive not to use the "confidential information" for other purposes expires when the information becomes public and finally that the court had discretion, by order, to permit use of the information. That discretion was exercised by Madam Justice Reed and they conclude by suggesting that the plaintiffs would suffer prejudice if they are presently unable to commence an action in the foreign jurisdiction without this information. Limitation periods are presumably running since the plaintiffs have sufficient information to commence an action in the foreign jurisdiction; however, if this information cannot be used, the plaintiffs cannot start the action. The prejudice the plaintiffs will suffer if they cannot use this information is that they may lose their ability to enforce their patent rights in the foreign jurisdiction.
[21]
Counsel for the plaintiffs/respondents then referred me to a number of authorities dealing with the staying of an order. The first two are
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). Both of these decisions canvassed the staying of an order until the Court of Appeal had resolved the matter in dispute and both refused to grant the remedy sought. As I review the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and
Dominion Mail Order Products
decisions, supra, the first one dealt with questions that were ordered answered on a discovery. Mr. Justice McNair emphasized that the onus was on the applicant seeking the stay to show irreparable harm, that the granting of the stay would not result in an injustice to other parties and that in the absence of a stay irreparable injury would occur. He went on to say at p. 120 "in the absence of other factors, the fact that an appeal would be rendered abortive is not sufficient to constitute special circumstances". My assessment of this decision dealing with answers to questions on discovery is simply that the Court of Appeal could, in rendering its decision effectively reverse the order to answer the questions and apply such restrictions on the use of the answers obtained. No injury would be suffered by any party should the Court of Appeal reverse the trial judge's decision.
[22]
In the
Dominion Mail Order Products
case, the stay was sought to prohibit the continued prosecution of an action which is not the case here. This matter can proceed and further steps can be pursued by the parties to this action pending the outcome of an appeal.
[23]
The next authority referred to by the plaintiffs/respondents is the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). In this particular case Mr. Justice Cattanach refused to grant a stay in circumstances again dealing with questions on discovery which were ordered answered. At page 94 his Lordship states:
"If the Court of Appeal should decide that the questions should not have been answered then the examination for discovery would be resolved by the decision of the Court of Appeal from which it would follow that the examination for the purpose indicated immediately above would be nugatory. No use could be made of the examination for discovery at trial.
"Thus the plaintiff would have obtained no advantage for this purpose from the examination."
[24]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 202 (T.D.), Mr. Justice Teitelbaum discusses the court's discretion with respect to granting a stay and suggests that, if it is in the interest of justice, the proceedings should be stayed. He then refers to the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , wherein Mr. Justice Cattanach wrote:
"There are elements of similarity in the exercise of a discretion to grant a stay and to grant an interlocutory injunction.
"Thus, it would appear that because of the delay involved the plaintiff would not suffer irreparable harm (a condition precedent to the grant of an injunction) in the sense that damages recoverable at law would not be an adequate remedy ...
"On balance, therefore, it appears appropriate that the stay should be granted because the detriment of the defendant on the refusal thereof exceeds the detriment to the plaintiff in relation to that refusal."
[25]
Mr. Justice Teitelbaum then concluded that:
"Therefore, what must be shown in order for a stay to be granted is that the applicant must show it has an arguable case, will suffer irreparable harm, and that the balance of convenience is in its favour.
"I am satisfied that a stay of an interlocutory order, as in the present case, should only be granted in the clearest of cases and the onus is on the applicant to show that he or she has an arguable case, will suffer irreparable harm and that the balance of convenience favours the granting of a stay."
[26]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mr. Justice Strayer analyzed the principles and the authorities with respect to the granting of a stay. He wrote at pp. 134-135:
"It is clear from the authorities that there is no automatic or presumptive right to a stay of an interlocutory order (such as my order of October 31, 1986) pending the determination of an appeal from that order. Applications for stays under s. 50 of the
Federal Court Act
, under rule 1909, or through the extension of time for filing a defence under rule 402, would appear to me all to involve the same principle. What that principle should be is less clear. At times it has been suggested that the test should be that of balance of convenience: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.). Elsewhere it has been said that the appropriate test is the one normally associated with s. 50 of the
Federal Court Act
, namely that the onus is on the party seeking a stay of an order or judgment to show that the denial of a stay would cause an injustice to him and the grant of the stay will not cause an injustice to the other party: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)]; see also
La Société Radio Canada contre l'Association des Réalisateurs
, [1982] 2 F.C. 337 (T.D.). Again, it has been said elsewhere in this court that a stay pending appeal should not be issued unless 'irreparable injury' will otherwise be caused;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 219 (F.C.T.D.). More recently, the Supreme Court of Canada has said in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  constitutionality of that order is in question are the same as for the grant of an interlocutory injunction sought against enforcement of an order or law whose constitutional validity has been challenged. Judgment rendered March 5, 1987, as yet unreported, at 14-40. [See 73 N.R. 341; 46 Man.R.(2d) 241.] For those purposes, the court regarded the balance of convenience as being the proper test. It emphasized that in constitutional cases the balance of convenience should be measured not just as between the interest of private parties attacking the validity of a law or order and the interests of the public officer or institution under direct attack. Rather, the interests of the public or portion of the public which would be furthered by the actions of the public agency or officer carrying out the impugned law or order must also be considered.
"For present purposes I think it will be sufficient to consider the balance of convenience."
[27]
There is no doubt in my mind that the information which Madam Justice Reed authorized for release and use by the plaintiffs was information that was sealed as far back as January 1992. At the hearing before Mr. Justice Teitelbaum, the Supplementary Statement of Fact and Law which contained an oblique referral to the foreign supplier was inadvertently put on the main file. Presumably also, the plaintiffs had in their possession a copy of this Supplementary Statement of Fact and Law. However, they chose not to use that information until they brought an application some 12 months later before Madam Justice Reed. It is evident from the affidavit of their witness, that this Statement of Fact and Law was the only source of Eli Lilly International's information with respect to the foreign supplier. In her second order Madam Justice Reed specifically states that the information contained in that Statement of Fact and Law, other than what she has just authorized released, may also be used if the plaintiffs accessed it through third parties who may have been aware of this document while it was on the public file. It is evident to me that no third parties have communicated any evidence to the plaintiffs. They were completely aware from the beginning that this information was confidential as was directed in my order, the order of Giles, A.S.P., and the confidentiality order of Mr. Justice Teitelbaum. If they genuinely felt that it was in the public domain, one must question why they did not transmit this information to their foreign correspondents immediately after the hearing before Mr. Justice Teitelbaum in March 1992. Why did they wait 12 months to seek the court's authority to use this information?
[28]
Contrary to counsel's contention, there is no evidence whatsoever before me that any action in the foreign jurisdiction may be prescribed if proceedings are not initiated immediately. If there is continuing infringement, it would seem to me that no prescription would apply.
[29]
I am satisfied after reviewing the facts and considering very carefully all of the evidence before me that, should the decision of Madam Justice Reed be reversed on appeal, the decision would render the matter nugatory since by the time this matter is dealt with, undoubtedly actions will have been taken against the foreign supplier. This is not the type of situation that can be rectified by the Court of Appeal for example by imposing restrictions on the use of certain disclosed information that should not have come to light. I accept that there is a serious issue to be tried and that the only harm that can come to the plaintiffs is a delay in commencing its proceedings in the foreign jurisdiction. Furthermore, the plaintiff's only source of the information necessary to commence foreign proceedings, that is, the name of the supplier, was known to all parties to be confidential. It was made available to counsel only through the inadvertent filing of the Supplementary Statement of Fact and Law in this court's file. I accept the evidence of Dr. Sherman that he could lose his foreign source of supply. I am also very aware of the fact that should proceedings be commenced in the foreign jurisdiction the foreign supplier may be bound by a court to discontinue his supply to the defendant Apotex or to refrain from supplying Apotex because of the breach of confidentiality. This would have the effect of rendering the entire proceedings in the Canadian courts nugatory since the alleged infringing material would no longer be available to the defendants for sale. In my view the balance of convenience and the irreparable harm certainly favour the applicant/defendants and I hereby grant the stay.
[30]
At the close of these proceedings counsel for the applicants advised the court that he had made enquiries in the Court of Appeal office as to when he could expect the matter to be heard. He was advised that if the preparation of appeal books were to remain the responsibility of the court staff it would take them approximately two months to complete the record. In order to see that this matter proceeds as expeditiously as possible, the applicant has undertaken to prepare the appeal books.
[31]
It is therefore ordered that the order of Madam Justice Reed dated the 30th day of March 1993 in which she allowed the release of confidential information concerning the name and address of the defendants' supplier for use in other proceedings is hereby stayed pending the determination by the Court of Appeal.
[32]
It is further ordered that the applicant-defendant shall prosecute the appeal with diligence and expedition by preparing the appeal books forthwith in consultation with the solicitors for the plaintiff.
[33]
Costs in the cause.
Application granted.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/sms
[End of document]