[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: This motion is brought by the Crown to strike out the plaintiff's Statement of Claim or, as it has more recently become, the plaintiff's Amended Statement of Claim. The Crown submits that the Statement of Claim discloses no reasonable cause of action and asks that the motion be dealt with in writing pursuant to rule 324.
[2]
The material filed by the plaintiff, including the Statement of Claim and the Amended Statement of Claim, is somewhat disjointed. However, it seems that the plaintiff, who styles himself as an expert in Indian, Biblical and political matters, wishes declarations, among other things, creating the principality of Gitanmaax at the canyons and junction of the Skeena and Hagwilget Rivers; diplomatic recognition of his right as the uncontradicted Messiah, True Heir of the Crown, Sovereign Prince of Gitanmaax and King by Succession following Her Majesty the Queen; damages caused by a covert action in which the plaintiff was deprived of $250,000 arising out of a herring roe on kelp operation; and exemplary damages on account of malice by the defendant who has ignored the plaintiff's rights over a very long period of time, going back at least to the actions of one Lieutenant General William Goffe in 1649, when the Lieutenant beheaded the plaintiff's ancestor, but apparently, by reason of timing, not to the plaintiff's prejudice.
The Motions
[3]
The defendant has moved to strike out the Statement of Claim, pursuant to rules 419(1)(a) and (c), in that the Statement of Claim discloses no reasonable cause of action and that it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious. The defendant, as noted earlier, asks that the motion be dealt with in writing pursuant to rule 324(1).
[4]
The plaintiff, in addition to material in opposition to the defendant's motion, has a number of pending motions and notices to admit facts. However, I need only deal with one of those motions, being to have the Crown's present motion to strike out dealt with by an oral hearing rather than in writing.
Motion For An Oral Hearing
[5]
An oral hearing of a motion intended to be disposed of in writing must "... be supported by some substantial reasons for concluding that, in the circumstances of the particular case, the applicant cannot adequately present his application in writing.":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 724 (F.C.A.).
[6]
The reasons for which the plaintiff requests the motion be dealt with either by oral hearing, or by means of a telephone conference, are that dealing with the motion in writing would be contrary to rule 2(2), which requires the court to interpret and apply the rules generally so as to facilitate rather than delay or to end prematurely the normal advancement of a case; that the defendant's motion is evasive; that the defendant's motion will prejudice and delay a fair trial of the action; and that the defendant's motion is an abuse of the process of the court.
[7]
As I pointed out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D. Prothonotary):
"There are a number of instances in which, pursuant to rule 324(3), the court will agree to a request by a respondent for an oral hearing including that the matter is complex (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ); where the issues raise questions of public interest that are novel so that oral argument would be a great assistance to the court (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  witnesses and full legal argument is required (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that the applicant cannot adequately present his application in writing (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  matter is urgent and can be disposed of more expeditiously if an oral hearing is directed, or if so many people are interested in the matter that to present it as contemplated by rule 324 wold prove cumbersome, or if the motion raises a question on which the court desires to hear oral submissions from counsel."
None of the reasons given by the plaintiff for requesting an oral hearing either fall within or are analogous to the reasons for which the court, in the past, has granted an oral hearing of a motion intended to be disposed of in writing. Nor are any of the plaintiff's reasons substantial, valid or relevant reasons to require the oral hearing of the straightforward motion brought by the Crown to strike out the Statement of Claim as showing no reasonable cause of action, or as being scandalous, frivolous or vexatious.
[8]
The plaintiff's motion that striking out the Statement of Claim be dealt with by an oral hearing or by a telephone conference is dismissed.
Motion To Strike Out
The Statement Of Claim
[9]
The defendant, in bringing her motion, relies only on the Statement of Claim.
[10]
In the case of a lay litigant, such as the plaintiff in this instance, I am required to give the Statement of Claim a generous reading to accommodate inadequacies which are merely the result of deficient drafting:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 481 (S.C.C.), at p. 488 [D.L.R.]. I have looked not only at the Amended Statement of Claim, but also at the plaintiff's affidavit material and submissions in order to try to understand the Statement of Claim.
[11]
In considering whether a Statement of Claim ought to be struck out as disclosing no reasonable cause of action, the court must assume the facts contained in the Statement of Claim to have been proven and then dismiss the action only in plain and obvious cases where the court is satisfied that the case is beyond doubt:
Inuit Tapirisat of Canada and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 740  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . This is, of course, subject to a pleading being patently ridiculous or incapable of proof:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 284.
[12]
Even assuming all the facts set out by the plaintiff are correct, they neither show a cause of action nor do they lead to the relief sought.
[13]
I have given the Statement of Claim a most generous reading. While Mr. Sterritt may believe most sincerely in some of his assertions, I am satisfied that it is beyond all doubt that the action cannot succeed.
[14]
Having reached this conclusion, I need not deal with the alternative in the defendant's motion that the action is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious. However, I would add that the action is embarrassing and for that reason also ought not to be allowed to proceed.
[15]
To elaborate, the Statement of Claim is disjointed. It contains many assertions and conclusions, but does not reveal enough facts to enable the court to regulate the proceedings: see, for example,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 236 in which Chief Justice Jackett dealt with a difficult series of statements of claim:
"In my view, a reading of such 'Statements of Claim' shows that none of them sufficiently reveals the facts on which the plaintiff bases his cause of action to make it possible for a defendant to answer it or for a court to regulate the proceedings in the action. In other words, each of them was fundamentally 'vexatious' within the legal sense of that word."
The Statement of Claim in this action contains many statements and conclusions, but is short on the relevant and necessary facts, leading up to the statements and conclusions, to the extent that the court would be unable to properly regulate any future proceedings.
[16]
The plaintiff's material contains what appear to be some immaterial points, but is to a large extent made up of their assertions and conclusions, to the extent that a defendant would be embarrassed and would have difficulty in dealing with them. This concept is dealt with by Lord Justice James of the English Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  stating his case he is entitled to be relieved from his difficulty. Now nothing is more embarrassing to a defendant than a number of statements which may be irrelevant, and with which he therefore does not know what to do. Almost every statement in this claim appears calculated to embarrass the defendant in ascertaining what is the case which he has to meet."
[17]
The plaintiff's Statement of Claim is embarrassing not only because of its disjointed nature, but also by reason of bare assertions and conclusions. The defendant cannot know how to react to and deal with the statements and conclusions. For this reason also the Statement of Claim ought to be struck out.
[18]
I have also considered whether any proper amendments might be made in order to revise the Statement of Claim to disclose a reasonable cause of action. Given the disjointed and improbable nature of the Statement of Claim, I am not able to see how it might be amended to present a reasonable cause of action to which the defendant might plead and the court might regulate.
[19]
For these reasons, the Statement of Claim is struck out without leave to amend.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/kaw
[End of document]