[1]
Denault, J.
: This is an application regarding a decision of the Director General Postings and Career Officers following a recommendation of the Canadian Forces Career Review Board directing that the applicant be released from the Canadian Forces. The applicant is requesting a writ of certiorari quashing the decision or, in the alternative, a declaration that the decision is of no force and effect and a writ of prohibition preventing the respondents from proceeding with the applicant's release. The grounds for the application are that the respondent failed to observe the principles of natural justice by not providing the applicant with an oral hearing, denying full disclosure and by not notifying the Career Review Board of a request for an adjournment pending a determination through the grievance procedure. Also, the applicant argues that the Career Review Board acted without jurisdiction because it was improperly constituted.
Facts
[2]
The applicant enroled in the Canadian Forces under the Officer Cadet Training Plan on August 27, 1986. On June 7, 1987 he was commissioned in the rank of Second Lieutenant and on June 7, 1988, he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant. His occupational classification is pilot and in January 1990, he was transferred to an operational fighter squadron in Bagotville, Quebec. On January 1, 1991, he became a Captain.
[3]
During the summer of 1991, the applicant was involved in a number of incidents which culminated in his suspension from flying duties on July 18, 1991. On October 3, 1991, he was convicted of an offence under the
National Defence Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-5, for performing an unauthorized air show. He was sentenced to a severe reprimand, fined $1,500 and placed on a Report of Shortcomings. On April 22, 1992, the report was terminated by the applicant's then Commanding Officer, Lieutenant Colonel Marcotte, since in his view the applicant had corrected his behaviour.
[4]
On August 26, 1992, the applicant led a Combat Ready Training flight which called for his Commanding Officer, Lieutenant Colonel Davies to perform several night intercepts on the applicant. During return to base Miller performed an intercept on Davies using night Visual Identification Procedures. The applicant's and Lieutenant Colonel Davies' accounts of this latter procedure vary. Lieutenant Colonel Davies expressed a concern that he was in ignorance of the applicant's actions, that the manoeuvre had brought the aircraft close together and that it demonstrated a disregard for pertinent safety rules. The applicant indicated that he briefed his Commanding Officer about the procedure by radio and that Lieutenant Colonel Davies improperly changed radio frequencies.
[5]
On September 29, 1992, as Alert Force Commander, the applicant left Canadian Forces Base Goose Bay with the Alert aircraft without following the appropriate change-over procedures with the incoming pilots. This incident led to a Summary Investigation which concluded that no aircraft were on alert for one hour and that the applicant did not receive proper authorization before launching the aircraft and that the aircraft returned to Canadian Forces Base Bagotville in the armed condition, both contrary to the NORAD Quick Reaction Area operations orders.
[6]
On October 14, 1992, Lieutenant Colonel Davies served the applicant with a Notice of Intent to Recommend Release which stated, in part:
"1. This notice is to advise you that I intend to recommend your release from the Canadian Forces under the provisions of QR&O 15.01 item 5(f) for the following reasons:
a. On at least two recent occasions, as described in the attached documents, you have demonstrated an unacceptable level of self-discipline; poor airmanship; disregard for rules, regulations and procedures; and a serious lack of judgment;
b. you have previously received all possible administrative corrections to correct these shortcomings including:
i. verbal warnings on 6 May 91, 10 Jul 91, 12 Jul 91, and 24 Jul 91,
ii. suspension from flying duties, additional squadron duty operations officer duties, and requirement to requalify as a wingman given 18 Jul 91; and
iii. a Report of Shortcomings signed on 15 Oct 91;
c. you were found guilty on 3 Oct 91 under the
National Defence Act
, art. 129 for acts resulting from these shortcomings;
d. your uncorrected shortcomings pose a significant threat to the safety of yourself and others, and adversely impact upon the effectiveness of the Canadian Forces; and
e. I cannot trust either your judgment or your ability to comply with rules, regulations, orders, or procedures."
The applicant was provided with 14 days to submit written objections to the recommendation for his release.
[7]
The applicant submitted written objections on October 27, 1992, indicating that he had corrected the behaviour which was subject to the Report of Shortcomings referred to in paras. 1(b) and (d) of the Notice, that he did exercise poor judgment regarding the change-over at Goose Bay, that the concerns expressed regarding the incident of August 26 should have been conveyed soon after the incident and that these concerns are minor. Lieutenant Colonel Davies forwarded the Notice and Captain Miller's objections to the Base Commander, Colonel Comptois. On November 9, Colonel Comptois issued a Recommendation for Compulsory Release of Captain Miller which was forwarded to the Director General Postings and Careers Officers (DGPCO) at National Defense Headquarters on November 12, 1992.
[8]
On October 30 and December 4, 1992, and January 14, 1993, the applicant made further written submissions reiterating his version of the events of August 26, 1992, and requesting the opportunity to make oral representations to the Career Review Board, notice of the date and place of hearing of the Career Review Board, and full disclosure of all documents and witnesses. He was informed that full disclosure was taking place, that the procedure before the Career Review Board was administrative and that there was no provision for an oral hearing. Each of his submissions were forwarded to the DGPCO and put before the Career Review Board.
[9]
Before considering whether to convene the Career Review Board, the DGPCO sought recommendations from Fighter Group Headquarters and Air Command Headquarters. On January 26 and February 24, 1993, respectively, both concurred in the Base Commander's recommendation for the applicant's release. The applicant's career manager and his superior concurred in the recommendation for release on March 19, 1993. However, the file was held in abeyance pending receipt at National Defense Headquarters of the applicant's most recent Personnel Evaluation Report on June 17, 1993.
[10]
The applicant signed his Personal Evaluation Report on April 21, 1993, and on the same day submitted an application for redress of grievance regarding the recommendation for release on the basis that it was not justified and alleging intimidation and misuse of authority on the part of Commanding Officer Davies. Davies rejected the grievance on April 30, as did the Base Commander on June 14. On June 28, the applicant submitted a request that the Career Review Board not be convened until after his grievance had been determined.
[11]
On June 30, the Secretary of the Career Review Board reviewed the applicant's file, prepared a briefing note and a decision slip for the Career Review Board recommending the applicant's release. The file was circulated to the Chairperson and the members of the Board. Between July 4 and 9 the members individually considered the applicant's case and each recommended his release. On July 9, the Career Review Board Secretary received the applicant's request for an adjournment together with the grievance file and further written submissions and immediately removed the Career Review Board's file from the DGPCO where it had been placed for final approval. The submissions were reviewed and put before the DGPCO on July 14, 1993, along with the Career Review Board's recommendation for release.
[12]
On July 16, 1993, the DGPCO approved the Career Review Board's recommendation for release pursuant to item 5(f) of art. 15.01 of the
Queen's Regulations and Orders for the Canadian Forces
and the applicant was informed on July 22 that the Career Review Board had considered his case and that he was to be released from the Canadian Forces.
Issues
[13]
The applicant submitted the following questions for determination:
"1. Whether the Career Review Board acted without jurisdiction because it was improperly constituted;
"2. Whether the duty of procedural fairness required an oral hearing in this instance;
"3. Whether the duty of procedural fairness required full disclosure in this instance;
"4. Whether the duty of procedural fairness required that the decision-makers be informed of the applicant's request for an adjournment; and
"5. Whether the military grievance process is an adequate internal remedy."
Analysis
[14]
The relevant provisions of the
National Defence Act
are as follows:
"12(1) The Governor-in-Council may make regulations for the organization, training, discipline, efficiency, administration and good government of the Canadian Forces and generally for carrying the purposes and provisions of this Act into effect.
. . . . .
"18(2) Unless the Governor-in-Council otherwise directs, all orders and instructions to the Canadian Forces that are required to give effect to the decisions and to carry out the directions of the Government of Canada or the Minister shall be issued by or through the Chief of the Defence Staff.
. . . . .
"23(1) The enrolment of a person binds the person to serve in the Canadian Forces until the person is, in accordance with regulations, lawfully released.
. . . . .
"49. Any power or jurisdiction given to, and any act or thing to be done by, to or before any officer or noncommissioned member may be exercised by, or done by, to or before any other officer or noncommissioned member for the time being authorized in that behalf by regulations or according to the custom of the service."
[15]
Article 15.01 of the
Queen's Regulations and Orders for the Canadian Forces
[see footnote 1] deals with the release of officers and provides in part:
"(1) An officer or man may be released, during his service, only in accordance with this article and table hereto.
"(2) ...
"(3) Except as prescribed in (4) of this article, the authority to approve a release is:
(a) the Governor General, in the case of an officer other than a subordinate officer; or
(b) the Chief of the Defence Staff, or such other officer as he may designate, in the case of a subordinate officer or man. ..."
Item 5(f) of the table attached to art. 15.01, the reason for the applicant's release, provides as follows:
"Applies to the release of an officer or noncommissioned member who, either wholly or chiefly because of factors within his control, develops personal weaknesses or behaviour or has domestic or other personal problems that seriously impair his usefulness to or impose an excessive administrative burden on the Canadian Forces."
Article 15.21 provides that the commanding officer who proposes to recommend the release of a commissioned officer under item 5(f) must provide to the officer a written Notice of Intent to Recommend Release with reasons and give the officer 14 days to provide written objections. The Notice and the officer's written objections are to be forwarded to the Chief of the Defence Staff in a manner prescribed by him. Paragraph 10 of art. 15.21 provides that when the release is proceeded with despite the officer's objections, the officer has a right to make an application for redress of grievance in accordance with art. 19.26.
[16]
Article 15-2 of the
Canadian Forces Administrative Orders
(
CAFAO
) [see footnote 2] also deals with the release of officers and serves to amplify s. 23 of the
National Defence Act
and art. 15 of the
Queen's Regulations and Orders for the Canadian Forces
(
QR&O
). Paragraph 9 provides that the release authority for officers is the Governor General (as provided in art. 15.01(3) of the
QR&O
). Paragraph 11 provides that submissions requesting Governor General approval must be in accordance with Annex A, Appendix 1 to
CFAO
15-2, which provides for the same procedure as outlined above in art. 15.21 of the
QR&O
. Both the
CFAO
and the
QR&O
are silent regarding the existence of the Career Review Board.
[17]
The Chief Personnel Careers and Development Operating Procedures Manual 203-7 (Operating Procedures Manual) provides for the establishment and procedures of the Career Review Board. The relevant provisions are as follows:
"1. A CRB will be convened, either secretarily or by formal meeting, to consider the disposition of the commissioned officers of the Regular Force (Majors and below) who fail to meet the requirements of the BOTC, the basic specifications for their classification, or who present unique situations that require special consideration ...
"2. DGPCO will authorize the disposition of those officers who have failed to meet the requirements for their continued advantageous employment by approving one of the following alternatives in consonance with para. 3:
. . . . .
d. the commencement of release proceedings; or
. . . . .
"5. The composition of the CRB will be:
a. Chairman - DPCAO
b. Members -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the grievance process, which operate independently of each other. Essentially, the Secretary of the Career Review Board gathers the information, and prepares a summary and recommendation which is circulated to the Chairman and members of the Career Review Board. If the members and the Chairman concur in the recommendation, the recommendation is forwarded to the DGPCO who has the ultimate authority to approve the recommendation for release. The grievance process is similar to most insofar as the complainant first seeks redress from the Commanding Officer and then to each subsequent level of authority, all the way to the Governor-in-Council.
Jurisdiction Of The
Career Review Board
[18]
The applicant submits that para. 5 of the Operating Procedures Manual above provides that the Career Review Board should be composed of the Chairman (DPCAO - Director Personnel Career Administration Officers), the Secretary (DPCAO 2-3 - Director Personnel Career Administration Officers) and three members (DMMD, DPRC, PCO). Counsel submits that these provisions are imperative. In this instance the members were R.S. Mosher (DMMD 3), E.C. Hague (DEMR 3) and J.D. Evans (PCO 5) and, as such, the Career Review Board acted without jurisdiction. In response, the respondent maintains that the directives are directory, not mandatory, and that failure to adhere to them does not give rise to a loss of jurisdiction. In addition, the respondent submits that R.S. Mosher was a subordinate of the DMMD, that the position of DPRC no longer exists and has been replaced by the DEMR, and that J.D. Evans is a subordinate of the PCO. In its opinion, s. 49 of the
National Defence Act
provides that persons in the Canadian Forces may delegate their authority to subordinates without a loss of jurisdiction.
[19]
The issue to be determined here is whether the directives in the Operating Procedures Manual are mandatory and whether a failure to adhere to them renders the recommendation of the Career Review Board and consequent decision of the DGPCO a nullity. It seems clear that if a decision-making body is improperly constituted, according to the constitutive act or regulation, a decision rendered by it is invalid. However, in order to determine whether the alleged improper composition of the Career Review Board renders the decision of the DGPCO invalid and prior to a determination of whether the directives establishing the Career Review Board are mandatory, I must first determine whether these directives have the force of law. In other words, I must determine whether the Operating Procedures Manual may be characterized as legislative or regulatory in nature.
[20]
The Supreme Court, in
Martineau and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , considered the effect of directives prescribing the process involved in a disciplinary decision within a penitentiary. Four judges found that these directives were "no more than directions" [see footnote 3]. Pigeon, J., speaking for the four judges, stated that
"I have no doubt that the regulations are law ... I do not think the same can be said of the directives ... It is significant that there is no provision for penalty and, while they are authorized by statute, they are clearly of an administrative, not a legislative, nature. It is not in any legislative capacity that the Commissioner is authorized to issue directives but in his administrative capacity ... In my opinion it is important to distinguish between duties imposed on public employees by statutes or regulations having the force of law and obligations prescribed by virtue of their condition of public employees. The members of a disciplinary board are not high public officers but ordinarily civil servants. The Commissioner's directives are no more than directions as to the manner of carrying out their duties in the administration of the institution where they are employed." [see footnote 4]
Four judges [see footnote 5] came to the opposite conclusion on the basis that the directives had explicit legislative basis, that they were formulated in imperative or mandatory terms, and that they concerned disciplinary matters with considerable consequences. Subsequent jurisprudence of the Court of Appeal has followed the reasoning of Pigeon, J., and found that
Martineau No. 1
established that policy directives, whether made pursuant to regulatory authority or general administrative capacity, are no more than directions which create no legal rights or obligations [see footnote 6].
[21]
According to the
Queen's Regulations and Orders for the Armed Forces
and the
Canadian Forces Administrative Orders
, the person authorized to release persons enroled in the Canadian Forces is the Governor General. The power to make a recommendation for compulsory release has been delegated to the DGPCO [see footnote 7]. According to the
QR&O
and the
CFAO
, the DGPCO may only recommend release after the officer has been provided with an Notice of Intent to Recommend Release in the form prescribed by the
CFAO
and after he has been provided with 14 days to submit written objections. This is the process which is contemplated in s. 23(1) and which is mandated by the
QR&O
and
CFAO
. While it is not necessary to determine this question as this process was adhered to in this case, clearly the
QR&O
are regulatory in nature and may be considered to have the force of law. It could be argued that the same might be said of the
CFAO
insofar as they are authorized by s. 18(2) of the
National Defense Act
, are general in application and are prescribed in mandatory terms [see footnote 8].
[22]
However, the process through which in some cases the DGPCO seeks recommendations from the Career Review Board is only provided for in the Operating Procedures Manual. There was no evidence regarding the source of the authority for issuing the Operating Procedures Manual. Also, while the applicant's arguments regarding the mandatory nature of para. 5 regarding the composition of the Career Review Board are correct, the same cannot be said of the procedures in general which, in my view, provide for considerable discretion. For example, it is not clear on the evidence whether a Career Review Board must be convened in every case and para. 1 provides that the Career Review Board may proceed "either secretarily or by formal meeting". In my opinion, even if it were possible to characterize an instrument which is not a "true" regulation or subordinate legislation as nonetheless having the force of law (an issue which is not settled), such is not the case here. The Operating Procedures Manual is no more than administrative directions with no legal force or effect. Therefore, a failure to comply with them cannot invalidate the decision of the DGPCO to recommend the applicant's release.
Duty Of Fairness
[23]
The finding above does not mean, however, that a failure to adhere to the duty of fairness cannot invalidate the decision as well. An examination of the two principal decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada on the issue of whether the duty of fairness applies in the situation of an employee's dismissal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 81; 69 D.L.R.(4th) 489; [1990] 3 W.W.R. 289 and
Reference Re ss. 193 and 195.1(1)(c) of the Criminal Code
, [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1123; [1990] 4 W.W.R. 481; 109 N.R. 81; 68 Man.R.(2d) 1; 56 C.C.C.(3d) 65; 77 C.R.(3d) 1) establishes that while s. 7 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
does not apply because it generally does not protect economic rights such as the right to a profession, the applicant is nonetheless owed a duty of procedural fairness because loss of employment is a serious decision with a significant impact upon the individual [see footnote 9]. Also, a determination of the content or scope of the duty to act fairly in this instance involves a consideration of the particular circumstances of the case, the subject matter under consideration, and the availability of alternate remedies [see footnote 10].
[24]
The majority of the Supreme Court in
Knight
, citing
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 671; 78 C.L.L.C. 14,181, held that when an employee is dismissed, reasons and an opportunity to be heard are sufficient to meet the duty of fairness. The comments of the court in determining whether the Board complied with the duty of fairness are instructive (at pp. 685-686):
"It must not be forgotten that every administrative body is the master of its own procedure and need not assume the trappings of a court. The object is not to import into administrative proceedings the rigidity of all the requirements of natural justice that must be observed by a court, but rather to allow administrative bodies to work out a system that is flexible, adapted to their needs and fair. As pointed out by de Smith (
Judicial Review of Administrative Action
(4th Ed. 1980), at p. 240), the aim is not to create 'procedural perfection' but to achieve a certain balance between the need for fairness, efficiency and predictability of outcome. Hence, in the case at bar, if it can be found that the respondent indeed had knowledge of the reasons for his dismissal and had an opportunity to be heard by the Board, the requirements of procedural fairness will be satisfied even if there was no structured 'hearing' in the judicial meaning of the word. I would agree with Wade when he writes (
Administrative Law
, at pp. 482-483):
'A "hearing" will normally be an oral hearing. But it has been held that a statutory board, acting in an administrative capacity, may decide for itself whether to deal with applications by oral hearing or merely on written evidence and arguments, provided that it does in substance "hear" them; ...' [Emphasis added; footnotes omitted.]
"Laskin, C.J., echoed this view in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at p. 328, when he stated that the Police Commissioners should have 'heard' Nicholson before deciding to terminate his employment, but not implying that there should be a formal hearing. (See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  reasons need not involve a full and complete disclosure by the administrative body of all of its reasons for dismissing the employee, but rather the communication of the broad grounds revealing the general substance of the reason for dismissal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the trial judge found as a fact that the respondent knew or should have known why the appellant Board was unhappy with his employment contract and that if he did not accept a one year contract he would be dismissed. In my view, the record amply supports this finding, which was not disputed by the Court of Appeal. I recognize the Court of Appeal's concern that the respondent was never officially notified of the reasons for his dismissal, but it is clear that he was informed of those reasons through his meetings with the appellant Board, sometimes personally, sometimes through his solicitor."
[25]
The applicant submits that an oral hearing was required in addition to his written submissions because credibility was in issue and because there were contradictions between his and his Commanding Officer's accounts of the events of August 26.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 622, the Federal Court of Appeal found that a failure to allow a woman who filed a complaint against the CBC with the Canadian Human Rights Commission to confront directly particular evidence against her and to test the credibility of its proponents amounted to a breach of natural justice.
[26]
However, in this instance, the applicant was provided ample opportunity to make written submissions, which he availed himself of on four occasions, and the evidence demonstrates that these submissions were taken into consideration during the decision-making process. For example, not only were his last submissions regarding the events of August 26, 1992, dated June 28, 1993, but received at National Defence Headquarters on July 9, considered both by the Secretary of the Career Review Board and the DGPCO prior to his release, as is reflected in the handwritten comments on the letter transmitting the file from the Career Review Board to the DGPCO, but they were expressly dealt with in the message of July 22 conveying the decision to recommend release:
"LE COMITE DE REVISION DES CARRIERES A PRIS EN CONSIDERATION LES COMMENTAIRES DU MEMBRE A LA REF A [June 28 submissions of Miller] AVANT DE PRENDRE SA DECISION. CEUX-CI APPARAISSAIENT SUBJECTIFS ET CONTIENNENT DES ALLEGATIONS D'ABUS DE POUVOIR. LA DEMANDE DE REDRESSEMENT DE GRIEF DU MEMBRE DEVRAIT POURSUIVRE SON COUR NATUREL PUISQU'IL N'EXISTE PAS PRESENTEMENT DE JUSTIFICATION POUR MODIFIER LA RECOMMANDATION." (apostrophes added)
I acknowledge that these submissions were not placed before the Career Review Board by its Secretary because they had already made their recommendations, but I do not believe that this failure is fatal to the decision given that the role of the Career Review Board is only to make a recommendation to the DGPCO and given that the submission was forwarded to the DGPCO. In addition, the events of August 26 were only one of the many reasons provided for recommending the applicant's release. In my opinion, the facts of this case did not justify the imposition of an oral hearing [see footnote 11].
[27]
On the issue of disclosure, it appears that of the numerous documents, including the applicant's written submissions, which were circulated to the members of the Career Review Board and provided to the DGPCO, the decision slip and a briefing note were not disclosed to the applicant. The decision slip is merely a form summarizing the possible findings of the Career Review Board and providing signature blocks for them to indicate their concurrence or nonconcurrence. I do not believe that the duty of fairness requires disclosure of this document.
[28]
The briefing note summarizes the Notice of Intent to Release provided to the applicant on October 14, 1992, the recommendations received from the chain of command (which were provided to the applicant on April 20, 1993), and the findings in his recent Personnel Evaluation Report, and suggests two applicable items of release under
QR&O
: item 5(d) to which no stigma is attached and which results because of factors beyond the officer's control and item 5(f) (see above). In the briefing note, the Secretary of the Career Review Board also recommended the applicant's release. I do not believe that the failure to disclose the briefing note amounted to a breach of the duty of fairness because the information contained therein had already been disclosed to the applicant and I do not believe that there was any possibility of prejudice to the applicant as a result of the failure to disclose the document.
[29]
The applicant also submits that the Secretary of the Career Review Board's failure to forward his request for adjournment to the Career Review Board amounted to a breach of the duty of procedural fairness. I must disagree. The request was only received by the Secretary after the Career Review Board had made its recommendations. It was put before the DGPCO who decided that an adjournment was not necessary and that the grievance process would take place notwithstanding any decision on his part.
[30]
Given my findings above regarding the jurisdiction of the Career Review Board, the adherence of the respondent to the principles of fairness, and the fact that the grievance process is not yet complete, it is not necessary at this time to decide whether the grievance process is an adequate alternative internal remedy.
Conclusion
[31]
For the above reasons, I am of the opinion that no grounds exist warranting the issuance of a writ of certiorari in this instance since the process leading to the recommendation for the applicant's release adhered to the rules of fairness. I would, therefore, dismiss the application.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/sms
Footnotes
1.	These
Regulations
were made pursuant to s. 12(1) of the
National Defence Act
.
2.	These orders are issued on the authority of the Chief of the Defence Staff pursuant to para. 18(2) of the
National Defence Act
.
3.	Ritchie, Pigeon, Beetz, and de Granpré, JJ. Judson, J., concurred in the result and relied on the Court of Appeal decision which found that the decision was not required to be made on a judicial or quasi-judicial basis and which did not address the issue of the effect of the directives.
4.	At page 129.
5.	Laskin, C.J., and Martland, Spence and Dickson, JJ., found the directives to have the force of law.
6.	For example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 321 (F.C.A.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
7.	There was little evidence presented by either side on this issue because the question was not framed in these terms by the applicant. However, it seems that such a delegation may be presumed from a reading of s. 49 of the
National Defence Act
, art. 1.13 of the
QR&O
which amplifies s. 49, and the Recommendation for Compulsory Release form provided at Appendix 1, Annex A, of the
CFAO
which provides for the signature of the officer's Commanding Officer and Base Commander, and distribution to the DGPCO.
8.	On the basis of the reasoning of Laskin, C.J., in
Martineau No. 1
.
9.	My colleague, Cullen, J., came to the same conclusion in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)].
10.	See also
Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 385, at p. 425.
11.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
[End of document]