[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an application by the plaintiffs for special direction concerning costs; for an order extending the time for hearing of this motion, on consent; and seeking the appointment of the Associate Senior Prothonotary as the taxing officer (an error in wording was made in clause 3 of the notice of motion where reference was made to a referee pursuant to rule 500).
[2]
An order will go extending the time for bringing this motion, the applicant having secured the consent of the defendant.
[3]
No order will be made to appoint a particular person as taxing officer. That is a matter best handled by the administrators of the court and no compelling reason was advanced for changing that process.
[4]
The court now operates under a new tariff of costs, with a different approach and some different wording. Thus, there is no real need to use the classifications I, II, or III save and except to assist in determining the fees paid to the Registry for various services. This point was not pressed and I see no real need for an order on this point.
[5]
This application is among the first to be made pursuant to the amendments made to Federal Court rules 344 and 346 and to Tariff B. Accordingly, I am including in these reasons the splendid summary of the changes in Federal Court Practice 1988, D. Sgayias, M. Kinnear, D.J. Rennie, B.J. Saunders (Carswell Legal publications, 1988):
"Rule 346.1(1) Subject to subsection (2), amendments made in Amending Order No. 11 to rules 344 and 346 and to Tariff B (hereinafter referred to as the new taxation rules) apply to all proceedings, whenever commenced, except where costs have already been fixed or where a taxation of costs has been applied for before the day the new taxation rules come into force.
"(2) The new taxation rules do not apply where, within 90 days after the coming into force of the new taxation rules, any party to a proceeding commenced before that day files with the Court a notice that the costs shall be determined without reference to the new taxation rules. [SOR/87-221, s. 4]
"Note
"Rule 346.1 is a transitional rule. It came into force along with the amendments to rules 344 and 346 enacted by SOR/87-221, dated April 2, 1987.
"Rule 346.1 provides that, unless notice is given under 346.1(2),
the new rules apply to proceedings whenever commenced
. The former rules continue to apply to a proceeding commenced before April 2, 1987 only if notice under rule 346.1(2) has been filed within 90 days of that date.
"The principal changes effected by the new rules 344 and 346 and the new Tariff B are set out below.
"1.
Order as to costs
. The provision, found in former rule 344(1), that costs follow the event unless other-wise ordered has been abolished. Under that provision, silence in the judgment as to costs resulted in an award to the successful party: see the cases noted under rule 344 - 'Former Rules -- Costs to Follow the Event'. Under the new rule 344(1), it would appear that silence in the judgment will result in no costs being awarded to any party.
"2.
Consideration in awarding costs
. The new rule 344(3) elaborates the considerations that may be taken into account in awarding costs. In particular, the Court may, under rule 344(3)(g), consider any offer of settlement made in writing.
"3.
Lump sum awards
. Under the former rule 344, it had been held that a lump sum award of costs should be related to Tariff B and not be used to increase the tariff amounts for counsel fees: see the cases noted under rule 344 -- 'Former Rules -- Awards of Lump Sums'. The new rule 344(4) expressly permits the Court to fix costs without reference to Tariff B and, when read with rules 344(1) and (3), would appear to allow the Court a wide discretion as to the amount of lump sum costs.
"4.
Special directions increasing counsel fees
. A body of jurisprudence had developed under the former rule 344, which limited the discretion of the Court to increase counsel fees beyond the very modest amounts permitted by the former Tariff B. In particular, it appeared that those amounts could not be increased solely by reason of the amounts involved in the proceeding, the importance of the issues, the volume of the work, or the complexity of the proceeding: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), and the other cases noted under rule 344 -- 'Former Rules - Special Directions as to Counsel Fees'. New rules 344(1) and (3) effect a change. Under the new rule 344(1), the Court has full discretionary power over the amount of costs, and under the new rules 344(1)(b), (c), (i) and (j), the Court may consider the factors that had come to be excluded under the former law.
"5.
Time for special directions
. The time within which special directions of the Court may be sought under new rule 344(7) is 30 days. Under the former rule, it was 10 days (by reference back to rule 337(5)).
"6.
Taxing officer's discretion
. Under the former rule 346(1), and Tariff B, the taxing officer had essentially no discretion as to the amounts allowed for counsel fees, absent a special direction by the Court. The taxing officer merely determined whether the proceeding came within Class I, II or III and then proceeded to apply the set amount under the tariff. The new Tariff B abolishes the three classes of action (which are retained for the purposes of Registry fees under Tariff B) and permits the taxing officer to award an amount up to a maximum. Rule 346(1) directs the taxing officer to consider a number of factors in exercising this new discretion as to amount. In order to exceed the set maximums, however, a special direction of the Court is still required.
"7.
Review of Taxation
. There is now a time limit for seeking a review of a taxation: 14 days as prescribed by new rule 346(2).
"8.
Tariff B counsel fees
. Under the new Tariff B, the maximum amounts that can be allowed by the taxing officer for counsel fees are greater than those permitted for the highest class of proceeding under the former tariff.
"9.
Expert witness fees
. The new Tariff B also effects a change as to expert witness fees. Under the former tariff, fees beyond the basic fee prescribed in Tariff A could be allowed for expert witnesses only if a special direction were obtained from the Court: see the cases noted under rule 344 -- 'Former Rules -- Special Directions as to Expert Witness Fees'. Under the new Tariff B, the taxing officer may allow reasonable payments to an expert witness without the necessity of any direction of the Court." (emphasis added)
[6]
In Re Harbour Brick Co. Ltd. and the Queen (1987), 38 L.C.R. 122, at p. 124, Joyal, J., makes the point:
"It will be noted that the court has full discretionary power over the award of costs (rule 344). In the exercise of this discretion, rule 344(3) lists some 16 indicia which a court may consider, the last of them being 'any other matter relevant to the question of costs'. There is a similar kind of discretion given to the court in awarding prejudgment interest and in setting the rate. The same rule should apply to the taxing of 'reasonable costs' to include any interest-added charges."
[7]
One more comment, by way of introduction before responding to the application, namely,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), McNair, J., reasons for order dated January 26, 1987:
"It is not the proper function of a judge under our Rules to tax party and party costs in the first instance. The role is better left to the prothonotary as taxing officer. Normally, a party must bring his bill of costs before the taxing officer in the usual way and if dissatisfied with the taxation, he can apply to the Court for a review pursuant to rule 346(2) [old tarriff]."
[8]
Actually, counsel are best able to determine if an application should be made for directions first and then move for taxation based on the directions. Despite the fact the taxing officers may have a wider discretion, if they make a ruling it must not exceed the maximums. To do so requires a special direction of the court.
[9]
Quoting again McNair, J., (supra):
"Counsel for the defendant takes the position that the matter is one that can be better dealt with on the taxation of costs. This is true so far as it goes on the assumption that the parties can come to some agreement as to a realistic fee for the costs of the plaintiff's expert. Absent such agreement, it would appear more than likely that the taxation of costs might have to be adjourned to enable the plaintiff to apply for special directions regarding the costs of his expert at some future time. Under the circumstances, it would be unjust to leave the matter in abeyance."
The Motion at Hand - The Plaintiffs' Case on the General Issues:
[10]
The plaintiffs seek increased fees based on seven possible factors outlined in Federal Court rule 344(3), namely:
(a) the result of the proceeding;
(b) the amounts claimed and the amounts recovered;
(c) the importance of the issues;
(i) the volume of work;
(j) the complexity of the issues;
(k) the conduct of any party that tended to shorten or to lengthen unnecessarily the duration of the proceeding;
(l) the denial of or the neglect or refusal of any party to admit anything that should have been admitted.
(a)
the result of the proceeding
: the plaintiffs were successful in maintaining the validity of a patent. They allege this was the first case and that it will affect other patent actions launched about the same time. No affidavit evidence was advanced to show it did in fact have any impact on the other actions except a claim by the applicant R. Scott Joliffe, counsel for the plaintiffs, who states in paragraph 3 of his affidavit, "The importance of this action was therefore heightened from the plaintiffs' point of view: the resolution of four other pending actions depended on the result achieved in this case". The plaintiffs allege the action did not exist in a vacuum because a similar case involving the American patent was proceeding in the United States before the International Trade Commission (I.T.C.), thereby adding importance to the case here in Canada.
(b)
the amounts claimed and amounts recovered
: the plaintiffs were able to show that over 40,000 rowers were sold by the defendant from the date of the issue of the plaintiffs' patent in April 1985. The plaintiffs were able to speculate only on amounts because no reference to-date has taken place, nor have the plaintiffs made their election whether to seek damages or profits. The range is quite wide, namely a minimum of $125,000 to a maximum of $1.25 million. It is obvious, however, that the recovery will be a significant sum.
(c)
the importance of the issue
: the plaintiffs suggest this is a test case (see earlier quotes of R. Scott Joliffe). The real issue, state the plaintiffs, was really invalidity, not infringement. Establishing this as a valid patent would have great importance beyond success in this case. Counsel cited Osborne and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 6 F.T.R. 119 (F.C.T.D.), for the proposition that "test case" should not be narrowly defined and that the case at hand has some of the elements of a test case. At page 310, Walsh, D.J., states:
"This statement by Chief Justice Thurlow also prevails over the statement by Justice Cattanach in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), in which at page 250 he found that section 3 of the Tariff B does not exclude fees to be paid to junior counsel when their presence can be justified. While it was not perhaps a test case Justice Cattanach states, at page 251:
'There were three other appeals pending, the results of which were dependant on the outcome of the present matter.'
"In the Manitoba Fisheries case there was a dissenting judgment by Justice Pratt in the Appeal decision but the majority judgment rendered by Justice Heald, [1980] 2 F.C. 217, at page 222, states:
'The practice adopted by counsel in this case and in the other seven actions affected by the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in this case is one which, in my view, needs to be encouraged, rather than discouraged. Rather than proceeding with eight parallel actions at an equal pace with the result that much larger costs would have been incurred, the plaintiffs and their counsel chose rather to proceed with one case, for a final determination of the very important legal principle established in this action by the Supreme Court of Canada. They should not, in my view, be penalized for adopting such a course. To hold them strictly to the items in the Tariff would penalize them severely. For these reasons I would dismiss the appeal with costs.' (emphasis added)
"The
Warwick Shipping
judgment (supra) appears to be the latest consideration of the matter by the Court of Appeal and it would appear that, without reversing the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision,
there is now a tendency to be more generous in making special directions as to costs rather than rigidly adhering to the hopelessly outdated and inadequate Tariff whenever the discoveries or days of hearing are shortened by the cooperation of the parties
in the preparation of same and at the trial. That appears to be the situation in the present case.
While it is not strictly speaking a test case to the same extent as the
Manitoba Fisheries
case but rather merely an important and difficult case which by virtue of the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> judgment would not justify departure from the Tariff, it certainly clearly resembles a test case in that it is the first such case on the issue
. While it is true that there are no other actions at present before this Court which would be disposed of as a result of the decision in this case and as a result it differs from the
Manitoba Fisheries
case, plaintiffs nevertheless point out that in proceedings before the Public Service Staff Relations Board, file 166-2-14941, Jacob W. Rempel, grievor and Treasury Board, employer, in a decision dated October 31, 1985 dealing with the validity of section 32 of the
Public Service Employment Act
in view of the
Charter of Rights
, the presiding Board member stated that he was advised that it was expected that this issue would come before the Federal Court on three cases and that the argument would be the same. As a result the hearing was adjourned until judgment was rendered by the Federal Court. This has now been done. It can therefore fairly be said that pending cases in another jurisdiction were not proceeded with while awaiting the outcome of the present actions, making them therefore equivalent to test cases." (emphasis added)
(i)
the volume of work
; (j)
the complexity of the issues
; (k)
the conduct of any party that tended to shorten or to lengthen unnecessarily the duration of the proceeding
; and (l)
the denial of or the neglect or refusal of any party to admit anything that should have been admitted
:
[11]
The plaintiffs maintain the action or volume of work was not really voluminous at the beginning, except the difficulty with a United Kingdom inventor and a United Kingdom corporation. The volume increased in a significant way, state the plaintiffs, when a long series of defences were pleaded, and 75 pieces of alleged prior art were introduced. This number was eventually reduced to 42 but still required an excessive amount of work. One counsel, Mr. Wahl, was given the exclusive responsibility to deal with these pieces of alleged prior art in answering the allegation of obviousness. Anticipation as a question of fact required the comments and statements of many witnesses -- and so it is alleged the defendant made it a complex case. The defendant is also chastized by the plaintiffs for its unreasonable position that there was non-infringement thereby increasing the volume of work.
[12]
The complexity and volume of work were also increased because of the U.S. proceeding where many witnesses were called and something in excess of 300 papers were filed, necessitating much time to enable examination of these documents.
The Motion at Hand - the Defendant's Responses:
[13]
The defendant was quick to point out that we are dealing here with party and party costs, so no complete indemnity is to be awarded. The plaintiffs are not entitled to full compensation. However, states the defendant, that is precisely what the plaintiffs are endeavouring to do here. With regard to the old tariff, Cullen, J., stated in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 261:
"In my view, anything other than a strict application of the tariff items could lead to practically every successful litigant seeking more costs if he felt a great deal of preparation was necessary; or the issues were complex; or it was a precedent-setting case; or a considerable amount of money was involved."
[14]
The defendant's counsel concedes that now the Rules have changed to provide more flexibility. The old tariff was justifiably criticized, "but that has now changed, and brought up to date and the plaintiffs are seeking an enormous increase over the new tariff", defence counsel stated in argument. The defendant then commented on the seven factors raised by the plaintiffs to generate an increase, and not surprisingly disagreed with the plaintiffs' observations.
(a)
the result of the proceedings
: the defendant agrees that upholding the validity of the patent was important, "but no more important than any other case". All patent litigation is basically the same.
(b)
the amounts claimed and the amounts recovered
: here, says the defendant, figures quoted are speculative at best, and the only solid evidence is that 40,000 rowers were sold, and they violated the patent. He points to the wide range that the plaintiff had conceded, $125,000 to $1.2 million. He also states that there is still no election re damages or lost profits.
(c)
importance of the case
: the defendant strongly attacks any suggestion that this is a "test case". Cited in support of this is  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), and counsel for the defendant quoted Smith, D.J., at page 49:
"This was a test case, the result of which was to decide the rights of seven other companies that were in the same position as the applicant. The two additional counsel were also counsel for several of those seven companies. It was highly important that counsel for the applicant, conducting a test case, make sure that all the facts that might be considered, by counsel for the other companies as well as by himself, to be relevant to the issues, were ascertained, considered, and presented fairly and fully to the Court, whether by way of an agreed statement of facts, or by parol or documentary evidence at the trial. Similarly, it was necessary, both in the various steps leading up to trial and at the trial itself, and subsequently, in deciding upon and proceeding with appeals to the Court of Appeal and Supreme Court, that counsel for the applicant be fully informed on all the points of law which counsel for the other companies thought applicable.
"All of the eight companies had a great deal of money at stake in this action. The closest possible collaboration between the applicant (plaintiff) and the other seven companies was needed to make certain, so far as was humanly possible, that the test case was handled throughout in a thoroughly efficient manner. Only by such collaboration could the other seven companies feel satisfied that their rights were being fully protected in the proceedings in the test case. Undoubtedly, numerous discussions and conferences were held, and necessarily so, throughout the various steps in the proceedings in the Trial Division and in the Court of Appeal. The simplest and most effective way to secure full cooperation was to engage counsel for some of the other companies as additional counsel in the test case. Doing so was in my opinion a prudent and well warranted step."
[15]
Mr. Arthur A. Garvis, at paragraphs 3 to 8 of his affidavit, states:
"3) THAT I have taken particular cognizance of paragraph 3 of Mr. Joliffe's affidavit, and I assert that the Tye-Sil litigation was not a 'test case'. This litigation does not meet the criteria of being a 'test case' in that the result obtained did not decide the rights of the parties in the four other pending actions referred to in paragraph 3 of Mr. Joliffe's affidavit. Counsel for defendant in this case did not consult the attorneys representing the various defendants in the four other pending actions in order to make sure that all the facts that might be considered by counsel for these defendants be raised and be relevant to the issues in this case; nor were the issues in the other four pending actions considered and presented fairly and fully to the Court, whether by way of an agreed statement of facts or by parol or documentary evidence at the trial.
"4) Nor was it necessary, in the various steps leading up to trial and at the trial itself in this litigation, and subsequently, for counsel for the defendants in the four other pending actions, to be fully informed on all of the points of law and facts which counsel for the defendants in the four other pending actions thought applicable.
"5) The rights of the defendants in the four other pending actions have not been settled or resolved by this litigation; those defendants not being precluded from raising all manners of defences to plaintiffs' actions against them, which defences may be similar or at variance with those defences raised by the defendant herein. Particularly, the devices in issue in each of the four other pending actions are, to the best of my information and belief, not identical with the defendant's device in this litigation.
"6) In the action instituted against Dorcy Ashflash Canada Ltd., the alleged infringing device was known as the 'AJAY OCTAGYM'; in the proceedings filed against Weslo Design International Inc., the alleged infringing device was identified as the 'BODY SHOP 360'; in the case against Ajay Enterprises Corp., the alleged infringing device was identified as the 'OCTA-GYM'; and in the action taken against Consumers Distributing Co. Ltd., the alleged infringed devices were identified as the 'VITAMASTER', 'MULTI-ACTION GYM BY SUNBEAM' and the 'OCTA-GYM' by Ajay. None of such devices were manufactured by Tye-Sil Corporation Ltd. and to the best of my belief all of such devices were manufactured in the United States by entities with no relationship to the defendant in this action.
"7) Thus the resolution of the four other pending actions does not depend on the results achieved in this case.
"8) A 'test action or case' has been defined in Black's Law Dictionary (5th Ed. 1979), West Publishing Co., as follows:
'An action selected out of a considerable number of suits, concurrently depending in the same court, brought by several plaintiffs against the same defendant, or by one plaintiff against different defendants, all similar in their circumstances and embracing the same questions, and to be supported by the same evidence, the selected action to go first to trial (under an order of court equivalent to consolidation), and its decision to serve as a test of the right of recovery in the others, all parties agreeing to be bound by the result of the test action. A lawsuit brought to establish an important legal principle of right.'"
[16]
Put simply, this is not the same as the Manitoba Fisheries case (supra).
(i)
the volume of work and (j) the complexity of the issues
: Mr. Garvis (supra) makes the point in paragraph 13 of his affidavit that,
"The variety of defences referred to in paragraph 8 of Mr. Joliffe's affidavit consisted of the usual defences raised by most defendants in patent infringement actions and are accurately described in paragraph 9 of Mr. Joliffe's affidavit. The facts themselves were not unusually complex."
(k) the conduct of any party that tended to shorten or to lengthen unnecessarily the duration of the proceeding
: the defendant argues that the plaintiffs had mentioned a number of rowers (42) but it did nothing to make the case more complex, and in any event the expert witness responded only to eight specifically and the others in a general way. The defendants state they were fully cooperative in reducing the number of pieces of alleged prior art from 75 to 42, responded to 139 answers to undertaking, attended pretrial conferences and agreed to examination for discovery of Mr. Ira Silberman in addition to Mr. Pilgrim who had left the company.
(l)
the denial of or the neglect or refusal of any party to admit anything that should have been admitted
: the defendant states it had every right to maintain non-infringement, despite suggestions by the plaintiff that the infringement was obvious and, quoting from earlier reasons of Cullen, J., in this case, was "tantamount to an exact copy".
[17]
And finally, with respect to the American case, it was Diversified who took that step and Tye-Sil was not a party to that action.
Conclusions re Factors Raised for Consideration:
(a)
the results of the proceeding
: the plaintiffs were successful, they proved the validity of their patent (a not insignificant factor - even the defendant called it important), and also established to the satisfaction of the court infringement. This is bound to have an impact vis-à-vis others who may consider attacking the validity of the patent. It was also the first case heard in Canada regarding the validity of the patent, although other actions were commenced.
(b)
the amounts claimed and the amounts recovered
: although the amount has not been determined, it is established that 40,000 rowers were sold in Canada in violation of the patent. Certainly a significant sum appears likely.
(c)
the importance of the issue
: certainly, as a "test case" it does not meet the requirements outlined in the Manitoba Fisheries case (supra). However, four other actions were put on hold (admitted by the plaintiff) and there is no evidence to suggest that the four named defendants moved under the Rules requiring the plaintiffs to proceed or they would move to have the case struck. The Osborne case (supra) suggests that "test cases should not be narrowly defined if the case has some of the elements of a "test case".
[18]
The court does encourage the procedure adopted by the plaintiffs which has saved countless hours that would have been required if five parallel actions moved at an equal pace.
(i)
the volume of work
; (j)
the complexity of the issues
; (k)
the conduct of any party that tended to shorten or to lengthen unnecessarily the duration of the proceedings
; and (l)
the denial of or the neglect or refusal of any party to admit anything that should have been admitted
:
[19]
Patent actions by their very nature require a good deal of work both in the preparation for trial and in the conduct of the trial. Avenues are open to people of good will to shorten the time required or to decrease the volume of work. Here, counsel for the defendants reduced the number of pieces of alleged prior art, attended pretrial conferences and responded to some 134 undertakings. They cooperated with the request to examine Mr. Silberman, and agreed to the necessity for commission evidence of Mr. Eugene Weiss and Mr. Carl F. Stroh. I can accept that even the reduced figure of 42 pieces would require the assistance and assignment of a junior counsel to be primarily responsible in this area. I cannot see the plaintiffs being allowed to rely on the I.T.C. case in the United States because Diversified launched that action. The added volume of work was the result of Diversified's move.
[20]
The defendants had every right to deny infringement and that is not a proper basis to be considered under factor (l).
Decisions on General Issues re Factors to be Considered:
[21]
The plaintiffs were successful in this action, secured a significant benefit, i.e., validity of a patent, and were able also to establish infringement. Whatever the amount eventually realized as a result of the judgment, it appears very likely that it will be a significant amount. The issue, although not a "test case" in the strictest sense of the word, contained some of the elements of a "test case", and a liberal or generous interpretation of "test case" is warranted here. On factor (i) the volume of work, I can see no real basis for increasing the tariff vis-à-vis that particular factor, nor do I see any basis for factors (k) and (l).
Guiding Principles when Taxing Costs under the new Tariff B:
[22]
Several matters here influenced my final determination. First, we have a new tariff that
significantly increases the amounts provided for in the old tariff
. As an example, specific provision is made for awarding costs to senior and junior counsel. Also, increases in many instances are two and a half times the earlier amounts provided.
[23]
Federal Court rule 344(3) as amended provides indicia to the courts in exercising its discretionary power re costs. Here, as earlier indicated, the plaintiffs relied on some seven factors.
[24]
It is also my view that the opinion expressed by Teitelbaum, J., at p. 5 of his reasons for order in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  namely:
"Only rarely and only under most exceptional circumstances should the Court allow extra costs to the attorneys concluding a trial."
[25]
Again, when increases have been allowed, it is inevitably from a lump sum provided for in the tariff to a higher lump sum and not an open-ended hourly rate.
[26]
Pretrial conferences are important if they lead to the results referred to by Jerome, A.C.J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  reasons.
[27]
In awarding costs on a party and party basis, one is reminded that this is money going to the client who has paid out fees and disbursements on a solicitor and client basis and will not be fully indemnified from party and party costs. It was argued, for example, by counsel for the plaintiffs that senior counsel fee at trial was $1,800 per day and they were seeking only 60% of that figure so they were hardly claiming fees on a solicitor-client basis. One cannot accept that argument of course as having any real merit, for forming the basis for establishing party-and-party costs.
[28]
Although the court now has full discretion to act, in the final analysis exhorbitant increases over the tariff items should not be countenanced. It may not be, as plaintiffs' counsel stated, "a fixed absolute tariff" but it is an indication about sums intended to be allowed on a party and party basis and the court must not interfere lightly with those rules.
[29]
Although he was commenting on the old tariff, Collier, J.'s, comments in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 118, are still good law today:
"In respect of the request to increase the party-and-party costs, or to set a fixed sum or amount, my sympathies are with you, Mr. Tait. But all you are going to get is my sympathy.
"There is no doubt the tariffs, compared with many of the provinces, are low. I was for several years the chairman of the Judges Rules Committee. It is, fortunately or unfortunately, the judges who make the rules in this court. While I was chairman, the Judges Committee worked jointly with a Canadian Bar Committee. One project we undertook was a survey of the tariff of costs in the various provinces, as compared to the tariff in the Federal Court. We all knew what the answer would be. We wanted something to compare. Many of us felt the Federal Court tariffs were low.
"That project, I understand, has been completed. It will be brought before the Judges Rules Committee. It may be there will be a change. [There has been.]
"My personal position has always been, that while I had sympathy for the criticism of low tariffs, I have never yet increased, in any case, the tariffs. Some of my colleagues have.
I take the view any increase should rarely be made
. I find support in two court of appeal cases. I agree the tariffs are extremely low. But it is my view the remedy is to change the rules setting out the tariffs, rather than for judges to get around the tariffs by, in a particular case, increasing them. I heard the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the tariffs in that case, for the same reason I deny it in this case.
A judicial increase of costs makes a mockery of the rules
." (emphasis added)
[30]
Discretion should certainly be exercised to enable parties to secure items not specifically provided for in Tariff B, and in many instances a Tariff B item could be expanded to provide for trips necessary to locate witnesses, to interview witnesses and to take statements from witnesses, if the court is satisfied that the action or actions were necessary to a proper conduct of the trial. Expert witnesses' invoices invariably make no allowance for any reduction and usually should be allowed in full, unless the court or the taxing officer is satisfied that an expert who billed for court time had overcharged because he/she was not required to be present through all stages of a trial. Naturally the court can require counsel to show why, on a party-and-party basis, time claimed by the expert to perform certain duties was in fact reasonable.
Directions Concerning Actual Amounts Sought:
[31]
Given my comments on the general issues raised by the plaintiffs and attacked by the defendant and the general principles just written, I am moved to increase the tariff items in some instances but I cannot accede to the plaintiffs' suggestions where they seek very significant increases, which I feel are well beyond the intention of the
new
tariff rules and not in keeping with guiding principles.
[32]
I shall refer to the numbers used in the notice of motion.
1. An order will go extending the time for the hearing of this motion, on consent.
2(a)
Classification
: under new rules, classification is unnecessary, save and except for determining fees in the Registry Office.
2(b)(i)
Preparation and filing of pleadings
: the new tariff provides up to $250. It should be noted this figure is two and a half times the old tariff. There was a good case made for the need to have Mr. Wahl, as junior counsel, deal exclusively with the prior art factor, in that 75 (later reduced to 42) examples of prior art were introduced. Also, the work performed was professionally done and most comprehensive. I am satisfied there was no duplication. However, I have serious difficulty in allowing senior counsel $100 per hour, junior counsel $60 per hour (for each junior counsel) over an unspecified number of hours. The tariff indicates a lump sum figure, rather than giving credit for the number of hours counsel were engaged in the effort of preparation and filing of pleadings. Accordingly, I am directing the taxing officer to use whatever criteria he feels is fair but the final amount to be allowed shall not exceed $600.
2(b)(ii)
Services prior to examination for discovery
: the new tariff provides for up to $250, again an increase of two and a half times the old tariff. Counsel for the plaintiffs seek the following for the reasons earlier referred to:
Senior counsel 25 hours @ $100 per hour
$2,500.00
Junior counsel 50 hours @ $60 per hour
$3,000.00
-
$5,500.00
This is almost 20 times the top amount quoted in the new tariff. The taxing officer is directed that the tariff item may be exceeded and on such basis as he shall determine but the final amount shall not exceed $600.
2(b)(iii)
Examination for discovery
: the new tariff item reads,
"(c) for examination for discovery, taxing costs, taking evidence on commission, a reference or cross-examination or an affidavit (and all matters incidental thereto) per one-half day up to $125."
Mr. Joliffe's affidavit indicates that discovery took place over five days as follows:
(a) April 30, 1986
Spence King (defendant)
(b) January 6, 1987
Spence King (defendant)
(c) November 24-25, 1987
Buddy Pilgrim (plaintiff)
(d) November 27, 1987
Pat Fitzpatrick (plaintiff)
(e) March 30, 1987
Ira Silberman (plaintiff)
[33]
Mr. Joliffe states:
"In order to minimize the reattendance of witnesses, counsel for
both parties
gave numerous undertakings and provided answers in writing at subsequent dates. Counsel for the defendant provided 139 answers to undertakings prior to trial. Counsel for the plaintiffs provided 74 answers in writing." (emphasis added)
[34]
The plaintiffs lay the responsibility for the lengthy examination for discovery, and ultimately the lengthy trial, at the defendant's doorstep because of the variety of defences raised and the complexity of the facts at issue. Mr. Garvis refutes these allegations in his affidavit at paragraphs 11, 12, 13.
[35]
The plaintiffs seek to have the $125 tariff item increased to $300 per half day for one and a half days for examination of Spence King. The tariff would allow $375 and the plaintiff seeks $900 - more than twice the new tariff item.
[36]
With respect to Pilgrim, Fitzpatrick and Silberman (who replaced Pilgrim), the tariff item allows $625 total and the plaintiffs seek $2,500, almost four times the tariff.
[37]
Certainly examinations for discovery are particularly important in a patent action, and both parties conducted themselves admirably in reducing the time required. In the circumstances here it seems to me, in the light of the increases provided in the new tariff, the examination for discovery of Spence King may exceed the tariff but the maximum here should be up to $700; re Pilgrim, Fitzpatrick and Silberman, the taxing officer may exceed the tariff but not beyond $1,200.
2(b)(iv)
Taxing evidence on commission
: this evidence was certainly important from the plaintiff's point of view and I believe warrants consideration over and above the tariff item. However, again, a counsel fee of $500 for each counsel seems excessive on a party to party basis when the tariff indicates up to $125 per half day. Accordingly, the taxing officer is directed that the tariff item may be exceeded in that two counsels were in my opinion necessary. The taxing officer may use such discretion and criteria as he deems necessary. Disbursement should also be allowed.
2(b)(v)
Preparation for trial
: the new tariff item provides for up to $250 for each two days of the actual trial or hearing or part thereof. Certainly, I cannot dispute the necessity here for a senior or supervisory counsel and two junior counsel performing the work outlined by counsel for the plaintiffs. The trial took 10 days, so the tariff item provided $1,250. Counsel for the plaintiffs seeks $100 per hour for senior and $60 per hour for junior counsel - over 300 hours or $20,000. The former tariff allowed $350, so the new tariff does in fact provide a most significant increase. In my view, the plaintiffs are entitled to receive more than provided for in the tariff and the taxing officer is so directed. I will not direct a maximum amount here and leave it to the taxing officer to exercise his discretion. However, I am convinced that $20,000 is far in excess of the amount the plaintiffs should receive on a party-and-party basis.
2(b)(vi)
Conduct of trial
: the tariff item is up to $300 per half day and it is open to the taxing officer to allow, at his discretion, for special reasons, a fee of $100 per half day spent in court for participation by junior counsel. Under the former tariff the amount allowed was $400 plus $200 for every day after the first day. Here, the taxing officer is directed that the counsel fee for both a senior and one junior counsel may be increased as he in his discretion warrants. Here the plaintiffs seek $17,500 whereas the tariff provides for $8,000.
[38]
In addition to the above, the plaintiffs seek assessment for costs with respect to services rendered and disbursements occurred which
are not included in Tariff B
.
2(c)(i)
Preparation of materials for and attendance on various pretrial conferences
: certainly, there can be no doubt of the importance of pretrial conferences if they accomplish the results possible and as indicated in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  expound on the value of this practice. Effectively used, especially with the full cooperation of counsel, it almost without exception, provides great assistance to the trial Judge. As a minimum, it identifies issues both of fact and law, but frequently does much more, as for example, Agreed Statements of Facts, Agreed Folios of Documents for use at trial and admissions which may cover points of both fact and law. Finally, of course, there are occasions when it leads to partial or complete resolution of the issues between the parties. Nothing should ever be done to discourage the practice or to indicate in any way that involvement in it is not every bit as important as in the other necessary appearances relating to the conduct of the trial. It would be entirely unjust, however, to expect counsel to participate in these proceedings with the very useful results obtained, at the expense of their clients and accordingly, an order will go allowing counsel for the plaintiffs taxed costs for attendance at the pretrial proceedings ..."
But counsel for the defendant indicated that little time was spent, and very little accomplished at the three pretrial conferences. His indication was:
(a) No. 1 - a telephone conference of one-half hour with nothing before the court except a possible date for trial;
(b) No. 2 - ordered by the Associate Chief Justice for Ottawa, when a firm date was fixed. Time spent was two hours and the defendant put forward a motion to postpone a hearing date which was granted;
(c) No. 3 - at Ottawa in Chambers - one-half hour and no materials put forward.
[39]
In light of the above, counsel certainly participated and also attended and the taxing officer must be cognizant of that. He is directed to make an award.
2(c)(ii)
Participation by two junior counsel at trial
: this has already been dealt with.
2(c)(iii)
Attendance in Chicago and New York to prepare nonparty witnesses and for taking evidence on commission and disbursements related thereto
: here the taxing officer is directed to examine the issue and where, in his view, it is appropriate, he is directed that the amount to be added to "preparation for trial" costs.
2(d) This matter has already been dealt with.
2(e) Here again the taxing officer is directed that if he feels the amount claimed or a portion thereof is appropriate he shall award such amount.
3. Already dealt with.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/lja
[End of document]