[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an application brought by the defendant to have the statement of claim struck out. The only ground alleged in the notice of motion was that the statement of claim discloses no cause of action. Counsel was allowed, by agreement at the hearing, to add the additional ground of abuse of the process of the Court. In return, counsel for the plaintiff (respondent) was allowed to file a notice of motion, without necessary prior service, applying for leave to amend the statement of claim. Having regard to my conclusions it is unnecessary for me to deal with the latter notice of motion except in passing.
[2]
I am satisfied that the statement of claim should be struck out. It is a rather unusual document which tends to give evidence rather than a "precise statement of the material facts" as required by Rule 408. It recites at considerable length events of his employment going back as far as 1973 which the plaintiff, a security officer for the Correctional Service of Canada, apparently regards as prejudicial to himself. Near the end of the statement of claim these events are summarized in very general terms as to their consequences for the plaintiff and following that is a prayer for relief seeking damages totalling some $1,150,000. One can only surmise from the prayer for relief that part of the claim is based on breach of contract and part of it is based on some kind of claim in tort. The proposed amendments included in the notice of motion filed at the hearing, while clarifying somewhat the claims of a tortious nature, do not overcome many of the difficulties which I shall mention below.
[3]
First, it was conceded by the plaintiff at the time of the hearing that there was no cause of action in contract here. This conclusion is based on the well-established principle that at common law employment in the Public Service is at the pleasure of the Crown, and that while this has been modified in many ways by statute the remedies which a public servant can pursue against his employer regarding the terms of his employment are those provided by statute. In the present case the plaintiff's complaints, which generally have to do with prejudicial treatment, loss of prospects for advancement, and inability to work as a prison guard in the institution where he wishes to work, if remediable at all, are remediable under the Public Service Employment Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-32 and the Public Service Staff Relations Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-35. See generally  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  remaining claims in the statement of claim, they are not expressed sufficiently clearly to allege a cause of action.
[5]
While the statement of claim hints at, and the proposed amendment specifically mentions, "violation of statute", this does not per se give rise to a cause of action. The breach of a statute is only relevant in support of a claim for negligent or intentional injury to another.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). That linkage is not demonstrated in the statement of claim or the proposed amendment as they now stand.
[6]
With respect to other possible claims in tort, none of these are articulated clearly in the documents. While many acts unfavourable and prejudicial to him are alleged by the plaintiff, it is not specified as to which of these, if any, was unlawful. To found a claim in tort it must be at least alleged that the offending activity was not authorized by law. Any claim based on "unfairness" or denial of "natural justice" must, in my view be supported, if at all, on the basis that such acts were unlawful. In respect of many of the activities complained of, it is not clear who allegedly committed these acts, when they were allegedly committed, or whether they were negligent or intentional. Conspiracy is hinted at but it is not alleged who were the conspirators or when the conspiratory agreement was entered into. Again, defamation is mentioned but the material does not allege any particular publication, nor by whom or to whom it was published.
[7]
I am therefore ordering that the claim be struck out on the basis that it discloses no cause of action, but with leave to the plaintiff to file a new statement of claim within 30 days of this order, if he wishes, overcoming the deficiencies of the present statement of claim and proposed amendments. I found it unnecessary to consider the ground of abuse of process. I am also declining to deal with the question of limitation periods; although invited to do so by counsel, it would be premature. Normally questions of limitation periods should not be dealt with on a motion such as this. If the plaintiff files a new and proper statement of claim, setting out clearly the nature and date of the allegedly tortious acts, it will then be open to the defendant to invoke any relevant limitation periods in its statement of defence. It is not possible for me to rule as to limitation periods on the basis of the material and argument before me. While this might have simplified matters for the parties, I must assume that counsel for the plaintiff will not in any new statement of claim be asserting any claims which are patently time-barred.
ORDER
[8]
The statement of claim in this action filed on February 11, 1986 is hereby struck out, with leave to the plaintiff to file a new statement of claim within 30 days of the date of this order. No costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]