[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is a statutory passing off action pursuant to paragraph 7(b) of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-10, s. 1.
[2]
The plaintiff claims that, although it does not own a registered trademark, it has acquired a valuable reputation and goodwill which is symbolized by its name "Prince Edward Island Mutual Fire Insurance Com­pany" (amended in 1994 to drop the word "Fire"), which the plaintiff and its prede­cessors have used as a trademark or tradename in association with insurance services for over 110 years.
[3]
The plaintiff further claims that the defendant has, by commencing to offer and sell insurance services since January 1, 1993, in association with the trademark and tradename "The Insurance Company of Prince Edward lsland", directed public atten­tion to its services and business in such a way as to cause or be likely to cause con­fusion in Canada between the defendant's insurance services and business and the plaintiff's services and business. The plaintiff therefore seeks a permanent injunction, delivery up, nominal damages of $1 and costs.
[4]
The facts are not in dispute and are set out in an Agreed Statement of Facts which is attached as Schedule "A" to these reasons for judgment and which can be summarized as follows.
[5]
On April 10, 1885, the "Prince Edward Island Agricultural Mutual Fire Insurance Company" was incorporated, for the purpose of carrying on the business of issuing insur­ance polices and providing insurance services with respect to loss or damage to farm prop­erty located in Prince Edward Island. In 1899, another company, the "Prince Edward Island Mutual Fire Insurance Company", was incorporated for the purpose of issuing insurance policies and providing insurance services in respect to loss or damage to rural property, other than farm property, located in the province. The two companies were related and shared the same head offices in Summerside, P.E.I.
[6]
On April 10, 1941, the two companies amalgamated under the name "Prince Edward Island Mutual Fire Insurance Com­pany", the plaintiff in the present action. In 1992, the plaintiff's Board of Directors agreed to delete the word "Fire" from the company name and on May 19, 1994, the plaintiff's name was amended to "Prince Edward Island Mutual Insurance Company". Since that date it has carried on its insurance business under that name and other related names such as "PEI Mutual Insurance Com­pany" and "PEI Mutual".
[7]
On April 11 and 18, 1987, a notice of petition to be presented to the Legislature of the Province of Prince Edward Island to incorporate "The Prince Edward Island General Insurance Company" to carry on the business of selling fire, automobile and general insurance, excluding life insurance, was published in the
Royal Gazette
.
[8]
After seeing that announcement, the plaintiff's manager, Malcolm MacFarlane, wrote to the Superintendent of Insurance, Mr. Bennett Campbell, on April 21, 1987, asking that he "intervene and prevent the name of "The Prince Edward Island General Insurance Company from being used as the name for this new proposed insurance com­pany" on the basis that the plaintiff's and defendant's services would be confused with each other.
[9]
The Superintendent of Insurance shared the plaintiff's concern and raised the issue with the promoter of the petition and counsel for the defendant, Mr. James Revell, suggest­ing that another name be chosen so as to avoid confusion. Mr. Campbell specifically advised Mr. Revell that the plaintiff had raised a concern relating to the defendant's proposed name. Mr. Revell then advised Mr. Charlie Cooke, the President and founder of the defendant, of the issue and sought in­structions. Mr. Cooke agreed that the defen­dant should change its name to accommodate the plaintiff and the proposed name of the defendant was amended to "The Insurance Company of Prince Edward lsland".
[10]
Thereafter, a petition was filed with the Legislature of the Province of Prince Edward Island on April 27, 1987, to incorporate "The Insurance Company of Prince Edward lsland" and the defendant company was incorporated on May 14, 1987. The defen­dant did not commence its business until late December of 1992 or January of 1993, although with the approval of the Superin­tendent of Insurance, it did list its name in the Yellow Pages directory in May of 1992.
[11]
Aside from these agreed facts, the evidence at trial established the following particulars.
[12]
After Mr. Cooke conceded that the defendant should change its name, Mr. Revell made the necessary revisions to the defendant's proposed private member's bill and forwarded the bill to the Superintendent with a cover letter confirming that the defen­dant had agreed to change its name. Mr. Revell testified that he expected to hear from the Superintendent if there was any further concern regarding the name.
[13]
Mr. Campbell's evidence at trial was that he was fully satisfied with the solution and upon receipt of the defendant's amended bill, he advised Mr. MacFarlane in writing of the name change. The Superintendent stated in his correspondence that he believed the solution would solve any potential problem and that he hoped it met with Mr. MacFar­lane's approval. Mr. Campbell did not receive a reply or any response from Mr. MacFarlane and the plaintiff, and the matter was never raised when he attended the plain­tiff's annual general meeting. He therefore believed that the matter had been satisfactor­ily concluded.
[14]
However, the plaintiff did raise the issue of the defendant's name with the Su­perintendent again in February of 1992, at which time Mr. MacFarlane sent a letter to Mr. Campbell complaining of a rumour about a new insurance company which was about to be incorporated, and which intended to use the words "PEI" or "Prince Edward Island" in its name. During his examination-in-chief, Mr. Campbell stated that he was surprised and confused by Mr. MacFarlane's letter as he thought the matter had been resolved in 1987.
[15]
The Superintendent wrote back to Mr. MacFarlane confirming that the Insurance Company of Prince Edward Island had been incorporated in 1987 and that the company had changed its name prior to its incorpo­ration at the request of the plaintiff. He indicated that he felt the problem had been resolved in 1987. There was no response from Mr. MacFarlane or the plaintiff, lead­ing Mr. Campbell, once again, to the con­clusion that the plaintiff, having been reminded of the events of 1987 was satisfied with the situation.
[16]
Nothing more transpired until June 27, 1995, when Blair Campbell, the plaintiff's claims manager met with the Superintendent of the Insurance to canvass certain concerns he had over some "misdirected communica­tions" the plaintiff had received and which were clearly intended to be sent to the defen­dant. During the course of the meeting, and in a follow-up letter, Blair Campbell asked the Superintendent to use his powers to have the defendant change its name.
[17]
The Superintendent did not take any steps in this regard however because, as he testified at the trial, the issue had already been dealt with in 1987. Furthermore, he was not satisfied that the misdirected com­munications offered by Mr. Campbell were compelling evidence that a problem existed and his own records revealed that there had been no complaints or inquiries from the public or otherwise.
[18]
On November 15, 1995, plaintiff's counsel sent a letter to the defendant request­ing that it change its name. In January of 1996, the plaintiff's solicitors provided copies of the misdirected communications to the defendant's counsel and reiterated its request for a name change. When the defen­dant did not acquiesce, the plaintiff com­menced its action in this court on March 29, 1996, by way of Statement of Claim.
[19]
The issues raised in this litigation have been delineated by the parties as follows:
1. Is paragraph 7(b) of the
Trade-marks Act
intra vires the Parliament of Canada;
2. Does the Federal Court have jurisdiction to grant the injunctive relief and other relief requested by the plaintiff as against the defendant;
3. As at the material date, (which is on or about January 1, 1993, when the defendant actually commenced its business), did the plaintiff have a reputation or goodwill associated with its trademark and tradename "Prince Edward Island Mutual Fire Insurance Company" which was capable of protection;
4. As at the material date, did the defen­dant, through its use of its name as a trademark and/or tradename, begin to direct public attention to its services or business in such a way as to cause or be likely to cause confusion in Canada between its services or business and the services or business of the plaintiff; and,
5. Is the plaintiff disentitled to the relief it has claimed by reason of the applicable statutory limitation period, laches or acqui­escence.
[20]
The first two issues may be summarily disposed of. The defendant maintains that this court does not have jurisdiction to force a company to change its name where that name has been granted by an act of the legislature of a province. Both the defendant and plaintiff corporations, it is argued, came into existence in this fashion and neither of the names are registered trademarks. The defendant submits that this court is not empowered to indirectly tell the legislature of Prince Edward Island what to do by ordering the injunctive relief requested by the plaintiff, particularly in a dispute between two unregistered trademarks. The defendant's position is that it is not trade­marks which are at issue in this dispute, but rather the corporate names or tradenames "Prince Edward Island Mutual Insurance Company" and "The Insurance Company of Prince Edward lsland".
[21]
I do not agree. First, the evidence is clear that both the plaintiff and the defendant have intended to use, and have used, their corporate names as trademarks and trade­names in carrying on their respective insur­ance businesses.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Feder­al Court of Appeal held that s. 7(b) of the
Trade-marks Act
is valid federal legislation insofar as the passing off claim is connected to a trademark, whether that mark is regis­tered or not. In other words, the section protects the goodwill associated with unregistered trademarks.
[22]
Second, if the plaintiff were to succeed in establishing a case of passing off under s. 7(b) of the
Trade-marks Act
, this court is not impeded from ordering the defendant to cease using its name, as a trademark, tradename or in any other way. If a corpo­rate name is adopted that is likely to cause confusion with another older estab­lished company, the use of that corporate name will be enjoined even though the name may have been adopted innocently and even though the competent authority has issued a charter of incorporation.
[23]
The issue of estoppel can also be dealt with summarily. The defendant maintains that the plaintiff is estopped from asserting its claim by virtue of its conduct; namely, that although it was aware of the defendant's activities, the plaintiff was silent and delayed in taking any action to protect its asserted rights. It is submitted that this silence and delay constitutes acquiescence on the plain­tiff's part and it would therefore be unjust to allow its claim to stand.
[24]
I am not prepared to dismiss the plain­tiff's claim on this basis. It is true, that in a suitable case, the court may refuse to provide equitable relief to a claimant who has delayed in asserting its claim. This will only be done however, where the delay has been for an inordinate length of time.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), this court made the following comments with respect to the defence of laches and acquiescence at pp. 165-166:
"Mere silence, is not, in my view, a defence to an action for infringement of rights.
"Nor is a long delay in bringing action against an infringer a ground for invoking the bar of laches. I  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , P., of the Exchequer Court, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  pp. 208-209:
'It was this inaction that was relied upon as laches and acquiescence. But counsel for the defendant admitted that he could not, in this court, maintain this defence in view of the statement by Fletcher Moulton, L.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 259 that it is settled law that a patentee need not attempt to stop an infringement when he first learns of it and that his right of action against an infringer is not affected by the circum­stance that he did not take action until just before the expiry of the patent. While counsel admitted that he could not urge the defence of laches and acquies­cence in this court he did not abandon it. I adopt the statement of Fletcher Moul­ton, L.J., as applicable in the present case. The plaintiff's delay in bringing action was not laches or acquiescence on its part.'"
[25]
I find that principle equally applicable to the facts of this case. It may be true that the plaintiff did not commence its action as soon as it was entitled to do so. However, the relevant limitation period is six years, and the action was commenced approximate­ly three years after the defendant's impugned activities began. Furthermore, given the complaints made to the Superintendent by the plaintiff with respect to the defendant's name and the subsequent meeting between the Superintendent and the plaintiff's repre­sentative, the plaintiff cannot, in any way, be considered to have consented to the defen­dant's use of its name. The circumstances therefore do not warrant dismissing the action on the grounds of laches or estoppel.
[26]
I turn now to the issue of passing off.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 321; 44 C.P.R.(3d) 289, the Supreme Court of Canada held that, in order to suc­ceed in an action for passing off, a plaintiff must prove three things:
1. that it has goodwill attached to the goods or services which it supplies, in the mind of the purchasing public, by associ­ation with the identifying name or mark under which its particular goods or ser­vices are offered;
2. that the defendant has made a misrepre­sentation (whether or not intentional) leading or likely to lead the public to believe that the source of the defendant's goods or services is the same as the source of those offered by the plaintiff; and,
3. that the plaintiff, as a result of the mis­representation, has suffered, or is likely to suffer damage.
[27]
The evidence in this case leaves no doubt that the plaintiff has established the existence of goodwill associated with its name "Prince Edward Island Mutual Insur­ance Company". The plaintiff and its prede­cessors have used "Prince Edward Island Mutual Fire Insurance Company" (amended in 1994 to drop the word "Fire") as a trade­mark or tradename in association with insur­ance services for over 110 years. In addition:
(a) the plaintiff has, continuously from 1971 to the present used its name in a prominent fashion in Yellow Page adver­tisements published in Prince Edward Island;
(b) the name of the plaintiff has been used on exterior signage prominently displayed at its head office address in Summerside, Prince Edward Island since at least as early as 1972. The signage on the back of the building has, since 1994, borne the words "PEI Mutual Insurance Company";
(c) the name of the plaintiff has appeared, in a prominent and distinctive fashion, on thousands of insurance policies and annual reports distributed by the plaintiff to its policy holders since at least as early as 1980;
(d) the name of the plaintiff has been labelled on fire extinguishers sold by the plaintiff (between four-hundred and five-hundred each year) to its policy holders since 1978;
(e) the name of the plaintiff has been used in connection with advertising, promotional and sponsorship activities for many years prior to the material date; and,
(f) in paragraph 27 of its written sub­missions, the defendant concedes that the plaintiff has established goodwill in associ­ation with its name.
[28]
I am satisfied therefore that the plaintiff has established goodwill in connection with its name.
[29]
What the evidence does not support however, is that a likelihood of confusion exists as to the source of the services offered by the defendant, such that the public would assume that those services were performed by, or in some way connected to, the plain­tiff.
[30]
In addressing the issue of likelihood of confusion, regard must be had to the follow­ing factors set out in s. 6(5) of the
Trade-marks Act
:
"(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or tradenames and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or tradenames have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and,
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or tradenames in appearance or sound or in the idea suggested by them."
"a) le caractère distinctif inhérent des marques de commerce ou noms commer­ciaux, et la mesure dans laquelle ils sont devenus connus;
b) la période pendant laquelle les marques de commerce ou noms commerciaux ont été en usage;
c) le genre de marchandises, services ou entreprises;
d) la nature du commerce;
e) le degré de ressemblance, entre les marques de commerce ou les noms com­merciaux dans la présentation ou le son, ou dans les idées qu'ils suggèrent."
[31]
In considering these factors and making its determination with respect to confusion, the court is required not only to consider the evidence before it, but also to apply its own common sense to the facts. The test is whether the ordinary and average consumer would be confused. As stated by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  weighed in relation to an 'ordinary' public, 'aver­age' customers: '... you must deal with the ordinary man and woman who would take ordinary care in purchasing what goods they require, and, if desiring a particular brand, would take ordinary precautions to see that they get it' (Neville, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ch. D.), at p. 453.)"
[32]
With respect to the first factor in s. 6(5) of the
Act
, inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks in question, it is well established that marks which contain descriptive words are not inherently distinctive and will be afforded only a minimal degree of protection by the court. In particular, trademarks or tradenames which contain a reference to a geographic location, such as those in issue here, are descriptive rather than distinctive and do not deserve a wide ambit of protec­tion. Where the court is called upon to determine the "likelihood of confusion" in respect of a descriptive name or mark, even small differences between the marks will be sufficient to diminish the "likelihood of confusion".
[33]
Furthermore, where a party adopts a descriptive name, it must accept that a cer­tain amount of confusion may arise.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Alta. L.R.(3d) 146; 15 B.L.R.(2d) 1; 56 C.P.R.(3d) 129 (Q.B.), affd. (1996), 184 A.R. 110; 122 W.A.C. 110; 67 C.P.R.(3d) 444 (C.A.), the court made the following comments in this regard at p. 183:
"Even where services are identical, where the name is descriptive rather than distinc­tive, a certain amount of confusion may be inevitable without sanction: ...
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  said:
'So long as descriptive words are used by two traders as part of their respective tradenames, it is possible that some members of the public will be confused whatever the differentiating words may be ... It comes in the end, I think, to no more than this, that where a trader adopts words in common use for his tradename,
some risk of confusion is inevitable
. But that risk must run unless the first user is allowed unfairly to mon­opolize the words.
The court will accept comparatively small differences as suffi­cient to avert confusion
. A greater degree of discrimination may fairly be expected from the public where a tradename con­sists wholly or in part of words descrip­tive of the articles to be sold or the services to be rendered.'"
[34]
In the present case, the plaintiff's name is highly descriptive (Insurance Company) and includes a descriptive geographic element (Prince Edward Island). According­ly, it is not entitled to a high degree of protection and it must accept the inevitable risk of some confusion in the use of such a highly descriptive.
[35]
Turning to the other factors listed in s. 6(5) of the
Act
, the evidence demonstrates that there are significant differences in the services and the trade of the parties. For example, the plaintiff's products are sold through employee agents who service specif­ic areas of the province. These agents are given a "book" of clients and an emphasis is placed on servicing these clients rather than marketing or sales.
[36]
In contrast, the defendant sells its prod­uct through an exclusive agency which was founded by Charlie Cooke, the founder of the defendant. As a result, there is a strong relationship and linkage between the defend­ant and its agency which serves to distin­guish the defendant in the marketplace. Indeed, most of the witnesses who testified referred to the defendant not by its tradename, but rather as "Cooke Insurance".
[37]
Furthermore, the manner in which the plaintiff is presented to the public in general, and to its members in particular, is strikingly different than the manner in which the de­fendant presents itself. Most importantly, the plaintiff has carefully and purposefully nurtured its reputation as a mutual company. In fact, the plaintiff is never referred to without the word "mutual"; that is, it is never referred to as Prince Edward Island or PEI Insurance. It is most commonly referred to as "PEI Mutual". All of its stationery, advertising and policies emphasize the "mutual" nature of the plaintiff. Indeed, the plaintiff emphasizes its nature as a "mutual" company owned by its members, protecting each other, providing reasonably-priced services and even discounts and rebates from time to time.
[38]
In contrast, the defendant's marketing and business materials paint an entirely different picture. In particular, the defendant represents itself as an island-based general insurance company linked to Charlie Cooke Insurance. Its dominant market is in auto­mobile insurance as well as writing commer­cial risks. The plaintiff does not, and never has, sold auto insurance and the extent of its commercial sales is minimal, its emphasis being fire insurance related primarily to the farming community.
[39]
Accordingly, while there is some level of overlap and competition between the parties, what is significant for purpose of determining the question of confusion, is that the nature of the relevant services and trade is such that the parties interact with the public, market, advertise and sell, emphasize their business goals and identities, all in manner so as to distinguish one from the other. These factors weigh heavily against any possibility of likelihood of confusion.
[40]
I turn now to the degree of resemblance between the trademarks. There is no doubt that the names contain two elements in common, namely, "Prince Edward Island" and "Insurance Company". However, the fact that both marks contain these particular elements is not sufficient, in and of itself, to conclude that the marks are confusing. The tests to be applied are those of appearance, sound and the ideas suggested by the marks. In applying these tests, the first principle to be invoked is that the marks are to be looked at as totalities and not as dissected items. It is the idea of each mark, that is, the net impression left by the mark as a whole upon the mind, which is to be considered. Accord­ingly, the marks should not be subjected to intense and detailed analysis, but should rather be viewed from the standpoint of a person who has only an imperfect recollec­tion of one mark and then later sees or hears the competing mark by itself.
[41]
This was the approach followed by the court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  81-82:
"It is not a proper approach to the determi­nation of whether one trademark is confus­ing with another to break them up into their elements, concentrate attention upon the elements that are similar and conclude that, because there are similarities in the trademarks, the trademarks as a whole are confusing with one another. Trademarks may be different from one another and, therefore, not confusing with one another when looked at in their totality, even if there are similarities in some of the elements when viewed separately. It is the combination of the elements that consti­tutes the trademark and it is the effect of the trademark as a whole, rather than any particular part in it, that must be con­sidered."
[42]
I am satisfied that as a matter of first impression, the trademarks in issue here are substantially dissimilar and, when looked at in their totality, there is so little resemblance between them that one could not conclude there exists a likelihood of confusion. Again, the plaintiff's logo emphasizes the word "Mutual" and features an umbrella covering Prince Edward Island. The defendant's mark on the other hand, depicts a tree with three smaller trees surrounding it. In short, the entire scheme and structure of the plaintiff's name and the manner in which it is pre­sented is completely and readily distinguish­able from that of the defendant.
[43]
Finally, there is the issue of actual confusion. The plaintiff has submitted in evidence a series of misdirected form letters and telephone calls in support of its allega­tion that there was actual confusion suffi­cient to justify a finding of a "likelihood of confusion" under s. 7 of the
Trade-marks Act
.
[44]
I am not satisfied that the evidence tendered by the plaintiff substantiates its claim. First of all, the majority of the misdi­rected documents have explanations which are unrelated to confusion. For example, the vast majority of them originated from the Co-operators as a result of a mis-entry in the Co-operators' internal directory. Until this was brought to The Co-operators attention, there was no reason for it to identify the error. The plaintiff did not advise Co-oper­ators and the defendant, not having been informed of the documents by the plaintiff, was not in a position to take any steps to correct the error until after this action had commenced.
[45]
With respect to the other incidents of alleged confusion, the evidence is clear that they were the result of carelessness, ignor­ance or inadvertence, rather than confusion as to source.
[46]
Most significant however, is the fact that there are no examples of any consumer or third party contacting the defendant or Cooke Insurance in an effort to find or contact or deal with the plaintiff. The Super­intendent of Insurance has been satisfied with the names of the two companies since 1987 and nothing has happened to change his mind; he has not received any complaints from the public or from other insurance companies. Furthermore, since 1992, the plaintiff and the defendant have received and reviewed literally thousands of pages of correspondence from bankers, lawyers and policy holders. With over 20,000 policies at play between the parties, there is no evi­dence of one misdirected piece of paper, letter, cheque or application from an actual or potential client.
[47]
What the plaintiff is in effect seeking here is a monopoly over the use of the name Prince Edward Island and the words Insur­ance Company. However, the court must strive to balance the rights of the plaintiff and the public while still respecting the right of the defendant to compete freely in the marketplace.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 247, the Federal Court of Appeal made the following obser­vations in this regard at pp. 258-259:
"A trade-mark is a mark used by a person to distinguish his or her wares or services from those of others. The mark, therefore, cannot be considered in isolation, but only in connection with those wares or services. This is evident from the wording of s. 6(2). The question posed by that subsection does not concern the confusion of marks, but the confusion of goods or services from one source as being from another source. It is for this reason that marks which rely on geographic origins or gen­erally descriptive words (e.g. the fictional marks Pacific Coffee or Premium Soda) are not afforded a wide ambit of protec­tion. Even though proposed marks might be similar to them, the public is not likely to assume that two products that describe themselves as being "Pacific" or "Pre­mium" necessarily originate from the same source. Because confusion is not likely, protection is not necessary.
"... The five specific considerations [in s. 6 of the
Trade-marks Act
] that must be considered indicate that the court must balance the right of the trademark owner to the exclusive use of his or her mark, with the right of others in the marketplace to compete freely."
[48]
Applying those principles to the facts before me, I am satisfied that the evidence before the court in this case does not estab­lish a likelihood of confusion as to the source of the services offered by the plaintiff and the defendant.
[49]
For these reasons, the plaintiff's action is dismissed. However, this dispute did raise legitimate questions of fact and law and it is appropriate therefore that there be no order as to costs.
Action dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/saf
Schedule A
Court File No. T-733-96
FEDERAL COURT - TRIAL DIVISION
BETWEEN:
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND MUTUAL
INSURANCE COMPANY
Plaintiff
- and -
THE INSURANCE COMPANY OF
PRINCE EDWARD LSLAND
Defendant
AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS
The parties agree that the following facts are to be deemed to have been proved in evi­dence at the trial of this action subject to any argument as to relevance thereof:
1. On April 10, 1885, the "Prince Edward Island Agricultural Mutual Fire Insurance Company" was incorporated.
2. From 1885 to April 9, 1941, the com­pany referred to in paragraph 1 above carried on the business of issuing policies of insurance and providing insurance ser­vices in respect to loss or damage to farm property located in Prince Edward Island.
3. In 1899, the "Prince Edward Island Mutual Fire Insurance Company" was incorporated.
4. From 1899 to April 9, 1941, the com­pany referred to in paragraph 3 above carried on the business of issuing policies of insurance and providing insurance ser­vices in respect to loss or damage to rural property (other than farm property) located in Prince Edward Island.
5. The companies referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 were related companies and shared the same head offices in Summerside, PEI and the same Manager, Alexander Campbell.
6. On April 10, 1941, the companies referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 above amalgamated under the name "Prince Edward Island Mutual Fire Insurance Company".
7. From 1941 to 1994, the amalgamated company referred to in paragraph 6 above carried on the business of issuing policies of insurance and providing insurance ser­vices in respect to loss and damage to property located in PEI under one or more names including "Prince Edward Island Mutual Fire Insurance Company".
8. The plaintiff in this Action is the amal­gamated company referred to in paragraph 6 above.
9. The companies referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 were the plaintiff's predecessors.
10. On December 8, 1992, the Board of Directors of the plaintiff agreed to delete the word "Fire" from the plaintiff's name and authorized its Manager to take the necessary legislative steps to complete the change.
11. At the annual meeting of the plaintiff's members on April 13, 1993, it was agreed to apply to the legislature of Prince Edward Island to delete the word "Fire" from the plaintiff's name.
12. On May 19, 1994, the plaintiff's name was amended to "Prince Edward Island Mutual Insurance Company" and has carried on its insurance business con­tinuously since then under that name and other names.
13. Throughout its history, the plaintiff and its predecessors have conducted business under one or more names one of which has included, among other words, the words "Prince Edward Island" and "Insurance Company".
14. At no time in the period 1885 to 1992, was there any person selling insurance products and issuing insurance policies in Canada in association with a name which includes the components "Prince Edward Island" and "Insurance Company" other than the plaintiff and its predecessors.
15. From 1993 to the present, the only persons who have sold insurance products and issued insurance policies in Canada in association with a name which includes the components "Prince Edward Island" and "Insurance Company" have been the plain­tiff and the defendant.
16. The plaintiff's name PEI Mutual Fire Insurance Co. or PEI Mutual Insurance Co. has been labelled upon fire extinguishers sold by the plaintiff to its policyholders since 1978.
17. In an internal business plan commis­sioned by the defendant, the plaintiff was identified as the insurer with the second highest total premiums written ("excluding A & S and life insurance") in 1990. The plaintiff was further identified as having the highest "property" volume in 1990.
18. In each of the 1987 to 1990 Annual Reports published by the Superindendent of Insurance of Prince Edward Island, the only insurance company licensed to do business in Prince Edward Island which used the words "Insurance Company" and "Prince Edward Island" in its name was the plaintiff.
19. In each of the years 1987 to 1990, the Annual Reports published by the Superin­tendent of Insurance of Prince Edward Island state that the plaintiff earned the highest underwriting income in respect to property insurance among companies licensed to do business in Prince Edward Island.
20. In 1997, the plaintiff was named one of the top 101 companies of Atlantic Canada in Atlantic Progress magazine.
21. On April 11 and 18, 1987, notice of a petition to be presented to the Legislature of the Province of Prince Edward Island to incorporate "The Prince Edward Island General Insurance Company" to carry on and engage in the business of selling fire, automobile and general insurance (exclud­ing life insurance) was published in the
Royal Gazette
.
22. In 1987, the defendant's promoters were aware of the existence of the plaintiff and the name under which it carried on business.
23. On April 21, 1987, the plaintiff's Manager, Malcolm MacFarlane, wrote to the Superintendent of Insurance (Bennett Campbell) asking that the Superintendent "intervene and prevent the name of 'The Prince Edward Island General Insurance Company' from being used as the name of this new proposed insurance company".
24. The Superintendent of Insurance shared the plaintiff's concern and raised the issue with the promoter (James T. Revell) of the petition and suggested that a name change be made to avoid confusion. The promoter acquiesced to the request made by the Superintendent of Insurance to change its proposed name to accommodate the plain­tiff.
25. On April 27, 1987, a petition was filed with the Legislature of the Province of Prince Edward Island by the defendant's promoter to incorporate "The Insurance Company of Prince Edward lsland".
26. The promoter relied upon the publica­tions made in the
Royal Gazette
(referred to in paragraph 21 above) in support of its petition.
27. The promoter represented to the Legis­lature that the "Company's Board of direc­tors are expected to be drawn from busi­nessmen and Prince Edward Island and elsewhere".
28. The promoter further represented to the Legislature as follows:
"While the Company will be located in PEI, it will be able, providing regulatory approval is obtained, to market and sell insurance elsewhere in Canada. The Insurance Company of Prince Edward Island's close association with companies such as Wellington Insurance may allow for this Company to branch out into other Provinces and sell insurance prod­ucts not available through other com­panies. In short, while the principle (sic) focus of the Company will be to serve the Prince Edward Island marketplace, its reach may exceed our province, which undoubtedly has benefits at here at home."
29. On May 14, 1987, The Insurance Company of Prince Edward Island was incorporated.
30. The company referred to in paragraph 29 above was empowered to carry on and pursue its objects (as set out in s. 2 of its incorporating statute) in the Province of Prince Edward Island and elsewhere in other Provinces of Canada, the United States of America and other foreign coun­tries.
31. Since approximately January 1993, the defendant has used its name to distinguish the insurance products and services it has offered for sale and sold from the insur­ance services and products of others.
32. The company referred to in paragraph 29 above did not begin to carry on the business of offering for sale or selling insurance policies until late December 1992 or January 1993.
33. From 1992 to 1993, the defendant's name was displayed in advertisements for its insurance services (including Yellow Page advertising) as follows:
[Diagram omitted]
34. From 1994 to 1995, the defendant's name was displayed in advertisements for its insurance services (including Yellow Page advertising) as follows:
[Diagram omitted]
35. From 1996 to the present, the defen­dant's name was been displayed in adver­tisements for its insurance services (includ­ing Yellow Page advertising) as follows:
[Diagram omitted]
36. From time to time since commencing to carry on business in late December 1992 or January 1993, the defendant's name as shown in paragraph 34 had been displayed by the defendant on (or in) letterhead, brochures, flyers, insurance proposals, insurance contracts, bumper stickers, news­paper advertisements, television advertise­ments, and third party (Maritime Electric) mailings.
37. By using its name as set out above, the defendant's intention was to distinguish its insurance services and products from the insurance services and products of others.
38. In dealing with the public and other persons within the insurance industry, the defendant sometimes refers to itself as the "Insurance Company of PEI".
39. In its first application filed by the defendant for a license to do business in Prince Edward Island, the defendant identi­fied itself as "The Insurance Company of PEI" although the defendant's first license was, in fact, issued in the name of "The Insurance Company of Prince Edward Island".
40. The defendant has contracts of insur­ance with persons who are resident outside of Prince Edward Island.
41. The defendant has filed applications to sell insurance products and offer insurance services in Nova Scotia and New Bruns­wick.
42. The defendant does not presently carry on business in other provinces of Canada. However, the defendant is presently ex­ploring the possibility of carrying on busi­ness in other Provinces of Canada.
43. Although it is not a common occur­rence, the defendant has written premiums for assets located outside of Prince Edward Island.
44. The defendant sells insurance products and offers insurance services through an exclusive broker. The plaintiff sells its insurance products and offers its insurance services through insurance agents/em­ployees who are assigned terri­tories in Prince Edward Island. Both the defendant's brokers and the plaintiff's agents/em­ployees deal directly with mem­bers of the public.
45. The plaintiff has received written communications from other companies within the insurance industry which were intended to be dispatched to the defendant.
DATE: November 25, 1998
SIM, HUGHES, ASHTON & McKAY
Barristers and Solicitors
6th Floor, 330 University Avenue
TORONTO ON M5G 1R7
Arthur B. Renaud
Tel: (416) 595-1155
Fax: (416) 595-1163
Solicitors for the plaintiff
DATE:
December
[Nov]
30
, 1998
PERLEY-ROBERTSON, PANET,
HILL & McDOUGALL
Barristers & Solicitors
99 Bank Street
Ottawa, Ontario K1P 6C1
R. Aaron Rubinoff
Tel: (613) 238-2022
Fax: (613) 238-8875
Solicitors for the defendant
[End of document]