[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision made by the respondents to award a failing grade to the applicants during their training at the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ("RCMP") Training Academy, thereby making them ineligible for employment with the RCMP. This matter came on for hearing before me on April 25, 1996, at Edmonton, Alberta. At the close of argument I took the matter under reserve and indicated that written reasons would follow.
Facts
[2]
The parties are in substantial agreement with respect to the facts of this case. The applicants were admitted to the RCMP Training Academy in Regina in October, 1994. The respondent, Superintendent Chipperfield, is the Cadet Training Officer at the Academy. Throughout the training program, cadets' proficiency is monitored in five areas: (1) understanding clients' and their needs; (2) acquiring and analyzing information; (3) establishing and maintaining partnerships for problem solving; (4) applying response strategies to solve problems and avoid and manage incidents; and (5) assessing and reviewing the outcomes of actions taken to support continuous improvement. Cadets were assessed after two, four, and six months, according to the following standards: (U) unsatisfactory; (NI) needs improvement; (C) competent; and (S) superior.
[3]
In order to be considered for employment with the RCMP, cadets must demonstrate that they are "competent" in every category by the end of the six month training program. Paragraph 2 of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Cadet Training Agreement, which forms part of the RCMP Cadet Training Standards of Performance and Conduct, states that: "Upon successful completion of this program, the Cadet will be engaged as a regular member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Under exceptional circumstances, the Cadet may be engaged only as appropriate positions become available".
[4]
By May 10, 1995, the applicants were under the impression that they had achieved a "C" ranking in all of the categories of assessment, although their final performance assessments were not to be made until the following day, May 11, 1995. One of the other cadets, Lily Rhodes-Novicki, had failed the self-defence portion of her training but was scheduled to appeal that assessment on May 11. The applicants had been asked to assist with her appeal and to help her deal with the emotional strain of failing the course.
[5]
On the evening of May 10, 1995, the applicants and Rhodes-Novicki went out for dinner together. Over the course of the evening, they consumed three pitchers of beer among them. Although they had driven to the restaurant in Linnell's car, the applicants felt that they were too impaired to drive back to the Training Academy and suggested that they call a taxi. Rhodes-Novicki assured them that she was able to drive and the applicants accepted her assessment because she appeared sober to them and had refused to drive in the past when she felt impaired. However, when they returned to the Training Academy, Rhodes-Novicki hit a curb and drove up on the roadside causing two flat tires and some body damage. After assessing the damage, the applicants walked back to their dormitory while Rhodes-Novicki drove the car to the parking lot. Rhodes-Novicki was subsequently taken to a detachment of the Regina City Police, given a breathalyser test, and charged with impaired driving.
[6]
A bystander approached the applicants after the accident and asked what had happened while another followed the car to the parking lot and spoke with Rhodes-Novicki as she got out. These bystanders later provided statements about what they witnessed. One of these, Corporal Guay, made the following report, found at page 171 of the applicants' amended application record:
"Cadet Rhodes was displaying symptoms of impairment. Slurred slow speech. Odor of liquor on breath. Very slow methodical movement. Unsteady on feet."
[7]
On the night of the incident, both applicants were also given the opportunity to provide a written statement of the events that occurred.
[8]
The following morning the applicants' training instructors met to discuss the cadets' final performance assessments and specifically, whether their satisfactory rating in the Ethics and Professionalism/Integrity component should be changed to unsatisfactory. The training team also met with each cadet individually, informed them of the possible change to their rating and gave them an opportunity to answer.
[9]
The decision was then made to award the applicants an unsatisfactory rating. This was communicated to the Acting Officer in Charge of Applied Police Sciences, Sergeant Touchette, who recommended to the Cadet Training Officer, Superintendent Chipperfield, that the applicants not be offered employment with the RCMP. Superintendent Chipperfield then met with each applicant individually. At the beginning of each meeting he handed the applicants a letter which read:
"As you have not demonstrated the traits and qualities we would expect from a member of the RCMP, you will not be offered employment in the RCMP.
I wish you every success in future endeavours."
[10]
He then discussed the incident with the applicants and allowed them to respond. Nevertheless, he did not change his mind and maintained that the applicants would not graduate with their class, and therefore not be considered for employment with the RCMP.
Applicants' Submissions
[11]
The applicants contend that they were denied natural justice and procedural fairness because they were not given adequate notice of the proposed change to their rating or a sufficient opportunity to respond to the allegations against them.
Analysis
[12]
I am satisfied that, both the requirements of procedural fairness and natural justice have been met in the present case. The evidence shows that the applicants met with their team leaders on the morning of May 11, 1995, and were advised that consideration was being given to a revision of their rating and the reasons for that potential revision. At that meeting, the situation was discussed at length with them and they were given an opportunity to provide their version of the events which had occurred the night before. After the team leaders decided an unsatisfactory rating would be given, the applicants then met individually with Superintendent Chipperfield. They had been told beforehand that they were entitled to bring someone to the meeting and indeed, they attended the meeting accompanied by Corporal Bouche. At these meetings, the Superintendent explained to the applicants what his understanding of the events were and asked them if they wished to say anything, which they did.
[13]
In light of these facts, the applicants must be considered to have received adequate notice of the proposed decision to give them an unsatisfactory rating and ample opportunity to provide their side of the story. Although they are understandably disappointed with the respondents' decision, I cannot ascertain, based upon the evidence, that there has been any breach of the duty of fairness.
[14]
Furthermore, the applicants availed themselves of the procedural remedy provided in the
Cadet Training Program Assessment Procedures
, which explains how cadets can contest the decisions of their instructors:
"VI. Review
The assessment process is designed to fairly assess cadets on the basis of team assessment, constant feedback and continual opportunities to address areas in need of improvement. The assessment is designed to minimize surprise and maximize opportunities for self-improvement. While the Training Officer is responsible for managing the assessment process including decisions to expel, he/she is required before making any such decision to review the case with the OIC Applied Police Sciences Section. Any decision to expel is automatically reviewed by the OIC of the Training Academy. If cadets have any concerns about the assessment or specific decisions, they should first approach the training team. They may, in addition, seek a review, interview or explanation from the OIC Applied Police Sciences Section."
[15]
In my view, the procedure followed here reflects a proper balance between the interest of the Training Academy to determine which individuals demonstrate aptitude for employment as members of the RCMP and the applicants' right to fairness. I am satisfied, therefore, that the respondents fulfilled their duty of procedural fairness and accordingly the application is dismissed. No order as to costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/sg
[End of document]