 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Campbell, J.
June 1, 2005.
Counsel:
Irvin H. Sherman, Q.C., for the applicant;
Stephen Jarvis, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Martinello & Associates, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
John H. Sims, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary.
[1]
Campbell, J.
: On May 20, 1997, the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board granted the Applicant a stay of deportation for five years, as it was entitled to do under the then applicable Immigration Act.
[2]
A term of the stay order is that the Applicant must "keep the peace and be of good behaviour". Between June 1, 2000 and May 15, 2003, the Applicant committed 18 driving offences, all under Ontario provincial legislation. As a result, the Immigration Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "Appeal Division") acting under the now applicable Immigration and Refugee Protection Act ("the IRPA") cancelled the Applicant's stay of deportation; the decision reads as follows:
A stay under the former Immigration Act was issued to the appellant. The appellant's removal order was based on serious criminality which the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) transition provisions at s. 320(5) describe. The appellant has breached the conditions of his stay with conditions subsequent to June 28, 2002.
Therefore IRPA s.197 applies and s.68 [sic] [s.64] and s. 68(4) apply
.
In that the appellant was found inadmissible on the basis of crime of which he was convicted in Canada and was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of at least two years, there is no appeal to the Immigration Appeal Division (IAD).
The Immigration Appeal Division orders that its order signed the 28th day of May, 1997, staying the deportation order of the appellant be
cancelled
.
Signed the 15th day of January, 2004. [Italics emphasis added]
(Applicant's Application Record, p.32)
As it is agreed that the Appeal Division erroneously applied s.68(4), I find the decision rendered was made in reviewable error
.
ORDER
[3]
Accordingly, I set aside the Appeal Division's decision.
[End of document]