[1]
Nadon, J.
: This is an application by the defendant, pursuant to rule 419(1)(a) of the
Rules
of this court, to strike out the plaintiff's Statement of Claim on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of action.
[2]
Specifically, the defendant seeks to strike out the Statement of Claim on the ground that this court has no jurisdiction to grant the relief sought by the plaintiff in that, according to the defendant, "Plaintiff is seeking declaratory relief by way of an action, whereas he should have proceeded by way of a Motion for Judicial Review".
[3]
The plaintiff argues that rule 419(1)(a) is not the appropriate channel for an attack on the court's jurisdiction. The plaintiff submits that such an attack should be made by virtue of rule 401.
[4]
There is abundant authority to the effect that the court's jurisdiction may be challenged by invoking rule 419(1)(a). ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.E.R. 349 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  defendant herein is fully entitled to raise the issue of jurisdiction by way of rule 419(1)(a) which reads as follows:
"419(1) The Court may at any stage of an action order any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that
(a) it discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, as the case may be,
and may order the action to be stayed or dismissed or judgment to be entered accordingly."
[6]
The authorities are clear that an application brought by a defendant under rule 419(1)(a) will only be allowed when it is plain and obvious that the plaintiff's case cannot possibly succeed.
[7]
In
Inuit Tapisirat of Canada and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 1, at page 740, Estey, J., offered the following comments regarding rule 419(1)(a):
"As I have said, all the facts pleaded in the statement of claim must be deemed to have been proven. On a motion such as this a court should, of course, dismiss the action or strike out any claim made by the plaintiff only in plain and obvious cases and where the court is satisfied that 'the case is beyond doubt':
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.R. 287; 18 D.L.R.(4th) 481; 12 Admin. L.R. 16, Wilson, J., at page 46, wrote as follows:
"The law then would appear to be clear. The facts pleaded are to be taken as proved. When so taken, the question is do they disclose a reasonable cause of action, i.e., a cause of action 'with some chance of success' (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 138, is 'plain and obvious that the action cannot succeed'."
[9]
The facts relevant to the determination of the defendant's motion are as follows.
[10]
By a decision rendered in November of 1990, the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Canada Immigration and Refugee Board recognized the plaintiff as a Convention refugee. On July 2, 1991, the defendant issued to the plaintiff a Refugee Travel Document, valid until January 21, 1992. Subsequently, the validity period of the document was extended to May 31, 1992.
[11]
Some time after May 31, 1992, the plaintiff requested the defendant to extend the validity period of the travel document. By letter dated November 5, 1992. Mr. John Murray of the Passport Office, on behalf of the defendant, advised the plaintiff that his request could not be granted.
[12]
On June 23, 1993, the plaintiff's then lawyer wrote to Mr. Murray, formally requesting him to issue to the plaintiff a "Refugee Travel Document pursuant to Article 28 of the U.N. Convention of July-28-51, Relating to the Status of Refugees". On July 19, 1993, the Department of Justice responded to the plaintiff's lawyer by advising that Mr. Murray's decision would not be changed.
[13]
On September 14, 1993, the plaintiff filed a Statement of Claim, in the Montreal Registry of this court, entitled "Civil Action for Declaratory Judgment and Declaratory Relief". The conclusion of this action, as it appears from the Statement of Claim, is as follows:
"Wherefore The Plaintiff Prays:
(A) That, present action be maintained;
(B) That the Court declare that the plaintiff is lawfully in Canada.
(C) That the defendant be ordered to issue to plaintiff the
Refugee Travel Document
referred to herein and under terms of Article 28 of the
United Nations Convention
;
(D) That the Court declare that Sections 702(2)(6), 704(4)(d), 720, 721(2), 723, and 740, of the Passport Office's
Internal
guidlines [sic] on the issuance of a travel document to convention refugees are all made arbitrary and thus all infringe article 28 of
U.N. Convention
and therefore curtailed and violate the plaintiff's rights. As well as
abusive
and
unreasonable
and
hardship
.
(E) That the court declare that the defendant's refusal or denial to issue
Refugee Travel Document
to plaintiff was contrary to the International Laws and treaty as well as Section 7 of the
Canadain
[sic]
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, in that defendant actions or omissions violated plaintiff's rights to liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice."
[14]
Thus, in a nutshell, the plaintiff is attacking the decision rendered by Mr. Murray on November 5, 1992. In my view, the plaintiff is seeking a relief covered by s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
, which reads as follows:
"18(1) Subject to section 28, the Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction
(a) to issue an injunction, writ of certiorari, writ of prohibition, writ of mandamus or writ of quo warranto, or grant declaratory relief, against any federal board, commission or other tribunal; and
(b) to hear and determine any application or other proceeding for relief in the nature of relief contemplated by paragraph (a), including any proceedings brought against the Attorney General of Canada, to obtain relief against a federal board, commission or other tribunal.
"(2) The Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine every application for a writ of habeas corpus ad subjiciendum, writ of certiorari, writ of prohibition or writ of mandamus in relation to any member of the Canadian Forces serving outside Canada.
"(3) The remedies provided for in subsections (1) and (2) may be obtained only on an application for judicial review made under section 18.1."
[15]
Section 18(3) makes it clear that the remedies provided for in subss. 1 and 2 can only be obtained by way of a judicial review application made under s. 18.1. Consequently, any application to obtain a declaratory relief or a writ of mandamus against any federal board, commission or other tribunal must be made pursuant to s. 18.1.
[16]
The plaintiff herein is seeking a declaratory relief and a writ of mandamus against the defendant in respect of the decision rendered by Mr. Murray on November 5, 1992.
[17]
What was the nature of the jurisdiction exercised by Mr. Murray when he denied the plaintiff's request for an extension of the validity of his Refugee Travel Document?
[18]
It would appear that the power to issue and revoke passports forms part of the Crown's prerogatives. That is, those powers and privileges given by the common law to the Crown. Dicey, in his
Law of the Constitution
(10th Ed., 1965), 424, refers to the royal prerogative as "the residue of discretionary of arbitrary authority, which at any given time is left in the hands of the Crown". Peter W. Hogg, in
Constitutional Law of Canada
(3rd Ed., 1992), Carswell, writes at page 15 that the issue of passports is "a prerogative power in Canada". Paul Lordon, Q.C., in
Crown Law
, 1991, Butterworths, at page 82, writes that "the Crown has a prerogative power to issue and revoke passports".
[19]
In rendering his decision on November 5, 1992, Mr. Murray would, in all likelihood, have considered the Passport Office's international policy guidelines on the issuance of travel documents to Convention refugees. Sections 701 and 702(2) thereof read as follows:
"701
Authority For Issuance Of Canadian Travel Documents
1 Canadian travel documents are issued under the authority of the Secretary of State for External Affairs in his exercise of the prerogative of the Crown respecting the issuance and control of passports.
"702
Definition And Functions Of Canadian Travel Documents
2 A RTD, pursuant to the 1951 United Nations Convention relating to refugees acceded to by Canada in 1969, is issued to those permanent residents (and occasionally to those on a Minister's permit) who have been determined to be 'convention refugees' by a Canadian Immigration authority."
[20]
In my view, there can be no doubt that on November 5, 1992, Mr. Murray was exercising his jurisdiction pursuant to a prerogative of the Crown and, as a result, Mr. Murray was "a federal board, commission or other tribunal" within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the
Federal Court Act
which reads as follows:
"... means any body or any person or persons having, exercising or purporting to exercise jurisdiction or powers conferred by or under an Act of Parliament or by or under an order made pursuant to a prerogative of the Crown, other than any such body constituted or established by or under a law of a province or any such person or persons appointed under or in accordance with a law of a province or under section 96 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
;"
[21]
I must therefore conclude that the plaintiff cannot obtain the relief which he seeks by way of a Statement of Claim.
[22]
A review of the authorities shows that, until recently, a refusal to issue a passport or a revocation thereof was not subject to judicial review. However, it now appears that it is possible to obtain judicial review in respect of the refusal by the Crown to issue a passport (including a Refugee Travel Document). Paul Lordon, Q.C., in
Crown Law
, supra, writes, at page 84, under the heading "Availability of Judicial Review Where Passport Denied" as follows:
"The traditional view is that a person has no right to a passport and the refusal or revocation thereof is not subject to judicial review, although the courts in South Africa, India and the United States have not adhered strictly to this position. (...)
"In Canada, the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
has paved the way for the application of similar constitutional objections where a passport is denied, particularly in view of the Supreme Court of Canada's ruling in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Sections 6 and 7 of the
Charter
provide the most fertile ground for challenge.
"Section 6(1) of the
Charter
provides that '[e]very citizen of Canada has the right to enter, remain in and leave Canada'. Although the denial of a passport would not present an insurmountable barrier to a person's ability to enter and leave Canada, it may be argued that such a denial would effectively deter a person from doing so, since travel outside the country without a valid passport is very difficult.
"Section 7 of the
Charter
enshrines the right to liberty and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. The right to travel or move freely has been recognized as an aspect of liberty in the United States and India and is identified as a universal human right in Article 2 of the [
European] Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
and Article 12 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
. A passport is essential to the meaningful exercise of this right, since, in practice, the refusal or loss of a passport usually prevents travel abroad by the person on whom the refusal or loss operates. Accordingly, the
Charter
may have the effect of imposing restrictions on the exercise of what has heretofore been regarded as an absolute discretionary power."
[23]
Peter W. Hogg, in
Constitutional Law of Canada
, supra, writes at page 15 that:
"It used to be asserted that the exercise of prerogative powers was not subject to judicial review. The assertion is belied by the many cases in which the exercise or purported exercise of prerogative powers has been reviewed by the courts. The courts will determine whether a prerogative power that is asserted by the Crown does in fact exist, and, if it does exist, what are its limits and whether any restrictions on the power have been complied with. The courts will also determine whether a prerogative power has been displaced by statute. The courts will also require, not only that prerogative powers be exercised in conformity with the
Charter of Rights
and other constitutional norms, but also that administrative-law norms such as the duty of fairness be observed."
[24]
As I have stated earlier, the plaintiff is unable to obtain the relief sought by way of a Statement of Claim. Consequently, it is, in my view, plain and obvious that the plaintiff's action cannot possibly succeed. However, nothing appears to prevent the plaintiff from seeking judicial review of Mr. Murray's decision by way of a s. 18.1 application.
[25]
Following the hearing of this application in Montreal on November 29, 1993, the plaintiff submitted further material to the court. In addition, the plaintiff requested leave to file, beyond time, an application for judicial review of the decision rendered by Mr. Murray on November 5, 1992. In his reply to the plaintiff's request for leave, counsel for the defendant submits that the plaintiff's application is premature. I agree. The plaintiff should seek leave of this court to extend the time to file his application for judicial review at the earliest possible moment.
[26]
For these reasons, the plaintiff's Statement of Claim is struck out and the plaintiff's action is dismissed.
[27]
Each party will support its costs.
Application allowed;
action dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/ldl
[End of document]