[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This matter came on for hearing in Toronto, Ontario, on December 13, 1988. The application is for an order by way of certiorari, quashing the decision of the respondent refusing the applicant's request for permanent residence in Canada and for a writ of mandamus directing that:
"(1) the respondents consider and process the applicant's request for permanent residence in Canada in accordance with the Immigration Act and Immigration Regulations;
"(2) the respondents determine in accordance with the law, whether or not it would be contrary to the said Immigration Act and Immigration Regulations to grant landing to the applicants."
[2]
Applications for permanent residence under the self-employed provisions of the Immigration Act and Regulations involve a two-stage assessment process. The first phase of the assessment is a paper screening process in which immigration officials evaluate documents submitted by applicants and decide if the application process should be continued. If the applicant passes this phase, he is invited to an interview with a visa officer. Obviously one of the most significant factors in any assessment is the applicant's possibility of supporting himself in Canada. Points are, therefore, awarded for occupational demand in the paper screening step, and for experience in the final assessment. Where an applicant is not awarded any units of assessment for experience, an immigrant visa cannot be issued unless the visa officer believes there are good reasons why the number of points do not reflect the chances of the applicant to become successfully established in Canada and those reasons have been approved by a senior immigration officer. A candidate for self-employment is also subject to the definition of a self-employed person in s. 2(1) of the Regulations and must be someone who intends and has the ability to establish or purchase a business in Canada that will create an employment opportunity for himself and will make a significant contribution to the economy or the cultural or artistic life of Canada. In addition, the visa officer will award 30 units of assessment to an applicant seeking to be self-employed if it is his opinion the applicant will be able to become successfully established in his business in Canada.
[3]
It is important to bear in mind that Parliament's intention in enacting the Immigration Act is to define Canada's immigration policy both to Canadians and to those who wish to come here from abroad. Such a policy cannot exist without complex regulations, a good many of which appear to be restrictive in nature, but the policy should always be interpreted in positive terms. The purpose of the statute is to permit immigration, not prevent it, and it is the corresponding obligation of immigration officers to provide a thorough and fair assessment in compliance with the terms and the spirit of the legislation.
[4]
All the facts are contained in the affidavits of the applicant, Cecil Rotenberg, her solicitor and Aphrodite Zografos, Justice Liaison Officer. The applicant is from the Peoples' Republic of China and has been residing in the United States since 1986. On September 21, 1987, she applied to the Canadian Consulate General of Canada in New York for permanent residence in Canada and states that she was planning to pursue the profession of self-employed music teacher. The applicant received training in China in both Oriental and Occidental music and graduated from the Sichuan Conservatory of Music with an Honours Bachelor degree in music in 1982. Her application indicates that from 1978 up to 1986 the applicant was employed continuously; as a soloist for eight years and as a soloist and vocal teacher for two years. She arrived in the United States on a student visa and was awarded a scholarship to attend the Aaron Copland School of Music in Queen's College and complete a Master's degree in music. The documentation also states that the applicant performed extensively in China and participated in at least one vocal competition in the United States.
[5]
On November 12, 1987, at the offices of the Canadian Consulate General in New York, the applicant was interviewed by a visa officer regarding her application for permanent residence. In her affidavit, the applicant states that the officer required a copy of her birth certificate and a letter of recommendation from a teacher or colleague that she was capable of teaching music. At the conclusion of the interview, the applicant learned a decision could not be made until the officer consulted her colleagues and reviewed the requested documents. During this interview, the visa officer made the following notes on the Immigrant Assessment Record:
"Subj. wants to set a music school. She went to Cda this year to investigate. She says that she would have 'at least' four students that she is sure of. She plans to have 30-40 students. She is now a student in U.S.A. All the experience she has is as a soloist (opera singer). She also has two students in PRC (four hours/w.) for two years. She does not qualify as a teacher (self-employed): no experience, no 'international reputation', all prizes were won at the school where she studied in PRC, no exp as self-employed."
[6]
On November 17, 1987, the applicant hand-delivered the requested documents to the Consulate. In a letter dated November 16, 1987, the applicant's request for permanent residence was denied:
"This concerns your application for permanent residence as a self-employed person.
"According to Canada's Immigration Regulations, 1978, a self-employed person means an immigrant
'... who intends and has the ability to establish or purchase a business in Canada that will create an employment opportunity for himself and will make a significant contribution to the economy or the cultural or artistic life of Canada.'
"In addition to falling within the foregoing definition, a self-employed applicant also requires a total of 70 units of assessment, including 30 bonus units which are awarded pursuant to subsection 9(4) of the Regulations which reads:
'Where a visa officer assesses an immigrant who intends to be a self-employed person in Canada, he shall, in addition to any other units of assessment awarded to that immigrant, award 30 units of assessment to the immigrant if, in the opinion of the visa officer, the immigrant will be able to become successfully established in his occupation or business in Canada.'
"After a careful and thorough review of your application, I regret to inform you that your application has been refused. In my opinion, your intended business in Canada, self-employed music teacher, would not make a significant contribution to the economy or the cultural or artistic life of Canada.
"Furthermore, based on all the information provided, I am not satisfied that you will be able to become successfully established in your proposed occupation/business. Consequently, you do not receive sufficient units of assessment to meet the above-mentioned requirement for selection as a self-employed person."
[7]
The applicant seeks judicial review of that decision and argues numerous grounds for the success of this application. The issues raised are whether the visa officer applied improper considerations in relying on international recognition as mentioned in a telex from the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission, or if such criteria were correct, were they irrelevant in these circumstances; whether the Immigration Regulations require a self-employed applicant to have self-employed experience; and whether the visa officer breached her duty of fairness by rendering her decision prior to receiving the requested documents from the applicant.
[8]
The relevant statutory provisions in this matter are ss. 2(1), 8(1)(b), 8(2), 8(4), 9 and 11(1) of the Immigration Regulations, 1978:
"2(1) 'self-employed person' means an immigrant who intends and has the ability to establish or purchase a business in Canada that will create an employment opportunity for himself and will make a significant contribution to the economy or the cultural or artistic life of Canada;
"8(1) For the purpose of determining whether an immigrant and his dependants, other than a member of the family class or a Convention refugee seeking resettlement, will be able to become successfully established in Canada, a visa officer shall assess that immigrant or, at the option of the immigrant, the spouse of that immigrant,
. . . . .
(b) in the case of an immigrant who intends to be a self-employed person in Canada, on the basis of each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I, other than the factor set out in item 5 thereof;
"8(2) A visa officer shall award to an immigrant who is assessed on the basis of factors listed in column I of Schedule I the appropriate number of units of assessment for each factor in accordance with the criteria set out in column II thereof opposite that factor, but he shall not award for any factor more units of assessment than the maximum number set out in column III thereof opposite that factor.
"8(4) Where a visa officer assesses an immigrant who intends to be a self-employed person in Canada, he shall, in addition to any other units of assessment awarded to that immigrant, award 30 units of assessment to the immigrant if, in the opinion of the visa officer, the immigrant will be able to become successfully established in his occupation or business in Canada.
"9(1) Where an immigrant, other than a member of the family class, an assisted relative, a Convention refugee seeking resettlement or an investor, makes an application for a visa, a visa officer may, subject to section 11, issue an immigrant visa to him and his accompanying dependants if
(a) he and his dependants, whether accompanying dependants or not, are not members of any inadmissible class and otherwise meet the requirements of the Act and these regulations; and
(b) on the basis of his assessment in accordance with section 8
(i) in the case of an immigrant other than a retired person or an entrepreneur, he is awarded at least 70 units of assessment, or
(ii) in the case of an entrepreneur, he is awarded at least 25 units of assessment.
"11(1) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), a visa officer shall not issue an immigrant visa pursuant to section 9 or 10 to an immigrant who is assessed on the basis of factors listed in column I of Schedule I and is not awarded any units of assessment for the factor set out in item 3 thereof unless the immigrant
(a) has arranged employment in Canada and has a written statement from the proposed employer verifying that he is willing to employ an inexperienced person in the position in which the person is to be employed, and the visa officer is satisfied that the person can perform the work required without experience; or
(b) is qualified for and is prepared to engage in employment in a designated occupation."
[9]
The exact basis for the visa officer's decision in this case is somewhat unclear. The written refusal concentrates on the visa officer's opinion that the applicant's business will be unsuccessful and would not make a significant contribution to the economy or cultural or artistic life of Canada, yet the notes taken during the interview deal exclusively with experience. The problem is further complicated by the factor of international recognition which is the subject of a CEIC telex containing the following information:
"We have conferred with foreign worker recruitment/RHQ and they would advise that any influx of self-employed musicians would adversely affect the Cdn labour market. In their opinion only internationally recognized musicians should be given consideration.
"For yr. info we also spoke with Mr. Robert Creech, Vice President at the Royal Conservatory of Music, Toronto. He advises that experienced music teachers can develop a clientele without difficulty, provided they are fluent in English. Teaching opportunities are good in Tor. but better in smaller communities. Conservatory teaching positions are impossible to obtain and performing opportunities scarce."
[10]
The language and structure of the message clearly distinguishes between self-employed musician applicants and music teaching applicants, separating the two into different paragraphs and referring to each in particular. Furthermore, it states that experienced candidates wishing to teach music have good opportunities in Toronto if they are fluent in English. Obviously, this, implies that any influx of these people will not adversely affect the Canadian labour market. Yet it is clear that the international recognition factor is applied by CEIC because of the expected negative impact of self-employed musicians on the labour market. I have difficulty with an interpretation of the telex which applies international recognition criteria to music teaching applicants in an effort to keep them out based on possible negative effects on the job market, when the same telex goes on to specify that if music teachers have experience and adequate English, there are good opportunities for work. In any event, the visa officer's notes from the interview indicate that the refusal of this application for permanent residence was also based on a lack of self-employed experience in the applicant's intended occupation of self-employed music teacher. Counsel for the applicant argues that this is an erroneous interpretation of the legislation, since neither the Act nor the Regulations makes any requirement that self-employed applicants have self-employed experience. The respondents reply that as the Act and Regulations require assessment of the applicant's experience in his intended occupation, here stated to be "self-employed music teacher", the deciding factor becomes whether the applicant has any self-employed experience as a music teacher.
[11]
I am convinced that the visa officer in this case interpreted the Regulations in such a narrow fashion as to render qualification virtually impossible and as a result, treated the applicant unfairly. The analysis appears to me to require consideration of three questions. First, is the applicant an accomplished musician (in which international recognition ought to be of great assistance)? second, can he teach? third, can he be self-employed as a teacher? It is obvious that the applicant was successful in the first two and by inference at least, partially successful in the third. His only failure in respect to the third issue is the lack of actual experience as a self-employed teacher. By placing undue emphasis on the lack of experience as a self-employed teacher, the visa officer allowed that partial failure on the third issue to override success on the other two, an interpretation that made it almost impossible for this applicant to succeed. Accordingly, there has been a fundamental breach of the duty of fairness to this applicant which is sufficient to warrant the relief sought.
[12]
I also note that the officer did not pose any questions dealing with the possibilities of the applicant's contributions, and notes made by the officer during the interview support this contention as no mention is made of any of these aspects. It appears that the officer at least partially based her refusal on these criteria and yet did not at the time of the interview give any indication of a negative assessment on this basis nor provide the applicant with an opportunity to reply to those criteria.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 630, as embodying the duty of fairness incumbent on visa officers, and it is applicable here:
"... even if an immigration officer is not in a judicial or quasi-judicial capacity,
he must at any rate give the immigrant an opportunity of satisfying him of the matters in the subsection, and for that purpose let the immigrant know what his immediate impression is so that the immigrant can disabuse him. That is not, as I see it, a question of acting or being required to act judicially, but of being required to act fairly. Good administration and an honest or bona fide decision, must as it seems to me, require not merely impartiality, nor merely bringing one's mind to bear on the problem but acting fairly;
"
[13]
In compliance with this principle, the visa officer ought to have presented the applicant with the opportunity to refute the opinion that she was unable to make a significant contribution. Not having done so was a breach of the duty of fairness and also constitutes reason to set aside the decision of the visa officer.
[14]
Finally, there is the argument that the rendering of a decision prior to receiving requested documentary information was not in accordance with the general duty of fairness. In her affidavit, the applicant maintains that the visa officer specifically requested certain documentation. The most favourable interpretation that can be placed on these uncontested events is that the visa officer recognized the principle of fairness enunciated  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in that she provided the applicant with an opportunity to respond to the negative assessment by submitting further documentation. However, in making her decision before that information was presented, the officer committed a breach of the duty of fairness.
[15]
For these reasons, the application for certiorari and mandamus is allowed. The decision of the visa officer is set aside and the respondent is directed to carry out the assessment in accordance with the Immigration Act and Regulations in a manner consistent with the interpretation placed upon them in these reasons for order.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]