Reasons For Judgment
[1]
Joyal, J.
[Translation]: This is an action for damages brought by the plaintiff against the defendant for financial losses suffered by him as a result of the decision of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada refusing to grant him a fishing licence.
[2]
The grounds in support of the claim are that the plaintiff's licence application was examined on the basis of criteria that did not exist at the time his application was filed, and so the administrative procedure followed by the defendant was discriminatory, unreasonable and contrary to public policy.
[3]
The plaintiff therefore asks that the defendant be ordered to pay him the sum of $68,220, plus interest on that amount from the date of service. This amount is composed of $9,272 for lost income for 1984, $27,648 for lost income in 1985, $1,300 for transportation of the boat, $20,000 for disturbance and inconvenience (loss of equipment, financing charges, proceedings) and $10,000 for moral and exemplary damages. The plaintiff further claims the interest provided for in art. 1056(c) of the
Civil Code of Quebec
from the date the defendant was put in default, May 25, 1984, the whole with costs.
Submissions Of The Plaintiff
[4]
The plaintiff is a Canadian citizen who has worked as a fisherman for several years in Gaspé County.
[5]
On May 23, 1984, the plaintiff purchased the fishing equipment and boat of Eddy Morin, himself a resident of Gaspé County. On that date, Mr. Morin held a licence to fish for lobster and certain species of groundfish.
[6]
Prior to the sale, Mr. Morin had duly advertised and publicized his intention to sell his boat and equipment. Moreover, the plaintiff had notified the Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada of the transaction on the forms provided for that purpose.
[7]
Also on that date, May 23, 1984, the plaintiff applied in his name for the licences held by the vendor, Mr. Morin.
[8]
The plaintiff states that the vendor resided in the municipality of Gascon and that he himself resided in Douglastown, both municipalities being situated in fishing district 10-D-1, as established by the
Lobster Fishery Regulations
.
[9]
Despite the fact that the plaintiff complied with all the existing requirements and regulations, the Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada, acting through the mis en cause Joseph Vignola, refused to issue the licences on the ground that the plaintiff did not meet the residence requirements relating to district 10-D-1. The plaintiff was thereby deprived of any income.
[10]
On May 28, 1984, the plaintiff sent an application for review to the office of Fisheries and Oceans Canada. On May 30, 1984, the review was held before the same officer, Mr. Vignola, who decided to uphold his decision refusing the licence, relying on the following fact as his reason:
[TRANSLATION] "The purchaser has not established beyond a reasonable doubt that he has resided permanently for two years in the sector in question."
[11]
The plaintiff contends that this decision is wrong in law, and is even unreasonable and contrary to public policy.
[12]
After the decision was made on May 30, 1984, and after further information was provided by the plaintiff, the defendant issued temporary fishing licences. Despite the issuance of these licences, the plaintiff contends that he has suffered serious prejudice, in that the fishing seasons for each of the species were then well advanced and it was not then possible to make up for any lost time. Moreover, the temporary licences did not in any way guarantee that the plaintiff would be able to have his licence renewed for the subsequent year.
[13]
Given this situation, the plaintiff criticized the defendant's inaction in letters dated June 1, 1984 and June 29, 1984, and further put the defendant in default in respect of the losses and damages that he might suffer as a result of the delay.
[14]
On September 14, 1984, Fisheries and Oceans Canada responded to the pressure from the plaintiff by stating that no decision would be made in his case before the advisory committees had reviewed the then existing policies.
[15]
Thereafter, that is, between December 7, 1984 and March 19, 1985, the parties conducted an exchange of correspondence for the purpose of confirming the plaintiff's rights. As this correspondence indicates, the plaintiff's file was examined on the basis of criteria that did not exist at the time he made his application, on May 23, 1984, but which became increasingly well developed as consultations proceeded and the rules took shape. In the plaintiff's eyes, this attitude was discriminatory and unreasonable.
[16]
Thus, once the new regulations were made, the defendant informed the plaintiff that henceforth the criterion of residence was eliminated as long, however, as the purchaser used his licence in the former licensee's district. The plaintiff thus found himself obliged to fish for lobster 70 miles from Douglastown. He then presented a request to the Minister for a complete review of his file. On May 13, 1985, the Minister made a decision in the plaintiff's favour.
[17]
The plaintiff alleges that based on all of these facts he has suffered serious prejudice for which he is entitled to claim compensation from the defendant, and asks this Court to allow this claim.
Submissions Of The Defendant
[18]
The defendant admits that the municipalities of Gascon and Douglastown are located within fishing district 10-D-1, but denies that the plaintiff resided in Douglastown at the relevant time, as stipulated in the policies of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans.
[19]
The defendant denies the plaintiff's allegation that he complied with all the existing requirements and regulations for obtaining licences.
[20]
The defendant denies the plaintiff's allegation that he has suffered serious prejudice, despite the fact that temporary licences were issued, given the advanced stage of the fishing seasons for each of the species, and also denies that it was then not possible to make up for any lost time.
[21]
The defendant also denies any other prejudice alleged by the plaintiff, as well as the amounts of damages and losses alleged.
[22]
As well, the defendant alleges that the damages claimed are, in any event, exaggerated.
[23]
With this, the defendant submits that the plaintiff's action is unfounded in fact and in law, and asks the Court to dismiss it, with costs.
The Issue
[24]
The issue is whether or not the defendant, acting through her officer, was correct in refusing to allow the plaintiff to transfer the fishing licence, and if not, what damages were suffered.
The Evidence
[25]
As a preamble, the Court must recognize that the events surrounding this case took place during a period of instability because of the transfer of fisheries administration, in this region of the province of Quebec, from the provincial authorities to the federal authorities. No one has suggested that there is any conflict in the testimony of the officer of the federal Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Joseph Vignola, on this aspect of the matter. This transfer took place during the period from 1983 to 1984, while the Department was involved in consultations with the fishermen's association in the Gaspé region. On May 1, 1984, the Department produced its licensing policy manual. I would quote a few passages from that manual:
[TRANSLATION]
"
Sec. 2.1.2
A person ... must register each year ... and keep his registration certificate with him at all times ...
"
Sec. 2.1.4(1)
A fishing licence shall be procured from the Department for all fishing activities ...
"
Sec. 2.1.4(3)
All fishing licences must be renewed each year ...
"
Sec. 2.1.4(4)
To be eligible for a licence, the applicant must have been a full-time fisherman for the two years immediately preceding his application ...
"
Sec. 2.1.4(8)
... all fishing privileges, except lobster fishing licences, are an indivisible unit and may not be shared by two or more boats.
"
Sec. 2.1.5(2)
Any licence that states a specific district for use may only be transferred or reissued to a fisherman who has had his principle residence in that district for at least two years.
"
Sec. 2.1.5.1(5)
Licences ... may be issued to a purchaser of a boat only if he: (a) is the registered owner of the boat ...; (b) has participated in commercial fishing on a full-time basis during the last two years and is recognized as a commercial fisherman in his local area; ...
"
Sec. 2.2.6
Lobster
... (a) For fishermen in the Gaspé and the North Shore regions, [the applicant must] have his domicile in the municipality of the former licensee ..."
[26]
Second, the Court should quote a few passages from the
Fisheries Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-14, which is the source of the right and obligation to regulate the industry. For example, s. 7 gives the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans complete discretion in granting fishing licences. Under s. 9, the Minister may cancel any licence issued under the authority of the
Act
if he ascertains that its provisions have been violated.
[27]
The powers to regulate by order-in-council are set out in s. 43, and I note in particular s. 43(f), which relates to the issue, suspension and cancellation of licences, and s. 43(l), which relates to the powers and duties of delegated officers.
[28]
We should also take into account the regulations respecting practice that were in force when fisheries administration was transferred to the federal authorities. In chapter 852, C.R.C. 1978, vol. VIII, "resident" is defined in s. 2(1) as a person who has resided in the province during the twelve month period immediately preceding his application for a licence. Section 4(1) imposes a general prohibition on fishing without a licence. Under s. 5, the Minister may limit the number of licences, cancel them and refuse to issue them to any person who has been convicted of an offence under the
Act
or these
Regulations
.
[29]
Chapter 817, C.R.C. 1978, vol. VII, consists of specific regulations relating to lobster fishing. Section 9 prohibits fishing in a district other than the district for which the licence was issued. That section also states that a person who wishes to fish in a lobster fishing district, other than the district in which he resides, shall procure an identification certificate to be delivered to the authorities in the new district, but an identification certificate shall not be issued to anyone who has, during the year, held a lobster fishing licence.
[30]
We shall now return to the facts before the Court, and as I indicated earlier, these facts are not seriously contested. The plaintiff lives in Matane, Quebec, but often spent time in the municipality of Douglastown where his brother lived. Starting in 1980, he worked for his brother as a fisherman's helper, fishing for lobster and other fish around Anse-à-Brillant. In a notarized deed dated August 31, 1983, and registered a year later, on September 12, 1984, the plaintiff purchased a piece of land in Douglastown. The plaintiff was designated therein as being domiciled in Matane. He slowly set about building himself a house, and for this purpose resided in Douglastown for longer and more frequent periods of time. At the same time, he continued to fish for his brother. Thus, according to his declaration of May 28, 1984, he spent two months on lobster fishing in 1980, four months in 1981 and four months in 1982, in addition to two months preparing the land for building his house. In 1983, he fished for two months and worked on his house for an additional two and a half months. From January to March 1984, he took training courses in Matane to become a professional fisherman. Between March 15 and April 1, 1984 he worked preparing the fishing gear, and during the following three weeks he worked on his new property. Starting in April 20, 1984 he fished for herring, and on May 1, 1984 he started fishing for lobster.
[31]
On May 23, 1984, a Mr. Eddy Morin sold the plaintiff his fishing boat, which was about 20 feet long, and his fishing equipment. At the same time, Mr. Morin transferred his lobster, mackerel, herring and groundfish fishing licence to him. Mr. Morin, who had been a fisherman in Gascons, about 70 miles from Douglastown, wanted to retire from fishing. Since the transfer of this licence had to be approved by the Department of Fisheries and Oceans, the plaintiff filed the documents required for this purpose on the same day. Two days later, May 25, 1984, the plaintiff was advised that he was not a permanent resident of Douglastown and that accordingly the transfer would be refused and he would be prohibited from engaging in any fishing activities related to the licence.
[32]
On May 28, 1984, the plaintiff's counsel requested a review of the case. Also on that day, the fishermen's association of Anse-à-Brillant confirmed the representations made by its members indicating that they opposed the transfer of the lobster fishing licence because the plaintiff was not a resident of Douglastown.
[33]
The case was re-examined, but on May 30, 1984, the earlier decision was confirmed. Two reasons were given: that the vendor had not proved that there was no one interested in his licences in Gascons, where he resided, and that the purchaser had not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that he had been residing permanently for two years in the district in question.
[34]
Additional representations were submitted to the office of the Director of the Department in Gaspé, and on June 1, 1984, the plaintiff was given a temporary lobster fishing licence.
[35]
Toward the end of June 1984, the lobster fishing season was drawing to an end and the issue of herring, mackerel and groundfish licences then had to be settled. A temporary licence for this purpose was issued on July 11, 1984.
[36]
On September 12, 1984, the plaintiff's lawyer again requested that a fishing licence be issued, as had been requested on May 23 of that year. At the same time, the lawyer informed the Department that the plaintiff was shortly going to file an application for a licence for Anticosti Island.
[37]
In its reply of September 24, 1984, the Department pointed out that the lobster fishing licence was the only one in dispute. The Department added that it was understood that if the application for a licence for Anticosti island was accepted, the plaintiff could no longer claim to have the lobster fishing licence transferred, since the Department's policy prohibited granting two licences to the same person. Moreover, the Department pointed out that the entire question of lobster fishing was under study, that advisory committees were to be set up, and that only later would it be in a position to resolve the plaintiff's case definitively.
[38]
Over the following months, the Department continued with the revision of its policy, and on February 12, 1985, the plaintiff's lawyer was informed that the new policy eliminated the residence requirements, but that the lobster fishing licence could be used only inside a specific district where the former licensee had exercised his or her rights.
[39]
The Court would immediately note that since the former licensee's district was in Gascons, 70 miles from Douglastown and from Anse-à-Brillant, the Department was imposing a condition on the plaintiff that could not make him happy.
[40]
Thus on March 25, 1985, after further correspondence was exchanged by the parties, the plaintiff's lawyer wrote to the Minister, John Fraser, setting out the entire history of the case and asking that the Minister direct that a licence be issued in the plaintiff's name for lobster fishing in district 10-D-1, so that the plaintiff could operate in Anse-à-Brillant, Town of Gaspé.
[41]
The Minister's decision was favourable, and on May 13, 1985 the Minister accepted the application to transfer the lobster fishing licence to Anse-à-Brillant for the 1985 season.
[42]
On May 17, 1985, because the licences are processed by computer, the plaintiff received only a temporary licence. On June 20, 1985, because the plaintiff had bought a new boat, another temporary licence was issued to him. Finally, on July 18, 1985, the Department was able to assure the plaintiff that an official licence would be issued to him within fifteen days.
Analysis Of The Evidence Relating
To The Liability Of The
Defendant
[43]
The testimony of the people involved, along with all the documentation filed in the record, clearly indicate the problems that may arise, if we consider the following facts:
1. the transfer of the administration of the fisheries industry from the Ministère de l'Industrie et du Commerce in Quebec City to the Department of Fisheries and Oceans in Ottawa, which was completed on April 1, 1984;
2. the preparation of a policy manual during 1983-84, which was not in place until May 1, 1984, and which was distributed, if I am not mistaken, through the fishermen's associations in the various districts of the province;
3. the recognition that the most abundant lobster fishing season occurs between the beginning of May and the beginning of July;
4. the sale and purchase of the boat and licence in question took place on May 23, 1984, when the season was already well advanced;
5. the proper management of a regulatory system of this nature always requires the participation or collaboration of groups of fishermen in each of the districts so as to take into account specific circumstances and ensure that the regulations do not simply become a means of abuse;
6. the licence application had been approved by the local fishermen's association, but a day or two later, the president of the association, at the urging of its members, expressed opposition to the transfer because the plaintiff was not a resident of Douglastown within the meaning of the Department's written policies;
7. on June 1, 1984, the Department granted a temporary lobster fishing licence;
8. on July 11, 1984, a temporary licence was granted for other fishing;
9. on May 13, 1985 the case was resolved, and on May 17, 1985 a temporary licence was issued, which was later replaced by an official licence;
10. as in the rest of the country, any fishing licence is granted at the discretion of the Minister, subject, furthermore, to the usual rules, and is for a period of one year only; it is further clear that renewal from one year to another is not automatic;
11. the experience acquired by the plaintiff during the period preceding the purchase of his boat was as fisherman's helper to his brother, and it was in this role that some 28 lobster fishermen in Anse-à-Brillant knew him;
12. of all the fishing units in issue, the lobster fishing licence was the most important in the plaintiff's eyes; the other licences nonetheless had some value.
[44]
In the context of the facts and the law as described, the Court must consider the merits of the plaintiff's claim for damages by reason of the defendant's failure or refusal without valid reason to accept the transfer application or her bad faith in the performance of her administrative duties.
[45]
We shall deal first with the reasons for the refusal. The evidence indicates to me that the aspect of the plaintiff's domicile or residence, which is set out in the documentation filed in support of his application for transfer, is doubtful, to say the least. My description of the plaintiff's periods of residence in Douglastown indicated that his stays were relatively short and coincided most often with the lobster fishing periods and, later in the season, with other fisheries. During that time, his usual residence or his domicile was in Matane, where, moreover, his wife resided permanently.
[46]
Although the plaintiff did purchase a piece of land in 1983, the deed of sale for which was not registered until a year later, the construction work was spread out over a relatively long period, and it is difficult to establish a precise date when an actual change of domicile or residence took place. While the defendant did describe all his activities in the municipality of Douglastown from 1980 to 1984 in his declaration of May 28, 1984, and those activities might serve as evidence of residence, his roots were still at all times in Matane; the more objective evidence, such as the declarations in the deed of sale for his land, his driver's licence and other similar items, cast doubt on the plaintiff's claims. Finally, we must always remember the two year rule.
[47]
Another aspect of the situation between the parties relates to the use of the word "residence" as well as of the word "domicile", as used in the policy manual. In the legal context, these are two distinct expressions. The distinction is often expressed by pointing out that a person can have only one domicile, but can have several residences. The distinction may also be expressed by saying that "domicile" is a question of fact and law, where the intention of the person in question may be of some importance in determining his or her status.
[48]
I must therefore recognize that the decision to be made by the officer on this question was a rather thorny one, and that it could not be suggested that it was prima facie wrong. On the other hand, I must point out that the expression "beyond a reasonable doubt" which the officer used in his refusal letter imposes a standard of proof that is recognized only in criminal law. This indicates that if, in the officer's mind, he had to impose this standard, the result was an error of law which is subject to revision or review.
[49]
We shall now deal with the other aspect of the case. Did the officer act prematurely in exercising his discretion as he did on May 25, 1984? Did he have an obligation to inform the plaintiff of the facts brought to his attention showing that the plaintiff was not a "permanent resident in a locality within district 10-D-1" before passing judgment on the transfer application? If we apply the rule audi alteram partem strictly, the Court would be invited to answer in the affirmative. However, I take into account that in his letter of May 25, 1984 the officer informed the plaintiff of his right of review, a right which the plaintiff exercised three days later by filing his declaration of May 28, 1984. The officer did take this declaration into account in his decision of May 30, 1984 and, in my view, this expeditious manner of remedying what might have been a breach of the rule avoids any of the usual remedies.
[50]
Another fact must be considered which relates directly to the nature of the remedies sought by the plaintiff. These remedies are not exclusively against an administrative decision vitiated by error of law, excess of jurisdiction or various defects which justify setting the decision aside by way of judicial review. These remedies relate to the damages suffered as a result of the defendant's refusal to allow the transfer in question. Jurisprudence clearly indicates that the Crown may be held liable if, even though all the conditions were met, the Crown nonetheless exercised its discretion negligently or in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. On the other hand, good faith is presumed, and in the absence of evidence on that point, any incorrect interpretation is sheltered from any claim for damages that might result. The opinions expressed by Mr. Justice Fauteux of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(2d) 165, clearly establish this doctrine.
[51]
The plaintiff raises another point of evidence that might justify his claim. This is the participation of third parties in the deliberations relating to the approval of the transfer, and specifically the first communication sent to the defendant by the president of the fishermen's association. It is clear that this communication would have established the credibility of the application. The reversal took place at about the same time as the fishermen learned of the application and strongly opposed it, on the grounds that the plaintiff was not qualified. Although this participation by third parties was the cause of the first decision made being set aside, the remedy would simply be an order requiring the defendant to reconsider the application, the process that the plaintiff in fact undertook several days later. In other words, the legal effects would be the same as in the case of the use of the expression "beyond a reasonable doubt" to which I have already referred.
[52]
It is clear, on the evidence, that following the representations made by the plaintiff's lawyer the defendant wasted no time in granting him a temporary lobster fishing licence. I interpret the granting of this licence not as an admission that a mistake had been made, but rather as an indication that perhaps the conditions for granting the licence were confused, in terms of the conditions attached to all fishing licences, and more specifically to lobster fishing licences. The plaintiff suffered a delay, undoubtedly, but I believe that the defendant's decision subsequent to the request for a review was made sufficiently expeditiously, taking into account the administrative procedures with which the officials had to comply.
[53]
The temporary licence for other fisheries was granted to the plaintiff on July 11, 1984. The season for those fisheries had started at the beginning of that month. I find nothing in the evidence, however, showing that an express application to transfer the licence for those fisheries was made. Based on the evidence in the record, the Court has reason to believe that the plaintiff's position or tactic was to decide the matter on an all or nothing basis. In my opinion, if the defendant were to reconsider the initial decision, she was in a position to reconsider both kinds of licences. If I read the policy manual produced on May 1, 1984 correctly, the conditions were nearly as onerous for one licence as for the others:
"-full time fisherman for two years;
"-transfer limited to a fisherman who participates in commercial fishing on a full-time basis for two years and is recognized as a commercial fisherman;
"-for lobster, domicile in the municipality of the former licensee."
[54]
I conclude from this that if the plaintiff suffered damages for lost income from fishing because of the two week delay, these losses are not attributable to the defendant, who moreover always has discretion, through the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans, in granting licences.
[55]
With respect to the events during the period from the fall of 1984 to May 1985, the delays in reexamining the plaintiff's case for the second or third time were, in my opinion, a result of the revision of the policy in the fishing industry as a whole. The criteria under that revision were communicated to the plaintiff in mid-February 1985, but they were certainly not likely to make the plaintiff happy. Finally, after the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans intervened, the plaintiff was granted all the licences required, on May 13, 1985. The fact that the process involved the preliminary issue of a temporary licence has nothing to do with the issue.
Conclusion:
[56]
The basic doctrine in respect of fishing licences is that neither the
Act
nor the regulations gives an applicant a
right
to any licence. The Minister always has residual discretion, as set out in s. 7 of the
Act
. Moreover, any licence is for one year only and renewal of the licence does not create a right that did not previously exist.
[57]
In administering as complex a system as the commercial fisheries system, it goes without saying that the administrator must comply with the established rules and act cautiously and, if he or she is required to interpret those rules in the context of the facts submitted to him or her, must do so in good faith, without constraint or discrimination.
[58]
In the case before me, notwithstanding the harsh things said by the plaintiff in his communications with the defendant's officer, I could not conclude that the initial decision was legally wrong or incorrect. The rules that the officer had to follow imposed a number of conditions on the plaintiff which were, on closer reading of each of them, ambiguous and difficult to analyze in the context of the actual application for transfer filed by the plaintiff. As I have already decided that there was no bad faith, it is not necessary for me to pass judgment on the legal validity or invalidity of the decision. Even today, with the benefit of all of the documentation in the record, and having heard the submissions and argument of the parties, the legal situation, in my humble opinion, is still ambiguous. I therefore still conclude that the plaintiff has not proved to me that he had a
right
to the licence transfer, refusal of which could otherwise open the door to a claim for damages.
[59]
At the outset of these reasons, I noted the somewhat confused and unstable period that characterized the course of events during 1984 and 1985. The restrictions that the policy manuals imposed on licence transfers are not contested in any way. It might very well be that the defendant, right from the start of the purchase of the boat in question, orally communicated vague or ambiguous information to the plaintiff, but that has nothing to do with the case as it has been conducted by the parties. It might also be suspected that the decision made later to grant temporary licences to the plaintiff shows that there was some doubt in the defendant's mind that the earlier decision was legitimate, and that it needed to be remedied. In my opinion, however, drawing legal conclusions on this question would add nothing to the plaintiff's claim and could simply be interpreted as unwarranted interference by a court in the exercise of the defendant's powers.
[60]
The courts have often considered the legal effect of various rules or guidelines that government officials must follow in performing their duties. In his volume
Droit administratif
, 2nd Edition, 1985, at page 285, Professor Garant deals at length with the civil liability that may result. Moreover, the learned author reminds us that if an official gives false or incorrect information, it is nonetheless necessary to prove negligence on the official's part, such as having acted precipitously or without taking reasonable care. On this point, he cites
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). That is, as in
Caisse populaire  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  as a source of liability if the person providing the information did not act as a prudent administrator or a normally informed and careful person.
[61]
If, on the other hand, I had found for the plaintiff in respect of damages, it goes without saying that they would be calculated on a different basis from what the plaintiff filed in exhibit 47. The calculations found there do not take into account the efforts that the plaintiff could have made to mitigate and thereby limit his losses. Nor do they take into account expenses and variations in the alleged catches, and finally, they do not deal with the income he might have earned when these licences were in effect and he was not using them. I would therefore fix these damages in the amount of $10,000.
[62]
The plaintiff's action must be dismissed. In view of the unique or exceptional circumstances out of which this case arose, I would make no order as to costs.
Action dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sg