[1]
MacKay, J.
: On application by the defendant for a confidentiality order following filing of its affidavit of documents filed January 7, 1993, prior to production of the documents for inspection by plaintiffs, the plaintiffs objected to any such order. The matter was heard, on short notice on consent, on February 9, 1993, together with other motions by both parties relating to disclosure of documents.
[2]
Decision was then reserved and counsel were invited to consider possible agreement on terms of an order if one should be issued, the defendant having presented a draft of such an order with its motion. Counsel for the plaintiffs made no comment on possible terms, maintaining the position that no such order should issue, at least at that stage of proceedings. Thereafter, following minor modification of terms originally proposed by the defendant, an order issued on March 26, 1993, which by very detailed terms would protect the confidentiality of documents, things and transcripts produced by the parties for the purposes of the action.
[3]
These are my reasons for that order.
The Background
[4]
This action initiated by statement of claim filed on December 5, 1990, seeks a declaration that the defendant's Canadian Letters Patent 1,238,277 is invalid. The patent relates to pharmaceutical formulations of a chemical compound known generically as Zidovudine, used in the treatment of persons suffering from HIV/AIDS, the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome. The action, as filed, also seeks a declaration that designated products of the plaintiffs do not infringe any interest protected by the patent.
[5]
Pleadings in the action closed with filing of the defendant's statement of defence and defence to amended particulars of objection, both filed in August 1991. Thereafter, each of the plaintiffs filed an affidavit of documents in August 1992, and a supplementary affidavit of documents on February 5, 1993. By order of my colleague Mr. Justice Noël the defendant was ordered to file an affidavit of documents by January 7, 1993, in accord with rule 448 of the
Federal Court Rules
. That was done but, before arranging inspection of the documents listed in its affidavit, counsel for the defendant sought the agreement of the plaintiffs on terms of a protective order to be proposed for approval of the court. The plaintiffs declined to agree on such an order, whereupon this application was brought by the defendant.
The Terms Of The Order
[6]
The confidentiality order proposed by the defendant is said to be based on the model of protective orders consented to in parallel proceedings in the United States District Court, Eastern Division of North Carolina, New Bern Division. There, in three actions by the defendant's U.S. subsidiary, Burroughs Wellcome Co., infringement of patent rights relating to zidovudine is claimed against the plaintiff Novopharm Ltd., and against its U.S. subsidiary company Novopharm Inc., and against Barr Laboratories Inc., said to be a U.S. subsidiary company controlled by the plaintiff, Apotex.
[7]
The order as issued is more detailed in its terms than may be anticipated where such an order is sought in the course of similar actions in this court. It provides that the producing party, or nonparty, may designate as "Confidential Information" any information produced that it believes in good faith to be proprietary or confidential which it desires not to be made public, and to designate as "Confidential Information - Counsel Only" any documents or other information of such a commercially sensitive nature that disclosure to persons other than those specified would reasonably be expected to result in injury to the producing party. Either designation of particular information is subject to challenge by a receiving party at any time and if the challenge is not resolved by agreement the court will determine the issue. In addition, the court, of its own motion, may order that information designated by a producing party shall not be considered confidential. Confidential information may include information as defined in the order, that is, recorded statements of counsel, transcripts, pleadings, motions, briefs, answers to interrogations and other responses to discovery requests, drawings, compositions, devices, company records and reports, summaries, notes, abstracts and any instrument that contains Confidential Information. Exceptions relate to information in the public domain or received from some other source, or developed after disclosure by persons who had no access to the producing party's confidential information. Specified persons who may have access to either category of designated information, in addition to the court, include certain categories of witnesses during the course of their examination, counsel and employees of counsel, instructing principals or in-house counsel and patent agents working on the case or their employees, experts and consultants as described, or other persons as may be designated by written stipulation of the parties or further order of the court. Specified persons having access shall each execute an undertaking as provided in the order to maintain the information as confidential. The plaintiffs are ordered not to disclose, except by court order, "Confidential Information - Counsel Only" material to the U.S. National Institutes of Health or its employees or to companies, or their employees, in the pharmaceutical industry. All designated information is to be maintained appropriately sealed and marked by the court registry to protect its confidential status.
[8]
After consideration of the terms proposed, with minor modifications not affecting the substance of those terms, and in the absence of suggestions from the plaintiffs, the order issued on March 26, 1993, in essence in the terms proposed by the defendant.
The Plaintiffs' Objections
[9]
The plaintiffs opposed the application for a confidentiality order on the ground that no need for the order was shown by the defendant. Plaintiffs argued that without demonstrated need, the general principle of openness to the public of the court and its processes should preclude a protective order sealing as confidential any information that would ordinarily be open to access by the public. In any event certain kinds of information such as "lab notes" would not generally be treated as confidential. Plaintiffs also suggested at the hearing of this matter that the basis of the action was that the defendant had appropriated to itself the fruits of work done within the U.S. National Institutes of Health, but I note this is not an action based on fraud where different considerations about confidentiality orders might apply.
Conclusion
[10]
The general principle of the court and its process being open to public scrutiny, including access for the public to court documents, is fundamental to our system of justice. Striking a balance between that principle and the interests of justice between the parties, including the bona fide commercial and proprietary interests of parties to litigation has led to the practice in this and other courts of providing by protective or confidentiality orders that information obtained in preparation for trial may, in appropriate cases, be maintained in confidence, not accessible to the general public, in the court's processes. (See generally,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 185 (F.C.A.), a case concerning an appeal from the refusal of the Commissioner of Patents to grant a patent, where the applicant's objective was to have sealed by the court as confidential the record produced from the Commissioner's office. The learned Chief Justice found the need for such an order was not demonstrated in light of the subject matter of the appeal, to obtain a patent, by which the information sought to be protected would be made public.
[12]
In this case there is evidence, uncontested, by affidavit of Deborah Lillian Lawrence dated February 5, 1993, that deals with the need for a confidentiality order as seen by the defendant. The deponent is a legal assistant at the defendant's U.S. subsidiary company from which come most of the 3,000 or more documents listed in the defendant's affidavit of documents. In her affidavit she states:
"6. A great number of the documents collected and forwarded to outside counsel include laboratory notebooks, research reports, memos and other forms of documents containing research results and other scientific information generated by researchers of BW Co. Said laboratory notebooks, research reports, memos and other forms of documents contain proprietary and confidential scientific and business information of BW Co. which are not revealed publicly and would not be revealed to competitors such as Apotex Inc., Novopharm Ltd., Barr Laboratories Inc. and Novopharm Inc. except under circumstances which would preserve their confidentiality and provide that no use may be made thereof except for the purposes of legal proceedings.
"7. The confidential information contained in said laboratories notebooks, research reports, memos and other forms of documents represent the result of confidential research conducted by researchers of BW Co.'s Research Laboratories and their release to persons who may have competitive interests adverse to BW Co. or its parent, The Wellcome Foundation Ltd., or any of its related companies worldwide, or such persons who may in turn reveal any such information to persons with such competitive interests, would cause incalculable financial loss to BW Co. and its parent and its parent's subsidiaries."
[13]
In my view, it is sufficient demonstration of the need for a confidentiality order in relation to information to be produced, if the moving party believes that its proprietary, commercial and scientific interests would be seriously harmed by producing information upon which those interests are based. That is particularly so at the stage of pretrial preparations, in my view. Considerations relating to application of the principle of an open court may be weighed differently by the trial judge, if this matter proceeds to trial, for he or she will control the process at the trial including what documentary information adduced at trial should be treated in confidence.
[14]
Moreover, there are three considerations that favour the grant of the order basically in the terms specified. First, those terms reflect the terms of protective orders granted upon consent in parallel litigation in the United States in which the parties here are directly or indirectly involved. There is merit in a case where parallel litigation is underway in the U.S. to have reasonably comparable protective orders, provided the terms are not contrary to principle or practice in this court. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , per Walsh, J., at pp. 53-59 (F.C.T.D.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 114, per Muldoon, J., at p. 119 C.P.R. (T.D.).)
[15]
Second, while the terms of the order are broad in their application to information of all kinds, and in leaving the initiative to the producing party to designate what is confidential, by its terms the order also provides opportunity to a receiving party to object to the classification as confidential. If the objection is not resolved between the parties the court shall do so on application, and the court of its own motion may determine that information classed as confidential by a party shall not be so treated. Thus the court ultimately may control the "declassification" of information originally classified as confidential by a producing party.
[16]
The third consideration favouring the order, in my view, is the practice of this court, as I understand it, in issuing protective orders in relation to information produced in discovery where a party believes in good faith that its commercial business or scientific interests associated with trade secrets may be seriously harmed by disclosure that is open to public access. (See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and
Procter & Gamble
, supra;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.); and note also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).) The practice reflects a recognition that in a case such as this, at this stage particularly, the preparation of the litigation belongs primarily to the litigants. At the hearing counsel for the plaintiffs suggested that the purpose of the order as sought was primarily to protect this action, not other interests of the parties, in view of other actions initiated by the defendant against the plaintiffs, also underway in this court. While the confidentiality order now issued would preclude use in any other action of confidential information received in this action, that aspect of the order, as all aspects, may in a proper case be varied by the court.
[17]
For the reasons outlined, the confidentiality order in terms sought by the defendant and in the absence of suggestions for modification of those terms by the plaintiffs, was granted. A copy of the order as issued is Appendix A to these reasons. I note for the record that the order as issued is on appeal by the plaintiffs (Court file A-259-93).
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
Appendix A
"OTTAWA, Ontario, Friday, this 26th day of March 1993
PRESENT: The Honourable Mr. Justice MacKay
BETWEEN:
APOTEX INC.
- and -
NOVOPHARM LTD.
Plaintiffs,
AND:
THE WELLCOME FOUNDATION
LIMITED
Defendant.
"UPON Motion on behalf of the defendant for an order reducing the time for filing and service of the Notice of Motion, and for an order protecting the confidentiality of certain documents, things and transcripts produced for the purposes of this action, and upon consent on behalf of the plaintiffs to reducing the time for service, and upon hearing counsel for the parties at Ottawa on February 9, 1993;
ORDER
"THIS COURT ORDERS THAT:
I. The time for filing and service of the Notice of Motion prior to hearing is abridged.
II. A Confidentiality Order is granted in the following terms.
"WHEREAS, documents, information and things may be sought, produced or exhibited by and among the parties to the above-captioned proceedings, which materials relate to trade secrets or other confidential research, development or commercial information;
"WHEREAS, in the interest of facilitating the just, speedy and inexpensive determination of this action, and to protect the legitimate interests of the parties in maintaining the confidentiality of certain confidential or proprietary information that may be disclosed;
"WHEREAS, documents, information and things may be sought from and produced by nonparties and exhibited by the parties, which materials relate to trade secrets or other confidential research, development or commercial information.
"1.	(a) Any party to this action may designate as 'Confidential Information' any information or tangible thing it believes in good faith to be proprietary or confidential and desires not to be made public.
(b) Any party to this action may designate as 'Confidential Information -- Counsel Only' documents or other information of such a commercially sensitive nature that disclosure to persons other than those specified in subparagraph 7(1)(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv), would reasonably be expected to result in injury to the producing party. Examples of documents or other information that are properly classifiable as 'Confidential Information -- Counsel Only' include, but are not necessarily limited to, technological or scientific information and financial information.
In-house counsel described in subparagraph 7(a)(iv) shall agree not to use Confidential Information -- Counsel Only documents or information for any purpose other than the prosecution, defense or settlement of this action. Unless otherwise noted, the term 'Confidential Information' as used in this Order is hereby defined to include 'Confidential Information -- Counsel Only'.
The inclusion of a category of documents or information in either this or any other paragraph hereof shall not be deemed consent to the relevance of any such documents or information. Neither defendant nor plaintiffs intend to waive and, on the contrary, they intend to preserve and do preserve, any objections they have to the relevance of such documents and information.
"2. For purposes of this Order, Confidential Information may include or be included in any document, physical object, tangible thing or the factual knowledge of persons, such as by way of example and not by limitation, recorded statements of counsel, transcripts, pleadings, motions, briefs, answers to interrogatories and other responses to discovery requests, drawings, compositions, devices, company records and reports, summaries, notes, abstracts and any other instrument which contains Confidential Information.
"3. The restrictions set forth in this Order with respect to Confidential Information shall not apply to:
(a) Any information which, at the time of the disclosure to a receiving party, is in the public domain;
(b) Any information which, after disclosure to a receiving party, becomes part of the public domain as a result of events not involving a violation of this Order,
(c) Any information which a receiving party can show was in its possession at the time of disclosure;
(d) Any information which a receiving party can show was received by it from a source who obtained the information lawfully and under no obligation to the producing party; or
(e) Any information which a receiving party can show was independently developed by it after the time of disclosure by persons who have not had access to the producing party's Confidential Information.
"4. Any information produced at any time, either voluntarily or pursuant to order, orally or in writing in this litigation, which is asserted by the producing party to contain or constitute Confidential Information shall be so designated by such producing party in writing, as follows:
(a) Pursuant to Paragraph 18 below, and this Paragraph, if such Confidential Information is contained in documents or things; and
(b) If such Confidential Information is contained in discovery, trial or other testimony, the transcript may be designated as containing Confidential Information in accordance with this Order by notifying the other party on the record, at the time of the testimony, or in writing, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the transcript of the specific pages and lines of the transcript which contain Confidential Information. All discoveries, regardless of whether a designation of confidentiality was made on the record, shall be treated as containing Confidential Information and subject to this Protective Order until thirty (30) days after a transcript of the discovery has been received by the party whose Confidential Information is involved.
Documents and things shall be clearly and prominently marked on their face with the legend:
'CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION' or
'CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION -- COUNSEL ONLY'
"5. The restrictions upon, and obligations accruing to, persons who become subject to this Order shall not apply to any information produced in accordance with this Order as to which this court or another court having jurisdiction over the production of information for this matter rules, after proper notice and hearing, that such information is not Confidential Information or Confidential Information -- Counsel Only as defined in Paragraph 1 hereof.
"6. All Confidential Information filed with the court, all discoveries, or any portion or portions of discoveries which contains Confidential Information, and all papers (including affidavits and memoranda of law) purporting to reflect Confidential Information shall be filed in sealed envelopes or other appropriate sealed containers on which shall be endorsed the title of the action, an identification of the contents of such sealed envelope or container, the words 'Confidential' or 'Confidential -- Counsel Only' and an explanation that the information contained therein is protected by this Order and shall not be disclosed by the Registry or any other person in a manner inconsistent with this Order except upon further order of this court. Confidential Information used in any court proceeding in connection with this action shall not lose its confidential status through such use.
"7.	(a) Confidential Information, which for purposes of this Subparagraph does not include documents or other information designated Confidential Information -- Counsel Only, shall be held in confidence and shall not be revealed, discussed, or disclosed in any manner, in any form, to any persons or entity other than:
(i) the court in this action or any other court having jurisdiction over discovery procedures in this action;
(ii) a witness, during the course of his examination, who is an employee or former employee of the producing party or is an author, addressee, or copyee of such material;
(iii) counsel for defendant or plaintiffs retained in or working on the prosecution, defense or settlement of this action and the employees of such 'outside' counsel assigned to assist such counsel in the prosecution, defense or settlement of this action;
(iv) instructing principals, in-house counsel and in-house patent agents who are employees of defendant or of its subsidiaries Burroughs Wellcome Co. and Burroughs Wellcome Inc. or plaintiffs and working on the prosecution, defense or settlement of this action, the employees of such in-house counsel, or other employees of defendant or of its subsidiary Burroughs Wellcome Co. or plaintiffs assigned to assist counsel in the prosecution, defense, or settlement of this action in a capacity other than as an expert or consultant as provided in sub-subparagraph (v) below;
(v) any person, including employees of defendant or of its subsidiary Burroughs Wellcome Co. or plaintiffs, used or retained by counsel or a party as an expert or consultant to the extent deemed necessary by counsel to aid in the prosecution, defense or settlement of this action subject to the following procedure and requirements: At least ten (10) days prior to Confidential Information being disclosed to such expert or consultant, the party or counsel seeking to use or retain such expert or consultant will submit written notification of such intention to counsel for the producing party, which written notification will be accompanied by a copy of an Undertaking in the form reproduced below signed by said expert or consultant and said other professional members of his or her staff who are anticipated to assist such expert or consultant in this litigation;
(vi) such other persons as hereafter may be designated by written stipulation of the parties or by further order of the court; provided, however, that any party desiring to disclose Confidential Information to any such other persons shall, at least ten (10) days prior to such disclosure, submit written notification of such intention to counsel for the producing party. Such notification must be accompanied by a copy of an Undertaking in the form reproduced below signed by such other person, and must contain (a) an identification of the information that such party proposes to disclose to such person, (b) a description of the person including his or her name, office address, and employer, if any, and (c) a description of any contact, relationship, or dealings that such person or entity has had with the party seeking the disclosure. Within ten (10) days after receipt of such written notification, the producing party shall be entitled to object to such disclosure by stating in writing the reasons why that party believes such person should not receive the Confidential Information proposed to be disclosed. If no objection is made in such time, the party proposing the disclosure may make the proposed disclosure. However, in the event of a timely objection, no disclosure shall be made to such person unless and until the parties, in writing, agree or the party proposing the disclosure, on motion, obtains a court order permitting it; and
(b) Confidential Information -- Counsel Only material shall be held in confidence and shall not be revealed, discussed or disclosed in any manner, in any form, to any person or entity other than the persons or entities identified in sub-subparagraphs 7(a)(i), (ii), (iii), and (iv); or, in sub-subparagraph 7(a)(v) if such expert or consultant has expertise in the general field to which the information relates, e.g., science. Any party desiring to disclose Confidential Information -- Counsel Only material to any such expert or consultant shall, at least ten (10) days prior to such disclosure, deliver to the producing party a copy of an Undertaking in the form reproduced below, signed by such person, and a copy of a curriculum vitae of such expert of consultant and any professional member of his or her staff who is anticipated to assist such expert or consultant in this litigation. Within ten (10) days after receipt of such written statement, the producing party shall be entitled to object to such disclosure by stating, in writing, the reasons why that party believes such person should not receive the Confidential Information -- Counsel Only proposed to be disclosed. If no objection is made in such time, the party proposing the disclosure may make the proposed disclosure. However, in the event of a timely objection, no disclosure shall be made to such person unless and until the parties, in writing, agree or the party proposing the disclosure, on motion, obtains a court order permitting it.
Plaintiffs agree that they may not, except by Order of the Court, disclose Confidential Information -- Counsel Only material produced by defendant to: (a) the United States National Institutes of Health or its employees; or (b) companies, or employees of companies, in the pharmaceutical industry.
"8. Inspection of documents or things by either party shall be conducted only by persons eligible under subparagraphs 7(a) (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi) (in accordance with the procedures set forth therein). Such persons shall treat all information in such documents or things as containing Confidential Information until copies, if any, are produced under paragraph 18 below, and thereafter to the extent that such information is designated Confidential Information under paragraph 4 above.
"9. Attendance at a discovery shall be limited to persons authorized to receive Confidential Information pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 7.
"10. All Confidential Information produced in accordance with the provisions of this Order shall be utilized by the recipient solely for purposes of this action. Use for purposes of this action by the recipient shall mean use only in prosecuting or defending this action, in testimony and exhibits at the trial and appeal of this action, or in connection with motions, discoveries or witness preparation subject to the restrictions of this Order, but shall not include, inter alia, use for or in connection with research, development, manufacture, sales or marketing of any product or process, publicity, any other legal proceeding, parliamentary testimony or submission to regulatory authorities agents, and no documents or tangible items that embody or contain Confidential Information shall be sent to or used outside of Canada except for use by an individual qualified under paragraph 7 hereof or for use at discoveries taken in this action.
"11. If the court orders, or if the producing party agrees, that access to or dissemination of information submitted as Confidential Information shall be made to persons other than those identified in paragraph 7 above, such Confidential Information shall only be accessible to, or disseminated to, such persons based upon the conditions pertaining to, and obligations arising from this Order, and such persons shall be considered subject to it, unless the court orders that the information is not Confidential Information as defined in paragraph 1 hereof.
"12. If a party to this Order who is to receive any Confidential Information produced in accordance with this Order disagrees with respect to its designation as Confidential Information or Confidential Information -- Counsel Only, in full or in part, it shall notify the producing party in writing, and the recipient and the producing party will thereupon confer as to the status of the subject information proffered within the context of this Order. If the recipient and producing party are unable to agree upon the status of the subject information, any party to this Order may raise the issue of such designation with the court, which shall decide the issue. The court may raise the issue of designation of the confidential status without any request from a party. In any disagreement over a designation of confidentiality, the receiving party bears the burden of showing that the designated information is not Confidential Information or Confidential Information -- Counsel only within the scope of paragraph 1 of this Order.
"13. No party to this action shall be obligated to challenge the propriety of any Confidential Information designation, and a failure to do so shall not preclude a subsequent attack on the propriety of such designation and shall not constitute an admission that any information is in fact confidential.
"14. Upon the final termination or completion of this action, the party producing Confidential Information may request in writing the return or destruction of all such material and all copies thereof made by or on behalf of the receiving party, and the receiving party shall comply with such request, and so confirm in writing unless otherwise ordered by the court.
"15. If any Confidential Information is produced by a nonparty subject to discovery in this action, such a nonparty shall be considered a 'producing party' within the meaning of that term as it is used in the context of this Order and defendant and plaintiffs shall be treated as receiving parties if the nonparty so elects.
"16. All documents and things produced for inspection may be numbered by the producing party; all produced documents and things which are copied at the request of opposing counsel shall be numbered by the producing party. The documents and things so numbered may thereafter be identified informally by the parties by number, or otherwise.
"17. Upon request, one copy of inspected documents or designated inspected documents, and where reasonably possible, inspected things, will be furnished by the party producing the same to the requesting party at the expense of the requesting party unless other arrangements have been made between defendant and plaintiffs. Prior to copying, defendant and plaintiffs shall agree upon a rate to be charged the requesting party for copies of documents and things requested.
"18. A producing party may produce for inspection documents or things containing Confidential Information which are not marked or designated in accordance with paragraph 4 above, and prior to supplying copies of documents and things requested by the inspecting party, may mark or designate such copies as containing Confidential Information or Confidential Information -- Counsel Only in accordance with paragraph 4. Failure to so mark or so designate such copies constitutes a waiver of confidential status only with respect to the specific documents and things produced without marking or designation. Inadvertent failure to so mark or so designate a particular copy of a document shall not constitute a waiver of confidential status of that document provided other copies of that document are so marked or so designated. Production of documents and things for the purpose of inspection and copying shall not constitute a waiver of confidentiality, privilege or other grounds of immunity from discovery as to any other document, thing or information.
"19. Legible photocopies of documents and, where reasonably possible, things, may be used for all purposes in this action as against a claim that they are not the 'originals', provided that the 'original' document, in whatever form it shall be found in the files of a party, and the original things shall have been and shall be made available for inspection upon request of either party on 10 days written notice.
"20. Nothing in this Order shall be deemed a waiver of any right defendant, plaintiffs or any nonparty subject to discovery in this action otherwise might have under freedom of access to information laws or the doctrines of solicitor-client privilege.
"21. This Order shall, consistent with the provisions of paragraph 14 above, survive the final termination or completion of this action with respect to any Confidential Information.
'
UNDERTAKING
I, ___________, hereby acknowledge that I am about to receive from _____________ Confidential Information and/or Confidential Information -- Counsel Only, as defined in the Confidentiality Order of __________ (collectively, "Confidential Information").
I certify my understanding that this Confidential Information is being provided to me pursuant to the terms and restrictions of the Confidentiality Order of ________ in the above-captioned matter, and that I have been given a copy of and have read and understood my obligations under that Order. I hereby agree to be bound by the terms of the Order. I agree to utilize the Confidential Information solely for the purposes of this litigation. I clearly understand that the Confidential Information and my copies or notes relating thereto shall not be disclosed to or discussed with anyone not similarly bound by the Protective Order.
On request of counsel for the party who provided me with the confidential materials, I will return to said counsel or destroy, all materials containing Confidential Information, copies thereof and notes that I have prepared relating thereto.
I hereby submit to the jurisdiction of the Federal Court of Canada for the purpose of enforcement of the Confidentiality Order and waive any and all objections to jurisdiction and venue.
___________________
(Signature)
Subscribed and Sworn to
before me this ____ day
of ______, 199_.
________________________
Commissioner for Oaths'
___________________
JUDGE"
[End of document]