[1]
Simpson, J.
: In this application for judicial review, the applicants seek an order pursuant to s. 6(1) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, SOR/93-133 (the "
Regulations
"), prohibiting the Minister of National Health and Welfare from issuing a Notice of Compliance to Apotex Inc. for the antibiotic Norfloxacin until after the expiry of Canadian Patent No. 1,178,961 (the "Patent").
[2]
In view of the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), affirmed (1995), 180 N.R. 323 (F.C.A.), the applicants have withdrawn their application in respect of patent No. 1,214,466 as it related only to manufacturing processes.
The Parties
[3]
The respondent Apotex Inc. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) opposes the application. It is a Canadian company which manufactures and distributes generic pharmaceutical products. Neither the Minister of National Health and Welfare (the "Minister") nor Kyorin Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. ("Kyorin") took part in the proceedings. Kyorin is a respondent because it is the holder of the Patent. The Patent is dated April 12, 1984 and will expire in the year 2001.
[4]
The applicant Merck & Co. Inc. is the exclusive holder of a license for the Patent and the applicant Merck Frosst Canada Inc. ("Merck") is the sole sublicencee. Merck filed a patent list pursuant to s. 4 of the
Regulations
on April 6, 1993. It listed the Patent and Merck is, to date, the only holder of a Notice of Compliance ("NOC") for Norfloxacin. The NOC was issued on July 2, 1986 and it covers various dosage forms including 400 mg.
The Notice Of Allegation
[5]
The Notice of Allegation (the "Notice"), which was served by Apotex, is dated April 19, 1993. The Notice, as it relates to the Patent, alleges noninfringement on the basis that Apotex will obtain Norfloxacin in bulk from or through Novopharm Limited ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). This is alleged to be a noninfringing activity because Novopharm holds a valid compulsory licence for Norfloxacin dated October 15, 1991 and bearing No. J2324-39(4)-975 (the "Licence"). Apotex plans to formulate and sell 400 mg tablets of Norfloxacin. The Notice does not mention where the proposed sales will be made.
[6]
The relevant portion of the Notice reads as follows:
"This patent includes a claim for norfloxacin made by certain processes. Compulsory licence number 975 has been issued to Novopharm Limited, and such licence has not been cancelled by the recent amendments to the
Patent Act
. Apotex Inc. and Novopharm Limited have a mutual understanding whereby at the request of either firm, the other will supply raw materials pursuant to a licence held by the other. Apotex Inc. has given Novopharm Limited notice of Apotex Inc.'s intention to obtain norfloxacin covered by the patent 1,178,961 through Novopharm Limited, and a copy of such notice is included herewith. Accordingly, Apotex Inc. will not and hereby undertakes that it will not obtain, use or sell any such norfloxacin other than as obtained from Novopharm Limited pursuant to Novopharm Limited's compulsory licence until such time as the patent expires."
The Licence
[7]
The Licence is subject to certain prohibitions which were not mentioned in the Notice. They arise pursuant to ss. 39.11 and 39.14 of the
Patent Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4, as amended by R.S.C. 1985 (3rd Supp.), c. 33 (the "
Act
"). There is no issue between the parties that those sections mean that, at the date of the Notice (April 19, 1993), and notwithstanding the Licence, Novopharm was not entitled to:
(a) Import Norfloxacin for sale for consumption in Canada until July 2, 1996;
(b) Produce Norfloxacin for sale for consumption in Canada until July 2, 1993.
[8]
These restrictions will be referred to together as the "Prohibitions".
[9]
At the date of the Notice, and in spite of the Prohibitions, Novopharm remained entitled to import bulk Norfloxacin for formulation and export without a NOC. As well, without a NOC, Novopharm could manufacture Norfloxacin for export sales.
The Agreement And Related
Correspondence
[10]
The "mutual understanding" which exists between Apotex and Novopharm is described in the Notice as the basis on which Apotex will obtain Norfloxacin from Novopharm pursuant to the latter's Licence. The mutual understanding is, in this case, a written agreement dated November 27, 1992 (the "Agreement"). It was produced as exhibit "A" to an affidavit sworn on June 14, 1993 by Bernard Sherman ("Sherman"). He is the President of Apotex. The Agreement provides, in essence, that Apotex and Novopharm will supply to one another drugs in bulk form that they each can obtain or produce under the licences they held at the time the Agreement was signed.
[11]
Further to the Agreement, Apotex wrote to Novopharm on April 19, 1993 and made a specific request for the supply of Norfloxacin obtained by Novopharm under the Licence. This letter was attached to and formed part of the Notice.
The Issues
[12]
Against this factual background, the applicants make the following submissions in support of their request for an order of prohibition:
I - The Notice is premature because, at its date, there was no noninfringing activity possible for which a NOC was required;
II - If the Notice is not premature, necessary details were missing;
III - The Agreement is, in reality, a sublicence and therefore infringes paragraph 12 of the Licence; and
IV - Apotex would be infringing if it purchased Norfloxacin through Novopharm because the Agreement provides that Apotex would function as a principal in such acquisitions.
[13]
I should note at this point that, although Apotex intends to formulate Norfloxacin, counsel for the applicant advised that he would not pursue the question of formulation as an infringing activing. In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 206 (T.D.), Madame Justice McGillis held, in similar circumstances, that formulation by Apotex was an infringing activity. Apotex's appeal from her decision is pending.
Issue I - Prematurity
[14]
By way of introduction, I will comment on the nature of a notice of allegation and the nature of these proceedings. A notice of allegation plays two roles. Firstly, it serves as an application to the Minister for a NOC. Secondly, if prohibition proceedings are commenced, it is the document which creates the cause of action and, as such, it cannot be amended. In this regard, the Federal Court of Appeal has said:
"Those who fail to file notices of allegation, or adequate notices of allegation, must assume their own risk when it comes to attack on the adequacy of such allegations once prohibition proceedings are commenced." (
Bayer AG and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 129, at 134 C.P.R. (F.C.A.))
[15]
With regard to the nature of this judicial proceeding, Strayer, J.A., made the following observations in the Federal Court of Appeal's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 8-9 (F.C.A.):
"... these proceedings are not actions for determining validity or infringement: rather they are proceedings to determine whether the Minister may issue a notice of compliance. That decision must turn on whether there are allegations by the generic company sufficiently substantiated to support a conclusion for administrative purposes (the issue of a notice of compliance) that the applicant's patent would not be infringed if the generic's product is put on the market."
[16]
I glean from this quotation that the focus of this proceeding is the NOC. Because a NOC is issued to permit marketing in Canada, it seems clear to me that what is relevant is the question of whether its issuance will cause infringement in the Canadian market.
[17]
The applicants allege that the Notice was premature because, on the 46th day after the service of the Notice, when the NOC could theoretically have been issued, there was no noninfringing activity possible under the NOC due to the Prohibitions. I accept this submission. At the time the NOC was requested and could have been issued, all purposes for which the NOC was required were prohibited.
[18]
However, Sherman testified that, although not required, a NOC is helpful for export sales because foreign governments are more willing to import a drug which has been approved for marketing in Canada. The question, therefore, becomes whether the allegation of noninfringement made by Apotex is justified when there are noninfringing activities, such as export sales, for which a NOC would be commercially useful, but no noninfringing activities for which it is required.
[19]
I have concluded that the allegation of noninfringement is not justified. In my view, because a NOC is at issue, infringement is to be considered only in respect of activities for which the NOC is required. Those activities are Canadian sales of Norfloxacin and, as they were prohibited both at the date of the Notice and at the date a NOC could have issued under the Notice, the allegations of noninfringement were premature.
[20]
I should note that I am aware that a prohibition order will apply for the life of the Patent which, in this case, means for six more years. Apotex argued that this result is unduly harsh given that the prohibition against the production of Norfloxacin for consumption in Canada under the Licence expired only one month after the day on which the NOC could have issued. Apotex submitted that the allegations were "close" to being justified at the time of the Notice and that I should take a "prospective" approach to the Notice. However, I am not persuaded that I should refuse to grant a prohibition order on the basis that the allegations, although premature, were "nearly" justified.
[21]
Apotex further submitted that, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), Madame Justice McGillis dealt with prohibitions attached to the Novopharm licence for Nizatidine. They precluded Canadian sales at the time the NOC could have issued but Justice McGillis did not conclude that the Apotex NOC was premature. However, I am satisfied from reading her reasons at page 203, that Madame Justice McGillis was not asked to consider the issue which is now before me. She was not confronted with whether a NOC, which is only required for marketing in Canada, should issue when, at the time of the Notice, there was no Canadian marketing possible.
[22]
In conclusion on this issue, I am of the view that the allegations of noninfringement made by Apotex in the Notice were not justified.
The Remaining Issues
[23]
As the applicant has succeeded on issue 1, it is unnecessary to deal with the other issues. However, I will indicate in obiter dicta and in abbreviated terms how those issues would have fared.
Issue II - Lack Of Details In Notice
[24]
This issue involved two attacks on the Notice. Firstly, the applicants said that it failed to mention the Prohibitions. This submission would have been unsuccessful. The Prohibitions were, in effect, disclosed in the Notice when it advised that the Licence had not been cancelled. Secondly, the applicants suggested that the Notice was deficient because Apotex did not indicate that it would be bound by the Prohibitions. Apotex, in response, submitted that its undertaking in the Notice to purchase only under the Licence subsumed an undertaking to abide by the applicable Prohibitions. I would have accepted this submission.
Issue III - The Agreement
[25]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 199, Madame Justice McGillis considered the Agreement in detail and concluded that, although it was "dressed up" to look like a sublicence, it was not in fact a sublicence. I have also reviewed the Agreement and I would have concurred with the reasons of McGillis, J., on this issue.
Issue IV - Infringement
[26]
Madame Justice McGillis also addressed this issue in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and, again, I would have agreed with her conclusion at page 201 that, under the Agreement, Novopharm remains the principal when it contracts under the Agreement with a third party for the manufacture of a licensed drug.
Conclusion
[27]
For the reasons discussed under Issue I, the application will be allowed.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/sms
[End of document]