[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary:
These reasons arise out of a motion to set bail. The application was well presented and of interest in that among the points raised was the issue of rearrest, in order to seek increased security, following an amendment to the statement of claim.
Background
[2]
The plaintiff, a time charterer of the "Captain Forever", says the vessel was wrongfully withdrawn by owners. In the statement of claim, filed June 2, 1995, the plaintiff referred to arbitration proceedings arising out of the wrongful withdrawal and claimed relief in the amount of $68,700.00 (U.S.), the value of bunkers the plaintiff says it provided as charterer. The affidavit to Lead Warrant, which gives good disclosure, sets out discussions, between English solicitors, to provide security for the outcome of the arbitration, that the security had not been provided and that "Brokers are now promoting that the defendant vessel has been placed in the sale and purchase market and that the vessel is available for inspection in Vancouver June 3rd to June 6th". As a result, the plaintiff arrested the vessel at Vancouver.
[3]
In the amended statement of claim, filed June 5, 1995, the plaintiff claims, in addition, damages for wrongful withdrawal of the vessel. This is elaborated on in a Further Affidavit to Lead Warrant, claiming wrongful withdrawal damages of $750,000.00 (U.S.).
[4]
Owners withdrew the vessel because of a late charter-hire payment. The charter-hire payment delay apparently arose out of a banking code mix-up. The charterers offered to make the next hire payment early, so that owners would not lose any interest.
[5]
Owners say that there was an agreement for security for the bunkers claim at $75,000.00 (U.S.) in London, which amount is being held by the owner's London lawyers and that this agreement should bind the plaintiff to seeking only that much security. It was on this basis that the defendant owners brought the present motion to set security.
[6]
The plaintiff, for its part, now wishes security to reflect the amended statement of claim, by which they seek $825,000.00 (U.S.). In this regard, counsel for the plaintiff advises that the amounts claimed for security, $75,000.00 (U.S.), for unused bunkers remaining aboard and $750,000.00 (U.S.), for wrongful withdrawal and for bunkers used, contain an interest component.
Analysis
[7]
The general principle, that a plaintiff, having arrested a vessel, is entitled to security in an amount sufficient to cover the reasonably arguable best case, together with interests and costs, capped at the value of the wrongdoing vessel, is not in dispute. Rather, the issues are the right of the plaintiff, having arrested the vessel, to seek additional security to reflect a subsequently amended statement of claim, and the value of the reasonably best arguable case of the plaintiff.
Rearrest And Increased Security
[8]
Edward Mayers in
Admiralty Law and Practice in Canada
(1916), p. 213, Carswell, in discussing security, asserts that: "If the amount claimed proves, during the proceedings, to be too small, the court will increase the amount, on the plaintiff's application on terms (
The "Maeander"
, (1863), Brown & Lush. 29; 167 E.R. 283 (P.C.);
The "Johannes"
(1870), L.R. 3 A. & E. 127); and will also give leave to rearrest the ship (
The "Hero"
(1865), Brown & Lush. 447; 167 E.R. 436).". (p. 213)
[9]
In
The "Maeander"
(1863), Brown & Lush. 29; 167 E.R. 283 (P.C.), and in
The "Johannes"
(1870), L.R. 3 A. & E. 127, the courts were concerned with amending the proceedings to allow a claim for increased damages. However,
The "Hero"
(1865), Brown & Lush. 447; 167 E.R. 436, is relevant in the present instance. In that case the vessel was arrested and security given. Subsequently, but before the hearing of the case, the plaintiffs realized that there had been a clerical error in instituting their action, proper damages being much higher. Dr. Lushington, in allowing the rearrest, said:
"I am of opinion that where application to increase the amount of the action is made before judgment has been pronounced, the Court has power to direct measures to be taken to do full justice to the plaintiff." (p. 436)
[10]
The "Hero"
was followed by our Exchequer Court in
The "Bayusona"
, [1923] Ex. C.R. 128. In that case the "Bayusona" was arrested following a collision and subsequently released on bail of $4,000.00, that being the best estimate of the cost of repairs to the plaintiff's vessel. Repairs in fact cost some $5,500.00. The plaintiff applied to amend to increase the amount claimed and to rearrest. Following
The "Hero"
, Maclennan, L.J.A., decided that "To do full justice to the plaintiff the re-arrest should be allowed." (p. 130).
[11]
As a matter of interest the line of cases, beginning with
The "Hero"
[supra] and also other related cases, are gathered together by Mr. Justice Mocatta in
The "Alletta"
, [1974] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 40, at p. 46 et seq. The important point to take from those cases is that while a court may increase security and allow a rearrest before judgment, that is not so following judgment. Nor is it the case where there is some contractual bar to increased security or to rearrest as a part of an agreement whereby the vessel has been released. This last proposition was touched upon by Lord Justice Fry in
The "Christiansborg"
(1885), 10 P.D. 141 (C.A.). And this is the defendant vessel owners' point: they say there was an agreement, an escrow agreement, at least in principle, in London, for security at $75,000.00 (U.S.), in consideration of which Atlantic Shipping (London) Limited, the plaintiff in this action, would refrain from arresting the "Captain Forever".
[12]
The plaintiff charterers, in their affidavit to Lead Warrant, say that the solicitors for the defendants offered security for $75,000.00 (U.S.) on May 26, 1995, and that owners accepted the offer on May 31, 1995. This is borne out by a copy of a May 31, 1995, letter from the London lawyers for the plaintiff to the London lawyers for the defendants, sent by fax.
[13]
The London lawyers for the defendant vessel owners did nothing for several days. During that time span, the London lawyers for the plaintiff charterers received advice that the vessel had been listed for sale and might be inspected in Vancouver June 3rd to June 6th.
[14]
It was not until the vessel was arrested in Vancouver that London lawyers for the defendant owners belatedly took any steps to follow up with the promised security.
[15]
The London lawyers for the defendant owners ought to have followed up immediately with security, or at least with an explanation as to why security was not immediately forthcoming. They did not. Given the belief by the plaintiff that the "Captain Forever" had been put up for sale, and the fact of the unexplained delay in providing security, the plaintiff could have at least a reasonably arguable case that they were no longer bound to refrain from arresting the vessel in return for promised security which had not materialized.
[16]
There is also a reason why the plaintiff might claim additional security in these present proceedings. The correspondence between the London lawyers for the parties refers only to the bunker claim. The draft escrow agreement, delivered over to London lawyers for the plaintiff charterers is very specific in that it refers only to the claim by the charterers to recover from the owners the value of bunkers on board the vessel at the time of the termination of the Charter party. The additional cause of action, wrongful withdrawal of the vessel, is not mentioned. The escrow agreement which, if signed, might have prevented the vessel from being arrested in a bunkers-related action, did not extend to wrongful withdrawal.
[17]
I have therefore concluded that the plaintiff owners could arrest the vessel here in Vancouver.
Procedure To Obtain Additional
Security
[18]
The next point is the procedure by which the plaintiff sought the additional security. In
The "Hero"
(supra) the plaintiffs applied for leave to rearrest. In the present case, the vessel already being under arrest, there was nothing to prevent the plaintiff, after having amended the statement of claim, from either applying for a new warrant by which to arrest the vessel for increased security, or filing a Caveat (and here I would note that Form 48, the Caveat referred to in rule 1009(2), clearly envisions a party to an action, in which a vessel is under arrest, filing a Caveat, for if that person is not a party, he or she must then state an address for service within three miles of the Registry), or as a further alternative, the plaintiff, relying on a new cause of action, that of wrongful withdrawal of the vessel, might have commenced a fresh action in the court. Instead, the plaintiff, as is proper, asked the court to consider the amended statement of claim and affidavit material and then to set bail, taking into account both claims. To ask that the court consider both claims, without either requiring the plaintiff to file a Caveat against the release of the vessel, or forcing the plaintiff to arrest the vessel a second time, is a practical and proper approach.
Amount Of Security
[19]
I now turn to the issue of the value of the plaintiff's best reasonably arguable case and whether bail, in this instance, ought to reflect an amount less than the $825,000.00 (U.S.) claim of the plaintiff.
[20]
Counsel for the defendants points out that the law is well settled, in favour of the shipowner, where there has been withdrawal of a vessel for nonpayment of hire. However, I would note that cancellation of a charter, for late payment, has from time to time been excused in special circumstances.
[21]
Counsel for the defendants went on to refer to an unreported decision of December 6, 1988, of Mr. Justice Muldoon in
The "Manitou III"
, action T-2180-88, in which the plaintiff, as an inexperienced person, an "in breaker", made a claim of some $30,000.00, for the most part claiming breach of contract of employment as a fisherman and crew member. The judge felt that the claim contained uncertainties, including that the plaintiff could not sue for the wages component of his claim until the wages had been earned, and that the balance of the damages were for breach of an alleged oral agreement. He therefore set bail at just under half of the amount claimed, to cover any judgment, interest and costs, that being, in the judge's view, a reasonable conclusion.
[22]
Of the cases which Mr. Justice Muldoon considered, in reaching his decision in
The "Manitou III"
, only
The "Moschanthy"
, [1971] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 37, touches on the present defendants' contention that the merits of the case ought to be considered at this point and bail set accordingly.
[23]
The "Moschanthy", a sistership, was arrested in a cargo action and released against security of £35,000. Subsequently, the defendant vessel owners moved to stay the action, or alternatively to have the security reduced. Among the arguments to have the security reduced were that the maximum liability of the defendants, as carriers, was the £100 per package limitation, which would reduce the maximum liability to only £4,300, less some freight that was due. Now one would think that a per-package limitation under the
Hague Rules
, given that there seemed to be no dispute as to the number of packages, ought to have been grounds on which to have security reduced. Alternately, the defendant said that there was a way in which the plaintiff could have mitigated damages for only £9,000. In any event, the defendants contended that the plaintiff's case was so hopeless that it should be stayed, or at least the security ought to have been reduced. However, Judge Brandon formed the view that the plaintiff had an arguable case which ought not to be prejudged at the interlocutory stage and that in interlocutory proceedings the court cannot try the case (see p. 45). He went on to say that if the plaintiff was wrong, there might well be damages for wrongful arrest, or for wrongful demand of excessive security, but that even if this proved so at the end of the day, that was not a ground, at this point, which can affect the plaintiff's right to make and prosecute his claim (p. 46).
[24]
There are, however, instances in which the security requested has been held exorbitant and reduced: see for example
The "Tribels"
, [1985] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 129, in which salvors sought security of £3,323,000.00 on a salved value of £16,150,000.00, the services being the re-floating of a grounded vessel, which took about an hour. The judge remarked: "Plainly that demand is exorbitant." and reduced the security.
[25]
These three representatives cases,
The "Manitou III"
,
The Moschanthy"
and
The "Tribels"
stand for the proposition that a court, in an interlocutory proceeding to set bail, ought not to try the case in order to determine the value of the plaintiff's reasonably arguable best case, in setting security, unless there are special circumstances. These special circumstances might include claims in which there are major uncertainties, such as in
The "Manitou III"
, or where the security demanded is exorbitant, but not a situation, such as the present, where the plaintiff's damages figures seem fairly firm and the security requested reflects those figures.
[26]
If, at the end of the day, security proves excessive, the defendants have their remedy for wrongful demand of excessive security as was suggested in
The "Moschanthy"
(supra) at p. 46.
[27]
As to the amount of the bail, on the bunkers portion of the claim, $68,700.00 (U.S.), I would normally consider allowing the plaintiff interest at a reasonable borrowing rate for, say, two years. However, in the present instance, given that arbitration in London may take less time than it would to require two offshore parties to bring their case to trial here in Canada, I have not allowed, in making a rough calculation, for a full two years' interest. Rather, in round figures, security for the bunkers claim should be $80,000.00 (U.S.). I have not allowed any interest on the wrongful withdrawal portion of the claim, as counsel for the plaintiff indicated that a reasonable interest factor had been built in to that portion of the claim. Finally, in setting a lump sum for the security, I have added $5,000.00 (U.S.) to go toward any costs which the plaintiff, if successful, might be able to claim here or in the arbitration. The total sum for security is therefore $835,000.00 (U.S.).
Order accordingly.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/slm
[End of document]