[1]
Muldoon, J.
: One possible use for the redundant passage beginning, IN THE MATTER OF ..., above the style of cause is that it tells one that the applicant seeks to invoke s. 18.1 against a
Labour Code
adjudicator's award. That passage will be eliminated as an aberration in or among the court's forms.
[2]
The originating notice of motion states that the applicant moves the court:
"for the purpose of obtaining an Order against [i.e. to quash or set aside] the Decision made under Division XIV, Part III of the
Canada Labour Code
, R.S.C. 1985, c. L-2 by the Adjudicator, Donna M. Gillis on June 3, 1994, by which she held that she had jurisdiction to hear the complaints made by the respondents, Theresa Dennis and Paula Morris."
The said notice asserts one ground for seeking the stated relief which is:
"1. The Adjudicator had no jurisdiction as the respondents, Theresa Dennis and Paula Morris were laid off as a result of the discontinuance of a function or lack of work pursuant to s. 242(3.1)(a) of the
Canada Labour Code
."
[3]
During this court's hearing into this matter, the applicant's counsel alluded to a second ground relating to damages (transcript: p. 3, lines 18 & 19) but it is not stated in the originating notice of motion filed on June 30, 1994. The applicant's supplementary record in Part III, paragraphs 56 through 59 raise the matter of the adjudicator's damages award. The supplementary record was permitted to be filed under Mr. Justice Nadon's order pronounced on November 30, 1995. That order does not permit an extension of time under subs. 18.1(2) of the
Federal Court Act
, and, since the supplementary record was filed on December 5, 1995, it is quite out of time to raise another ground of alleged invalidity of the adjudicator's award dated June 3, 1994. Consequently, the court is not empowered to adjudicate on the matter of damages, and, of course, will not do so.
[4]
The Band's application is supported by the affidavit of Ruby William, its chief councillor. The applicant's counsel stated:
"The Williams [sic] affidavit, the one affidavit I've filed, the only material that is in there from Ms. Williams [sic] relates to her evidence, she gave evidence before the adjudicator, and which was found, is in the findings of fact of the adjudicator, so principally, I'm not going to be referring to Ms. Williams's [sic] affidavit, I'm going to be referring to the adjudicator's findings because I understand that that is what the court must deal with and what I must deal with." (transcript: p. 7)
Significantly Ms. William's affidavit, in paragraph 3, adopts part of the text of the adjudicator's decision, thus:
"The facts set out at the beginning of Part III, under 'FACTS', between pages 2 and 12, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 'A' to this my affidavit, (to the end of the letter of THERESA DENNIS) are true."
[5]
At all material times the applicant was the respondents' employer. The respondents were employed in the Band's office. The respondent Theresa Dennis (hereinafter generally: Ms. Dennis; or Dennis) had worked for the applicant since 1985, primarily as bookkeeper. The respondent Paula Morris (hereinafter generally: Ms. Morris; or Morris) started working for the applicant on January 11, 1989, as the receptionist and secretary, her first and only job. The respondents worked among and with others in the Band office. They were, as of the respondents' last day at work, February 18, 1992, Jerina Alfred, the alternative or second receptionist hired under a Workers' Opportunity Program, Joan Brown, the social worker, Lorraine Tate, the social worker's assistant, and Alice Kruta, not a Band member who was hired to be Band Manager in September, 1991, as the adjudicator found (decision p. 5; applicant's record, p. 29) "on a twelve month contract ending March 31, [sic] 1992" (decision p. 4; applicant's record, p. 28). What seems to be correct about this in the adjudicator's decision is that Ms. Kruta's term really did expire at the end of March, 1992. As of February 18, 1992, Ms. Morris also served as accounts payable clerk.
[6]
On February 18, 1992, five of the above named office workers, excepting Joan Brown, left the Band office and did not return. The two respondents invoked the
Canada Labour Code
.
[7]
What was the status of Ms. Dennis in contemplation of s. 240(1)(a) of the
Code
? In the result her term of service could not be considered granulated into segments of less than twelve months simply because on each occasion of her employment's purported termination she had been re-instated legally. Her service was, therefore, continuous and that fact did not rob the adjudicator of her jurisdiction. The adjudicator considered this matter in writing on pages 22 and 23 of her decision (applicant's record, pp. 46 & 47). She found that Ms. Morris had "completed twelve consecutive months of employment. To find otherwise would be to interpret s. 240(1)(a) of the
Code
unreasonably and unfairly". In this regard there can be no doubt: the adjudicator was quite correct.
[8]
Another aspect of the
Labour Code
's purview is s. 167(3) pursuant to which the applicant had asserted that Theresa Dennis was a manager because of her job duties, in part, and also because of Alice Kruta's letter to Ms. Dennis in November, 1991, wherein Ms. Kruta stated in a subordinate expression "... as you are part of the management team ...". The adjudicator correctly held that being part of the management team does not necessarily a manager make. In fact, Ms. Dennis reported to and took directions from the Band manager, Ms. Kruta. The latter was responsible for staff and supplies and under the council's financial management plan (F.M.P.), all purchases had to be approved by Ms. Kruta. Ms. Dennis had no authority to act independently in allocating responsibilities to other staff, unless so delegated by the Band manager. The manager or managers on a management team, may frequently require assistants such as stenographers, bookkeepers and the like, who are part of the team, but that does not invest such assistants with any managerial powers or status. The adjudicator in pp. 23 to 25 of her decision (applicant's record, pp. 47 to 49) correctly concluded that Ms. Dennis was not a manager in contemplation of s. 167(3) of the
Labour Code
.
[9]
Since at least the beginning of July, 1991, the applicant had been operating under financial constraints and had developed the financial management plan (F.M.P.) which was intended to reduce the Moricetown Band's deficit. The council's financial position was described in the plan on October 1, 1991, was found by the adjudicator at pp. 4 and 5 of her reasons (record, pp. 28 & 29) to be:
"
Financial Position:
As indicated on the following schedule the Moricetown Band's financial position has deteriorated at a rapid pace. Uncontrolled spending has increased over the years and is responsible for the adjusted accumulated deficit of $657,927.00. This situation is the result of excessive spending, incompetent Band administration and a blatant disregard for constraint. The Band's credibility with their suppliers, the bank, lending agencies, and other native organizations is at its lowest level."
[10]
The F.M.P. was an important factor in this case. The Band Council hoped to reduce the deficit drastically within three years. Alice Kruta was engaged to help the council with the implementation and success of the F.M.P. as the council's instrument of spending restraint.
[11]
Deep concern for restraint on spending is implied by the adjudicator in noting at pp. 5 & 6 that on September 5, 1991, a council motion was passed that Ms. Morris be laid off on two weeks' notice due to the financial situation of the band. The minutes also indicate insufficient funds in the operating and maintenance budget. Also shown was a peculiar situation of maintenance man Russell Lewis' U.I. benefits being topped up by the council due to financial constraints. Later, Ms. Kruta "saved" Ms. Morris from the intended lay-off (applicant's record, pp. 29 & 30).
[12]
At the November 4, 1991 council meeting, Ms. Morris' status was discussed, and the adjudicator stated at p. 7 of her decision:
"... Alice Kruta explained to the Band Council that Paula Morris' salary would be paid out of cigarette sales to Band members and that she had provided for this in the budget to March 31, 1992. Alice Kruta did not want to train someone new for this position. It is apparent from these minutes, which are corroborated by the evidence of the Complainants, that Alice Kruta's plan following the completion of her contract on March 31, 1992, that Theresa Dennis and Paula Morris would be able to competently manage the office. The financial situation of the Band was still looking bleak at this meeting as the minutes state the following under item 4(A):
1991/92 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN REVIEW
General discussion and concerns about the F.M.P., as it indicates that the Band is going to be short $92,545.37 by the end of this current fiscal year. Based on this, the Council may request in advance from the C.W.G.C. from the 1992-93 budget.
"It was agreed at this meeting, that the F.M.P. would be signed and a copy forwarded to the hereditary chiefs."
(applicant's record, p. 31)
. . . . .
"As the years went by, [Ms. Dennis'] responsibilities increased. In the fall of 1991, her work included the administration of lands and estates, land transfers and quit claims, some accounts payable work, bookkeeping for all of the Band projects, maintaining accounts for Band operations, and some portion of accounts receivable. As part of her lands and estates responsibility she would mostly deal with land transfers and quit claims. Some of the land transfers would become public knowledge although there were some transfers between family members which would be considered confidential. The confidential transfers would be discussed at the Band Council meetings, and any office staff present at the meetings would hear this discussion.
"One of the operations conducted by the Band Council was the Canyon Development Project which was a campground. Theresa Dennis' duties in this operation included overseeing the project and dealing with small management issues. She forwarded the more significant issues to the Band Council.
"The employer also conducted a hardware business which was eventually shut down due to financial losses. Theresa Dennis, because of her bookkeeping responsibilities, was privy to the decisions relating to this business. These decisions were eventually released to the community by the Band Council.
. . . . .
"[Although she acted thrice as interim band manager] Theresa Dennis did not consider herself as having managerial responsibilities in her capacity as bookkeeper and never did regard herself as having the skills and abilities to be able to perform effectively the functions of Band Manager during these interim periods."
(decision, p. 8; applicant's record, p. 32)
[13]
During late autumn of 1991, Ms. Dennis tendered her resignation due to her husband's opposition to her being employed, Ms. Kruta did not accept it, and then Ms. Dennis withdrew it. The adjudicator continued on pp. 9 & 10:
"... As noted in the minutes [November 26, 1991], the Council supported Theresa Dennis' efforts and indicated their appreciation of her loyalty. At this same meeting, the Band dealt with a problem of malfunctioning septic systems and that an estimate of $30,000.00 had been received for the upgrading of these systems. At this meeting, the Council also decided to request $37,000.00 from the Band Capital Trust Fund Account in Ottawa to apply against a deficit for the new health centre. This kind of request was very unusual because the Trust Fund was never used for this purpose. By this time the deficit was reduced to approximately $325,000.00.
"At the December 2, 1991 Band Council meeting, it was determined that all the staff would have their performances evaluated, and that Alice Kruta would contact the Personnel Committee to set the date and time for these evaluations.
"On January 21, 1992, Russell Lewis, who was working regular full time hours as a maintenance person, resigned his position. It is unclear as to the reason for his resignation, only that according to Theresa Dennis, he and Alice Kruta had had bad words between them and Russell Lewis was upset. The arrangement of topping up his salary over and above his unemployment insurance benefits was still in effect on the date of his resignation.
"Sometime in January, 1992, Paula Morris met with Members of the Personnel Committee for her job evaluation. Present at this meeting were, Helen Nikal, Roy Morris, and Alice Kruta. Paula Morris was asked questions about how she thought she was performing her duties and to repeat the work goals that she saw for herself. She recalled that nothing was said to her with regard to complaints about her work.
"On January 24, 1992, an incident occurred at the Band Office which upset Theresa Dennis ... These incidents [Stanley Nikal's yelling abuse at her and Stanley Morris' purchase of dead-bolt lock for the band office] prompted Theresa Dennis to make two immediate requests on this day. By means of memoranda to Alice Kruta, she requested payment for overtime hours, and for any vacation accrual owed to her. She had requested that overtime be paid to her in her original letter of resignation of November 18, 1991. In her January request, she wrote to Alice Kruta that she had heard through the grapevine that she might be fired. A cheque was issued the same day in the amount of $1,672.69.
"Russell Lewis had previously requested overtime pay in December, 1991, but because of the deficit situation, the Band Council had refused his request. Alice Kruta was aware of this refusal. Some members of the Personnel Committee were unaware of the overtime payment [to Ms. Dennis] by Alice Kruta until after February 18, 1992.
. . . . .
"... Dan Michell [at a January 27, 1992 general public meeting] talked about the Village Maintenance Plan, and informed the community that a task force study was being conducted on the Village Maintenance Plan and that the Band was hopeful that once the report was presented to the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs more money would become available to the Band Council. The Village Maintenance Plan encompassed the staffing and operations of the Village water and sewer system.
. . . . .
"On February 10, 1992, Theresa Dennis was interviewed by the Personnel Committee respecting her job evaluation. She believed that the purpose of this evaluation was to determine her strengths and weaknesses and what training could be recommended. Ruby Williams [sic], Alice Kruta, and possibly Doris Michell were present at this meeting."
(decision, pp. 10 & 11; record, pp. 34 & 35)
. . . . .
"With respect to the two Complainants, Alice Kruta recommended that Paula Morris be laid off with no replacement and that Theresa Dennis' position be reduced to half time. According to Ron Mitchell, the reasons Alice Kruta recommended that Paula Morris be let go were firstly, her attitude and secondly, that Alice Kruta was becoming frustrated with the complaints about Paula Morris. The Personnel Committee did not accept Alice Kruta's recommendation regarding Paula Morris at this time as they believed that there was room for improvement.
. . . . .
"Alice Kruta's recommendation to reduce Theresa Dennis' hours was based on Alice Kruta's self-assessment of her accounting strengths and that she felt she could do some of Theresa Dennis' work. It is unclear from the Employer's witnesses exactly what Alice Kruta intended for Theresa Dennis after March 31, 1992, but it was Ruby William's understanding that once Alice Kruta's contract expired, Theresa Dennis would return to full time as a bookkeeper. The Councillors knew that Theresa Dennis did not want to take on the responsibilities of Band Manager once Alice Kruta's contract was completed on March 31, 1992.
"The Band Council meeting of February 17, 1992, commenced in the afternoon. Members of the Personnel Committee were present ... Paula Morris was allocated the responsibility of recording the minutes, a function she performed regularly at Band Council meetings. Minutes of this meeting were never produced because both Alice Kruta and Paula Morris who were responsible for the production of the minutes, permanently left the Band Office the next morning. Usually, Band Council meetings were taped, however, no tape could be located. On the last day of evidence, approximately a year after this hearing commenced, Paula Morris, who attended every day of the hearing, produced her notes of the February 17, 1992 Band Council meeting.
"One of the problems facing the Band Council at the February 17, 1992, meeting was that there was no qualified person responsible for the Moricetown water system. There were two maintenance personnel ... but neither of these individuals were [sic] capable of maintaining the water system.
"Prior to the February 17, 1992, meeting, one of the Band Councillors, Susan Alfred, had received complaints from Band Members about rashes caused by the water, and other complaints about garbage piling up and malfunctioning septic systems.
"Sterling Mitchell, was present at this meeting. He is an engineer and employee of the Government Commission and provides services to Indian Bands under a funding agreement between the Bands and the Government Commission."
(decision, p. 13, record, p. 37)
. . . . .
"Sterling Mitchell also recommended the hiring of a full time maintenance supervisor and a part time maintenance helper and suggested how this could be implemented without overtaxing the maintenance staff. The Band Council made no decision at this time about Sterling Mitchell's recommendation. According to Paula Morris' notes, at the end of the discussion regarding Sterling Mitchell's report on the Village Maintenance Plan, she wrote 'Alice: 1½ positions minimal - do some juggling.'
"At approximately 19:00 hours, the Band Council brought forward the matter of staff evaluations and subsequently asked the staff to withdraw from the meeting. At this point, all of the staff present withdrew, with the exception of Alice Kruta who was asked to remain. The Council then heard the recommendations of the Personnel Committee. During this part of the meeting, a letter was delivered to the Band Office which, in part, complained about Paula Morris. The letter was signed by, 'Concerned Band Members'. The exhibit placed in evidence in this hearing had signatures removed, although the evidence of the Band Councillors was that individuals had signed the letter. Some witnesses recalled names of individuals in the community whose name appeared on the bottom of the letter. Stanley Nikal had left the in camera meeting to receive the letter which had been delivered. On his return to the meeting, he showed the letter to Paula Morris who responded. 'Oh, another love letter.' Paula Morris testified that although this was the expression she used, she did take the letter seriously. It was at this point that Paula Morris received a telephone call concerning her grandmother, Madeleine Alfred, a respected elder and Chief of Moricetown, who was gravely ill and in the hospital. Paula Morris then left the Band Office and went to the hospital.
"The letter delivered to the Band Office on the evening of February 17, 1992, was then discussed. During this meeting, the only financial statements available to the Employer were for the month ending December 31, 1991, which recorded a deficit. These statements were prepared by Alice Kruta with the assistance of Theresa Dennis."
(decision, p. 14; applicant's record, p. 38)
[14]
Among the above financial statements, the adjudicator's exhibit 54, is a summary of revenue and expenditures, for April 1, 1991 to December 31, 1991. It includes an item for cigarettes sales, the item out of which Ms. Morris' salary was earlier intended to be recouped. That item is shown to have netted a deficit of $234.96! Not enough to pay Ms. Dennis anything. The adjudicator did not mention this. She continued as follows on page 16 of her written decision:
"Due to the deficit situation, there were no capital projects or housing projects ongoing or other major projects. ... According to the evidence of Dan Michell, it was anticipated that once the deficit was under control, and other programs started up, there would be more work for the office staff. Neither Theresa Dennis nor Paula Morris detected any noticeable difference in their work functions due to the lack of any major projects.
"After the Councillors left the Band Office on the evening of February 17, 1992, three staff members remained in the office, Theresa Dennis, Alice Kruta and Joan Brown, the Band Social Worker. Notwithstanding the fact that the Band Council had asked Alice Kruta not to disclose their decision to the Complainants, she proceeded to inform Theresa Dennis and Joan Brown about the Band Council's decision. Theresa Dennis was informed that she would be reduced to half time and that Paula Morris would be 'let go'. These three staff members remained in the Band Office discussing the Band Council's decision for about one and one half hours. Alice Kruta also advised Theresa Dennis that Ron Mitchell and Stanley Nikal were to meet with her the next morning to inform her of the Council's decision and asked if she and Joan Brown would call in sick so that the meeting could not be held. Theresa Dennis told Alice Kruta that she would be going to work the next morning.
"At approximately 09:00, Stanley Nika and Ron Mitchell arrived at the Band Office and proceeded to meet with Theresa Dennis. Ron Mitchell did the talking. He informed Theresa Dennis that her administrative skills were weak and accounting proved to be her strong point, and because she had not taken the Band Manager position, her job hours would be reduced to half time. He also informed her that two other staff members would be laid off. Theresa Dennis asked Ron Mitchell who the other staff members were and he replied that he could not tell her. She then asked if there would be sufficient staff to cover the front reception and he said yes. She asked when the change would take effect and he told her immediately. Stanley Nikal confirmed that the reduction in hours would take effect immediately. Ron Mitchell also said that the reason for her reduction in hours was due to the F.M.P. Although Theresa Dennis knew that the cash flow projection, prepared by Alice Kruta with her help, indicated a surplus, she did not question either Councillor about the reason for the reduction in her hours. Although Theresa Dennis had been previously informed by Alice Kruta about the Council's decision, she felt hurt and upset during and after this meeting with the two Band Councillors.
"Following Stanley Nikal's and Dan Michell's departure, Theresa Dennis decided to treat the Council's decision as a constructive dismissal. Alice Kruta had contacted Mr. Vince Smith, an employee of Labour Canada in Prince George, to inform him of the Employer's actions. Following consultation with Vince Smith and Alice Kruta, Theresa Dennis decided to file a complaint with Labour Canada. Her decision to leave the office was in protest to the Employer's decision."
(applicant's record, p. 40)
. . . . .
"After meeting with Theresa Dennis, Stanley Nikal and Ron Mitchell had intended to meet with Paula Morris. Paula Morris arrived at the Band Office later than usual that morning because she had been at the hospital the previous evening visiting her grandmother, Madeleine Alfred. Ron Mitchell and Stanley Nikal had left the Band Office without seeing Paula Morris.
"Theresa Dennis and Alice Kruta were present at the Band Office when Paula Morris arrived. Theresa Dennis approached her and told her that Alice had something to say to her. Thereafter, Paula Morris went into Alice Kruta's office and was informed that her position had been terminated effective immediately. Alice Kruta did not indicate why the Council had made this decision, nor did she indicate to Paula Morris that she had not been authorized by the Council to disclose their decision. Paula Morris also spoke with the Labour Canada representative that morning, and decided to treat the Employer's decision as an unjust dismissal and to file a complaint with Labour Canada. She wanted to get back at the Band Council for doing what she considered wrongful. She just wanted to leave because she was angry and tired.
"The remaining staff, with the exception of Joan Brown, who had not been in the office for most of the morning, collectively decided to leave the office. In preparation for this departure, Theresa Dennis prepared cheques payable to the individual staff members for outstanding monies owing to them. The system provided different cheques depending upon their function. There were payroll cheques drawn for salary or wages and administrative cheques used for paying vacation and overtime benefits. ... There is contradictory evidence as to what then transpired."
(decision, p. 17; applicant's record, p. 41)
[15]
There certainly was contradictory evidence, and the adjudicator, apparently quite correctly, resolved the differences wholly against the complainants' joint and several credibility.
[16]
Ms. Dennis filed an affidavit which is replete with unsupported belief and unproved accusation.
"18. ... As stated previously in this Affidavit, Ms. Morris' position was filled by Priscilla Naziel upon her dismissal. The Band Council used budget restrictions as a pretext for their actions on February 17, 1992. I believe that the underlying reason to hire Dan Michell and Russel Lewis was not because they were 'reorganizing' or because of financial difficulties."
(respondents' record, p. 5)
"19. ... As stated previously in this my Affidavit, I believe that the only reason that Ms. Morris and I were dismissed was because it was the Band's intention to fill our positions with family members. To the best of my knowledge, information and belief, Dan Michell is not a properly qualified technician. As well, the cost of hiring Dan Michell and Russel Lewis far exceeded both Paula Morris and my salaries.
"20. THAT Stanley Nikal knew that original cheques and original documents were handed over to the R.C.M.P. regarding a misappropriation of Band funds. I gave these documents to the R.C.M.P.
"21. THAT I feel that the Mr. Nikal had a great deal of influence over the decisions made by the Band Councillors and that my job was terminated in part due to my involvement in handing over the aforementioned documents to the R.C.M.P."
(respondents' record, p. 6)
[17]
As was found by the adjudicator in Ms. Dennis' oral testimony (decision, pp. 17 & 18; record, pp. 41 & 42), so in her affidavit, there were incredible elements. In paragraph 8, she stated her belief that the Band Council on February 17 and 18, 1992 simply wished to purge the band office of the women who were working there, but in paragraph 10, Ms. Dennis feels that her position was cut to half time because she would not accept the position of Band manager. It is difficult to treat this affidavit seriously, and especially since it appears to be designed just to re-argue the case.
[18]
The adjudicator continued on p. 19 of her written decision:
"At approximately 12:30 hours on February 18, 1992, the Complainants together with other office staff left the office. There was no further communication regarding the circumstances of their departure until February 27, 1992. From February 18 until February 27, the community was preoccupied with the death of Madeleine Alfred. On February 27, 1992, the Personnel Committee held a meeting. As a result of this meeting, letters were sent by the Employer to the Complainants and are reproduced as follows:
'Dear Theresa:
This is to advise you that due to shortage of funds at the Moricetown Band Office, the Band Council has been forced to reduce your full-time position to a half time position at the same pay scale. We appreciated your work and as soon as we are financially able, we hope to be able to return you to a full time position.
The Band Council had never intended to terminate your position. Your conduct on February 18, 1992 amounts to a resignation without notice. We are prepared to ignore your resignation if you want to return to your employment by March 3, 1992.
Please contact Band Council, if you have a problem with this.'
and,
'Dear Paula:
This is to advise you that due to our financial situation at the Moricetown Band Office, you will be laid off as of Tuesday, March 31, 1992. This notice is for one month. However, as your employer, we want you to continue to work for us until March 31, 1992. If you do not want to return to work by March 3, 1992, we shall be forced to accept your resignation on February 18, 1992 without notice.
The Band Council has not terminated you as of February 18, 1992. Your pay will be deducted for the 8 days (February 18-February 28, 1992) for which you did not attend at work.
You may collect your vacation pay and separation slip on March 31, 1992. If you have a problem with your employer, please let Council know, so that we may try and remedy the situation.
The Band Council would like to thank you for your past services and wish you success in your future endeavors.
Sincerely,
Dan Michell'
"The Personnel Committee viewed the departure of Theresa Dennis and Paula Morris on February 18, 1992 as a resignation of their position. The Band Councillor's were receiving inquiries from members of the community as to what had occurred in the Band Office. In part, the letters were intended to clarify to the community that the Employer had not fired the staff, and that the staff should be given an opportunity to return to work. According to the Employer's evidence, if the Complainants had remained in their positions, they would have been dealt with according to the Band Council's decision of February 17, 1992, but because they walked off the job this decision could not be carried out. The employees were invited back to work so that the Employer could deal with them properly."
(decision, p. 19 & 20; applicant's record, pp. 43 & 44)
. . . . .
"The reason Paula Morris did not contact any Band Councillor after receiving the February 27, 1992, was because she thought the letter was a joke.
. . . . .
"On February 27, 1992, ... approached Theresa Dennis ... and handed her the Band Council letter of February 27, 1992 ... She knew that the Band was trying to make amends by their letter of February 27, 1992."
(decision, p. 21; applicant's record, p. 45)
[19]
Here is how the adjudicator analyzed the purposes of the Band council, at p. 26 of her decision:
"There is no doubt that the Band Council was wrestling with bringing their deficit into line and had taken some unusual steps to manage the deficit during the latter part of the fiscal year. Theresa Dennis acknowledged, under cross-examination, that one of the strategies employed under the F.M.P. included transferring $38,000.00 from the Employer's Trust Fund in Ottawa. This was the only time in her seven years of employment with the Band that she was aware of this kind of transfer. Another measure was the allocation of monies normally budgeted for housing projects. Approximately $109,000.00 budgeted for housing projects was allocated to reduce the debt. In addition, the Band Council approached the Government Commission to alter funding to meet the requirements of the F.M.P.
"Downsizing the number of staff during financial shortages had occurred previously with employees Dan Michell and Russel Lewis."
(decision, p. 26; applicant's record, p. 50)
. . . . .
"Not only was the Band Council trying to manage its financial deficit in the fall of 1991, it was consulting with Alice Kruta about the future organization of the office staff. Both Alice Kruta and the Band Council had discussed with Theresa Dennis the possibility of taking over the Band Manager position when Alice Kruta's contract expired on March 31, 1992. Although there was no definitive plan concerning Paula Morris' role after this date, steps were being taken in the fall of 1991 to train her in bookkeeping and payroll duties.
. . . . .
"The Councillors were also concerned about the lack of trained maintenance personnel to look after the water system. The decision to hire maintenance personnel was hastened by the complaints of members of the community who had and were experiencing skin rashes. No causal relationship was ever established by the Band Councillors between the problem of skin rashes and the lack of maintenance personnel for the water system."
(decision, p. 27; applicant's record, p. 51)
. . . . .
"The cases before me on this issue of lay off refer to shortages of work resulting in significant financial losses and reduction of staff. In some instances, the fear of financial losses provides the basis for a reorganization of work or the elimination of certain functions. The onus is clearly on the Employer to establish and prove that it was operating under significant or severe financial restraints. None of the Employer's witnesses who participated in the decision to terminate the Complainant were [sic] aware of the [true] financial status of the Employer as of February 17, 1992, or recall seeing Alice Kruta's projected surplus to March 31, 1992, in the Band Administration budget.
"The Employer submits that it has the right to re-organize the work and the Band Council has the responsibility to determine the importance of maintenance staff as opposed to the office staff. The Employer relies on the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  desires.
"The meaning of discontinuance of function was an issue before the Federal Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). This case was similar to the facts in
Roland  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in that the employee was advised that, because of a restraint policy, her position was being abolished and that her duties were to be performed by others after her termination. The plaintiff argues that since the actual work assigned to her continued to be performed that 'function' was not discontinued. The facts were that the work done and duties performed by the plaintiff were no longer allocated to any one person but were distributed in the branch.
"Addy, J., in interpreting the word 'function' quoted Cattanach, J., in the unreported case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  performing and is defined as the kind of action belonging to the holder of an office, hence the function is the performance of the duties of that office. By the performance of the duties of an office, the holder thereof can be said to fulfil his function. Functions are therefore the powers and duties of an office.
'Thus, it seems to me, that when the functions of an office are transferred elsewhere in the course of a reorganization and the office is abolished while the functions are continued the function of the holder of the office is discontinued from which it follows that the services of an employee who held that office are no longer required because of the discontinuance of the functions formerly performed by him, and the deputy head has authority to lay off the employee.'
"The court held that the function had been discontinued and said to give effect to the Employer's argument would preclude the Government from reorganizing its departments and branches."
(decision, p. 29; applicant's record, p. 53)
[20]
Now here is where the adjudicator started to fall into error in her reasons:
"I cannot agree that the decision of the Employer on February 17, 1992, was a reorganization of work as contemplated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. In those decisions, the reorganization was the transference of functions within the office. The end result was that the employee's function was discontinued because another employee was given the work and as such there was a discontinuance of function. In the case before me, it cannot be said that the work of these two Complainants was transferred to two maintenance employees. At best, the reorganization of the Complainants' work resulted from assigning the Complainants' tasks to the only employee who remained in the Band Office after February 18, 1992. That employee was Joan Brown, the social worker.
"I have before me the evidence of the Complainants as to the work they were performing at the time of their termination. The only evidence from the Employer about the work in the Band Office was generalizations made by Dan Michell that there was little work being done. There was no dispute that the Band's projects were reduced from their previous level of operation; however, the Employer never properly addressed what impact this reduction had on the amount of work being performed by the Complainants.
"In light of the legislation I am left with the fundamental question as to whether in February, 1992, there was a lack of work or a discontinuance of function. The Employer filled Theresa Dennis' position permanently in June, 1992. After the Complainants left on February 18, 1992, Joan Brown was asked to perform the functions of bookkeeper and secretary/receptionist. The Employer's witnesses testified that Paula Morris' position was not filled until April, 1993. Paula Morris applied for this position and was rejected.
"The Employer has not established to my satisfaction that Paula Morris' position was not filled until the spring of 1993. After the departure of Paula Morris, Joan Brown testified that she could not handle the reception area as well as continue with her regular duties as social worker. The Band Council authorized the hiring of an individual to fulfil this responsibility. As this was part of the responsibilities of Paula Morris prior to February 18, 1992, I am not satisfied that there was a genuine lack of work, as contemplated by the
Code
."
(decision, pp. 29 & 30; record, pp. 53 & 54)
This misinterpretation of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)], in the above passage, is the key to the adjudicator's decision. Unfortunately, she errs in interpreting the jurisprudence and arrives at a material conclusion which is inconsistent with the evidence and the law. In distinguishing the present matter from <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the adjudicator states: "In those decisions, the reorganization was the transference of functions within the office.", and then states with regard to the present matter "... the reorganization of the Complainants' work resulted from assigning the Complainants' tasks to the only employee who remained in the Band Office ...." In essence the situations are the same; functions were transferred from departing employees to the employees who remained. This misinterpretation is an error of law which goes inter alia to the heart of the adjudicator's inherent jurisdiction.
[21]
The adjudicator seems to have forgotten that she herself found that there were
two
receptionists in that office staff of six, the
other
receptionist being Jerina Alfred. Only Ms. Morris' function as a receptionist was discontinued. The other was vacant, as Ms. Alfred had walked off the job. There had been rollicking between Ms. Morris and Ms. Alfred and Ms. Kruta wanted to keep them apart.
[22]
Ms. Dennis' function was semi-discontinued or discontinued in part, and probably only temporarily, because Ms. Kruta was to perform part of the bookkeeping function until her contract expired at the end of March, 1992, when it appeared that the function would be restored to Ms. Dennis. There was reason to believe that in the council's letter of February 27, 1992. She went on to say that the council did not do its work thoroughly but acted always in good faith. These are important passages which follow as stated in the adjudicator's pp. 30 and 31:
"I am not persuaded that the Band Councillors turned their minds to properly identifying their financial position in February, 1992, or to ascertaining their needs vis-à-vis their finances. None of the Employer's witnesses knew the salaries of the Complainants nor the amount of money required for the salaries of the rehired maintenance staff. The Employer did not undertake any analysis as to whether there would be any net savings or net losses, nor did it conduct costing of any kind. The Employer's decision was based on a perception of its financial position at that time.
"To effect a lay off, both the legislation and the case law contemplates genuine lack of work or discontinuance of function. There was no apparent assessment of how much work was being performed by the Complainants or whether their time was being utilized to fulfil their job functions. Further, there was no planning as to how the needs for reception, as an example, would be met. There was no plan for reorganization of the office that would effectively make redundant the work of the two Complainants or to discontinue their functions altogether.
"I find that the Band Council's decisions on February 17, 1992, were
made in good faith
. They believed that they were acting in the best interests of their community. They also believed that they were in a financial shortage. As Dan Michell stated in his evidence, 'Any money the Band had left was for services to the people.'
"There was
no sham intended
. The Band Council was operating under the belief that a financial deficit existed and required cut backs. However, they failed to fully analyze their financial situation, and in acting hastily, did not adequately put in place the essential requirements to effect a lay off. I find that the Employer has failed to prove that a financial shortage necessitating lay off existed. I therefore conclude that s. 242(3.1)(a) of the
Code
does not apply as there has been no lay off because of lack of work or discontinuance of function.
"Having made the foregoing conclusions ... and finding there are no impediments to my jurisdiction, I will now consider the remaining issues." (decision, pp. 31 & 32; applicant's record, pp. 54 & 55)
[23]
After her finding of jurisdiction, the adjudicator made at least two more findings of the applicant's good faith.
"Re: Paula Morris:
I find the invitation by the Employer of February 27, 1992, was merely an extension of the termination date of employment. It was an invitation made
in good faith
, with good intentions, and under a misunderstanding of finances. The Employer was prepared to extend her termination date and provide some notice. In the least, the Complainant should have responded to the Employer under the circumstances. It is unfortunate that neither the Employer nor the employee sought an opportunity to clarify the reasons for the Employer's actions." (decision, p. 32, applicant's record, p. 56)
(emphasis not in original text)
"Re: Theresa Dennis:
Subsequent to her decision, she received the Employer's letter of February 27, 1992, which invited her back to work, on reduced hours until March 31, 1992. I find this invitation was extended
in good faith
and the Complainant knew the Band Council was trying to make amends. The Employer was responding to concerns raised in the community and wanted to give the Complainant a chance to return to work. Underlying the Employer's action was the misapprehension of its financial situation. It was unfortunate that the Complainant never responded to this letter. She could have expressed her understanding of the Employer's finances and any confusion over the Employer's financial situation could have been clarified." (applicant's record, p. 58)
[24]
Now the adjudicator's foregoing findings are important, because her very jurisdiction to adjudicate turns on the found circumstances, as expressed in s. 242(3.1)(a), thus:
"(3.1) No complaint shall be considered by an adjudicator under subs. (3) in respect of a person where
(a) that person had been laid off because of lack of work or because of discontinuance of a function;"
[25]
In Canada's constitution, the authentic interpreters of the law are the superior courts, and the ultimate authentic interpreter is the Supreme Court of Canada. So it is here.
[26]
The Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.B.R.(2d) 161; 354 A.P.R. 161, adopted the reasoning of the Federal Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of a function". Mr. Justice Cory in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> described a discontinuance of function in two pithy passages, thus:
"The approach taken in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> relates the word 'function' to the 'office' held by the plaintiff. Her office consisted of the bundle of tasks and responsibilities which had been undertaken and performed by her as a secretary. This bundle of tasks was no longer being performed. Thus her office had ceased to exist and there was accordingly a 'discontinuance of a function'." (p. 661  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> )
"'Discontinuance' obviously refers to that termination of something that is termed a function. A 'function' must be the 'office' that is to say the bundle of responsibilities, duties and activities that are carried out by a particular employee or group of employees." (p. 663  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> )
Cory, J., concluded his analysis of a "discontinuance of a function" by stating at p. 664  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"Therefore, a 'discontinuance of a function' will occur when that set of activities which form an office is no longer carried out
as a result of a decision of an employer acting in good faith
. For example, if a particular set of activities is merely handed over in its entirely [sic] to another person, or, if the activity or duty is simply given a new and different title so as to fit another job description then there would be no 'discontinuance of a function'. On the other hand,
if the activities that form part of the set or bundle are divided among other people such as occurred in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, there would be a 'discontinuance of a function'. Similarly, if the responsibilities are decentralized, as happened in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, there would also be a 'discontinuance of a function'." (emphasis not in original text)
[27]
The gravamen is "an employer acting in good faith", not an employer "possessed of all the facts", nor an employer "wantonly doubting its manager's reports or advice", nor an employer "making a clairvoyant business decision", or the like. Indeed the standard of "good faith" is purposely invoked to comprehend error not maliciously intended, not perfection, for perfection does not need the latitude of "good faith". "An employer acting in good faith": is that not exactly the adjudicator's finding?
[28]
It is not only the adjudicator's decision which itself provides the factors which strip the adjudicator of jurisdiction, if one heeds the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada, but also an assertion, perhaps inadvertent or inattentive, in Ms. Dennis's affidavit: paragraph 15. What the deponent alleges as Patricia Naziel's duties makes a good example of a legitimate form of discontinuance of a function. Just as a function can be discontinued by parcelling out the duties among others, so the functions of two offices, (in the sense meant), can be discontinued by consolidating some or all of those duties in the hands of a single office-holder. Each original function would be thereby discontinued.
[29]
It must be noted on behalf of the adjudicator that whereas her decision was released on June 3, 1994, the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> judgment was released on June 30, 1993, during the very course of her sessions in this case, so she probably overlooked it. Having found that the applicant acted in good faith in discontinuing Ms. Morris' functions and partially discontinuing Ms. Dennis' functions, the adjudicator made a serious error of law in according herself jurisdiction to adjudicate these complaints.
[30]
Although the
Code
places certain restrictions on employers it does not strip employers of the freedom to restructure and reorganize their businesses. Mr. Justice Pratte in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  decision is genuine and there is nothing artificial about it, s. 61.5(3)(a) [now s. 242(3.1)(a) of the
Canada Labour Code
] cannot be interpreted otherwise without unduly limiting the employer's freedom to plan and organize its business as it wishes." Mr. Justice Pratte was of course referring to restructuring which resulted in "discontinuance of a function". Therefore, in circumstances such as these, provided the employer makes its decision in good faith as the adjudicator found, and for legitimate reasons there is said to be a discontinuance of a function.
[31]
It is sure that an employer's discontinuance of a function or functions to save overhead in
this
department, in order to subsidize the overhead in
that
department, is a legitimate reorganization of business, if ever there was one, where the employer, in good faith, believes that the unrelieved expense of all functions is too costly.
[32]
The applicant's good faith in the discontinuance of the indicated functions means that it did not have to be correctly informed by the band manager when she informed the council in the course of her ordinary duties. Although one may doubt the accuracy of the financial statements then available to the council, one cannot doubt the true discontinuance of the indicated functions, or the office-holders' offices, soon to be consolidated in the hands of Priscilla Naziel, according to paragraph 15 of Ms. Dennis' affidavit:
"... Ms. Naziel performed my job duties as well as those of Ms. Morris until in or about the month of June, 1992 at which time, Gina Alfred was hired as the bookkeeper." (respondents' record, p. 5)
[33]
Later on, further reorganization including re-establishment of functions, given good faith, become irrelevant to the matter in issue.
[34]
Also irrelevant are the adjudicator's dispositions of the various issues in dispute herein, once it is determined that she lacked jurisdiction in the manner provided for excluding jurisdiction in s. 242(3.1)(a) of the
Labour Code
. All discussion of the correctness, or otherwise, of the rest of her decision is to no avail. There is no point in arguing the complainant's substantive cases.
[35]
Now, s. 243 of the
Labour Code
is as strongly worded a privative provision as one is likely to encounter in the statutes of Canada. The Supreme Court of Canada, however, has really interpreted subs. 243(1) as if it contained the emphasized words, as follows:
"243.(1) Every Order of an adjudicator appointed under subs. 242(1)
vested with jurisdiction to adjudicate by law, including this Act
, is final and not to be questioned or reviewed in any court."
[36]
It is for a superior court, then, to determine if the adjudicator be so vested, according to law. Only if it be so, does the privative provision operate according to its terms. Section 243(2) is interpreted in conformity with s. 243(1)'s interpretation. This is, in essence, what was taught by the Supreme Court of Canada in
U.E.S., Local 298 v. Bibeault
, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 1048; 95 N.R. 161; 24 Q.A.C. 244. The headnote, at p. 1050  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , provides an apt summation:
"The chief problem in a case of judicial review is determining the jurisdiction of the tribunal whose decision is impugned. In the absence of any coherent test for distinguishing what is in fact preliminary, the prerequisite concept does not assist in the inquiry. It diverts the courts from the only question they should ask, 'Did the legislator intend such a matter to be within the jurisdiction conferred on the tribunal?' By limiting the concept of the preliminary or collateral question and by introducing the doctrine of a patently unreasonable interpretation, this court is giving notice of the development of a new approach to determining jurisdictional questions. Henceforth, the formalistic analysis of the preliminary or collateral question must give way to a pragmatic and functional analysis. This analysis, hitherto associated with cases of patently unreasonable error on a matter within the court's jurisdiction, is just as suited to a case in which an error is alleged in the interpretation of a provision limiting that jurisdiction. To do this, the court examines not only the wording of the enactment conferring jurisdiction on the administrative tribunal, but the purpose of the statute creating the tribunal, the reason for its existence, the area of expertise of its members and the nature of the problem before the tribunal."
[37]
The foregoing, among other jurisprudence, provides reason for the court to dare to embark on any review of the adjudicator's decision. Such other jurisprudence includes:
C.J.A., Local 579 v. Bradco Construction Ltd.
, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 316; 153 N.R. 81; 106 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 140; 334 A.P.R. 140, with a privative clause judicial review is limited the issue(s) of jurisdiction;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a tribunal can lose jurisdiction by making a patently unreasonable decision; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the traditional standard governing the determination of jurisdiction, is correctness.
[38]
Therefore the adjudicator, having made an incorrect finding as to her jurisdiction (by her own hand, so to speak, having found good faith), her decision is quashable.
[39]
For all these stated reasons, the adjudicator's aforementioned decision and order are quashed and set aside, because she is found to have utterly lacked jurisdiction to make an award or order herein, for failure to comply with paragraph 242(3.1)(a) of the
Canada Labour Code
.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/vem
[End of document]