[1]
Reed, J.
: This is an application by the plaintiff to require the defendant to answer certain questions on examination for discovery. The questions are of two types, those relating to sales and financial information (questions numbered 27, 239, 240, 241, 263, 370, 379, 382, 383) and those relating to whether the defendant had ever previously been sued for industrial design infringement (questions 218 and 221). The application is by way of appeal under Rule 336(5) from an order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary dated April 7, 1986.
[2]
With respect to the questions of the first type (the number of alleged infringing articles that were sold; the sale price thereof, etc.) the prothonotary found that such questions were relevant to the issues in these proceedings but considered himself bound by the decision in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  answered.
[3]
The main action to which this motion relates is one for copyright infringement of a rainbow and heart design surrounding the words "Niagara Falls - where rainbows end and love begins". The plaintiff seeks to prevent the defendant using this design on hats distributed and sold by it.
[4]
It is the defendant's position that in a copyright or patent infringement case the plaintiff must first of all prove validity of the copyright or patent right asserted as well as infringement of such right, and then it is entitled to discovery on the question of damages. It is argued that this is a common law principle which derives from the Sigma case (supra) as well as from  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C. Sup. Ct.), and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on the need to protect defendant from premature disclosure of financial or business information (cost, prices, profits, names of customers or suppliers); refer: editorial note to Simpson and Gorman case (supra). I do not read the jurisprudence as going as far as the defendant contends.
[5]
In my view the starting point is the general principle that a plaintiff is required to "make out the whole of his case in the first instance": see Brouwer Turf Equipment Ltd. v. A and M Sod Supply Ltd., [1977] 1 F.C. 51; 13 N.R. 83 (F.C.A.), at page 54 F.C. Accordingly, full discovery on all elements required to be proved is the general rule. Rule 465(15) of the Federal Court Rules provides:
"465.(15) Upon examination for discovery otherwise than under paragraph (5), the individual being questioned shall answer any question as to any fact within the knowledge or means of knowledge of the party being examined for discovery that may prove or
tend to prove or disprove
or tend to disprove any unadmitted allegation of fact in any pleading filed by the party being examined for discovery or the examining party."
(Underlining added)
[6]
In some instances it is appropriate to alter this procedure:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). When an order for a reference is made before discovery, discovery will not extend to the fact in issue which has been referred for consideration only after trial (Rule 466). If a reference under Rule 480 is not made until after discovery, however, (which may be done at the request of the parties or by order of the court on its own motion) there is no such necessary limitation on discovery. As noted in both the Brouwer and Abramsky cases (supra) a division of a case by ordering a reference is a matter of discretion in each individual instance. It depends upon a determination of the most economical manner of conducting an action.
[7]
In light of the general procedure established for the conduct of actions and references, it is my view that the Sigma, Simpson, and Leithiser cases (supra) can be taken as indicating no more than that the court may refuse to order discovery on the question of damages (even in the absence of a 466 order) when in its discretion it considers it appropriate to do so. Those cases do not establish a general common law principle of severance as argued by the defendant.
[8]
The present case is not a complex one; it will not involve extensive expert or other technical evidence; it is a very simple case. It is not one in which I consider it appropriate to deny the plaintiff discovery on the issue of damages, on the basis of the Sigma, Simpson and Leithiser cases.
[9]
With respect to the argument that the severance is required in order to protect defendants from premature disclosure of financial or business information I would note that confidentiality orders are available to protect business and financial information which it is appropriate to keep confidential. That consideration cannot found a general principle of severance. In addition, significant function of discovery is to acquaint each side with the case against them. At times this leads to settlement. A general principle of severance as argued by the defendant, it seem to me, would undercut, in part at least, that function.
[10]
With respect to the questions asking whether there has been any previous suits against the defendant alleging infringement of industrial design, it is necessary to note that two defences raised in the statement of defence are: (1) innocent infringement (section 22 of the Copyright Act) and (2) the plaintiff's design is not a copyrightable subject-matter by reason of section 46 of the Copyright Act.
[11]
Section 46 provides:
"46.(1) This Act does not apply to designs capable of being registered under the Industrial Design Act, except designs that, though capable of being so registered, are not used or intended to be used as models or patterns to be multiplied by any industrial process.
"(2) General rules, under the Industrial Design Act, may be made for determining the conditions under which a design shall be deemed to be used for such purposes as aforesaid."
Counsel for the plaintiff argues that the two questions are relevant because if the defendant had in fact been previously sued for infringement of industrial design rights this would tend to prove that he had knowledge that there would likely be some type of intellectual property right held by the plaintiff in its design, even if he did not specifically identify that right as a copyright.
[12]
With some degree of hesitation, I have decided that the questions should be answered. I accept counsel's argument that a positive answer would tend to disprove the defence of innocent infringement. In addition, I agree that on examination for discovery it is appropriate that the benefit of the doubt be given in favour of requiring that questions be answered.
[13]
Accordingly questions 27, 139, 240, 241, 263, 370, 379, 382, 383, 218 and 221 are to be answered.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]