[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an application by the defendant in a patent infringement action for an order striking out paragraph 6 of the plaintiff's statement of claim on the grounds that it discloses no reasonable cause of action in that there is not a precise statement of material facts by which the defendant has allegedly infringed the claims of the patent.
[2]
It is clear that in a statement of claim the plaintiff must plead the facts upon which it bases its claim. Here, paragraphs 1 and 2 identify the parties; paragraph 3 tells us of the plaintiff's patent and its registered number; in paragraph 4 the plaintiff defines its rights under the patent; paragraph 5 describes the patent; and paragraph 6 reads:
"Since the issue of Patent No. 1,185,584, the defendant has, without the consent, authority or licence of the plaintiff, made, used, offered for sale, sold and otherwise distributed in Canada floor anchoring systems for monocoque automobile bodies, identified as Power-Lok Chainless Anchoring System, which floor anchoring systems include underbody clamps which fall within each and every one of the claims of Patent No. 1,185,584."
In my view it is only an allegation of infringement
without adequate facts to show how the defendant has done so
. It is tantamount to saying, "I have a patent, duly registered and described above and your product infringes all claims". It does not tell the defendant how this has been done - there are no facts provided by the plaintiff who obviously has the most information about its patent, and then sees, in its view, where the Power-Lok Chainless Anchoring System offends.
[3]
The defendant must be in a position to "have an opportunity of understanding clearly and precisely the exact nature of the invention ... and finally, an opportunity of knowing the
precise manner
in which, according to the allegations of the plaintiff, he has infringed the claims of the patent":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Emphasis added).
[4]
There is no need to belabour the matter other than to quote Jackett, P., of the Exchequer Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 241:
"In general, under our system of pleading, a statement of claim for an infringement of a right should clearly show
(a) facts by virtue of which the law recognizes a defined right as belonging to the plaintiff, and
(b)
facts that constitute an encroachment by the defendant
on that defined right of the plaintiff." (Emphasis added)
[5]
The plaintiff has met the first test but not the second. Jackett, P., at p. 242 of the Precision Metalsmiths case (supra):
"It is not a compliance with requirement that the material facts be alleged merely to state the conclusions that the court will be asked to draw, which are,
(a) that the plaintiff is the owner of one or more specified Canadian patents, and
(b) that the defendant has infringed the plaintiff's rights under such patents."
[6]
I cannot agree with counsel for the plaintiff that the defendant is asking it to construe the law by giving the facts upon which it relies to show infringement nor that the plaintiff has adequately set forth the facts. Discovery may very well narrow the issues, but before discovery the defendant needs the facts showing how, in the view of the plaintiff, infringement occurred.
[7]
Accordingly, the application is allowed for the reasons stated above, with costs to the defendant in any event of the cause. The plaintiff will have leave to file an amended statement of claim within 30 days.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]