[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for judicial review, for an order setting aside the decision made December 23, 1991, by members of the Refugee Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board wherein they determined that the applicant is not a Convention refugee. The application was heard in Toronto on August 11, 1993 when decision was reserved. On this the following day, after further consideration of submissions made at the hearing, an order is issued dismissing the application. These are reasons for that Order, filed in accord with s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 as amended.
[2]
After reviewing several matters on which the panel found that the evidence adduced at his hearing by the applicant was implausible, in the panel's view, its decision concludes:
"In conclusion, we find that the cumulative effect of the above implausibilities in the claimant's story is such as to discredit it on material points.
"For these reasons, and after careful consideration of all the evidence adduced at this hearing, the panel is not satisfied that the claimant has good grounds for fearing persecution by reason of any of the grounds set out in the Convention refugee definition.
"The Refugee Division determines, therefore, that Jamal Muhammed is not a Convention refugee."
[3]
For the applicant it is urged that several findings of the panel were not reasonably made, in light of the evidence presented by the applicant, and in the absence of any express finding on credibility of the applicant as a witness. Insofar as the evidence is found to be implausible by the panel, not with reference to internal inconsistencies or discrepancies, but with reference to inferences drawn by the panel it is urged on the authority of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) that this court is in as good a position as the panel was to assess the credibility of evidence offered.
[4]
The test thus proposed for the court is one I do not accept in light of s. 18.1(4)(d) of the
Federal Court Act
which in relation to judicial review provides that in an application for judicial review the court may grant relief, inter alia, where a federal board, commission or tribunal.
"(d) based its decision or order on an erroneous finding of fact that it made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before it."
It is the standard as set by the
Act
which underlies the decisions of my colleague Mr. Justice Noël in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  role of the court to substitute its decision for that of the tribunal, especially where the decision is based on an assessment of credibility, I note also, that the decision of Mr. Justice MacGuigan, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , to which the applicant refers, was rendered at a time when the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in dealing with appeals from the Immigration and Refugee Board included the authority to make the decision the Board should have made, as well as to refer the matter back for reconsideration which is the typical outcome of success in an application for judicial review, which is not an appeal of the substance of the decision questioned.
[5]
The applicant claims to be a national of the Sudan, without formal education except for some 18 years of arabic study relating only to the Koran, who lived at home in Juba, with his parents. He was a herder of animals and when he was 26 years old, while herding, he and his friends were taken into detention by the SPLA, an insurgent force in the Sudan. They were held for a month, threatened with death if they did not agree to train as SPLA troops, which under duress he agreed to do. After about five days in training, he asked to leave the armed camp where they were held and in training to buy cigarettes and he was allowed to walk out the main gate. He was not followed, ran off to his house and spent one night in a deserted building near his home before going on to his home next morning. Shortly after his arrival at home, a vehicle and soldiers, which he believed to be SPLA forces, arrived at his home. While he hid in his father's room, his father and mother were attacked by the soldiers and both parents were shot and killed. He was not discovered, left later that day to Khartoum and from there made his way to Egypt. There, in Cairo, he encountered a friend of his father, who provided shelter and arranged for his travel by air to Finland and thence to Canada, where he arrived without travel or other documents and claimed refugee status.
[6]
His claim to refugee status is based on his fear of persecution, should he be returned to the Sudan, at the hands of the SPLA, or as a result of government action since parents of some of those detained with him by the SPLA would know of his involvement with the insurrectionists.
[7]
In assessing the credibility of the evidence offered, the panel had two main concerns, first in accepting the fact that the applicant is really from the Sudan, and second in relation to several aspects of his story that the panel found to be implausible.
[8]
As to the first, the panel refers to documentary evidence which describes the Hausa Tribe as principally located in an area of Sudan other than the south where the claimant's home city was located and which he described as populated by members of that tribe, of which he himself was a member. He did not refer to one of the colours in the flag of the Sudan, when requested to identify the flag colours. His estimates of the population of his home city, Juba, at 10,000 were not a close approximation of the 56,000 population provided by documentary evidence. He did not name, when asked, any national holiday of the Sudan. He claimed ignorance as a result of lack of education, the fact that he lived at home and did not venture out except for herding responsibilities - and counsel urged that the panel was not properly sensitive to the world of an uneducated Sudanese. I am not persuaded that, even if I might not have reached the same conclusion, the panel did not have before it evidence that would support its doubt that the claimant actually was a native of Sudan.
[9]
As to the second matter, the implausibilities found in relation to his story or key aspects of it, these concerned the claimed enforced recruitment into SPLA forces in light of documentary evidence which although it referred to reports of such activity had found no basis to verify the reports; the description of his walking out of the camp where he had been held for a month and was training for five days and not being followed; the basis of claiming the military men who followed to his home and killed his parents as SPLA forces and for assuming their visit was in any way related to his escape from the camp; the apparent failure of the soldiers, after killing his parents, to search for him in the house if he was indeed their target; the basis for any fear of persecution by government for his involvement with SPLA, since those who would report it were themselves similarly involved; the sheer coincidence of meeting an old friend of his father, while wandering in Cairo, one whom the claimant had not seen for a decade, and who made possible his transit to Canada.
[10]
Again, having read the transcript of the hearing and the panel's decision, I might have reached a different conclusion on any of these aspects of the applicant's story but the panel's findings cannot be said, in my view, to be unreasonable in light of the evidence before the panel including documentary evidence, and reasonable inferences the panel was free to draw from that evidence. In these circumstances, I am not persuaded that the tribunal's decision was based on findings that can be characterized as perverse, or capricious or made without regard to the material before the panel.
[11]
For these reasons, an order goes dismissing the application for judicial review.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/dlr
[End of document]