[1]
Walsh, D.J.
: Plaintiff moves for certiorari, reviewing the defendant Canadian Human Rights Commission's decision to proceed with a claim by Alfred Hinrichsen against plaintiff, and prohibition preventing defendant from proceeding with Mr. Hinrichsen's claim on the following grounds:
(i) the complain against the plaintiff pursuant to s. 7 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6 ("
C.H.R.A.
") was filed by Mr. Hinrichsen more than one year after the act complained of, contrary to s. 41(e) of the
C.H.R.A.
and the defendant failed to observe procedural fairness in deciding to proceed with the complaint without disclosing the reasons for doing so and providing the plaintiff with an opportunity to make submissions on an informed basis;
(ii) the complaint against the plaintiff pursuant to s. 10 of the
C.H.R.A.
was filed by Mr. Hinrichsen more than one year after the act complained of, contrary to s. 41(e) of the
C.H.R.A.
and the defendant did not make any decision to extend the time limits nor did it give reasons for its extension of the time limits;
(iii) laches, breach of natural justice, and failure to observe procedural fairness, in that the extreme delay in proceeding with the application is prejudicial to the interests of the plaintiff.
[2]
The affidavits in evidence disclose that plaintiff Motorways Direct Transport Ltd. employed Alfred Hinrichsen from July 22, 1959 until December 14, 1984. Hinrichsen was a member of Teamsters Local Union 938, which was the certified bargaining agent for Motorways employees, and Motorways is a member of the Motor Transport Industrial Relations Bureau of Ontario. The Bureau and Local 938 signed the Ontario General Freight Agreement in force from October 1982 to October 1985 which provided for arbitration of grievances by the Ontario Joint Grievances Committee and which also provided that an employee who reported for duty while under the influence of an intoxicant or illegal stimulant would be subject to dismissal after the second offence. Plaintiff claims that during his employment Hinrichsen had the worst disciplinary record of any employee of the company, being disciplined on numerous occasions including several alcohol-related incidents. On November 1, 1984 he was intoxicated at work and suspended for three days. In December 1984 he was again intoxicated at work and was dismissed on December 14, 1984, in accordance with the collective agreement with the union. He grieved this termination, which proceeded to arbitration and his grievance was dismissed on March 6, 1985.
[3]
There were eight different terminal managers during the course of Hinrichsen's employment at the Toronto terminal and each of them had occasion to discipline Hinrichsen.
[4]
On February 9, 1987, Hinrichsen filed a complaint with the Canadian Human Rights Commission alleging that Motorways discriminated against him by refusing to continue to employ him on the basis of his disability (alcoholism) in contravention of s. 7 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
. The Commission made a preliminary report prior to designation of an investigator on April 2, 1987, which points out that his complaint was not within the one year time limit, that he had been represented by two lawyers from April 1985 to November 1986, the delay in signing the complaint was partially attributable to the complainant pursuing other avenues of redress and that since the complaint was over two years out of time prejudice to the respondent was possible. He had contacted the Commission within the time limit but did not file a complaint as Commission staff encouraged him to pursue other avenues. It concludes that the Commission should deal with the complaint even though based on acts which occurred more than one year before it was filed. On May 13, 1987, the Commission wrote a letter to Motorways advising that the complaint would be dealt with, asking them to make a submission within thirty days of receipt of the letter stating "This 30 day time limit will be strictly adhered to in order to expedite the completion of this complaint". Motorways made a submission on June 9, 1987, stating that the report was not clear as to whether the investigator's information came solely from the complainant as there was no indication of any specific discussion with any employees of the Commission. Even if he received advice from the Commission staff to pursue other remedies he had experience with grievance process and was represented by two lawyers who were well aware of the requirements for filing a complaint.
[5]
On July 18, 1988, Hinrichsen filed a second complaint against Motorways alleging that it discriminated against him by entering into an agreement and establishing a practice that deprived him of employment opportunities in violation of s. 10 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, alleging that the discriminating practice occurred on or about December 13, 1984 and is continuing. On September 22, 1988 (some fifteen months after Motorways' submission), C.H.R.C. informed Motorways it intended to deal with the first complaint. In a letter dated November 16, 1988, the Commission advised Motorways that Hinrichsen's s. 10 complaint should be investigated, the issue of the timing of that complaint not being addressed by the Commission. On February 15, 1989, Motorways responded to the s. 10 complaint and on March 7 Motorways was advised that the two complaints were redesignated to another investigator. On July 11, 1989, Motorways' counsel wrote the Commission advising that further delays in processing the complaints were totally unacceptable and on August 29, 1989, the Commission replied that the investigation would proceed within the next two months. Another ten months later, on June 13, 1990, the Commission advised Motorways' counsel they would like a meeting to review Hinrichsen's personnel files and relevant company policies and identify available witnesses. It has been difficult to locate potential witnesses or obtain information for the necessary affidavits. The present motion was made on January 3, 1991.
[6]
Section 41 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, 1976-77, c. 33, reads in part as follows:
"41. Subject to s. 40, the Commission shall deal with any complaint filed with it unless in respect of that complaint it appears to the Commission that
(a) the alleged victim of the discriminatory practice to which the complaint relates ought to exhaust grievance or review procedures otherwise reasonably available;
. . . . .
(e) the complaint is based on acts or omissions the last to which occurred more than one year or such longer period of time as the Commission considers appropriate in the circumstances, before receipt of the complaint."
[7]
Section 10 on which the second complaint was based reads as follows:
"It is a discriminatory practice for an employer, employee organization or organization of employers
(a) to establish or pursue a policy or practice, or
(b) to enter into an agreement affecting recruitment, referral, hiring, promotion, training, apprenticeship, transfer or any other matter relating to employment or prospective employment,
that deprives or tends to deprive an individual or a class of individuals of any employment opportunities on prohibitive grounds of discrimination."
[8]
In answer to this, defendant submits that it was decided to deal with the complaint even though it was well outside the normal one year period as Mr. Hinrichsen had contacted C.H.R.C. well within the one year period. It was the Commission itself which induced the second complaint to be made after discussions with Mr. Stewart, their investigator, and the union. This decision was made in February 1988 according to Mr. Stewart's affidavit but it was not until November 1988, nine months later, that the Commission forwarded a copy of the s. 10 complaint to Motorways. Soon after, Mr. Stewart was assigned to new duties and another investigator, Ms. Ridding was assigned to investigate the complaints at the end of January 1989. It was not until one year and a half later in June 1990 that she suggested a meeting with representatives of Motorways for reviewing Hinrichsen's personal files, company policies and to identify available witnesses. Much of this information was already on file as a result of the earlier investigations and Motorways' previous submissions. Counsel for Motorways replied that they had to obtain instructions from their clients with respect to the lengthy delays which had severely prejudiced it. Having understandably lost all patience with Mr. Hinrichsen and with respondent for the excessive delay in investigating his complaints and having them heard, Motorways decided that to bring the matter to a head they would introduce the present motion.
[9]
There is no doubt that Motorways has suffered severe prejudice by the delay. While Hinrichsen's dismissal did not take place until December 1984 there was, as already indicated, an extremely long series of complaints going back to 1963. He was supervised by eight different terminal managers, one of whom is now dead and the only one the company was able to communicate with, one Dave Christian, a supervisor from 1982 to 1985, states in an affidavit taken November 20, 1990 that he has not been employed by Motorways for six or seven years, and has had two other jobs since that time in the same industry. He recalls, however, during his employment with Motorways, Hinrichsen worked on the docks and also was a long-haul driver and was not a good worker being subject to discipline on numerous occasions. In view of the long delay, he states that his recollection of specific incidents is impaired by the passage of time between Hinrichsen's termination and the present time. This would clearly be prejudicial at a hearing into the complaint.
[10]
It may well be that over the years, Motorways has been too lenient with Mr. Hinrichsen. A listing of some of the complaints appears in their letter of February 15, 1989, to the Canadian Human Rights Commission and indicates that in addition to the alleged alcoholism he had been reprimanded for flagrant disobedience of orders of authorized personnel who warned that unless his driving record changed the company would terminate his employment, suspended again for flagrant disobedience of orders of authorized personnel, and another case for mishandling or abusing equipment. He was suspended again for misconduct for behaviour at a customer's premises, and another case for deliberate disobedience of orders of authorized personnel. In July 1978 he parked his personal vehicle blocking the terminal's driveway attempting to incite an illegal strike, and was removed by the police. He was terminated at that time but the company agreed with the union to give him one last chance. He was reinstated on five years' probation ending August 14, 1983, providing a letter of resignation, applicable at any time during that period when his work performance and conduct did not meet the requirements of the company. He was no longer allowed to operate company trucks.
[11]
It appears that little weight has been given in considering the recommendation to proceed with the complaint, to the information provided in Motorways' said letter of February 15, 1989. On page 4, that letter stated:
"Contrary to Mr. Hinrichsen's statement, his termination on December 14, 1984, was not just the second time he had been at work intoxicated. There were several previous disciplinary events when the company had provided him with suspensions and had terminated him and reinstated him on the condition that he change his work-related conduct. The company also tried to counsel him after the suspension he received in November of 1984."
[12]
Plaintiff submits that Mr. Hinrichsen was not discriminated against because of any disability. If Mr. Hinrichsen is in fact dependent upon alcohol, no action was taken against him because of his dependence upon alcohol. Rather it is Mr. Hinrichsen's work-related conduct which resulted in his termination. His employment conduct can only be described as abysmal. If that conduct stems from an alcohol-related dependency the
Act
does not provide that he is entitled to a standard treatment by his employer greater than that accorded to other employees, which is what he is attempting to obtain through this complaint. The work-related conduct engaged in Mr. Hinrichsen would not have been tolerated with respect to an employee who did not have a dependence on alcohol, so it cannot be suggested that Mr. Hinrichsen is being discriminated against because of a dependence on alcohol. The
Act
does not provide an obligation upon employers to treat preferentially those with disabilities. It only requires the employer not to act or establish policies which would discriminate against individuals because of a prohibited ground to discrimination. Aside from having been extremely, perhaps excessively, patient with Mr. Hinrichsen over a period of many years, Motorways endeavoured even through his termination to make a settlement satisfactory to him.
[13]
In October 1985, his union indicated that they wished to have him given a pension but could not do so unless Motorways confirmed with the local union that Mr. Hinrichsen had intended to take early retirement prior to his dismissal. Mr. Hinrichsen had not so informed Motorways of his intention to take early retirement but despite this, in consideration of a letter from Motorways to his union Local 938 stating that Motorways was aware of an intention on Mr. Hinrichsen's part to take early retirement, Mr. Hinrichsen agreed to release Motorways from any further legal action.
[14]
On or about November 8, 1985, the company wrote the letter and on December 3 wrote to the union enclosing a release from further legal claims of Mr. Hinrichsen. He never executed this agreement so has not received a pension. This would have settled the matter to the satisfaction of all parties assuming that the complaint before the Canadian Human Rights Commission is a form of legal action. Instead, whether by his own decision, or on the advice of his union (perhaps it matters not which) on February 9, 1987, the first complaint subject of the present proceedings was filed by him.
[15]
It is interesting to note that Alwyn Child, Acting Chief of National Investigation Policies of the Commission, had recommended that the complaint not proceed. He was apparently eventually overruled. The two complaints eventually scheduled to proceed both set out the ground of "disability" and they are both dated July 18, 1988. That based on s. 7 of the
Act
reads:
"On December 13, 1984, I was dismissed for being under the influence of alcohol while at work. I had been disciplined before for an alcohol related offence, and the respondent knew that my driver's licence had been suspended as a result of an impaired driving conviction. I believe that the respondent should have known because of this that I was dependent on alcohol. The standard discipline for reporting to work under the influence of alcohol, as outlined in the collective agreement between the respondent and Teamsters Union Local 938 signed on November 21, 1982, is that on a second offence any employee is subject to dismissal. This was not modified to take into account my dependence on alcohol. I was not offered any alternative to dismissal, such as leave for counselling or rehabilitation. Employees suffering from other illnesses or disabilities receive short-term and long-term benefits to support them while they are unable to work."
[16]
The other complaint, based on s. 10, reads:
"The collective agreement signed between the respondent and Teamsters Union Local 938 on November 21, 1982, states that an employee reporting for duty under the influence of an intoxicant or an illegal stimulant is subject to dismissal on a second offence. The respondent does not offer a less discriminatory alternative, such as rehabilitation or counselling. On December 14, 1984, I was dismissed for being under the influence of alcohol at work. This was my second such offence. The respondent should have known I was dependent on alcohol because I had already been disciplined for the same reason, and the respondent knew that my driver's licence had been suspended for impaired driving. I was offered no alternative to dismissal such as leave for counselling or rehabilitation. Employees of the respondent who are unable to work because of other illnesses or disabilities receive short-term and long-term benefits to support them while they are unable to work."
[17]
It is evident that respondent wishes to make a test case of this as appears from frequent reference to it being in the "public interest". The two issues which concern them are, first, the acceptance of alcoholism as a disability within the meaning of the
Act
and what steps an employer should take to endeavour to have the employee treated for this before dismissing him, and whether otherwise clearly inexcusable conduct induced by alcohol constitutes a ground for dismissal. The second issue is whether a union contract which specifies certain conditions for dismissal including alcoholism, after proper warning, should be sustained, even after proper grievance has been taken and dismissed, on the basis that such a clause in a contract itself is an infringement of s. 10 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
.
[18]
It is for this reason that I have gone at some length into the background of the matter in order to assist in a full understanding of it, although any decision on the merits has to be made by the Commission, and is not a matter in issue before me on the present motion.
[19]
Section 2 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
sets out the purpose of the
Act
as follows:
"2. The purpose of this Act is to extend the laws in Canada to give effect, within the purview of matters coming within the legislative authority of Parliament, to the principle that every individual should have an equal opportunity with other individuals to make for himself or herself the life that he or she is able and wishes to have, consistent with his or her duties and obligations as a member of society, without being hindered in or prevented from doing so by discriminatory practices based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, age, sex, marital status, family status, disability or conviction for an offence for which a pardon has been granted."
[20]
While it is clearly intended to protect an individual from discrimination on the basis, inter alia, of "disability", in its application those charged with applying it are not exempted from complying with fundamental legal principles. It is trite law to state that the duty of fairness applies to decisions even of an administrative nature. The duty of fairness applies to all parties to a dispute and it is fundamental that they must be treated equally. It is just as important that an employer be dealt with fairly as a discharged employee. This must not be lost sight of in rendering decisions for protection of the employee pursuant to the provisions of the
Act
. Employers have some rights in their dealings with their employees, and this must be given fair consideration unless these rights are abused.
[21]
It is in the light of this general comment and the jurisprudence to which the court has been referred that I will now deal with the specific paragraphs of plaintiff's motion.
[22]
I have concluded that plaintiff cannot succeed on paragraph (i) of its motion submitting that Hinrichsen's complaint was filed more than one year after expiry of the delay for filing such complaints provided in s. 41(e) of the
Act
and that defendant failed to observe procedural fairness in deciding to proceed with the complaint without disclosing the reasons for doing so and providing the plaintiff an opportunity to make submissions on an informed basis. While plaintiff argues that the fact that the section provides delay of one year indicates that Parliament felt that this was adequate, that this should not be likely departed from, the Commission did in this case have some extenuating circumstances justifying acceptance of the long delayed complaint. While some of the delays were undoubtedly attributable to Hinrichsen himself, certainly in the period after the expiry of one year, attributable to him and his counsel, it appears that he first communicated with the Commission before the year had expired and was discouraged from proceeding with the complaint until he had exhausted grievance procedures available to him by virtue of his employment contract. This would appear to be sensible advice, but after his grievance was dismissed on March 6, 1985, though still well within the twelve month delay, the report prior to designation of an investigator signed by investigator Stewart on April 2, 1987, indicates that the first contact with the complainant was on April 3, 1985. Complainant advised him that his lawyer was attempting to obtain minutes of the grievance hearing from the employer, and depending on his lawyer's efforts he might then file a complaint. From April 1985 to November 1986 he was represented by two lawyers who attempted to obtain redress through his union, from Labour Canada, and the Canada Labour Relations Board. He even approached his member of Parliament. It was not until November 27, 1986, that he again communicated with the Commission. However, when he communicated with the Commission on September 11, 1985, he was "encouraged by the Commission staff to pursue other avenues. The complaint would have been in time had it been filed at that time". It would appear therefore that the Commission shares in the delay resulting in him not filing his claim on time which is the main reason why they accepted it for investigation even after the lengthy delay.
[23]
When on May 13, 1987, the Commission wrote a letter to Motorways advising that the complaint should be dealt with because "the delay in signing the complaint is not primarily attributable to the claimant and the complaint could have a significant impact on public interest", Motorways was given an opportunity to reply which it did on June 9, 1987. It was not until September 22, 1988, that Motorways were advised that the Commission had reviewed the complaint including Motorways' submissions and had decided to deal with it. It is this "decision" dealing with the delay in filing the complaint which is being attacked and that it was made without an opportunity for Motorways to have made representations. It would appear however that procedural fairness was complied with and the merits to this decision is not a matter for the court in this motion.
[24]
With respect to paragraph (ii) of the motion plaintiff complains that the s. 10 complaint is also well beyond the one year delay. Defendant argues that with respect to s. 10 this is an ongoing complaint respecting the policy or practice of the employer, and especially the agreement with the union and therefore the time limit does not apply and it was unnecessary to make any decision with respect to extending it, so there was no reason to give plaintiff any reasons for this. It appears that this is an issue which the Commission itself wishes to raise and complainant was willing to sign a complaint by virtue of s. 10 also. I do not believe therefore that the motion can succeed on this point.
[25]
With respect to s. (iii) however, pleading laches, breach of natural justice, and failing to observe procedural fairness, and that the extreme delay in proceeding with the application is prejudicial to the interest of the plaintiff, I believe that plaintiff has a very strong argument which must be sustained.
[26]
In the case of
Kodellas and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 52 Sask. R. 139, complaints were filed within the time limit for discrimination pursuant to s. 27 of the
Human Rights Code
. The inquiry was not held until four years after the complaint was served and it was held that this amounted to unreasonable delay and justified an order to stay the proceedings pursuant to ss. 24, 7, and 11(b) of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. That case set out what could be considered as unreasonable delay and among the considerations looked at was whether the conduct of the Commission was responsible for the delay, the lack of institutional resources which could be responsible for it, the conduct of the wrongdoer (in this case allegedly Motorways) whether the delay was acquiesced in or failure to cooperate with the investigation and whether it was prejudicial to the wrongdoer including impairment of ability to make full answer in defence, and prejudice to society. It was held that there is a societal value in having trials or proceedings dealt with in an expeditious manner and without delay which assures confidence in the administration of justice. A comment was made about the difficulty in being forced to attempt to locate witnesses to testify to a circumstance which took place some four years before and at page 45 W.W.R. the judgment states:
"Had these matters been proceeded with in a timely fashion, none of that additional effort or expense would have been required, nor would the potential prejudice caused by impairment or potential impairment of the opportunity to mount a full answer and defence caused by lack of memory or faded memory exist."
[27]
The quotation continues on the same page:
"The effects of the over long delay in this case caused by the failure of the Commission to investigate and take action in a timely fashion could have a deleterious effect on the administration of justice. The public has a right to expect the complaints of this nature indeed, complaints of any kind under the
Code
, will be dealt with expeditiously in order to assure the purposes and objects of the
Code
are attained."
[28]
In fairness to the Commission it must be stated that they are quite possibly overworked and short staffed, but the delay in proceeding with this matter, not only the initial decision to entertain the complaint notwithstanding the delay in bringing it, but thereafter by change of investigator, and indecision within the bureaucracy of the Commission itself as to whether the complaint should be entertained or not, is extraordinary and unacceptable. This is an issue which is coming before the courts with increasing frequency even in serious criminal trials which have frequently been dismissed as a result of a Supreme Court decision that unreasonable delay, not the fault of the accused himself, is excessive, resulting in dismissal of the complaints.
[29]
I believe it is unnecessary to go into the jurisprudence respecting laches. Respondent argues that where the impugned decision is merely one to initiate an investigation, insufficient interests are at stake to demand a high level of procedural fairness, and certiorari is not available to quash such decision (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  jurisdiction to decide whether it has the jurisdiction to proceed with the complaint, and where it has the court should not interfere to prevent it from investigating (see
Re Singh (Subhaschan)
, [1989] 1 F.C. 430; 86 N.R. 69, at pages 436, 438 F.C.).
[30]
The
Kodellas
case (supra) is distinguished on the basis that here we are dealing with a common law action by a corporate respondent which cannot avail itself of s. 7 of the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 2; 58 D.L.R.(4th) 577; 25 C.P.R.(3d) 417, at p. 1004). Without relying on s. 7 of the
Charter
, however, it appears to me that the criteria set out in
Kodellas
as to what is an unreasonable delay are also applicable in considering the duty of fairness. Since the date of the investigator's report that an inquiry was warranted, no decision has yet been made to initiate it. An examination of the record discloses, however, that this will most likely be the result of the report in view of the issues which the Commission itself has indicated it wishes to have determined in this case. I have already indicated that the prejudice to Motorways is great. To require it to await an investigator's report, referral to the Commission, and enquiry before the Commission involving very extensive evidence and expense which may well be a waste of time for all parties does not seem justified. Far too much delay and prejudice to the plaintiff has occurred already which justifies a conclusion that the decision to proceed with an investigation is in itself a decision approved by the Commission. This has not been made fairly in regard to plaintiff.
[31]
With respect to the question of laches, defendant attempts to reverse the argument, stating that plaintiff itself is guilty of laches since after being advised on September 27, 1988, of the Commission's decision to proceed with the initial complaint, it did not bring the present proceedings seeking a certiorari to quash it until present proceedings were brought in January 1991. While at first sight this argument may appear valid, it must be noted that what was in issue at that time was the decision to accept the complaint for investigation although it had only been made on February 9, 1987, two years after Hinrichsen's dismissal. As I have already indicated in dismissing paragraph (i) of plaintiff's motion, the Commission appears to have had valid reasons for accepting the complaint despite the prolonged delay. At that time, plaintiff's application for certiorari would most probably have been futile. What I am now deciding however is, assuming the complaint was validly accepted, whether the delays from February 9, 1987, to September 27, 1988, while the Commission was deciding whether to accept the complaint or not, and more especially the subsequent delays in investigating this and the subsequent s. 10 complaint with respect to which complaints Ms. Redding only commenced her investigations in June 1990 was not unacceptably long, and that the delays which are so prejudicial to plaintiff breach the duty to act fairly. I therefore direct that a writ of certiorari be issued against defendant quashing its decision to proceed with an investigation of Alfred Hinrichsen's claims against the plaintiff and a writ of prohibition preventing it from proceeding with these claims with costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]