Reasons For Order
[1]
Rouleau, J.
: The applicant seeks a writ of certiorari quashing the October 29, 1992 decision of respondents refusing his request that he be granted an interview with respect to his application for permanent residence in Canada, and an order in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to reconsider and process his application under the "retired persons" category in accordance with the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the
Act
) and the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978 SOR/78-172 (the
Regulations
) as they existed at the time he filed his application.
[2]
The applicant applied for permanent residence in Canada on December 30, 1990 under the "retired persons" category notwithstanding the fact that he would not turn 55 years of age until January 9, 1992. As of midnight, August 2, 1991, the retirement provisions of the
Regulations
were revoked by legislative amendment, SOR/91-433.
[3]
The applicant was eventually advised on March 18, 1992 that his application was refused because it was determined that he did not meet the definition of a "retired person" at any time prior to the closure of that category on August 2, 1991. Given his age and occupation, it was also determined that he would not have received the required number of units of assessment pursuant to regulation 8 and schedule 1 to qualify as an "independent" immigrant.
[4]
On March 29, 1992, the applicant wrote a letter to the Commission in Hong Kong requesting that he be afforded a personal interview. A reply from the Commission on July 23, 1992 advised that his application had been refused on the same grounds and that a further review of his file indicated that there were no compassionate or humanitarian circumstances to otherwise warrant the exercise of the Governor-in-Council's discretionary power to waive the age requirement. For these reasons, the Commission did not feel that an interview was necessary.
[5]
It was at this point that the applicant retained counsel. He wrote the Commission on August 17, 1992. In his letter, he argued that his client was entitled to an interview pursuant to the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 275 (F.C.T.D.), and was therefore requesting that an interview be scheduled. This letter also indicated that he disagreed with the Commission's refusal to consider his application under the "retired" category.
[6]
When no reply was received, the applicant's counsel again wrote the Commission advising that if they were not going to provide their client with an interview as required by law and in accordance with this court's decision in
Lam
, supra, they were prepared to proceed accordingly. By letter dated October 29, 1992, counsel received a reply from the Commission maintaining the refusal. It is this final decision which is the subject matter of this application.
[7]
At the outset, counsel on behalf of the respondents moved that the application be dismissed on the grounds that it was initiated on December 8, 1992, nine months after he was first advised that his application had been refused; this, contrary to s. 18.1(2) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7; no extension of time for commencing the application had been sought. In the alternative, it was submitted that, if I should decide not to accede to the motion, the applicant should only be entitled to challenge the decision of October 29, 1992; that there was no legal requirement to grant an interview.
[8]
I am prepared to address the issues raised by both these decisions. If an extension of time is required in order to bring the issue of the visa officer's refusal to assess the application under the "retired" category before the court, I am satisfied that in the interest of justice, such an extension be granted:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 116.
[9]
That having been said, I shall now review the applicant's arguments that he was entitled to the benefit of those laws in existence at the time he filed his application; that SOR/91-433, the regulation revoking the "retired" category was of no force and effect on this application and finally that the respondents erred by "blindly adhering to a directive from head office directing all retiree applicants not 55 years of age by August 3, 1991 to be refused". They all fail for the reasons set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Court file No.T-1256-92 and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Court file No. T-700-92.
[10]
The remaining issue raised in this application is whether or not the respondents erred in denying the applicant the benefit of an interview?
[11]
I am not persuaded that the respondents erred. According to s. 9(2) of the
Act
, a visa officer is required to make an assessment as to whether or not a person is entitled to be granted landing. The
Act
further requires that an applicant must demonstrate that they will be able to become successfully established in Canada. The criteria for demonstrating "successful establishment" under the former "retired" category was set out in para. 8(1)(e) of the
Regulations
(now revoked) which provided:
"8(1) For the purpose of determining whether an immigrant and his dependents, other than a member of the family class or a Convention refugee seeking resettlement, will be able to become successfully established in Canada, a visa officer shall assess that immigrant or, at the option of the immigrant, the spouse of that immigrant
(e) in the case of a retired person, on the basis of
(i) The location in which the immigrant intends to reside,
(ii) The presence of friends or relatives of the immigrant in the locality in which he intends to reside, and
(iii) the potential of the immigrant for adjusting to life in Canada, his motivation and whether he has sufficient financial resources to support himself and his accompanying dependents without receiving any financial or social benefits that may be paid to him by any department or agency of a municipal, provincial or federal government in Canada."
[12]
Counsel for the applicant submitted that this assessment is subject to the rules of procedural fairness and that it should be carried out in a manner that is fair and responsive to the
Regulations
:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 222 (F.C.T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 48 (F.C.T.D.). He then went on to suggest that the criteria set out in regulation 8(1)(e), could only be properly and lawfully assessed during a personal interview:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 275 (F.C.T.D.).
[13]
I was then referred to the ministerial guidelines as they used to appear in the
Immigration Manual
, volume 1, Selection and Control, c. 4, Independent Immigration, in particular para. 4.23(6) which reads:
"6)
Governor-in-Council Request
"a) Because each case is unique and needs to be carefully judged on its individual merits, all retiree applicants 55 years of age or over should be interviewed personally unless it is clearly evident that an applicant lacks sufficient financial means to retire in Canada. Although the
Regulations
stipulate that the age factor as being the only absolute determinant on which decisions are to be reached in the case of retired persons,
there may be the occasional situation involving individuals who have legitimately and genuinely retired
or intend doing so before reaching age fifty-five.
Officers should bear this in mind and where circumstances warrant
, interviews should be extended to such persons as well. While discretion cannot be used to overcome the age factor,
officers may put such cases forward for Governor-in-Council consideration where they feel the situation merits such exceptional action
." (emphasis added)
[14]
Accordingly, it was submitted that the respondents acted contrary to the law, the Minister's guidelines and they breached the duty of fairness owed to the applicant in denying him the benefit of an interview. It was also suggested that the visa officer's decision was made in a perverse and capricious manner, and was based on information filed fifteen months earlier without providing the applicant with the opportunity of updating this information; particularly because of the fact that he had genuinely retired from full-time employment in 1990.
[15]
At the outset, the applicant's reliance on
Lam
in support of his submission that the visa officer had no discretion to refuse an interview is erroneous. In response to the decision in
Lam
, the Governor-in-Council amended the
Regulations
and the decision in
Lam
was set aside by the enactment of SOR/92-133 which came into force on February 20, 1992. This amendment allows a visa officer to reject an application on the basis of a paper review if it is obvious that the applicant does not meet the necessary criteria. This, in fact, was done in the present case. Having determined that the applicant did not qualify as a "retired person" at any time prior to the closing of the category, the visa officer determined, quite properly in my view, that the applicant did not qualify and that an interview was unnecessary.
[16]
The guidelines do provide, that
in exceptional circumstances
the Governor-in-Council may waive the age requirement with respect to an application under the retired category if, in the opinion of the visa officer, it is determined that such action is warranted. It is well-established that an interview is not an absolute requirement when a visa officer is considering an exercise of discretion under s. 114(2):
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R.(2d) 59 (F.C.T.D.).
[17]
One question remains; did the visa officer err in his assessment that the facts in the present case did not warrant exceptional action? The criteria by which the exercise of a statutory discretion may be assessed are well-settled. The Supreme Court has stated that if that discretion has been exercised in good faith, not arbitrarily or illegally and uninfluenced by irrelevant considerations, no court is entitled to interfere even if the court might have exercised its discretion otherwise:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[18]
It should be pointed out that even if the applicant has genuinely retired as was submitted, that fact alone would not justify favourable consideration by the Governor-in-Council. The record indicates that the visa officer did have regard to the submissions advanced by the applicant in his letter to the Commission dated March 29, 1992 as well as the letters written on his behalf by counsel. Having carefully reviewed the file, I am not satisfied that there is any evidence to support the allegation that the visa officer, in exercising this discretion, acted in such a manner that would warrant interference by this court.
[19]
This application is dismissed; costs to the respondents.
[20]
Having reviewed the submissions filed concerning a serious question of general importance to be certified under s. 83(1) of the
Act
, I am not satisfied that such a question arises out of this claim.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/rdw
[End of document]