[1]
Wetston, J.
: This is an application by Pharmacia Inc. and Farmitalia Carlo Erba S.R.L. for an order pursuant to s. 6(1) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations,
SOR/93-133 (the "
Regulations
"), prohibiting the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance ("NOC"), under s. C.08.004 of the
Food and Drug Regulations
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 870, as amended, to David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc., in respect of the medicine Doxorubicin Hydrochloride, until after the expiration of Canadian Letters Patent 1,248,453 and 1,291,037.
Background
[2]
Farmitalia Carlo Erba S.R.L., the named applicant pursuant to s. 6(4) of the
Regulations
, is the owner of Canadian Letters Patent 1,248,453 ("'453") and 1,291,037 ("'037) in respect of the medicine Doxorubicin, or its pharmaceutical salt, Doxorubicin Hydrochloride, used in the treatment of cancer tumours. Both patents '453 and '037 contain claims to pharmaceutical compositions, as well as claims to the processes to make those compositions.
[3]
Pharmacia Inc., formerly Adria Laboratories of Canada Ltd., is a licensee under the aforementioned patents held by Farmitalia. As such, by virtue of a notice of compliance issued by the respondent Minister of National Health and Welfare under s. C.08.004 of the
Food and Drug Regulations,
Pharmacia Inc. markets and distributes, in Canada, with Farmitalia's consent, the two Doxorubicin compositions contemplated in patents '453 and '037.
[4]
On April 7, 1993, following the proclamation of the
Regulations
, Pharmacia Inc., with the consent of Farmitalia, submitted a patent list, to the Minister, in respect of the medicine Doxorubicin, pursuant to s. 4(1) of the
Regulations
. Included on the list, among others, were Canadian Letters Patent '453 and '037.
[5]
David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. is a Canadian subsidiary of the Australian pharmaceutical company David Bull Laboratories Pty. Ltd. On September 28, 1990, on behalf of its parent company, David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. initiated proceedings to obtain approval to market and distribute, in Canada, its version of two Doxorubicin compositions, one a lyophilized powder and the other a ready-to-inject solution. A single New Drug Submission ("NDS") was filed with the Minister. Before the approval process was completed, the
Patent Act Amendment Act, 1992
, S.C. 1993, c. 2, was proclaimed in force and the
Regulations
were subsequently enacted.
[6]
Accordingly, the Minister advised David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc., by letter dated July 21, 1993, that the requirements of s. 5(1) of the
Regulations
would have to be satisfied. Pursuant to s. 5(1), David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. elected to pursue regulatory approval for one of the two proposed products contained in their September 28, 1990 NDS, the lyophilized Doxorubicin powder. Consequently, a notice of allegation was submitted alleging that, pursuant to s. 5(1)(b)(iv) of the
Regulations
, no claim in patent '453 would be infringed by David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. in the making, constructing, using or selling of its Doxorubicin lyophilized powder product. In compliance with s. 5(3)(b) of the
Regulations
, David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. served its notice of allegation on Pharmacia Inc. The following statement of legal and factual basis for the non-infringement allegation was also provided to Pharmacia Inc.:
"
I. The Notice of Compliance Application
"In the application, as on record with Health and Welfare Canada, a Notice of Compliance is sought for a doxorubicin product, in various dosage sizes, which will contain only the following materials: doxorubicin hydrochloride U.S.P. and lactose B.P. (as the monohydrate) in a weight ratio of approximately one part of doxorubicin hydrochloride to five parts of lactose. The product is prepared in an aqueous solution and lyophilised to provide a dry powder containing only the specified ingredients. The water used is water for injection, to either U.S.P. or B.P. The dissolution and lyophilisation are carried out under an inert cover of nitrogen gas. The lyophilised powder is packaged into suitable sealed containers.
"Hence, the product for which the Notice of Compliance is sought is a lyophilised powder mixture containing essentially only doxorubicin hydrochloride and lactose in the specified ration by weight.
"
II. Patent No. 1,248,453
"This patent discloses and claims a lyophilised product containing an anthracycline glycoside. It is clear from both the disclosure and claims that doxorubicin hydrochloride falls within the definition of 'anthracycline glycoside' used in the patent. Explicit reference is made to doxorubicin, for example, in claim 2, and claim 3 refers to the anthracycline glycoside being present in the form of its hydrochloride. Similar statements are to be found at page 4, line 16, and page 5, lines 6 and 7.
"The patent also refers to lyophilised powders according to the invention which optionally may contain lactose, described as an 'inert excipient' together with the anthracycline glycoside. Explicit reference is made to the presence of lactose in the lyophilised powder in claim 7, for example, and to the presence of both lactose and doxorubicin hydrochloride in the lyophilised powder in claim 8. Similar references are to be found in the disclosure, at page 5, lines 15 to 27.
"The patent additionally requires a further component to be present in the lyophilised powder. This is not an optional ingredient (as is the lactose) but is an essential ingredient. Each of the independent claims made, to with claims 1, 8, 9, 22, 24 and 25, require the presence of a co-solubilizing agent. This co-solubilizing agent is defined to be 'a hydroxy-mercapto, or amino-substituted benzoic acid or an alkali metal salt thereof or a C
1
-C
4
alkyl ester thereof, or a ring-halogenated methyl-substituted phenol or an amino acid, or a combination of two or more of said compounds' (see claim 1). Both the disclosure, especially at page 1, lines 9 to 14, page 2, line 19 to page 3, line 9, and page 4, line 1 to page 5, line 27, and each of the above-mentioned independent claims make it clear that the co-solubilising agent is an essential ingredient.
"
III. Non-Infringement
"The Federal Court of Canada has held on numerous occasions that in order for the claims of a patent to be infringed, it is necessary that all essential features in the claims in question must be found in the allegedly infringing product. Two determinations must be made. Firstly, the essential features of the patent claim, or claims are identified, and secondly, an analysis of the product is made to see whether it contains all of the identified essential features. An analysis of the patent claims in this case shows the following:
(a) As essential components, the lyophilised is required to contain an anthracycline glycoside together with a co-solubilizing agent; further doxorubicin hydrochloride is within the ambit of the claims; and
(b) As a nonessential optional component, the lyophilised may contain an inert excipient; lactose is identified as a suitable excipient.
"Therefore, in this case, there is a clear and unmistakable difference between the patent claim, or claims, and the product in question. The DBL product contains essentially
only
doxorubicin hydrochloride and lactose. No co-solubilizing agent, within the definition for that material to be found in the paten claims, is present. Indeed, no third substance, apart from residual amounts of water remaining in the lyophilised, is present in the DBL product.
"This is to be compared with the basic statement to be found in the patent which defines the invention made as follows (see page 2, lines 3 to 9):
'It has now been found that
the presence of a suitable co-solubilising agent
in a lyophilised anthracycline glycoside-containing preparation enhances to a great extent the solubility of the drug so that upon reconstitution, e.g. with physiological saline solution, but also with sterile water, complete dissolution is achieved in a few seconds without any difficulty.' (emphasis added)
"Only one conclusion can be drawn from this statement: the co-solubilizing agent is the most important ingredient in the compositions claimed; its addition to lyophilised systems of the type described is the invention of Canadian Patent No. 1,248,453.
"Therefore, a composition which does not include such a co-solubilizing agent cannot be an infringement of any claim in Patent No. 1,248,453."
[7]
On December 21, 1993, pursuant to s. 6(1) of the
Regulations
, Pharmacia Inc. filed an originating notice of motion seeking an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing an NOC to David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc., for their lyophilized Doxorubicin powder, until after the expiration of the Canadian Letters Patent '453 and '037.
Issue
[8]
In accordance with s. 6(2), the issue to be determined is whether the respondent's allegation of non-infringement with respect to Canadian patent '453 is "justified".
Analysis
Legislation
[9]
Prior to the
Patent Act Amendment Act
, patented medicines were subject to a scheme of compulsory licensing. Under the licensing scheme, generic or subsequent drug companies were able to market, import, and distribute generic versions of patented medicines without having to demonstrate that their product did not infringe an existing Canadian patent in respect of a certain medicine. If certain conditions were met, licenses were issued and the pharmaceutical patentee was responsible for enforcing its patent rights in the marketplace by way of a patent infringement action. Judicial remedies were considered adequate compensation for patent infringement.
[10]
The
Patent Act Amendment Act
and the repeal of compulsory licensing have created a new regulatory scheme for patented medicines, which, from a policy perspective, takes into account both public and private rights
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 302 (F.C.A.), at 304 C.P.R. The monopoly rights of a patentee have been expressly preserved in that a medicine cannot be marketed in Canada without a NOC issued by the Minister. However, two exceptions to infringement have been introduced by the addition of ss. 55.2(1) and (2) to the
Patent Act.
Those subsections read:
"55.2(1) It is not infringement of a patent for any person to make, construct, use or sell the patented invention solely for uses reasonably related to the development and submission of information required under any law of Canada, a province or a country other than Canada that regulates the manufacture, construction, use or sale of any product.
"(2) It is not an infringement of a patent for any person who makes, constructs, uses or sells a patented invention in accordance with subsection (1) to make, construct or use the invention, during the applicable period provided for by the regulations, for the manufacture and storage of articles intended for sale after the date on which the term of the patent expires."
The exceptions created by ss. 55.2(1) and (2) removed a patent right which would otherwise have been available to prevent a generic company from obtaining such regulatory approval. Moreover, to avoid abuse, the Governor-in-Council was given the authority to create, by virtue of s. 55.2(4), regulations "for preventing the infringement of a patent by any person who makes, constructs, uses or sells a patented invention". The
Regulations
, which came into force on March 12, 1993, were enacted for that purpose.
[11]
It is clear from the Regulatory Impact Statement that the
Regulations
recognize existing private commercial patent rights but not private rights of action. The regulatory scheme, one pertaining to public law, provides for a delay in the approval process by the Minister, by allowing a patentee the opportunity to determine whether the manufacture or marketing of the competitive product would infringe its patent rights.
Nature Of These Proceedings
[12]
The Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 329 (F.C.A.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  s. 6(1) of the
Regulations
are proceedings by way of judicial review and the procedure to be followed is contained in Part V.1 of the
Federal Court Rules
. It follows, in keeping with the timeframe contemplated in the
Regulations
, that these matters are to be determined expeditiously. However, unlike typical Part V.1 proceedings, there is no decision to be reviewed, rather, the question is whether the Minister may issue a subsequent NOC. Recently, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at pp. 53 and 54, Strayer, J.A., said the following with respect to the nature of these proceedings:
"... this court made [it] clear in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  proceedings to determine whether the Minister may issue a notice of compliance. That decision must turn on whether there are allegations made by the generic company sufficiently substantiated to support a conclusion for administrative purposes (the issue of a notice of compliance) that the applicant's patent would not be infringed if the generic's product is put on the market.
. . . . .
it will be noted that the
Regulations
nowhere create or abolish any rights of action between the parties: instead they confer a right on the patentee to bring an application for prohibition against the Minister of National Health and Welfare.
That is, the
Regulations
pertain to public law, not private rights of action
. ...
"If the Governor-in-Council had intended by these regulations to provide for a final determination of the issues of validity or infringement, a determination which would be binding on all private parties and preclude future litigation of the same issues, it surely would have said so." (own emphasis)
[13]
Against this background, I turn now to the issue of burden of proof.
Burden Of Proof
[14]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  legislation has any unusual bearing on burden of proof". The applicants argue that the issue before the Federal Court of Appeal in this case was whether McGillis, J., erred in refusing to direct a preliminary question on burden of proof and therefore his comments regarding burden of proof were obiter. While this may be the case, subsequent decisions have confirmed this approach.
[15]
In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 145 (T.D.), at p. 154 C.P.R., Nadon, J., said the following:
"... the working of s. 6(2) of the
Regulations
can lead to no other conclusion: the burden of proving that Nu-Pharm's allegation is not justified falls, at the outset, upon the applicants. If the patentee is not satisfied with the statement made by the second person it must seek the help of this court in order to compel the second person to provide a statement which meets the intended purpose of the
Regulations
."
While it has since been decided that the court cannot compel a further and better statement from a generic, it is clear that the burden of proving that a generic's allegation is other than "justified" falls on the applicant.
[16]
The issue of the legal burden of proof was again argued before Madame Justice McGillis in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 323 (T.D.), where she stated, at p. 327 C.P.R.:
"I have carefully considered the very capable submissions of counsel for the parties and have concluded, as did Nadon, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the
Regulations
rests on the patentee. However, in my opinion, the wording of s. 6(2) of the
Regulations
imposes an evidential burden on the generic company. In the event that the generic company fails to satisfy its burden of adducing sufficient evidence to justify its allegations, the patentee will have little difficulty meeting its overall legal burden in the proceedings."
[17]
Later,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Frosst Canada Inc.
, supra, at p. 319 C.P.R., Mr. Justice Hugessen, on behalf of the Court of Appeal, made the following comments with respect to the burden of proof in these proceedings:
"As I understand the scheme of the
Regulations
, it is the party moving under s. 6, in this case <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , which, as initiator of the proceedings, has carriage of the litigation and bears the initial burden of proof. That burden, it seems to me, is a difficult one since it must be to disprove some or all of the allegations in the notice of allegation which, if left unchallenged, would allow the Minister to issue a notice of compliance ...
"Furthermore, since the
Regulations
clearly allow the Minister, absent a timely application under s. 6, to issue a notice of compliance on the basis of the allegations in the notice of allegation, it would seem that on the hearing of such an application, at least where the notice has alleged noninfringement, the court should start from the proposition that the allegations of fact in the notice of allegation are true except to the extent that the contrary has been shown by the applicant. In determining whether or not the allegations are 'justified' (s. 6(2)), the court must then decide whether, on the basis of such facts as have been assumed or proven, the allegations would give rise in law to the conclusion that the patent would not be infringed by the respondent."
This view was confirmed in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), and in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  there is some burden on the applicants. However, in his view, because an applicant is only nominally an applicant, that burden is simply to demonstrate that the respondent has failed to "justify" its allegation.
[19]
The applicants argue that the evidential burden in these proceedings is on the respondent, relying on
AB Hassle
, supra, p. 327 C.P.R. By evidential burden, the applicants submit McGillis, J., was referring to the responsibility on the generic to provide sufficient evidence to justify their allegation. It is the applicants' position that because the respondent has not completely disclosed facts as to the process of manufacture, and specifically as to the product's ingredients, the evidential burden has not been met and the order of prohibition should issue. The applicants contend that this interpretation is consistent with the purpose of the
Regulations
, namely that generics must establish that they should be entitled to enter the marketplace, and that the
Regulations
were enacted to, in counsel's words, increase a patentee's rights.
[20]
Moreover, the applicants argue, on the basis of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. H.C.), affd. (1984), 1 C.P.R.(3d) 507 (Ont. C.A.), that at common law, where the subject-matter of an allegation lies particularly within the knowledge of one of the parties, that party must prove it. In this instance, the applicants submit that only the respondent knows the precise composition and process to be used in making their product.
[21]
The applicants submit that the respondent has refused to provide samples, which if tested, could conclusively determine whether or not the respondent's Doxorubicin infringes. In the applicants' submission, in light of the limited means of obtaining disclosure under the
Regulations
, it would be contrary to the principles of natural justice to deny them the benefit of their patent rights where there has not been full and complete disclosure. Essentially, the applicants say it is impossible for them to ascertain whether the respondent's product will infringe.
[22]
The respondent firmly takes the position that the wording of the
Regulations
requires the applicants, as the initiators of the proceeding, to prove that the allegation of non-infringement is not "justified".
[23]
The respondent contends that there are actually different evidentiary requirements at each stage in these proceedings. In the respondent's submission, a generic or an applicant for a subsequent NOC, who wishes to compare its product with one appearing on a patent list, and for which an NOC has previously issued, has a statutory obligation to provide the patentee with a detailed statement outlining the factual and legal basis for the legal conclusion that no claim in a particular patent will be infringed if a second NOC is issued. The respondent submits, that this is in keeping with Mr. Justice Mahoney's comments  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  AG
, supra, where at pp. 337 and 338 C.P.R. he said the following:
"One further matter warrants comment. Section 5(3)(a) of the
Regulations
requires that the applicant for the NOC provide a detailed statement of the basis in fact and law for his statement of allegation. It seems intended that the patentee be fully aware of the grounds on which the applicant says issuance of a NOC will not lead to infringement of the patent before the patentee decides whether or not to apply to a court for a determination. Such disclosure would define the issues at a very early stage. If that is the purpose, it confirms the intention that the proceedings be expeditiously conducted."
The patentee then has a choice. The patentee can take no steps, whereby the Minister may issue an NOC, or commence proceedings pursuant to s. 6(1) of the
Regulations
. Counsel contends that if an application is brought pursuant to s. 6(1), the patentee must either take issue with the facts or the legal conclusion set out in the detailed statement, in which case the applicant must put forward some evidence to the contrary, or the patentee can challenge the adequacy of the detailed statement itself. While it has been determined that the court cannot compel a further or better statement, in the respondent's submission, the inadequacies of the detailed statement must be pleaded in the originating motion in order for the respondent to know what further evidence should be filed to meet the challenge.
[24]
Regarding the comments of McGillis, J., in
AB Hassle
, supra, pp. 337-338, with respect to the evidential burden, the respondent contends that the court's comments must be considered in the context of that case. In that case, a motion was brought to compel the respondent to provide a further and better detailed statement. The one that was filed was essentially just a bald allegation. Accordingly, when the court concluded that the respondent bears an evidential burden, the respondent submits McGillis, J., was referring to the adequacy of the detailed statement since the purpose of a notice of allegation and its accompanying detailed statement is to illuminate the issues early in the proceedings. The respondent argues that once the detailed statement of the factual and legal basis for the allegation of non-infringement is provided to the applicant, and the applicant decides to pursue an application for an order of prohibition, the burden that the respondent will bear will be a function of what is disputed and the evidence that is filed by the applicant.
[25]
Similarly, the respondent argues that Strayer, J.A.'s, comment in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  adequacy of the detailed statement, rather than the evidence adduced in the judicial review application. The respondent submits this interpretation is consistent with the Federal Court of Appeal's decision that a respondent in an application brought under s. 6(1), need not even file any evidence:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  argument regarding the applicability of the common law presumption, the respondent contends that if the applicants seek to invoke the common law exception to the general rule regarding the legal burden of proof, not only must the subject matter of an allegation lie particularly within the knowledge of one of the parties, but the applicants must also establish that they are entitled to rely on that exception. This precondition appears in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at p. 227, where Ferguson, J.A., stated:
"No doubt the general rule is that he who asserts must prove, and that the onus is generally upon the plaintiff, but there are two well-known exceptions:
(1) That where the subject matter of the allegation lies particularly within the knowledge of one of the parties, that party must prove it, whether it be an affirmative or negative character ...
(2) That he who relies on an exception to the general rule must prove that he comes within the exception."
In the respondent's submission, if the applicants intended to rely on any such presumption, it should have been set out in the originating notice of motion in order to alert the respondent as to the type of evidence that may be required to rebut such a presumption.
[27]
It is the opinion of the court that the applicants herein are more than nominal applicants. The generic is required, by virtue of s. 5(1), to make an allegation. The allegation made by the generic must be supported by a detailed statement of the legal and factual basis for that allegation. This allows the patentee to determine if an order for prohibition should be sought, either because the facts as set out in the detailed statement are deficient, or because the legal conclusion as to non-infringement is unsupported by the facts. At this stage, since a further and better statement cannot be compelled, concerns with the detailed statement should be highlighted. Moreover, the grounds that the patentee has for challenging the generic's notice of allegation should be advanced in the Originating Notice of Motion filed pursuant to s. 6(1) of the
Regulations
. This approach flows from the dual requirements of the
Federal Court Rules
, Part V.1, and the legal burden on the applicants. The patentee should also present evidence to support its grounds whether such grounds are based on fact, law, mixed fact and law or opinion evidence. The generic may then be informed as to what vexes the patentee and why a prohibition order barring entry should be issued. Initially, i.e., before the Minister, the generic has raised the issue of non-infringement. At this stage, before the court, the generic now has the opportunity to file evidence supporting its detailed statement. In essence, this is the evidential burden on a respondent.
[28]
I conclude that the common law presumption is inapplicable herein. In
Hoffman- <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the court was dealing with a case involving the payment of royalties under a compulsory licence. The presumption in s. 41(2) of the
Patent Act
, which is identical to the wording of the new s. 55.1 was held to apply. That presumption was said to be bolstered by the common law presumption set out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. However, proceedings under the
Regulations
are not actions for infringement. In the words of Mr. Justice Hugessen  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>   <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 319 C.P.R.:
"There may, of course, be some presumptions (such as for example the statutory presumption of validity of a patent) which may help the moving party and have the effect of displacing the burden of proof. The presumption enacted by section 55.1, however, is not one of them. The proceedings are not an action and their object is solely to prohibit the issuance of a notice of compliance under the
Food and Drug Regulations
. Manifestly, they do not constitute 'an action for infringement of a patent'."
Moreover, an applicant cannot expect to rely on the common law presumption, which effectively reverses the burden of proof, without pleading, in their originating notice of motion the nature of the information which is within the exclusive knowledge of the generic and without establishing the inapplicability of the general rule.
The Allegation Of Non-infringement
[29]
Basically, the patented product at issue is a lyophilized powder which contains: the medicine Doxorubicin; an inert-excipient, which is often lactose; and a cosolubilizer as claimed in the patent. The cosolubilizer is the inventive ingenuity of the '453 patent. The respondent's product, also a lyophilized powder, as described in the detailed statement, contains "essentially only" Doxorubicin and lactose.
[30]
The applicants' concern, in part, stems from the respondent's use of the words "essentially only" in the detailed statement. The detailed statement makes the following assertion:
"[T]he product for which the Notice of Compliance is sought is a lyophilised powder mixture containing
essentially
only doxorubicin hydrochloride and lactose in the specified ration by weight." (own emphasis)
Accordingly, the applicants focused on whether the respondent's product contained something other than Doxorubicin and lactose, and if so whether it was a cosolubilizer within the '453 patent. In the applicants' submission, the respondent could be infringing without their knowledge. For instance, it is contended that an impurity in a starting ingredient could have the same properties as a cosolubilizer or the manufacturing process could convert a starting ingredient into a cosolubilizer. The applicants note that the respondent's product contains up to 3% impurities and that they are unaware of what those impurities are.
[31]
The respondent, on the other hand, urges the court to accept that an impurity is just that. It is not something added but rather is an inherent, inevitable byproduct of manufacturing. In support of this, the respondent argues that their product is within the range of purity required by either the United States Pharmacopeia (U.S.P.) or the British Pharmacopeia (B.P.). The respondent's argue that their Doxorubicin product does not contain a cosolubilizer within the meaning of the '453 patent claims.
[32]
The applicants' Originating Notice of Motion is lean. Essentially, the Originating Notice of Motion establishes only the applicants' standing under the
Regulations
to bring the application. The motion states that: Farmitalia is the owner of two Canadian patents which are marketed in Canada, by consent, by Pharmacia. Pharmacia has filed a patent list pursuant to s. 4 of the
Regulations
with the Minister, and an allegation was made by the respondent alleging non-infringement. The only evidence filed by the applicants consists of the affidavit of Robert J. Little, President of Pharmacia Inc. The affidavit simply attests to the facts set out in the originating motion. Despite having been granted leave by the court to file evidence at a later stage, nothing further was filed.
[33]
The respondent, in addition to providing the detailed statement, filed the affidavit of Mr. Richard Palangiewicz, the Regulatory Affairs Manager for David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. The respondent also filed four opinion affidavits, those of Peter Kirby, James R. Lake, David Rogers and David McGruder, all patent agents.
[34]
Counsel for the applicants urge the court to disregard the opinion evidence of the patent agents since they were only asked to examine the patent and the David Bull product which was alleged to contain only Doxorubicin and lactose and provide an opinion regarding infringement. The applicants argue that their opinions are not persuasive, since on cross-examination it was demonstrated that those were not the only ingredients. Alternatively, the applicants argue that they are not persons skilled in the art.
[35]
While the respondent has provided the opinions of four patent agents, the starting point must be whether the applicants have adduced any evidence contradicting the factual or legal basis for the respondent's allegation of non-infringement. As mentioned, the applicants' Originating Notice of Motion only asserts the applicants' right to bring an application pursuant to s. 6(1) of the
Regulations
. However, the applicants are seeking an order of prohibition. The Originating Notice of Motion and the supporting affidavit of Mr. Little provide no grounds for the granting of such relief.
[36]
In this case, the applicants are in receipt of a detailed statement, which, as Mr. Justice Mahoney noted  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  AG
, supra, at pp. 337 and 338 C.P.R., is intended to inform the patentee of the ground(s) on which the respondent contends the issuance of a subsequent NOC will not lead to infringement of the patent. The patentee decides whether to apply to the court for an order of prohibition. Where an originating notice of motion establishes only standing, how is the respondent expected to know and meet its evidential burden of proof.
[37]
The applicants concede that an essential ingredient or element, indeed the inventive ingenuity of patent '453, is the addition of a cosolubilizer to the Doxorubicin, which increases the solubility of the lyophilized powder composition. As indicated above, the applicants' concern with the language "essentially only" is with the unknown ingredient(s) and whether it is a cosolubilizer. They submit that the respondent could infringe the '453 patent claims without intentionally adding a cosolubilizer. The inherent impurities in the starting elements of the respondent's product remain suspect according to the applicants.
[38]
The applicants led no evidence regarding the fact that impurities could be cosolubilizers. The applicants obviously argue infringement and bear the legal burden of proof. In this regard, they have an obligation to adduce sufficient evidence in this context given the burden of proof. I am satisfied that the applicants have not demonstrated that the respondent's product contains a cosolubilizing agent, the inventive ingenuity of patent No. '453. I have not been persuaded that the non-infringement allegation made by the respondent is other than "justified".
[39]
The applicants have the legal burden of proof in these proceedings. Discharging the legal burden of proof generally requires evidence, particularly where the Court of Appeal has stated,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>   <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 319 C.P.R., that:
"the court should start from the proposition that the allegations of fact in the notice of allegation are true except to the extent that the contrary has been shown by the applicant."
Patent '037
[40]
The respondent sought regulatory approval in its NDS submitted to the Minister on September 28, 1990, regarding a second product. While an allegation was filed regarding the '453 patent, the applicants submit that no allegation was made regarding the second product, a liquid Doxorubicin solution, similar to the applicants' '037 patent.
[41]
The applicants contend that the respondent must indicate whether they are prepared to wait until the expiry of the '037 patent, or they must make an allegation within s. 5(1) of the
Regulations
. The applicants argue that to simply "wait and see" not only violates s. 5(1), but also prejudices the applicants and other generics by allowing the respondent to keep its options open. Accordingly, the applicants submit that an order of prohibition should be issued with respect to patent '037.
[42]
The respondent submits that an order of prohibition regarding the proposed liquid product is outside the scope of these proceedings. In the respondent's submission these proceedings are to determine whether a particular allegation is "justified". Because there has been no allegation with respect to the liquid product, the respondent argues that the court has no basis to issue a prohibition order. The applicants' inability to forecast future market share, in the respondent's submission, does not give the court jurisdiction regarding the '037 product.
[43]
The regulatory scheme contemplates a patentee being provided the opportunity to bring an application to prohibit the Minister from issuing a NOC where an allegation has been made. The
Regulations
also constrain the Minister from issuing a NOC until an allegation has been made. There has been no allegation with respect to the respondent's proposed product. An order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a NOC regarding the respondent's second proposed liquid Doxorubicin product would be premature. Moreover, there is nothing in s. 5(1) of the
Regulations
which requires the respondent to make an allegation within a specific time. The effect of no allegation being made is that the regulatory approval process for the respondent's second product cannot advance. If the court cannot require that an allegation be amended, or order a further and better detailed statement since they are materials that originate with the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Minister.
The Correct "Second Person"
[44]
The applicants contend that the respondent herein is not the correct "second person" within the meaning of the
Regulations
. The applicants submit that the correct "second person" should have been the respondent's Australian parent, David Bull Laboratories Pty. Ltd., in whose name the NDS was filed, and by whom the product to be distributed in Canada will be manufactured. The applicants argue that the allegation made by the respondent, David Bull Laboratories Inc., is null and void and that an order of prohibition should issue until the correct "second person" complies with s. 5(1) of the
Regulations
.
[45]
It is the applicants' contention that the effect of having the Canadian subsidiary make the allegation, is that the correct "second person" with the relevant facts and knowledge as to the composition and manufacturing process, David Bull Laboratories Pty. Ltd. (Australia) avoids having to provide evidence and being cross-examined. The respondent emphasizes that the court has decided that a respondent cannot be compelled to provide a further or better detailed statement, or put forward a witness, or even file evidence in these proceedings. Therefore, the applicants would be no further ahead in terms of disclosure even if the parent Australian company had made the allegation. Moreover, in the respondent's submission, the matter of who, in a given instance, is the correct "second person" is primarily an administrative matter for the Minister. It is the "second person" to whom the Minister will issue the NOC. In this case, it is the Canadian subsidiary who will be distributing and marketing the products in Canada.
[46]
In these proceedings, the applicants previously brought a motion that David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. was not the appropriate "second person". Muldoon, J., decided that the David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. was "capable of being a 'second person' within the meaning of the
Regulations
". He decided this, in part, on the basis of the definition of manufacturer in the
Food and Drug Regulations
, Part A, s. A.01.010, which provides:
"'manufacturer' except in DIVISION 3 and DIVISION 4 of Part C, means a person who under his own name, or a trade, design or word mark, trade name or other name, work or mark controlled by him sells a food or drug and includes a firm, partnership or corporation."
In my view, Muldoon, J., is saying that David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. is a "second person", and that if he had been hearing the judicial review application, rather than the interlocutory motion, he would have found as such.
[47]
The court, in these proceedings, is called upon to determine whether an allegation is "justified". The Minister was clearly aware that David Bull Australia filed the NDS, yet the letter requesting the allegation was sent by the Minister to David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. I am satisfied that there was a reasonable basis for the Minister to request that the Canadian company, who requires the NOC to market and distribute in Canada, make the allegation.
Disposition
[48]
Accordingly, this application for an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a Notice of Compliance to David Bull Laboratories (Canada) Inc. in respect of the medicine Doxorubicin Hydrochloride, until after the expiration of patent Nos. 1,248,433 and 1,291,037, is dismissed.
Application Dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/slm
[End of document]