[1]
Denault, J.
: This is an appeal pursuant to s. 56 of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13 (hereinafter referred to as "the
Act
"), from a decision of the Chairman of the Trademarks Opposition Board dated March 30, 1990, rendered by G.W. Partington on behalf of the Registrar of Trademarks, rejecting the appellant's application for registration of the trademark "Rickard's Red" for use in association with "brewed alcoholic beverages".
Beverages
[2]
The respondent, Pernod Ricard, is the owner of the registered trademark No. 157,477 "Ricard" for use in association with the following wares: "apéritifs, alcools et eaux-de vie, liqueurs et spiritueux".
[3]
On October 7, 1983, the appellant's predecessor in title, The Molson Companies Limited, filed Application No. 510,763 to register the trademark "Rickard's Red" for use in association with "brewed alcoholic beverages". The application was based on proposed use and the right to the exclusive use of the word "Rickard's" apart from the trademark was disclaimed. The application was advertised for opposition purposes in the Trade Marks Journal dated August 29, 1984.
[4]
On October 1, 1984, the respondent requested an extension of time within which to file a statement of opposition to the appellant's application. An extension of time was granted until January 29, 1985.
[5]
On December 21, 1984, the respondent registered the Société Pour l'Exportation de Grandes Marques (hereinafter referred to as "S.E.G.M.") as a registered user of the respondent's trademark "Ricard".
[6]
On January 29, 1985, the respondent filed a statement of opposition, in which it alleged that the appellant's mark, "Rickard's Red", was not registrable insofar as it was confusing with its registered trademark, "Ricard". The respondent also claimed that the appellant was not the person entitled to registration of its proposed mark in view of the registration and prior use by the respondent of the trademark "Ricard" in association with spirits. Finally, the respondent alleged that the appellant's mark was not "distinctive" and, as such, would not actually distinguish the wares of the appellant from those of the respondent.
[7]
The appellant filed its counterstatement on March 21, 1985, in which it denied the allegations contained in the opposition. The respondent filed as evidence the affidavit of Marc L. Nougayrol, sworn March 16, 1987, as well as written argument. Mr. Nougayrol was cross-examined on his affidavit on May 27, 1987, and a copy of the transcript of cross-examination was filed. The appellant filed written argument but no additional evidence.
[8]
On October 23, 1987, the respondent requested permission to amend its statement of opposition. On December 24, 1987, leave to amend the statement of opposition was denied on the grounds of unexplained delay on the part of the respondent in making such a request and the fact that the amendments would prejudice the appellant who would be required to incur the expense of filing an amended cross-examination of Mr. Nougayrol.
[9]
At the oral hearing before the Trade-marks Opposition Board on September 22, 1989, the respondent renewed its request for permission to amend its statement of opposition to more accurately reflect use of its trademark by a predecessor in title. Finding the proposed amendments ambiguous, the Registrar once again refused the respondent's request. As a result, the respondent's ground of opposition based on confusion resulting from the respondent's registration and
prior use
of its mark in association with spirits, was also rejected at the hearing.
Decision Of The Trademarks
Opposition Board:
[10]
On March 30, 1990, the Registrar of Trademarks, through the Chairman of the Trademarks Opposition Board, refused the appellant's application to register the trademark "Rickard's Red" for use in association with "brewed alcoholic beverages" on the ground that the appellant had failed to meet its burden of establishing that there would be no reasonable likelihood of confusion between its mark, "Rickard's Red", and the respondent's registered trademark, "Ricard".
[11]
In his reasons for judgment, the Registrar noted that the material date for assessing the issue of confusion is the date of filing of the opposition. In applying the test for confusion, he emphasized the importance of considering all of the surrounding circumstances, including those specifically enumerated in s. 6(5) of the
Act
which provides:
"6(5) In determining whether trademarks or trade names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
[12]
With respect to the first enumerated factor, the Registrar found that the respondent's mark "Ricard", lacked inherent distinctiveness given its surname significance. He found that the appellant's mark "Rickard's Red", when considered in its entirety ("Rickard's" having been disclaimed), was inherently distinctive as it possessed no apparent significance in relation to brewed alcoholic beverages. He considered the evidence with respect to the length of time the trademarks had been in use to favour neither the appellant nor the respondent. With regards to the nature of the wares, the Registrar concluded that, although the specific wares of both parties were not the same, they could be categorized generally as alcoholic beverages. It was unquestionably the two remaining factors outlined in s. 6(5) which contributed most to the Registrar's finding of confusion between the marks. He considered the channels of trade associated with the wares of both parties to be very closely related, even overlapping. In addition, he found there to be some similarity in appearance and even more similarity in the sounding of the two marks.
[13]
A notice of appeal was filed on May 30, 1990, in which the appellant alleged that the Registrar had erred:
"1) in fact and in law in deciding that the appellant had failed to discharge the burden of establishing that there would be no reasonable likelihood of confusion between the two marks at issue, and
"2) in concluding that the appellant had failed to discharge the burden in view of the degree of resemblance between the trademarks at issue and the fact that the channels of trade associated with the wares of the parties would be overlapping."
Additional Evidence Filed On Appeal:
[14]
The appellant's evidence on appeal consisted of the affidavits of Solomon Gold and David Perkins, as well as the statutory declaration of John Koh. For its part, the respondent filed the affidavits of Danièle Archambault and Daniel Gruel, in addition to the transcript of cross-examination of David Perkins.
Issue:
[15]
Since the parties limited their arguments to the issue of confusion, the essential question to be determined in this case is whether the use of the mark "Rickard's Red" by the appellant would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares associated with that mark and those associated with respondent's registered trademark, "Ricard", were manufactured or sold by the same company.
Discussion:
[16]
It is settled law that the Registrar's decision as to whether two marks are confusing is to be given great weight and not to be lightly set aside (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 199-200). However, where the court is called upon to consider evidence which was not presented before the Registrar (as is permitted by s. 56 of the
Act
), the appeal essentially functions as a trial de novo (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 49, at p. 51 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 7 at p. 11 (F.C.T.D.)). Since the parties have furnished a considerable amount of additional evidence in the present case, I am not limited to deciding whether the Registrar erred in his appreciation of the facts or in his interpretation of the law. Rather, having the authority to exercise any discretion vested in the Registrar, I must also decide, in light of all of the evidence, whether the trademarks at issue are confusing within the meaning of the
Act
.
[17]
Where there is a question of confusion between a mark for which an application for registration was made and a registered trademark, there is a continuing onus on the party seeking to register its mark to establish that confusion is unlikely. Thus, it follows that the onus remains on the appellant in this case.
[18]
The provisions of the
Trade-marks Act
which are relevant in this appeal are as follows:
"12(1) Subject to s. 13, a trademark is registrable if it is not
(d) confusing with a registered mark;
. . . . .
"2. 'confusing', when applied as an adjective to a trademark or trade name, means a trademark or trade name the use of which would cause confusion in the manner and circumstances described in s. 6.
"6(1) for the purposes of this Act, a trademark or trade name is confusing with another trademark or trade name if the use of the first mentioned trademark or trade name would cause confusion with the last mentioned trademark or trade name in the manner and circumstances described in this section.
"6(2) The use of a trademark causes confusion with another trademark if the use of both trademarks in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with those trademarks are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class.
"6(5) In determining whether trademarks or trade names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or trade names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or trade names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or trade names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
[19]
Before proceeding to an examination of the surrounding circumstances of this case it should be noted that the
Act
does not specify a "material date" for assessing whether trademarks are confusing. The Federal Court of Appeal recently dealt with this point in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 413, at 422-424, where it was finally determined that in cases dealing with an opposition to registration, the question of "
registrability should be determined at the date of registration or at the date of refusal of registration
". Although this point was not specifically raised by the parties, it should be noted that the Registrar erred when he stated that the material date for an assessment of the surrounding circumstances is the date of filing of the opposition.
[20]
I will now review the evidence in light of the surrounding circumstances of this case, and in particular, with reference to the specific factors enumerated in s. 6(5) of the
Act
.
a) The Inherent Distinctiveness Of The
Trademarks And The Extent To
Which They Have Become Known
[21]
In his reasons, the Registrar found that the respondent's mark, "Ricard", lacked inherent distinctiveness given its surname significance. There can be no disagreement with the Registrar on this point. The affidavit of Marc Nougayrol, a representative of S.E.G.M., contains a published document which outlines the history of the respondent's pastis and describes its creator, Mr. Paul "Ricard". Clearly, the respondent's trademark is a surname. There are undoubtedly many attractions to adopting one's surname as a trademark. However, the respondent must be prepared to accept both the attractions and the disadvantages of such a strategy. Accordingly, the respondent's mark is considered to be a weak mark.
[22]
The degree of distinctiveness attributed to a weak mark may, however, be enhanced through extensive use (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 167 (F.C.T.D.)). Evidence of use of the respondent's mark in Canada is contained in both the affidavits of Marc Nougayrol and Daniel Gruel. Mr. Nougayrol's affidavit outlines S.E.G.M.'s sales figures of the respondent's products in the Province of Quebec. Since S.E.G.M. became a registered user of the respondent's mark in Canada on December 21, 1984, only those sales figures which refer to transactions occurring after this date may be considered. In his affidavit, Mr. Gruel provides the number of cases of the respondent's products sold in Canada in 1987, 1988 and 1989. In my opinion, the sales figures contained in both of these affidavits fall short of establishing that the respondent's mark has become widely known in Canada or that it has attained any substantial public reputation or notoriety in association with its products. Similarly, the respondent's evidence relating to its sponsorship of sporting events and its advertising expenses failed to prove that the respondent's mark had been used in association with its wares to such an extent as to have become distinctive. Consequently, the respondent's mark must be given a more limited range of protection than would be afforded a strong mark. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that the appellant's mark, "Rickard's Red", when considered in its entirety ("Rickard's" having been disclaimed), was inherently distinctive as it possessed no apparent significance in relation to brewed alcoholic beverages. I agree with this finding.
b) Length Of Time The Trade­
marks Have Been In Use
[24]
It was the Registrar's opinion that the length of time the trademarks had been in use was not a factor which weighed in favour of either party to this action.
[25]
In arriving at this conclusion, the Registrar considered S.E.G.M.'s use of the respondent's mark from the date of its registration as a registered user of the mark (December 21, 1984) to the date of filing of the opposition (January 29, 1985) one month later. As I pointed out above, the Federal Court of Appeal, in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  mark is not the date of filing of the opposition, but rather the date on which the opposition is disposed of on the evidence adduced. The Registrar's error with respect to the material date clearly affected his finding on this point. The respondent's evidence included sales figures for the respondent's products in Canada from the date of S.E.G.M.'s registration as a registered user of the "Ricard" mark to the end of 1989. Although these sales figures may be considered modest by industry standards, I am satisfied that the respondent has established that its mark was in use in Canada for a greater length of time than the appellant's
proposed
mark, for which no evidence of use was adduced.
c) Nature Of The Wares
[26]
Having regard to the nature of the wares, the Registrar found that, although "brewed alcoholic beverages" differ from the wares covered in the respondent's registration, "the wares of both parties could be categorized generally as alcoholic beverages".
[27]
Included in the additional evidence filed on appeal is the affidavit of David Perkins, Vice President and Business Director of Molson Breweries. In his affidavit, Mr. Perkins states that "consumers of any kind of alcoholic beverages in Canada are adults, and they are aware of the nature of the product they are purchasing ... a consumer would not confuse the source of any beer with the source of any other alcoholic beverage". During cross-examination of his affidavit, Mr. Perkins stated that his conclusions were based on his experience with focus groups and surveys involving beer drinkers. In his opinion, beer drinkers were well aware of the fact that brewers in this country limit their alcoholic beverage production to beer. Unfortunately, the appellant provided no evidence of the validity of this assertion or that consumers of the types of wares covered in the respondent's registration also possessed this knowledge. Moreover, there was no evidence that the public has been in any way educated on this point.
[28]
I believe that Mr. Perkins' statement does address the proper test to be applied under this heading, that is, whether there is a real likelihood that the average consumer of alcoholic beverages would believe that the wares associated with these trademarks were manufactured and sold by the same person. In my opinion, such a likelihood exists since the wares of both parties are products of the same industry. Consequently, I see no reason to disagree with the Registrar's finding on this point.
d) Nature Of The Trade
[29]
In his reasons, the Registrar found that the channels of trade associated with the wares of the parties would be closely related, even overlapping.
[30]
The courts have held that in attempting to establish a likelihood of confusion, it is not necessary to prove that the wares of both parties are sold in the same outlets, as long as the parties are entitled to do so (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 73 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 43 (F.C.T.D.)). In this instance, the wares of both parties are products of the same industry and, as such, there exists the very real possibility that they would be made available to consumers in many of the same outlets. The appellant argued that even if its products were sold in the same retail outlets as those of the respondent, they would be sold in distinct portions of the store, and never side by side. Again, I must emphasize that the potential does exist.
[31]
The appellant argued that the means of advertising beer differ from the methods used to advertise spirits and liqueurs and that competition for brewers comes almost exclusively from other brewers. I agree that there may be more to a study of the "nature of the trade" than an examination of the channels of distribution selected by manufacturers of wares. However, in my opinion, the channels of trade in this case constitute a very important consideration to the issue of the likelihood of confusion between these competing marks. Moreover, I was unconvinced by the appellant's bald statement with respect to competition in the industry; in my view both parties would be competing for consumer dollars spent on alcoholic beverages. In any event, both parties agreed that there is at least a minimal overlap of the beer market and the market for liqueurs and spirits. There is no doubt that allowing the wares of both parties to be distributed in the same types of establishments under similar but competing trademarks would increase the likelihood of confusion in the mind of the average consumer in regards to the source or origin of the wares.
[32]
Although the Registrar did not have access to all of the evidence before this court, he did conclude that the potential overlap in the trades of the parties contributed to his finding of a likelihood of confusion between the parties' trademarks. After reviewing all of the evidence, I can find no reason to reverse the Registrar's finding on this point.
e) Degree Of Resemblance
[33]
Section 6(5)(e) of the
Act
provides that one of the surrounding circumstances to be considered in determining whether trademarks are confusing is the degree of resemblance between them in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them. The Registrar found there to be some similarity in appearance and even more similarity in the sounding of the trademarks Ricard and Rickard's Red.
[34]
The test of confusion is one of first impression. The trademarks should be examined from the point of view of the average consumer having a general and not a precise recollection of the earlier mark. Consequently, the marks should not be dissected or subjected to a microscopic analysis with a view to assessing their similarities and differences. Rather, they should be looked at in their totality and assessed for their effect on the average consumer as a whole (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 737;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 29, at p. 35 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 137, at p. 146 (F.C.T.D.)).
[35]
Although the marks are not to be dissected when determining matters of confusion, it has been held that the first portion of a trademark is the most relevant for purposes of distinction (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 457, at p. 461 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 188 (F.C.T.D.)). I believe the following words of President Thorson in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  why attention should be drawn to the first portion of the appellant's mark in this case:
"... the court should rather seek to put itself in the position of a person who has only a general and not a precise recollection of the earlier mark and then sees the later mark by itself; if such a person would be likely to think that the goods on which the later mark appears are put out by the same people as the goods sold under the mark of which he has only such a recollection the court may properly conclude that the marks are similar."
[36]
In my view, the average consumer of ordinary intelligence, experiencing imperfect recollection, might not be particularly alerted to the distinction between the respondent's mark and the first word of the appellant's mark. Consequently, I feel that there is a potential for consumers believing that the
respondent
has launched a new product to which it has added the identifier "Red" for the purpose of distinguishing it from its other products.
[37]
Both parties provided additional evidence before this court dealing with the pronunciation of the marks at issue. The appellant, relying on English publications only, provided evidence of the phonetic differences between the two marks. The expert evidence supplied by the respondent, however, included an analysis of the pronunciation of the marks in both English and French. The respondent's expert concluded that, in both languages, the marks can only be distinguished in sound by the element "'S Red" contained in the appellant's mark. I agree with the respondent's contention that francophone Canadians would pronounce both the respondent's mark and the first and cominant word in the appellant's mark in virtually the same manner. However, I find there to be sufficient phonetic differences between the marks for the English speaker to draw a distinction.
[38]
Having regard to all the surrounding circumstances, including those specifically enumerated in s. 6(5) of the
Act
, I find that the Registrar was correct in concluding that the appellant failed to discharge its burden of establishing that confusion between its trademark Rickard's Red and the respondent registered trademark Ricard is unlikely. After reviewing the evidence before this court, it is my opinion that the use of "Ricard" and "Rickard's Red" in the same area would likely lead to the inference that the wares associated with these marks were manufactured or sold by the same company. Although the Registrar's error with respect to the material date for assessing the issue of confusion affected one of the criteria analyzed above, the operation of the later date does not change my overall finding that the appellant again failed to establish its right to registrability.
[39]
Given the above conclusion, I do not find it necessary to discuss the issue of distinctiveness, raised by the respondent as one of its initial grounds of opposition.
[40]
Although the respondent had advanced an additional ground of opposition in its Reply to the Notice of Appeal, it made no mention of it on the day of the hearing. I can only assume that the respondent realized that, although parties may introduce new evidence on an appeal pursuant to s. 56(5) of the
Act
, the grounds of opposition must be limited to those raised before the Registrar (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 259, at 264-265 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 45, at p. 51 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 242-243 (F.C.T.D.)).
[41]
For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slm
[End of document]