[1]
Muldoon, J.
: This is a difficult case in which the excellence of the opposing counsel made resolution more difficult.
[2]
This is an application for judicial review of a decision (U93-07510 & ***512) of the Immigration and Refugee Board's Convention Refugee Determination Division (hereinafter sometime: CRDD or Refugee Division), which decision is dated March 29, 1994. The Refugee Division determined that the applicants were not Convention refugees. All proceedings herein were conducted pursuant to the provisions of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, (the
Act
).
[3]
Leave to commence this judicial review proceeding was accorded on January 17, 1995, and that order also accorded time to the applicant until March 6, 1995, within which to file and serve her memorandum of argument, but the respondent avers not having been served any such material.
[4]
As noted in the hearing transcript this judge wavered on his final conclusions throughout the hearing. Having taken the time to study the file at length, the court concludes that the CRDD erred in ways which are fundamental to this applicant's and her young daughter's fate. Such conclusion is not based on sympathy, although this file is not entirely devoid of that element.
[5]
The court holds that the Refugee Division erred in law on two counts. The first is its interpretation of that element of the refugee definition "particular social group" in regard to the facts presented before it. The applicant stated credibly that she and a small coterie of fellow employees in her town's municipal office all had sure knowledge of the self-important ruthless mayor's complicity in blackmail, corruption and self-enrichment and that she, the applicant, actually had possession of the documents to prove the mayor's criminal conduct for a short time. The person who first invaded the mayor's private papers died under suspicious circumstances, likely murder. The remaining four or five were threatened (as was the applicant), injured and in at least one instance raped by the police. Now, the CRDD held that this group of persons, including the applicant, did not constitute a "particular social group". In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 739 and 744  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mr. Justice La Forest, for the unanimous court, gave one of three categories of ingredients of "particular social group" as being this: "(1) groups defined by an innate or unchangeable characteristic". The other two categories include former or present voluntary association and are irrelevant to the present case.
[6]
The applicant's group is a small number of former fellow municipal employees terrified and terrorized by what they know about the ruthless, criminal mayor. Unless or until those people, including the applicant suffer feeble mindedness, as from Alzheimer's disease, they could not, and cannot shake that terrible knowledge which they all shared and which the survivors still share. It puts them all in awful jeopardy from the thugs ("body guards") of the mayor, at least as long as he holds municipal office and wields State power, whether or not being "audited" by another organ of State. The applicant's group, then, is clearly "defined by an innate or unchangeable characteristic". To be sure that characteristic of this group is not ancestry or racial origin. They all acquired it later in life. If only they could persuade their tormentor that they have all just truly forgotten that which they know, they would be delighted - thankful, indeed, to do so. They all "know too much" and live in the fear and objective risk of "liquidation". It is surely an unchangeable characteristic.
[7]
The CRDD, not unmindful of the flood-gates risk, nevertheless drew too long a bow on the risk. They wrote:
"The panel does not believe that those, such as the adult claimant, aware of the corrupt practices of a municipal politician, fall within the ambit of any one of the three categories defined by the SCC. For her to do so would mean that anyone, anywhere, with knowledge of anything, would be a member of a particular social group. The panel also notes that the SCC, held that an association of people defined solely by their 'common victimization as the objects of persecution' cannot be a particular social group [
Ward
, p. 729]."
The Refugee Division appears to have misinterpreted the Supreme Court in
Ward
. Nothing of the kind is written on p. 729  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and, where the passage on this subject ends, or nearly so, on p. 732  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , thus:
"* * * The need for 'persecution' in order to warrant international protection, for example, results in the exclusion of such pleas as those of economic migrants, i.e., individuals in search of better living conditions, and those of victims of natural disasters, even when the home state is unable to provide assistance, although both of these cases might seem deserving of international sanctuary.
"Similarly, the drafters of the Convention limited the included bases for a well-founded fear of persecution to 'race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion'. Although the delegates inserted the social group category in order to cover any possible lacuna left by the other four groups, this does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that any association bound by some common thread is included. If this were the case, the enumeration of these bases would have been superfluous; the definition of 'refugee' could have been limited to individuals who have a well-founded fear of persecution without more. The drafters' decision to list these bases was intended to function as another built-in limitation to the obligations of signatory states. The issue that arises, therefore, is the demarcation of this limit."
[8]
Persecution is quite apparent on the facts of this case, in paragraphs 3 through 19 of the applicant's personal information form (PIF) recited in full by the CRDD on pp. 3 through 5 of its decision, pp. 000005-007 of the tribunal record. The CRDD exaggerated when it wrote (pp. 8 & 9 - trib. record pp. 000010-011) of "knowledge of anything". The knowledge here was of proof of blackmail, fraud and theft on the part of a ruthless, State-office holding criminal who had the power to manipulate and direct official organs of the municipality such as the police.
[9]
In fact and in law, the applicant was at all material times a member of a small but genuine "particular [persecuted] social group". What then is the purpose of witness protection programs, in other countries? The CRDD erred in law in this regard.
[10]
It erred, as well, in failing to find that the applicant's political opinion made her the subject of persecution by the mayor and his mob. Indeed the CRDD did not deal with this aspect of the refugee definition in its examination of the applicant's claim. The applicant was being persecuted by a politician who controlled not only thugs, but municipal police. In terms of "political opinion", the law does not stipulate partisan opinion, nor membership in big partisan movements, nor yet even the politics of the national State, the provincial or cantonal State, or the municipal State, even although one seeks refuge from the country, the national entity.
[11]
Here is what Mr. Justice La Forest wrote for the Supreme Court, in
Ward
, at pp. 745-747  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"
C. Political Opinion
"Political opinion was not raised as a ground for fear of persecution either before the Board or the Court of Appeal. It was raised for the first time in this court by the intervener, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who, in his factum, expressed the view that the Court of Appeal had 'erred in considering that the claimant's fear of persecution was based on membership in an organization'. The additional ground was ultimately accepted by the appellant during oral argument. I note that the UNHCR Handbook, at p. 17, paragraph 66, states that it is not the duty of a claimant to identify the reasons for the persecution. It is for the examiner to decide whether the Convention definition is met; usually there will be more than one ground (idem, paragraph 67). While political opinion was raised at a very late stage of the proceedings, the court has decided to deal with it because this case is one involving human rights and the issue is critical to the case.
"Political opinion as a basis for a well-founded fear of persecution has been defined quite simply as persecution of persons on the ground 'that they are alleged or known to hold opinions contrary to or critical of the policies of the government or ruling party'; see Grahl-Madsen [
The Status of Refugees in International Law
, (1966)], at p. 220. The persecution stems from the desire to put down any dissent viewed as a threat to the persecutors. Grahl-Madsen's definition assumes that the persecutor from whom the claimant is fleeing is always the government or ruling party, or at least some party having parallel interests to those of the government. As noted earlier, however, international refugee protection extends to situations where the state is not an accomplice to the persecution, but is unable to protect the claimant. In such cases, it is possible that a claimant may be seen as a threat by a group unrelated, and perhaps even opposed, to the government because of his or her political viewpoint, perceived or real. The more general interpretation of political opinion suggested by Goodwin-Gill [
The Refugee in International Law
(1983)], at p. 31, i.e., 'any opinion on any matter in which the machinery of state, government, and policy may be engaged', reflects more care in embracing situations of this kind.
"Two refinements must be added to the definition of this category. First, the political opinion at issue need not have been expressed outright. In many cases, the claimant is not even given the opportunity to articulate his or her beliefs, but these can be perceived from his or her actions. In such situations, the political opinion that constitutes the basis for the claimant's well-founded fear of persecution is said to be imputed to the claimant. The absence of expression in words may make it more difficult for the claimant to establish the relationship between that opinion and the feared persecution, but it does not preclude protection of the claimant.
"Second, the political opinion ascribed to the claimant and for which he or she fears persecution need not necessarily conform to the claimant's true beliefs. The examination of the circumstances should be approached from the perspective of the persecutor, since that is the perspective that is determinative in inciting the persecution. The political opinion that lies at the root of the persecution, therefore, need not necessarily be correctly attributed to the claimant. Similar considerations would seem to apply to other bases of persecution."
For the Refugee Division not to have analyzed and considered the applicant's demonstrable political opinion as, or not, a basis of her demonstrable persecution, is an error for which the decision ought to be quashed.
[12]
The CRDD based its decision on what it found to be an internal flight alternative for her in relatively near Mexico City. It is said that unless a State's machinery of government and maintenance of law and order has completely broken down into a complete shambles, the State is presumed to be capable of protecting its people. Well, that must be a rebuttable presumption. If it were so, there would be no abductions, rapes or murders. Was the USA capable of protecting President Kennedy? Was Egypt, on an occasion with armed guards all around, capable of protecting Anwar Sadat? And what of the recently late lamented Itshaak Rabin? Israel, no shambles, failed. Even supplying armed, vigilant guards, no State can really protect anyone from an assassin. That is the reality, not just the theoretical rebuttable presumption.
[13]
In Mexico City, the applicant was watched and beset by the malicious mayor's thugs. She was nearly run down by one of them at the wheel of an automobile, perhaps with the intention of causing a fatal "accident", or at least, then, to keep her terrified. She is a mother and she looks after her child. How, it was asked, could they find you among the 20 million other inhabitants of Mexico City? They obviously followed my mother who came to visit me, she justly answered. In finding the capital city to be her IFA, the CRDD had to have ignored the two incidents above mentioned and to have considered the other 20 million inhabitants to form some sort of protective insulation around the applicant. This is a much different IFA from that of Columbo for Tamils, or the vast sub-continent of India for certain Sikhs. This applicant is specifically targeted by her resourceful persecutor. She is one of a small group, infinitely small compared with, say, the vast numbers of Tamils or Sikhs mentioned above. She is in such plight, specifically targeted, but not specifically guarded by the State. She cannot really rely on State protection only the "insulating factor of a big city". This seems not to be a case of someone going away and being of no further interest to the persecutors. The applicant's persecutor will always be after her until he is locked up, suffers memory loss, or is convinced that she has suffered memory loss. The CRDD dealt only with Mexico City as providing an IFA, perhaps the rest of the country could have been analyzed and considered, but the CRDD focussed only on the city.
[14]
One could write much more on this case, but one would not wish to compromise a fair hearing by a new tribunal, which should be provided with a copy of these reasons, to deal with the applicant's case on the basis of her being persecuted as a member of a particular but tiny social group, as holding a political opinion, and as one whose IFA in Mexico City is very tenuous. The CRDD's decision nos. U93-07510 & ***512, dated March 29, 1994, is quashed and the applicants' case is referred for re-adjudication by a different lawfully constituted tribunal.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Janette Blue/clh
[End of document]