Introduction
[1]
Lemieux, J.
: The central issue in this motion is whether the applicant is entitled, under s. 49(1) of the
Immigration Act
, to a statutory or automatic stay of the execution of a removal order pending decision of this court on whether to grant leave for judicial review or pending a determination by the respondent on the applicant's wife's applica­tion to include him as a dependent in her application for permanent residence.
[2]
Counsel for the applicant conceded at the hearing that his application would not cover the second prong of his request related to the respondent's H&C pending decision; this aspect of the motion was abandoned.
[3]
Subject to the exceptions contained in s. 49(1.1) of the
Act
as well as those continued in paras. (e) and (f) of s. 49(1) of that
Act
, a statutory stay of execution of a re­moval order is provided for in subsection in defined circumstances, one of those being the filing of an application for leave to commence ju­dicial review proceedings after a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board on the refugee claim.
[4]
The applicant argues that the exception contained in s. 49(1.1) does not apply to him. Section 49(1.1) reads:
"49(1.1) Subsection (1) does not apply to
(a)
a person residing or sojourning in the United States or St. Pierre and Miquelon who is the subject of a report made pur­suant to paragraph 20(1)(a)
; or
(b) a person who has been determined to be not elegible to make a claim to be a Convention refugee by reason of para­graph 46.01(1)(b) and who is to be re­moved to a country with which the Min­ister has entered into an agreement under section 108.1 for sharing the re­sponsibil­ity for examining refugee claims." (em­phasis mine)
"49(1.1) Le sursis d'exécution ne s'appli­que pas dans les cas suivants:
a)
l'intéressé fait l'objet du rapport prévu à l'alinéa 20(1)a) et réside ou séjourne aux Etats-Unis ou à Saint-Pierre-et-Mi­quelon;
b) le ravendication a été jugée irreceva­ble au titre de l'alinéa 46.01(1)b) et l'intéressé doit être renvoyé dans un pays avec lequel le ministre a conclu un accord en vertu de l'article 108.1 en vue du partage de la responsabilité de l'exa­men des revendications du statut de réfugié au sens de la Convention." (je souligne)
The Facts
[5]
The applicant, his wife and son are citizens of Ecuador. The applicant pursued a military career in the army of that country. He joined in 1973; by 1990 he reached the rank of first sergeant and expected to be promoted to lieutenant in 1996. He special­ized in coding and decoding military mes­sages. He became head of his unit. In July 1995, he said he overheard, accidentally, the plotting of a coup by the military, was seen overhearing the message and was arrested and detained for 20 days. He was then trans­ferred to a remote region and feared the military wanted to get rid of him.
[6]
He fled Ecuador with his wife and son on November 29, 1995. He went to New York City and stayed there for three months. On March 20, 1996, he drove to Canada and crossed the border at Blackpool, Quebec. His Ecuadorian passport contained a visa issued by the United States of America dated No­vember 24, 1995, and expiring on February 24, 1996.
[7]
At the Canadian border point, the Cana­dian Immigration Officer made a s. 20(1)(a) report to the Senior Immigration Officer indicating he questioned the applicant seek­ing entry as a landed immigrant. In his report, the immigration officer said the applicant's entry into Canada contravened or would contravene the
Act
and
Regulations
, namely, s. 9(1), which provides persons seeking admission into Canada must obtain a visa before presenting themselves for entry.
[8]
That same day, March 20, 1996, the Senior Immigration Officer issued the appli­cant a conditional departure order pursuant to s. 28(1) of the
Act
on account of the applicant's refugee claim. On the same day, the Senior Immigration Officer, under s. 45 of the
Act
, dealt with the applicant's refugee claim and in accordance with s. 46.02 of the
Act
, he sent the applicant's refugee claim to the Refugee Division for decision.
[9]
The refugee claims of the applicant, his wife, Gloria Albuja Echeverria, and son, Jorge Luis Echeverria were considered by the Refugee Division (the "tribunal") who issued reasons for decision on June 25, 1999. The tribunal determination that his wife, Mrs. Echeverria and his son, Jorge Luis Echeverria were Convention refugees. How­ever, the tribunal decided the applicant was not a Convention refugee; he was excluded by the application of art. 1F(A) of the
Con­vention
, because, in the tribunal's view, there were serious reasons for considering that the applicant committed crimes against humanity. It is from this determination the applicant seeks leave to initiate judicial review proceedings in this court.
[10]
On October 1, 1999, an immigration officer, pursuant to s. 27 of the
Act
, made a report to the Deputy Minister stating the applicant was in Canada without legal auth­orization. On the basis of this report the execution of the applicant's deportation was sought.
[11]
On October 12, 1999, pursuant to s. 46.04(1) of the
Act
, Mrs. Echeverria, having been determined to be a Convention refugee, filed an application for permanent residence in Canada and named her husband as a dependant.
The Issues And The Arguments
[12]
Two questions arise for decision in this motion. First, the substantive question, which has not been the subject of judicial comment, is when or at what point in time is the as­sessment made that a person is residing or sojourning in the United States within the meaning of s. 49(1.1) of the
Act
.
[13]
The applicant argues that this point in time is October 26, 1999, when the removal order against him is to be executed. The applicant says the words "residing" or "so­journing" are expressed by Parliament in the present tense and that the entire thrust of s. 49, taken as a whole, speaks in terms of current and existing events or steps entitling a person to an automatic or statutory stay; he points out that, for example, the automatic stay is triggered when a person takes a step in the present and not in the past such as the filing of an application for leave and judicial review to this court or an appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal on a certified ques­tion or files an application for leave to the Supreme Court of Canada.
[14]
In other words, the execution of a removal order, which is the subject matter of s. 49, is the defining temporal event which fixes when the assessment of "residing" or "sojourning" is made. The applicant then argued, on the facts, that it is obvious the s. 49(1.1) exception to an automatic or statu­tory stay does not apply to him because he has been living in Canada since March 20, 1996, and not in the United States.
[15]
The respondent argues the applicant's interpretation is flawed because s. 49(1.1) contains the defining event that being the report made on March 20, 1996, by the immigration officer under s. 20(1)(a) and it is from this date the question as to where was the applicant "residing" or "sojourning" is to be answered. In this motion, I am not compelled to consider the meaning of the terms "residing" or "sojourning" since the applicant conceded that prior to coming to Canada the applicant had sojourned in the United States for a period of three months.
[16]
The subsidiary question is whether this court has the jurisdiction to certify a ques­tion arising out of this motion, which is in essence for a ruling or injunction that the respondent cannot execute the removal order against him. The respondent argues a certi­fied question can only be framed under s. 83(1) of the
Act
in relation to a judgment of this court on an application for judicial review, which this motion is not.
Analysis
(1) The Main Question
[17]
Fundamentally, the main question is to be resolved by the application of proper principles of statutory interpretation. The approach to be taken has recently been expressed by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  written about the interpretation of legislation (see, e.g., Ruth Sullivan,
Statutory Interpretation
(1997); Ruth Sullivan,
Driegder on the Construc­tion of Statutes
(3rd Ed. 1994) (hereinafter
Construction of Statutes
); Pierre-André Côté,
The Interpretation of Legislation in Canada
(2nd Ed. 1991)), Elmer Driedger in
Construction of Stat­utes
(2nd Ed. 1983), best encapsulates the approach upon which I prefer to rely. He recognizes that statutory interpretation cannot be founded on the wording of the legislation alone. At p. 87, he states:
'Today there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an Act are to be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the inten­tion of Parliament.'
"Recent cases which have cited the above passage with approval include:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
"I also rely upon s. 10 of the
Interpreta­tion Act
, R.S.O. 1980, c. 219, which provides that every Act 'shall be deemed to be remedial' and directs that every Act shall 'receive such fair, large and liberal construction and interpretation as will best ensure the attainment of the object of the Act according to its true intent, meaning and spirit'."
[18]
I begin the interpretative analysis by considering the terms of the statutory provi­sion in play, here s. 49(1.1), which I set out again for convenience:
"49(1.1) Subsection (1) does not apply to
(a)
a person residing or sojourning in the United States or St. Pierre and Miquelon who is the subject of a report made pursuant to paragraph 20(1)(a)
; or
(b) a person who has been determined to be not eligible to make a claim to be a Convention refugee by reason of para­graph 46.01(1)(b) and who is to be removed to a country with which the Minister has entered into an agreement under section 108.1 for sharing the re­sponsibility for examining refugee claims." (emphasis mine)
"49(1.1) Le sursis d'exécution ne s'appli­que pas dans les cas suivants:
a)
l'intéressé fait l'objet du rapport prévu à l'alinéa 20(1)a) et réside ou séjourne aux Etats-Unis ou à Saint-Pierre-et-Mi­quelon;
b) le ravendication a été jugée irreceva­ble au titre de l'alinéa 46.01(1)b) et l'intéressé doit être renvoyé dans un pays avec lequel le ministre a conclu un accord en vertu de l'article 108.1 en vue du partage de la responsabilité de l'exa­men des revendications du statut de réfugié au sens de la Convention." (je souligne)
[19]
Section 49(1.1) clearly links the concept of a person residing or sojourning in the United States to one who is the subject of a report made pursuant to s. 20(1)(a) of the
Act
.
[20]
Section 20 is contains in Part III of the
Act
dealing with "Exclusion and Removal" and itself is introduced by a heading labelled "Removal at Ports of Entry".
[21]
Section 20 of the
Act
reads:
"20(1) Where an immigration officer is of the opinion that it would or may be con­trary to this Act or the regulations to grant admission to a person examined by the officer or otherwise let that person come into Canada, the officer may detain or make an order to detain that person and shall
(a) subject to subsection (2), report that person in writing to a senior immigration officer; or
(b) allow that person to leave Canada forthwith.
"(2) Where an immigration officer at a port of entry is of the opinion that it would or may be contrary to this Act or the regulations to grant admission to or other­wise let come into Canada a person who is ar­riving from the United States, the officer may, where a senior immigration officer to whom the officer would otherwise make a report pursuant to paragraph (1)(a) is not reasonably available, direct that person to return to the United States until such time as a senior immigration officer is avail­able."
"20(1) L'agent d'immigration qui, après interrogatoire, estime que le fait d'admettre ou de laisser entrer l'intéressé au Canada contreviendrait ou pourrait contravenir à la présente loi ou à ses règlements peut le retenir ou prendre une mesure à cet effet. Il est tenu:
a) soit, sous résere du paragraphe (2), de signaler son cas dans un rapport écrit, à un rapport écrit, à un agent principal;
b) soit de l'autoriser à quitter le Canada sans délai.
"(2) Lorsqu'il estime que le fait d'admettre ou de laisser entrer au Canada une personne en provenance des Etats-Unis contreviendrait ou pourrait contrevenir à la présente loi ou à ses règlements, l'agent d'immigration en poste à un point d'entrée peut, s'il n'est pas en mesure d'en référer à l'agent principal auquel il ferait normale­ment rapport conformément à l'alinéa (1)a), ordonner à l'intéressé de retourner aux Etats-Unis et d'attendre que l'agent principal soit disponible pour examiner son cas."
[22]
Section 20 of the
Act
cannot be read in isolation particularly since a s. 20(1)(a) report is the basis upon which Parliament has authorized a senior immigra­tion officer to exercise certain mandatory or discretion­ary statutory powers contained in ss. 21 through 24 of the
Act
. For example, s. 21 of the
Act
provides that a s. 20(1)(a) report may be the basis of a removal order if the person is a member of any inadmissible class. Moreover, s. 22(3) grants powers of detention to a senior immigration officer on a s. 20(1)(a) report and s. 22(4) authorizes a senior immigration officer, subject to s. 28, to make an exclusion order on the basis of a s. 20(1)(a) report if he or she is satisfied the person is a member of an inadmissible class referred to in s. 19(2)(d) by reasons of not possessing a valid or subsisting visa, which is what occurred in the applicant's case.
[23]
The s. 28 limitation on the exercise of powers under s. 22(4) of the
Act
is impor­tant because the applicant made a refugee claim at the border which he was entitled to do because he was "a person who is in Can­ada" as defined in s. 44 of the
Act
. As noted, in this case, the senior immigration officer, pursuant to s. 45 of the
Act
, deter­mined the applicant as having an eligible claim. Section 28 of the
Act
reads:
"28(1) Where a senior immigration officer is of the opinion that a person who claims to be a Convention refugee is eligible to have their claim referred to the Refugee Division and is a person in respect of whom the senior immigration officer would, but for this section, have made an exclusion order under subsection 23(4) or (4.01) or a departure order under subsec­tion 27(4), the senior immigration officer shall make a
conditional departure
order against the person.
"(2)
No conditional departure order
made pursuant to subsection (1) against a person who claims to be a Convention refugee is effective unless and until
(a) the person withdraws the claim to be a Convention refugee;
(a.1) the person is determined by a sen­ior immigration officer not to be eligible to make a claim to be a Convention refu­gee and has been so notified;
(b) the person is declared by the Refugee Division to have abandoned the claim to be a Convention refugee and has been so notified;
(c) the person is determined by the Refu­gee Division not to be a Convention refugee and has been so notified; or
(d) the person is determined pursuant to subsection 46.07(1.1) or (2) not to have a right under subsection 4(2.1) to remain in Canada and has been so notified." (emphasis mine)
"28(1) S'il conclut à la recevabilité de la revendication du statut de réfugié au sens de la Convention de la personne à l'encon­tre de laquelle il prendrait une mesure d'exclusion au titre des paragraphes 23(4) ou (4.01) ou une mesure d'interdiction de séjour au titre du paragraphe 27(4), l'agent principal prend contre elle une mesure d'interdiction de séjour conditionnelle.
"(2) La mesure d'interdiction de séjour conditionnelle ne devient exécutoire que si se réalise l'une des conditions suivantes:
a) la personne retire sa revendication du statut de réfugié au sens de la Conven­tion;
a.1) sa revendication a été jugée irreceva­ble par l'agent principal, qui le lui a dûment notifié;
b) son désistement a été constaté par la section du statut, qui le lui a dûment notifié'
c) la section du statut lui a refusé le statut de réfugié au sens de la Conven­tion et lui a dûment notifié le refus;
d) il a été déterminé conformément aux paragraphes 46.07(1.1) ou (2) que la personne n'avait pas le droit que confère le paragraphe 4(2.1) de demeurer au Canada et la personne en a été avisée."
[24]
In my view, the statutory scheme set out above leads to only one conclusion: the time fixed by Parliament for determining the applicant's status of residency or sojourn­ment in the United States is when the appli­cant was first the subject of a s. 20(1)(a) report, i.e., March 20, 1996. The s. 20(1)(a) report was the basis of his subse­quent condi­tional departure order made that same day, because of his refugee claim. From that point in time, the making of a s. 20(1)(a) report, the clock stopped ticking and his days in Canada pending the determination of his refugee claim or subsequent appeal proceed­ings cannot be taken into account in deter­mining whether he was residing or sojourn­ing in the United States.
[25]
Any other interpretation, in my view, would do substantial violence to the statutory scheme and would, in effect, nullify or de­stroy the carefully drafted enforcement pro­visions related to actions taken at ports of entry. In addition, any other interpretation would lead to an absurd result and would render meaningless the provision of s. 49(1.1) itself. The Minister responsible for immigration matters, when the precursor of s. 49(1.1) of the
Act
was introduced in 1952, noted that refugee claims took considerable time to be processed. If the applicant's in­terpretation was correct, s. 49(1.1) would have little or not application and that cannot be Parliament's intention; it is presumed Parliament's intention is to make workable laws.
[26]
I appreciate that if the applicant had not sojourned in the United States before making a refugee claim, he might have been entitled to a statutory stay provided he did not fall within the further exceptions of s. 49(1)(d) and (f). The internal structure of the
Act
does not reveal the policy considerations which lead Parliament to enact the exception and external sources consulted are not help­ful on the point. The court is aware, how­ever, that Canada and the United States have entered into a bilateral agreement for the exchange of deportees.
[27]
For these reasons, I find that the appli­cant is a person residing or sojourning in the United States and as a result the exception provided in s. 49(1.1) applies to him.
(2) The Subsidiary Question
[28]
The applicant asked this court to certify a question on the basis that there is a matter arising under the
Immigration Act
which falls under s. 83(1) of the
Act
which reads:
"83(1) A judgment of the Federal Court - Trial Division on an application for judi­cial review with respect to any decision or order made, or any matter arising, under this Act or the rules or regulations there­under may be appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal only if the Federal Court -Trial Division has at the time of rendering judgment certified that a serious question of general importance is involved and has stated that question.
"(2) Where a judgment of the Federal Court - Trial Division is appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal pursuant to sub­section (1), the appeal shall be commenced by filing a notice of appeal within fifteen days after the pronouncement of the judg­ment."
"83(1) Le jugement de la Section de première instance de la Cour fédérale rendu sur une demande de contrôle judiciaire relative à une décision ou ordonnance rendue, une mesure prise ou toute question soulevée dans le cadre de la présente loi ou de ses textes d'application -- règlements ou régles -- ne peut être porté en appel devant la Cour d'appel fédérale que si la Section de première instance certifie dans son jugement que l'affaire soulève une question grave de portée générale et énonce celle-ci.
"(2) L'appel doit être formé dans les quinze jours qui suivent le prononcé du jugement de la Section de première instance de la Cour fédérale qui en fait l'objet."
[29]
However, the respondent argues the Federal Court, Trial Division has no jurisdiction under s. 83(1) of the
Act
to certify a question arising from the present motion which is an incidental proceeding to a leave application for judicial review.
[30]
After carefully examining the jurisprudence of this court on this matter, I conclude that I have no jurisdiction to certify a question within the context of the motion before me. My colleague Pinard, J., stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 74:
"It is clear from the wording of these provisions that certification can apply only to a judgment on an application for judicial review. The application for a stay made by the applicant is clearly not an application for judicial review pursuant to s. 83(1) of the
Immigration Act
or s. 18 of the
Federal Court Immigration Rules
, 1993. It is simply an incidental application made in connection with an application for leave pursuant to s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
."
[31]
Serena
, supra, was followed by my colleague Nadon, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  a certified question can only be formulated on a judgment on judicial review.
Conclusion
[32]
For all these reasons, this motion is dismissed and no certified question is framed.
Motion dismissed.
Editor: Sharon J. McLaughlin/aga
Footnotes
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 1.
2.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
[End of document]