[1]
Denault, J.
: Defendant has filed a conditional appearance for the purpose of objecting to the jurisdiction of the court and for an order staying proceedings to enable such objection to be raised and disposed of, or, alternatively, for an order pursuant to s. 50(1)(b) of the Federal Court Act that all proceedings in the action be stayed.
[2]
The charterparty agreement between the parties contains a clause whereby they have agreed to submit their disputes to an arbitrator.
[3]
According to art. 8 of the Commercial Arbitration Code, under the Commercial Arbitration Act (S.C. 1986, c. 22):
"A court before which an action is brought in a matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if a party so requests not later than when submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute, refer the parties to arbitration unless it finds that the agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed."
[4]
In the present case, involving an admiralty matter, there exists an arbitration agreement and the defendant, on the first given occasion, requests a transfer before the arbitration tribunal. Parliament imposes an imperative duty upon the court to refer the parties to arbitration, unless the agreement is found to be "null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed". No evidence of this sort has been shown in the present case, except the fact that the right to proceed to arbitration could be timebarred; but this is "no reason for regarding arbitration as inoperative and refusing a stay". (Walton, Russel on Arbitration (18th Ed., 1970), p. 166). This arbitration tribunal is therefore the forum where this issue will have to be debated, and the court must refer the parties to arbitration.
[5]
This finding disposes of this application, but even if I had decided otherwise, I would still, in the exercise of my discretion, have granted a stay of all proceedings, according to s. 50 of the Federal Court Act, in view of this rule expressed by the majority in the Ship M/V " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"The prima facie rule is that a court must grant a stay of proceedings commenced in defiance of a contractual undertaking. Before a court may depart from this general rule there must be sufficiently strong reasons to support the conclusion that it would not be reasonable or just in the circumstances to keep the plaintiff to his promise and enforce the contract."
[6]
There are no such reasons here.
[7]
The defendant's motion is granted with costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]