[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an action for damages for breach of contract, or in the alternative, for negligent misrepresentation with respect to a refusal by the defendant to pay several monthly instalments during 1979 of an annual allowance payable to the plaintiff with respect to his retirement from the Public Service.
[2]
The plaintiff resigned from his position in the Department of Transport effective December 31st, 1978. As he was to be fifty on April 25th, 1979, he had the option of taking a deferred annuity payable at age sixty, or an annual allowance which could commence at age fifty and which would, if commenced at that age, be at an annual rate equivalent to fifty per cent of the rate of the deferred annuity payable at sixty. On November 1st, 1979, he advised his former department that he wished to elect to receive the annual allowance, payable at fifty. He was then advised by a letter of January 9, 1980, that the annual allowance could not be made payable retroactively to his fiftieth birthday but it could only become payable as of November 1st, 1979, the date when he exercised his option. He says that until this time he had understood that he had one year from retirement in which to exercise his option and that when he did so, if he elected for an annual allowance, that allowance would be payable commencing on his fiftieth birthday. He therefore says that he is entitled to $1,797.15 representing the payments that should have been paid to him at the monthly rate of $291.37 (the rate which would have applied had the annual allowance commenced to be paid at age fifty) together with interest.
[3]
It is reasonably clear from the Public Service Superannuation Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-36, that the annual allowance only becomes payable at the time the retiree exercises his option. While s. 12(1)(c)(ii)(A) of the Act does not state this explicitly, the intention is clear from the fact that the amount of the annual allowance is calculated taking into account the actual age of the retiree "at the time he exercises his option", breaking down his age to the nearest one-tenth of a year. This means that the longer he waits to exercise his option, the larger his annual allowance will be, and that the amount payable augments not merely year by year but from one-tenth of a year to the next one-tenth of a year. I did not understand the plaintiff to be disputing this interpretation of the Act. Rather, his case is that by contract or through liability for negligent misrepresentation the defendant is liable to make a further payment to him notwithstanding the provisions of the Act.
[4]
With respect to the claim founded in contract, I am not satisfied that any contractual obligation was created here obliging the defendant to pay the annual allowance retroactively to the plaintiff's fiftieth birthday. In the correspondence concerning payment of benefits attendant upon retirement I can find no clear intention that a new contractual relationship was being created. Nor can I see any consideration passing from the plaintiff to the defendant in this situation. The consideration provided by the plaintiff was surely his past service which terminated on December 31st, 1979. It was no doubt a condition of that employment that he would be entitled to retirement benefits, either in the form of a deferred annuity or an annual allowance, subject to him making his election. The defendant for its part was obliged to see that payment of one or the other was provided. But from the mere act of making his election the plaintiff was not providing some new consideration in return for which the defendant made a new commitment which did not previously exist by law or contract.
[5]
I have come to the conclusion, however, that the defendant is liable to pay the plaintiff damages by reason of a negligent misrepresentation made to the plaintiff that he would have one year to elect to receive an annual allowance that would be paid retroactively to his fiftieth birthday. I believe this situation falls within the principles enunciated in the House of Lords in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 381, at 283-6. According to these authorities, to establish such liability there must be (1) an untrue statement made negligently; (2) a reliance by the representee on that statement which was foreseeable by the representor; and (3) a special relationship giving rise to a duty of care. The defendant here admits that such a special relationship existed in the present case and I think this is clearly so.
[6]
I am satisfied from the evidence that there was a misrepresentation to the plaintiff that if he elected for an annual allowance any time within the first year after he became fifty it would be payable to him effective on his fiftieth birthday and at the rate relevant to that date. In the letter to him from a Personnel Assistant dated February 12th, 1979, he was advised that:
"Based on your age and years of pensionable service, you are entitled to:
1. Deferred annuity payable at 60
2. Return of contributions
prior to October 1st, 1967
.
3. Annual Allowance payable at age 50 and reduced by 50%."
The second paragraph following that statement commences as follows:
"Please be advised that you have one year in which to exercise your option."
With this letter was enclosed form DSS 2011. The last portion of this form states, in small print:
"I, the undersigned contributor, exercise my option for the benefit indicated above, pursuant to the terms of the Public Service Superannuation Act, on the understanding that
...
(ii) This option I have made becomes operative and irrevocable on the date of ceasing to be employed, or the date of forwarding this form to the Superannuation Division - Department of Supply and Services, whichever is later."
In my view this letter could reasonably leave the impression that the plaintiff had one year in which to choose option 3 which was an "annual allowance payable at age 50". The statement on the enclosed form DSS 2011, which has been much relied on by the defendant as clarifying the matter, does not in my view inform the average reader that his annual allowance will commence to be payable only on the date the form is signed. The statement on the form as quoted above, saying that the option becomes "operative and irrevocable" on the date of forwarding the form, could reasonably be taken to mean that no option is deemed to be made until the form is sent in and until that time he will be treated as not having made an option. This would be apt and relevant with respect to the rule that if a person does not elect for an annual allowance within one year after retirement he will be deemed to have chosen a deferred annuity. But the form is by no means explicit as to the date from which the annual allowance payments would be calculated, particularly having regard to the inference left by the accompanying letter. This inference was subsequently reinforced by letter of June 13th, 1979, in which the plaintiff was advised in part as follows by a Personnel Assistant:
"However, should you opt effective December 30, 1978, for a deferred annuity and any time after reaching 50, opt for an annual allowance, your benefits would be the following:
Annual allowance:
age 51 $3846.87p.a. $320.57p.mth.
age 52 $4196.59p.a. $349.71p.mth.
age 53 $4546.31p.a. $378.86p.mth.
age 54 $4896.02p.a. $408.00p.mth.
age 55 $5245.74p.a. $437.14p.mth.
"You have up to December 1979 to exercise your option under the Superannuation Plan. Please ensure that your option reaches this office in sufficient time."
This recital of the different amounts of annual allowance depending on the age when the option is exercised would certainly leave the impression in the mind of a reasonable person that the annual allowance payments would augment only once per year of age attained and not virtually month by month as the Act provides. The different rates per annum as stated are apparently intended to represent the amortization of a reasonable approximation of the present value of a deferred annuity and that value augments year by year the longer one waits to commence receiving an annual allowance. It would be reasonable for anyone reading this letter to assume that in order, therefore, for him to receive the approximate equivalent of the present value of his deferred annuity, if he commenced drawing his annual allowance at any time during the year following his fiftieth birthday, he would receive the total allowance for that year calculated on the basis of present value at age fifty of the deferred annuity otherwise payable at age sixty. This, of course, is not what the Act provides as it contemplates instead a more frequent augmentation of the rate of payment of annual allowance, the amount increasing with every tenth of one year of age achieved by the contributor. By the scheme of the Act, payment is not retroactive to the last birthday but rather commences with the election, and the rate payable is higher than it would have been at that birthday if one or more tenths of a year has elapsed since it occurred. By this means, approximately the same amount of money is paid over time to the contributor for a shorter period at a higher rate.
[7]
The representation made on behalf of the defendant to the plaintiff was therefore untrue as in law the allowance was not payable retroactively. This representation was clearly negligent because it was easily within the competence of the defendant and his officers to state the situation clearly. It was also foreseeable that a contributor would be confused by the information provided to him. While the defendant contends that the onus was on the plaintiff to ask for clarification, it appears to me that the meaning which the plaintiff attributed to these communications was one which appeared sufficiently clear that it was not unreasonable for him to assume he understood them.
[8]
There remains the more difficult question as to whether the plaintiff suffered damages, and if so, how much. The defendant contends that the plaintiff was just as well off by receiving his annual allowance commencing November 1st, 1979, instead of retroactively to his fiftieth birthday on April 25th, 1979, because he was paid an allowance commencing at $305.93 per month effective November 1st whereas he would only have received a monthly amount of $291.37 had he started to collect as of April 25th. I have two difficulties with this proposition. Firstly, the evidence presented by the defendant was not very clear on this point. Because counsel for the defendant had not given the full ten days notice with respect to the nature of the expert evidence to be submitted, as required by rule 482, I limited the evidence of his expert to the explanation of certain of the calculations done by this witness and given to the plaintiff on examination for discovery in November of 1984. The result of this was that the only admissible evidence was as to the present value at age fifty, of an annual allowance payable then, compared to the present value at that age or at age 50.5 (the age when the plaintiff started to receive his allowance) of an allowance commencing at 50.5. This showed that the present value of the payment of $305.93 commencing on November 1st, 1979, was greater than the present value of the allowance of $291.37 commencing on April 25th, 1979. The witness admitted, however, on cross-examination that for the plaintiff actually to realize this "present value" he would have to live a considerable number of years and laws and governmental policies would have to remain unchanged. This calculation is therefore very speculative. Secondly, the plaintiff takes the position that he did not want payment of an amount equivalent to $1,797.15 made in small monthly amounts over a long period of time. He wanted the money in 1979 to invest in a registered retirement savings plan where interest rates were much higher than those assumed by the actuary for the purpose of calculating the present value of that money. I believe that the plaintiff had a right of choice here and was entitled to have the money in hand in 1979 rather than in the form of a right to small future payments over a long period of time. The right was denied to him by the misrepresentations of the defendant. I therefore find that he is entitled to the sum of $1,797.15, an amount said by him (and undisputed by the defendant) to represent the equivalent of monthly payments of $291.37 commencing April 25th, 1979, and continuing until November 1, 1979, when he commenced to receive payments in the amount of $305.93. This may leave something of an anomaly since the plaintiff has received payment at a higher rate since November 1, 1979, on the basis that he was not entitled to any payment before that time. It must be kept in mind, however, that my finding as to liability here is based on tort: I am not finding that the payment as made commencing November 1, 1979, was other than in accordance with the Public Service Superannuation Act and nothing here has the effect of making that payment other than legal. Nor has the defendant made any counterclaim for overpayment in case there should be a finding in favour of the plaintiff.
[9]
The plaintiff also claims for pre-judgment interest, and apparently post-judgment interest at a rate higher than that allowed in the Interest Act. As the successful claim in this action is based on tort, by virtue of s. 3 of the Crown Liability Act there is payable in respect of this claim pre-judgment interest in accordance with the law of Ontario where all the relevant acts occurred. With regard to pre-judgment interest, it appears by virtue of the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1984, c. 11, s. 138(4) that this proceeding having been commenced in January, 1983, such interest would be governed by s. 36 of the Judicature Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 223. That section provides that where the judgment is given upon an unliquidated claim the rate of interest payable is the "prime rate", payable from the date the person entitled gave notice in writing of his claim to the date of the judgment. Unfortunately the first "notice in writing" which I can find in the evidence in which this claim is clearly stated is an undated letter, obviously written by the plaintiff subsequent to the receipt by him of the letter referred to above from the Department of Supply and Services dated January 9th, 1980, and prior to a letter dated January 30, 1980, from that department in reply to his notice of claim. In the absence of any other indication as to when the plaintiff's letter of claim was written, I shall assign to it the date of January 30, 1980, the date on which a reply to his letter was written. I am treating this as a judgment upon an unliquidated claim because it is for damages in tort. According to s. 36 of the Judicature Act, R.S.O. 1980, c. 223, the pre-judgment interest is therefore payable at the prime rate as fixed by the Bank of Canada for the month preceding the month on which the action was commenced, that is for the month of December, 1982, which was 12.5%. This pre-judgment interest is payable from January 30, 1980, until the date of this judgment. With respect to post-judgment interest, it appears to me that this does not arise out of liability in tort but rather from liability for payment of a judgment debt, and is governed solely by s. 40 of the Federal Court Act. That section gives the court a discretion in fixing the rate of interest: see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Fed. C.A.). I am therefore exercising my discretion in the matter by directing that post-judgment interest be payable at the same rate I found to be payable with respect to pre-judgment interest.
[10]
The plaintiff is entitled to costs. His counsel requested that I make a special order as to costs, either awarding them on a solicitor-client basis or fixing a substantial counsel fee. He made this submission on the basis that the issue is more important than the amount of money involved would indicate; that the amount involved would normally be a subject of a claim in a Small Claims Court or at least not in a Superior Court; that the procedures and preparations required in a Superior Court such as the Federal Court of Canada are somewhat burdensome in relation to the amount of money involved here. While I do not think that the special circumstances exist which would justify either solicitor-client costs or a special counsel fee, having regard to the novelty and importance of the issue I would direct that costs be payable on a Class II basis.
[11]
Counsel for the plaintiff is requested to prepare a judgment incorporating the above findings and move for judgment either under rule 324 if with consent of counsel for the defendant or otherwise under rule 319.
Judgment for plaintiff.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]