[1]
Heneghan, J.
: Yosyp Stanislavsky and Galyna Stanislavska (the "Applicants") seek judicial review of the decision of Immigration Counsellor David Rydygier (the "Officer"). In his decision, dated August 13, 2002, the Officer denied the Applicants' request for restoration of their temporary resident status in Canada.
[2]
The Applicants, who are married to each other, are citizens of Ukraine. They entered Canada in July 2000, as visitors. They have two sons who are Canadian citizens and who live in Canada. In 2000, the purpose of the Applicants' visit was to look after the ill mother of Mr. Stanislavsky. The mother died in August 2001, leaving property in Canada. Mr. Stanislavsky was a beneficiary of her estate.
[3]
The Applicants' visitor visas were extended until February 2002. Their request for a further extension was denied by a letter dated May 6, 2002. The Applicants' visitor status expired and by an application dated May 27, 2002, they applied for restoration of their visitor status.
[4]
On or about May 27, 2002, the Applicants made application for permanent residence in Canada. This application for permanent residence was sponsored by the Applicants' son Igor. The covering letter from counsel for the Applicants which accompanied the application for permanent residence referred to the sponsorship of the son Igor and set out some reasons why he wanted his parents to live in Canada. Those reasons included the son's decision to assist his parents in their advancing years. The covering letter which accompanied the Applicants' application for restoration of their visitor status, dated May 28, 2002, set out the fact that they had submitted a sponsored application for permanent residence and reasons why they wished to remain in Canada pending the outcome of that application.
[5]
By a decision dated August 13, 2002, the Officer denied the Applicants' request for restoration of temporary resident status in Canada. The refusal was in the form of a standard letter which provided as follows:
"Dear Client
This refers to your application for:
- Temporary Resident Status Extension
- Study Permit
- Work Permit
- Temporary Resident Permit
- Restoration of Temporary Resident Status
We regret to inform you that we are unable to approve your request.
It appears your original reason or purpose for coming to Canada has been satisfied. Your application is therefore refused.
You are required to leave Canada Immediately. Failure to depart Canada may result in enforcement action being initiated against you. Enclosed please find a Voluntary Confirmation of departure letter, which you are asked to present to immigration officials at your port of exit."
[6]
The Computer Assisted Immigration Processing System ("CAIPS") notes provided the following information:
"REMARKS: REFUSED VR EXT 09MAY2002
REQUEST FOR RESTORATION REFUSED ---- NO CHANGE OF CIRCUMSTANCE
THE FACT THAT AFL SUBMITTED NOT RELEVANT BECAUSE OF LONG PROCESSING TIME AT VEGREVILLE
IMMEDIATE DEPARTURE ADVISED
VOL DEP LETTER SENT"
[7]
The Applicants now argue that the Officer erred in making the negative decision because he based his decision on the fact that the original reason for their entry into Canada had come to an end. The Applicants say that this is an error because it ignores the recognition in the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2002, c. 27 (the "
Act
") and the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations
, SOR/2002-227 (the "
Regulations
") that persons who apply for permanent residence in Canada are not consequently precluded from remaining as visitors. In this regard, the Applicants rely on section 22(2) of the
Act
and section 183 of the
Regulations
.
[8]
The Applicants submit that the Officer ignored relevant evidence in reaching the negative decision, specifically the evidence relating to the fact that the application was one in the family class, that the male Applicant's mother had recently died, that he was a beneficiary of her estate and his presence was required to deal with administration of that estate and that the Applicants' son Igor desired that his parents remain in Canada with him for emotional support. According to the Applicants, this was all relevant information that was before the Officer but there was no indication that he considered any of these facts when making his decision.
[9]
The Respondent submits that the decision of the Officer was a discretionary one and should stand unless there is evidence to show that he failed to exercise his discretion in good faith. The Respondent argues that the Officer did not err in the exercise of his discretion, that the Applicants' circumstances were considered and the decision is justified.
[10]
The Respondent relies on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), where the Court held that the issuance of a visitor's visa is a discretionary one and an applicant bears the burden of showing that their continuing presence in Canada is not contrary to the statutory or regulatory schemes. The Respondent says that here, sections 20(1), 22(1), 22(2) and 26 of the
Act
apply, as well as sections 63, 179, 182 and 183(1) to (4) of the
Regulations
.
[11]
The sole issue arising here is whether the Officer erred in law by failing to consider the totality of the evidence or by ignoring or misconstruing the evidence.
[12]
Sections 20(1)(b), 22(1) and (2), 29(1) and (2) and 47 of
IRPA
are relevant to this judicial review and provide as follows:
"20(1) Every foreign national, other than a foreign national referred to in section 19, who seeks to enter or remain in Canada must establish,
. . . . .
(b) to become a temporary resident, that they hold the visa or other document required under the regulations and will leave Canada by the end of the period authorized for their stay.
"22(1) A foreign national becomes a temporary resident if an officer is satisfied that the foreign national has applied for that status, has met the obligations set out in paragraph 20(1)(b) and is not inadmissible.
"(2) An intention by a foreign national to become a permanent resident does not preclude them from becoming a temporary resident if the officer is satisfied that they will leave Canada by the end of the period authorized for their stay.
"29(1) A temporary resident is, subject to the other provisions of this Act, authorized to enter and remain in Canada on a temporary basis as a visitor or as a holder of a temporary resident permit.
"(2) A temporary resident must comply with any conditions imposed under the regulations and with any requirements under this Act, must leave Canada by the end of the period authorized for their stay and may re-enter Canada only if their authorization provides for re-entry.
"47. A foreign national loses temporary resident status
(a) at the end of the period for which they are authorized to remain in Canada;
(b) on a determination by an officer or the Immigration Division that they have failed to comply with any other requirement of this Act; or
(c) on cancellation of their temporary resident permit."
"20(1) L'étranger non visé à l'article 19 qui cherche à entrer au Canada ou à y séjourner est tenu de prouver:
. . . . .
b) pour devenir un résident temporaire, qu'il détient les visa ou autres documents requis par règlement et aura quitté le Canada à la fin de la période de séjour autorisée.
"22(1) Devient résident temporaire l'étranger dont l'agent constate qu'il a demandé ce statut, s'est déchargé des obligations prévues à l'alinéa 20(1)b) et n'est pas interdit de territoire.
"(2) L'intention qu'il a de s'établir au Canada n'empêche pas l'étranger de devenir résident temporaire sur preuve qu'il aura quitté le Canada à la fin de la période de séjour autorisée.
"29(1) Le résident temporaire a, sous réserve des autres dispositions de la présente loi, l'autorisation d'entrer au Canada et d'y séjourner à titre temporaire comme visiteur ou titulaire d'un permis de séjour temporaire.
"(2) Le résident temporaire est assujetti aux conditions imposées par les règlements et doit se conformer à la présente loi et avoir quitté le pays à la fin de la période de séjour autorisée. Il ne peut y rentrer que si l'autorisation le prévoit.
"47. Emportent perte du statut de résident temporaire les faits suivants:
a) l'expiration de la période de séjour autorisé;
b) la décision de l'agent ou de la Section de l'immigration constatant le manquement aux autres exigences prévues par la présente loi;
c) la révocation du permis de séjour temporaire."
[13]
The following sections of
IRPR
are also relevant and provide:
"7(1) A foreign national may not enter Canada to remain on a temporary basis without first obtaining a temporary resident visa.
"(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a foreign national who
(a) is exempted under Division 5 of Part 9 from the requirement to have a temporary resident visa;
(b) holds a temporary resident permit issued under subsection 24(1) of the Act; or
(c) is authorized under the Act or these Regulations to re-enter Canada to remain in Canada.
. . . . .
"179. An officer shall issue a temporary resident visa to a foreign national if, following an examination, it is established that the foreign national
(a) has applied in accordance with these Regulations for a temporary resident visa as a member of the visitor, worker or student class;
(b) will leave Canada by the end of the period authorized for their stay under Division 2;
(c) holds a passport or other document that they may use to enter the country that issued it or another country;
(d) meets the requirements applicable to that class;
(e) is not inadmissible; and
(f) meets the requirements of section 30.
. . . . .
"181(1) A foreign national may apply for an extension of their authorization to remain in Canada as a temporary resident if
(a) the application is made by the end of the period authorized for their stay; and
(b) they have complied with all conditions imposed on their entry into Canada.
"(2) An officer shall extend the foreign national's authorization to remain in Canada as a temporary resident if, following an examination, it is established that the foreign national continues to meet the requirements of section 179.
"182. On application made by a visitor, worker or student within 90 days after losing temporary resident status as a result of failing to comply with a condition imposed under paragraph 185(a), any of subparagraphs 185(b)(i) to (iii) or paragraph 185(c), an officer shall restore that status if, following an examination, it is established that the visitor, worker or student meets the initial requirements for their stay and has not failed to comply with any other conditions imposed.
"183(1) Subject to section 185, the following conditions are imposed on all temporary residents:
(a) to leave Canada by the end of the period authorized for their stay;
(b) to not work, unless authorized by this Part or Part 11; and
(c) to not study, unless authorized by this Part or Part 12.
"(2) Subject to subsections (3) to (5), the period authorized for the stay of a temporary resident is six months or any other period that is fixed by an officer on the basis of
(a) the temporary resident's means of support in Canada;
(b) the period for which the temporary resident applies to stay; and
(c) the expiry of the temporary resident's passport or other travel document.
"(3) The period authorized for the stay of a temporary resident begins on
(a) if they are authorized to enter and remain in Canada on a temporary basis, the day on which they first enter Canada after they are so authorized; and
(b) in any other case, the day on which they enter Canada.
"(4) The period authorized for a temporary resident's stay ends on the earliest of
(a) the day on which the temporary resident leaves Canada without obtaining prior authorization to re-enter Canada;
(b) the day on which any work permit or study permit issued to the temporary resident expires;
(c) the day on which any temporary resident permit issued to the temporary resident is no longer valid under section 63; or
(d) the day on which the period authorized under subsection (2) ends, if paragraphs (a) to (c) do not apply.
"(5) If a temporary resident has applied for an extension of the period authorized for their stay and a decision is not made on the application by the end of the period authorized for their stay, the period is extended until
(a) the day on which a decision is made, if the application is refused; or
(b) the end of the new period authorized for their stay, if the application is allowed.
"(6) If the period authorized for the stay of a temporary resident is extended by operation of paragraph (5)(a) or extended under paragraph (5)(b), the temporary resident retains their status, subject to any other conditions imposed, during the extended period.
. . . . .
"185. An officer may impose, vary or cancel the following specific conditions on a temporary resident:
(a) the period authorized for their stay;
(b) the work that they are permitted to engage in, or are prohibited from engaging in, in Canada, including
(i) the type of work,
(ii) the employer,
(iii) the location of the work,
(iv) the times and periods of the work, and
(v) in the case of a member of a crew, the period within which they must join the means of transportation;
(c) the studies that they are permitted to engage in, or are prohibited from engaging in, in Canada, including
(i) the type of studies or course,
(ii) the educational institution,
(iii) the location of the studies, and
(iv) the times and periods of the studies;
(d) the area within which they are permitted to travel or are prohibited from travelling in Canada; and
(e) the times and places at which they must report for
(i) medical examination, surveillance or treatment, or
(ii) the presentation of evidence of compliance with applicable conditions."
"7(1) L'étranger ne peut entrer au Canada pour y séjourner temporairement que s'il a préalablement obtenu un visa de résident temporaire.
"(2) Cette obligation ne s'applique pas:
a) à l'étranger dispensé, au titre de la section 5 de la partie 9, de l'obligation d'obtenir un visa de résident temporaire;
b) au titulaire d'un permis de séjour temporaire délivré au titre du paragraphe 24(1) de la Loi;
c) à tout étranger autorisé, en vertu de la Loi ou du présent règlement, à rentrer au Canada pour y séjourner.
. . . . .
"179. L'agent délivre un visa de résident temporaire à l'étranger si, à l'issue d'un contrôle, les éléments suivants sont établis:
a) l'étranger en a fait, conformément au présent règlement, la demande au titre de la catégorie des visiteurs, des travailleurs ou des étudiants;
b) il quittera le Canada à la fin de la période de séjour autorisée qui lui est applicable au titre de la section 2;
c) il est titulaire d'un passeport ou autre document qui lui permet d'entrer dans le pays qui l'a délivré ou dans un autre pays;
d) il se conforme aux exigences applicables à cette catégorie;
e) il n'est pas interdit de territoire;
f) il satisfait aux exigences prévues à l'article 30.
. . . . .
"181(1) L'étranger peut demander la prolongation de son autorisation de séjourner à titre de résident temporaire si, à la fois:
a) il en fait la demande à l'intérieur de sa période de séjour autorisée;
b) il s'est conformé aux conditions qui lui ont été imposées à son entrée au Canada.
"(2) L'agent prolonge l'autorisation de séjourner à titre de résident temporaire de l'étranger si, à l'issue d'un contrôle, celui-ci satisfait toujours aux exigences prévues à l'article 179.
"182. Sur demande faite par le visiteur, le travailleur ou l'étudiant dans les quatre-vingt-dix jours suivant la perte de son statut de résident temporaire parce qu'il ne s'est pas conformé à l'une des conditions prévues à l'alinéa 185a), aux sous-alinéas 185b)(i) à (iii) ou à l'alinéa 185c), l'agent rétablit ce statut si, à l'issue d'un contrôle, il est établi que l'intéressé satisfait aux exigences initiales de sa période de séjour et qu'il s'est conformé à toute autre condition imposée à cette occasion.
"183(1) Sous réserve de l'article 185, les conditions ci-après sont imposées à tout résident temporaire:
a) il doit quitter le Canada à la fin de la période de séjour autorisée;
b) il ne doit pas travailler, sauf en conformité avec la présente partie ou la partie 11;
c) il ne doit pas étudier, sauf en conformité avec la présente partie ou la partie 12.
"(2) Sous réserve des paragraphes (3) à (5), la période de séjour autorisée du résident temporaire est de six mois ou de toute autre durée que l'agent fixe en se fondant sur les critères suivants:
a) les moyens de subsistance du résident temporaire au Canada;
b) la période de séjour que l'étranger demande;
c) la durée de validité de son passeport ou autre titre de voyage.
"(3) La période de séjour du résident temporaire commence:
a) dans le cas de celui qui est autorisé à entrer et à séjourner à titre temporaire, à la date à laquelle il entre au Canada pour la première fois par suite de cette autorisation;
b) dans tout autre cas, à la date à laquelle il entre au Canada.
"(4) La période de séjour autorisée du résident temporaire prend fin au premier en date des événements suivants:
a) le résident temporaire quitte le Canada sans avoir obtenu au préalable l'autorisation d'y rentrer;
b) dans le cas du titulaire d'un permis de travail ou d'études, son permis expire;
c) dans le cas du titulaire d'un permis de séjour temporaire, son permis cesse d'être valide aux termes de l'article 63;
d) dans tout autre cas, la période de séjour autorisée aux termes du paragraphe (2) prend fin.
"(5) Si le résident temporaire demande la prolongation de sa période de séjour et qu'il n'est pas statué sur la demande avant l'expiration de la période, celle-ci est prolongée:
a) jusqu'au moment de la décision, dans le cas où il est décidé de ne pas la prolonger;
b) jusqu'à l'expiration de la période de prolongation accordée.
"(6) Si la période de séjour est prolongée par l'effet de l'alinéa (5)a) ou par application de l'alinéa (5)b), le résident temporaire conserve son statut, sous réserve des autres conditions qui lui sont imposées, pendant toute la prolongation.
. . . . .
"185. Les conditions particulières ci-après peuvent être imposées, modifiées ou levées par l'agent à l'égard du résident temporaire:
a) la période de séjour autorisée;
b) l'exercice d'un travail au Canada, ou son interdiction, et notamment:
(i) le genre de travail,
(ii) l'employeur,
(iii) le lieu de travail,
(iv) les modalités de temps de celui-ci,
(v) dans le cas d'un membre d'équipage, le délai à l'intérieur duquel il doit retourner à son moyen de transport;
c) la poursuite d'études au Canada, ou son interdiction, et notamment:
(i) le genre d'études ou de cours,
(ii) l'établissement d'enseignement,
(iii) le lieu des études,
(iv) les modalités de temps de celles-ci;
d) la partie du Canada où sa présence est obligatoire ou interdite;
e) les date, heure et lieu où il doit:
(i) se soumettre à une visite médicale, une surveillance médicale ou un traitement médical,
(ii) présenter des éléments de preuve de conformité aux conditions applicables."
[14]
A person seeking a temporary resident permit must have the intention of staying in Canada for a temporary purpose and an officer must be satisfied that such person will leave Canada upon the expiry of status: see sections 20(1)(b) and 29(1) and (2) of the
Act
and
De La  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In this case, the Officer did not refuse the Applicants' application for restoration of temporary status on the basis that they would not be in Canada for a temporary purpose. On the contrary, the Officer denied the application because the Applicants' stay in Canada would be for a "long" temporary purpose, that is, while awaiting a decision on their application for permanent residence. The extended delay in this regard was attributed to the long processing time in Vegreville, Alberta relative to inland sponsorship applications.
[15]
In my opinion, the fact that the Applicants had submitted an inland sponsorship application was relevant to their intention to remain in Canada for a temporary purpose, that is for the duration of the processing of their landing applications. Granted, this was a new and different temporary purpose from their original temporary purpose when they entered Canada as visitors in July 2000. However, the current statutory and regulatory scheme does not say that a person's initial temporary purpose must remain constant and unchanged. The only requirement is the existence of a "temporary purpose" and in the present case, I find that the Officer did not address his mind to this question in relation to the prevailing personal circumstances of the Applicants. That is a reversible error.
[16]
The Applicants entered Canada in 2000 as visitors. The stated purpose for that trip was to look after the male Applicant's ailing mother. The Applicants obtained one extension to their visitors' visas. They failed to comply with section 185(a) of the
Regulations
, that is, concerning the period authorized for the stay in Canada, but they acted within the time limits imposed by section 182 to seek reinstatement of status; they applied for restoration within 90 days after expiry of their temporary resident status.
[17]
A review of the record in this case suggests that the Officer improperly limited his consideration of the Applicants' application for reinstatement of status to the length of time required for the Respondent's employees to deal with processing of the inland sponsorship application without addressing the existence or otherwise of a current "temporary purpose" for the Applicants' stay in Canada. Accordingly, this application for judicial review is allowed and the matter remitted to a different officer for redetermination. There is no question for certification arising.
ORDER
[18]
The application for judicial review is allowed and the matter remitted to a different officer for redetermination. There is no question for certification arising.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/pdk
[End of document]