 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
McVeigh, J.
August 14, 2013.
Counsel:
[Not disclosed].
Solicitors of Record:
[Not disclosed].
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
ORDER
UPON
an application for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (the Board), Refugee Protection Division, dated August 15, 2012, in which the decision maker rejected the claim of the Applicant for refugee protection under sections 96 and 97 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act,
SC 2001 (IRPA). The decision was regarding two individuals but the subject matter of this judicial review deals only with the application of Zsolt Buzas.
AND UPON
reading the written submissions, the Certified Tribunal Record (CTR) and hearing the oral submissions of the parties;
AND UPON
determining that this Application should be dismissed for the following reasons:
I.
Background
[1]
McVeigh, J.
: The Applicant, Zsolt Buzas is a Roma man while his common-law spouse, Zsusza Zagyva is an ethnic Hungarian. The Applicant worked as a nurse in hospitals and private care facilities and had been living most recently in Budapest before he left Hungary for Canada on May 23, 2009 and made a refugee claim on May 29, 2009.
[2]
The Applicant alleges that on several occasions he was beat by individuals hired by his wife's parents and family because they were unhappy with his relationship with her. His evidence was that he was asked to leave her.
[3]
The Applicant's position is that the Board's credibility findings were not supported by the evidence and that they were based on an unduly microscopic examination of the Applicant's evidence. I disagree.
II.
Credibility Findings
[4]
The Board found:
Given the serious discrepancies, omissions and other problems with respect to major issues, I find that the claimants were generally lacking in credibility. I simply do not believe, on a balance of probabilities, that any of the significant events that the claimants alleged happened to them actually happened.
[5]
The Board explained a number of reasons that supported its findings of credibility in the decision:
1. With respect to an incident in 2005, the Applicant sought treatment at a medical facility where he worked as a nurse but was unable to support it by obtaining the documents. He had no police report or the letter saying the police closed the investigation. The Board found this not credible as he worked at the hospital and documents are obtainable even from abroad. The Board found an absence of documentation undermined the Applicant's credibility;
2. With regards to the 2006 incident, there are discrepancies between the Applicant's testimony and his Personal Information Form (PIF). The discrepancies were whether the police came to the hospital and took a report and then closed the investigation or whether he went to the police and they refused to make a report. The Board found there was no coherent explanation for these events to be described dramatically different;
3. The Applicant originally said he feared no one in particular and in later testimony and in his PIF he identified his fear was of his wife's parents and family. The Board found this further undermined his credibility;
4. The Applicant alleged that in 2007 he sustained bruises and a possible cracked rib in an attack from his wife's family but he did not seek medical attention. The Board found that apathy not credible and a possible concocted explanation of why no medical report after such a sever attack with a metal bar. There also was a discrepancy regarding whether there were one or two dogs that menaced him as the PIF and his testimony were in contradiction;
5. The Applicant claimed to be a well known radio commentator on Roma issues and was on air 3 times a week for 1 ½ years to 2 years. He felt some of his problems were due to his broadcasting activities but in his PIF employment or narrative at no time does it mention his alleged activities as a radio commentator. He says most of his problems because of his relationship with his wife. The Board did not find it credible that he would not have mentioned the issue in his PIF given the detail he provided in his PIF. This omission the Board found undermined his credibility;
6. The Applicant testified that most of the "problems" that happened to him were because of his relationship with his current partner. Yet the Board found that in the Immigration documents he only mentions his former partner and not his current one and only general problems in Hungary and not the specific ones related to his relationship. The Board found it not credible that he did not mention his current wife when the whole thrust of his PIF was that being in a mixed relationship was the source of the majority of his problems. The Board questioned the genuineness of the relationship but in any event found it undermined his credibility;
7. The female claimant's testimony was also found lacking and reasons were provided but her application was not before me.
[6]
The Board's credibility findings are owed the highest degree of deference and are subject to a reasonableness standard of review (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[7]
On these facts I find that the Board did not microscopically analyse the claim as multiple inconsistencies and lack of documentation to support the incidents go to the heart of the Applicant's claim. I find no reviewable error on the Board's findings of lack of credibility.
III.
Article 1F (b) Findings
[8]
The Minister of Public Safety intervened to exclude the Applicant pursuant to Article 1F (b) of the Refugee Convention (Convention). In October 2009, the Applicant requested a loan of $25,000.00 over the internet from a woman in Hungary. The Applicant had not repaid the loan and a warrant had been issued for his arrest in Hungary. Originally the information lead was that the crime was the equivalent to a fraud of over $5,000.00 in Canada but subsequently information was received that the Applicant was in fact charged with extortion. If committed in Canada, extortion is an indictable offence and punishable to a maximum sentence of life imprisonment. The Board found this to be a non political crime.
[9]
The Applicant alleged he had lost contact with the woman that he had borrowed money from. At the hearing when questioned he alleged that the woman may have had problems with her husband over his relationship with her and the charges may be because of this. The Board found that the Applicant had no corroborative documents to show he had tried to contact the woman. The Board found his explanation that his computer had crashed that is why he had not documentation not to be credible. After the hearing, the Applicant submitted emails to show he had tried to contact her and his explanation then was that he had forgotten about the emails as he was psychologically worn and scared at the hearing. The Board was mindful of a medical report of his medical condition but gave it little weight and found the emails to be forgeries. The Board found his reliance on it to further undermine his credibility.
[10]
The Board found that the documentary evidence supported that the Hungarian judicial system is generally fair and that the existence of the warrant itself is sufficient for the Board to find that there are serious reasons to believe that he committed a serious not-political crime and should be excluded. The Board looked at all aggravating and mitigating factors.
[11]
The Federal Court of Appeal found that pure economic crime can be grounds for exclusion under Article 1F (b) of the Convention (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). There is also nothing improper in relying on the charges laid and there is no need for a conviction.
23
...The fact that this evidence falls far short of the standard of proof in criminal cases is of no moment since the issue is not whether the appellant committed the crime of which she is accused. The issue is whether there are serious reasons for considering that she did. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [12]
The Board's determination with respect to whether a claimant is a person as described in Article 1F (b) of the Convention is a question of mixed fact and law. I find the Board applied the correct legal test (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) and how the Board applied the facts of this case was reasonable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ff'd 2008 FCA 404 at para 14, 56).
[13]
I find the Board did not make a reviewable error on the exclusion pursuant to Article 1F (b).
IV.
State Protection Analysis
[14]
The Board disbelieved the Applicant's events as recounted but turned to the general situation for Roma people in Hungary. The Board, after a careful review of the documentary evidence, found that the Applicant failed to rebut the presumption of state protection. I find the Board did not make a reviewable error in finding that there was adequate state protection available. The Board did not err in finding the Applicant was not subject to risks delineated in section 97 of IRPA.
[15]
The reasons provided by the Board are articulated clearly and demonstrate why the Board took issue with the credibility of the Applicant's assertion that he would be at risk upon return to Hungary.
[16]
In conclusion, I find that the Board rendered a decision that fell "within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). There are no grounds upon which this Court should intervene in the Board's decision.
[17]
THIS COURT ORDERS that
:
1. The Application for judicial review is dismissed; and
2. No question of general importance is certified
[End of document]