[1]
Joyal, J.
: The applicant for judicial review herein is a citizen of Ghana born in 1958. In 1984, he enlisted in the Committee for the Defence of the Revolution ("CDR"), an arm of the Rawlings regime in Ghana. In that capacity, the applicant participated in any number of "special duties" which included what are commonly called crimes against human rights. The applicant admitted that his group used force to arrest people, beat them and committed the usual atrocities, all of which has been outlined in detail in the documentary evidence relating to the CDR.
[2]
On the face of this, the applicant could prima facie find himself facing an exclusion from any refugee protection pursuant to Article 1F(a) of the
United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
where there are "serious reasons for considering that he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn up to make provisions in respect of such crimes".
[3]
The singular aspect of the applicant's case, however, is that his joining the CDR and its special unit and his participating in its programmes was for the express purpose of spying on the group. He states that his intention was to try to save some victims and report on the CDR's activities to his father living in London, England, who was at that time running an opposition group, the Ghana Democratic Movement ("GDM"). In this way, the applicant was able to warn some ten people that they were on the victims' list, and his father, through the GDM, could otherwise do what he could to warn or assist others who might have been at risk. Whether this aspect of the case constitutes a kind of absolution for the applicant was essentially the issue before the Refugee Board.
[4]
In its decision, the Board decided that it did not absolve the applicant. Referring to the applicant's own evidence on the subject of his activities, as well as authorities relating to the applicant's degree of participation in terrorism, the Board found that the claimant knowingly and violently participated in CDR atrocities, thus disengaging himself from consideration as a refugee claimant and becoming, in the words of the
Convention
, a person on whose behalf the provisions of the
Convention
did not apply.
[5]
On the standard of proof, the Board subscribed to the decision of MacGuigan, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), to the effect that the expression "serious reasons for considering" imposes a burden which is certainly lower than the standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt and lower even than the civil law code of balance of probabilities or preponderance of evidence.
[6]
On the basis of the applicant's own admissions, the Board could conclude that there were reasonable grounds for finding that the applicant was excluded from the protection otherwise available to refugee claimants.
[7]
In a more recent case, however, Robertson, J.A., appears to impose a more stringent standard when applying Section 1F of the
Convention
. In
Moreno and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), A-746-91, judgment dated September 14, 1993, His Lordship suggests that the standard of proof is not relevant when the issue being addressed is essentially a question of law. I interpret his comments in the light of the circumstances before him where the applicant had been conscripted for service in the army of San Salvador, during which service he had directly or indirectly participated in the killing of civilians. It was a question of law, says Robertson, J.A., whether the applicant's acts or omissions as a guard watching others kill civilians constitute a crime against humanity. That determination, he goes on to say, could only be made by reference to legal principles found in jurisprudence dealing with "complicity" and further, it was a question of law whether membership in a military organization such as the army of San Salvador constitutes sufficient complicity to warrant application of the exclusion clause.
[8]
While I might share the Court of Appeal's concern with the possibility of an overreaching effect being given to the exclusion clause, I view the court's lengthy reasons for judgment as reflective of the particular objective facts of the case before it, namely that the applicant had been forcibly inducted, that his service in the army had been a brief period of four months, and that there was no evidence of a "shared common purpose" making the applicant's presence at scenes of crime tantamount to possible acquiescence. The court could then conclude that there was no basis on which to rest the application of the exclusion order.
[9]
On page 26 of its reasons, the Court of Appeal in
Moreno and Sanchez
is quick to distinguish the facts before it from those facing the Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. The court says:
"In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the court was satisfied 'beyond a reasonable doubt' that the claimant had been personally and knowingly involved in persecutorial acts. The fact that Mr. Ramirez underwent an ideological conversion and then fled both the army and his country were not acts which by themselves could absolve him of complicity in crimes against humanity. In my view, what distinguishes the present case from <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is the duration of the appellant's military service, his military rank and the passive role which he played in what clearly was a crime committed by ranking officers."
[10]
In my view, the facts before the Board in the case at bar is far closer to the situation in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> than to the one in
Moreno and Sanchez
. I should therefore doubt that the extremely erudite analysis in the latter judgement of what constitutes a matter of law or a matter of fact, or what constitutes "complicity" under criminal rules, or whether or not the rule respecting exclusion is left begging when an applicant is no more than a conscripted bystander to acts against humanity, is particularly helpful in a case where there is voluntary participation by the application in what countless refugee claimants from Ghana as well as numerous documents have identified as a repressive, terrorist group, where he showed enough zeal to be appointed to a special unit or group, where his seniority extended for some four years, and where the decision to leave the group was made when somehow or other he found out he was now on the CDR hit list.
[11]
In terms of the evidence before the Board, I might find it odd that the CDR's internal security measures were such as to permit the participation of a person whose father was head of an opposition group operating out of London, England. His claim to have helped some ten people in the course of his four-year stint only goes so far, in my view, in raising equity considerations on his behalf. Were these people apolitical friends, or idealists, or terrorists in their own right? As was the situation in San Salvador, terrorism breeds terrorism and it is not untoward to suggest, without casting any moral judgment or adopting political rectitude, that at times it is difficult to distinguish "the good guys" from "the bad guys".
[12]
These comments, albeit of limited relevancy to the case before me, nevertheless are indication of the Board's appreciation of the weight to be given to the applicant's claim that he was an undercover man for a rival organization and that some kind of exculpatory clause should be applied to his benefit. To do so, in my view of the evidence before the Board, would render inoperative Article 1F of the
Convention
. Terrorists fleeing terrorists would always find refuge under
Convention
rules.
[13]
Two other issues were raised and I need only briefly refer to them. One is the issue of "credible basis" as found in the concluding sentences of the Board's reasons. The applicant of course argues that grounds must be shown by a board when that determination is made. In my view, these grounds may be found in the body of the Board's decision when it characterizes the applicant's evidence as self-serving and in essence, finds an obvious contradiction between the motive ascribed by the applicant in voluntarily joining the CDR and his several admissions as to his own conduct during a period of four years. In the alternative, I would view the Board's finding on "credible basis" as being directed much more to the applicant's claim that he should be forgiven for his sins than to the material evidence which he himself presented to the Board.
[14]
The other issue is whether or not it was incumbent on the Board, having found for exclusion, to enter into a further enquiry into the applicant's refugee status. Robertson, J.A., in the
Moreno and Sanchez
case, leaves that question to another day. It must be remembered that in that part of his reasons, His Lordship had already found that the Board's decision under the exclusion clause was wrong. This explains his observation that it might have been preferable for the Board to have heard the case on refugee status, and he advances some practical considerations for this, all worthy of respect. Indeed, the comment reflects (1) the particular nature of the case before him, where the refugee claim of Ms. Sanchez, as spouse of Mr. Moreno, rested on her husband's claim, and (2) the law whereby a dependant claimant is still entitled to have his or her case determined on a convention refugee basis.
[15]
It is my view that there is no legal obligation, in the case before me, to have the Board consider the refugee claim. While it is true that in some cases, this procedure might avoid another enquiry at some other time, it is also reasonable to suggest that an enquiry now or an enquiry later are self-cancelling as far as time is concerned. In any event, I should think that courts should eschew the temptation to judicialize the issue and leave it to a refugee board's discretion, subject of course to the requirements outlined by Robertson, J.A., supra.
[16]
The application for judicial review is denied.
Application denied.
Editor: Janette Blue/dlr
[End of document]