[1]
Gibson, J.
: These reasons arise out of two applications by the respondent, Andre Rouleau, brought pursuant to s. 225.2(8) of the
Income Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp. (as amended), to review two authorizations, commonly known as jeopardy collection orders, granted by Mr. Justice Dubé on May 31, 1994 and June 3, 1994 pursuant to s. 225.2(2) of the
Income Tax Act
. Sections 225.2(2) and (8) read as follows:
"(2) Notwithstanding s. 225.1, where on ex parte application by the Minister, a judge is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the collection of all or any part of an amount assessed in respect of a taxpayer would be jeopardized by a delay in the collection of that amount, the judge shall, on such terms as the judge considers reasonable in the circumstances, authorize the Minister to take forthwith any of the actions described in paragraphs 225(1)(a) to (g) with respect to the amount.
. . . . .
"(8) Where a judge of a court has granted an authorization under this section in respect of a taxpayer, the taxpayer may, on 6 clear days notice to the Deputy Attorney General of Canada, apply to a judge of the court to review the authorization."
The dispositions open to a judge on a motion such as this are set out in subs. 225.2(11) which reads as follows:
"(11) On an application under subs. (8), the judge shall determine the question summarily and may confirm, set aside, or vary the authorization and make such other order as the judge considers appropriate."
[2]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Associate Chief Justice Jerome stated at p. 727:
"In
Satellite Earth
, MacKay, J., reviewed the factors to be considered by a court on a subs. 225.2(8) review of a jeopardy collection order. After considering the case law dealing with the former version of s. 225.2 he concluded (at p. 296) that in a subs. 225.2(8) application the Minister has the ultimate burden of justifying the decision despite the fact that s. 225.2 as amended no longer includes the former paragraph (5) that specifically stated that '[O]n the hearing of an application under paragraph (2)(c) the burden of justifying the direction is on the Minister.' However, the initial burden is on the taxpayer to show that there are reasonable grounds to doubt that the test has been met ..."
On this application, the applicant failed to discharge the initial burden on him.
[3]
The applicant is retired. He was born in September 1931 and has lived in various locations in Canada throughout his life. He is single and without children. He has an elderly mother and five surviving sisters and two surviving brothers which, according to his counsel, implies a substantial attachment to Canada. From the age of 17, he worked steadily for some 38 years. He apparently travels little, and then only to the United States.
[4]
On May 30, 1994 he was reassessed in respect of the 1989, 1990 and 1991 taxation years in amounts totalling $160,146.13. A few days later, he was reassessed in respect of the 1992 and 1993 taxation years in amounts totalling $143,225.49. These reassessments were based on net worth statements which the applicant alleges are inaccurate. The net worth statements were in part developed on the basis of information garnered through search warrants obtained by the Minister of National Revenue on May 3, 1994 and a later date, also in May, 1994. In the execution of the search warrants, it was discovered that the applicant had $25,000 in cash at his apartment, approximately $92,000 in cash in safety deposit boxes and over $96,000 in cash in a cold storage depot locker maintained by the applicant.
[5]
Counsel for the applicant argued that these discoveries alone, disclosing as they did rather unusual practises for holding and preservation of assets, did not provide "reasonable grounds to believe" that the collection of all or any part of amounts assessed against the applicant would be jeopardized by a delay in the collection of those amounts. Further, counsel argued, the Minister of National Revenue was under a duty to make full and frank disclosure to the judge considering an application for a jeopardy collection order and failed to do so on the application for the second jeopardy collection order when the Minister failed to put before the judge the net worth statements developed by the Minister's officials on which the reassessments were based.
[6]
As I indicated earlier, I am not satisfied that the applicant discharged the initial burden on him to show that there are reasonable grounds to doubt that the test for a jeopardy collection order has been met.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 5 F.T.R. 161 (T.D.). Mr. Justice Joyal stated at p. 524 (F.C.):
"I find that the nature of the assessment itself raises reasonable apprehensions that the taxpayer had not been conducting his affairs in what might be called an orthodox fashion. There is reasonable apprehension that in placing surplus funds for investment purposes through the hands of a third party instead of directly, there would be difficulty in retracing these funds or in recovering them."
[7]
I find the foregoing quotation apt to the circumstances before me. Certainly, the nature of the reassessments against the applicant indicate a range of income to the applicant quite out of scale with the incomes disclosed by the applicant in his annual returns to the Minister of National Revenue. The way in which he held assets certainly disclosed a conducting of affairs that could be called unorthodox. It also disclosed practises that would have made it very simple for the applicant to spirit away substantial assets if he had been so inclined so that there conceivably could have been difficulty in retracing the assets and in recovering them.
[8]
Further, I find no support for the position that the Minister of National Revenue failed to make full and frank disclosure, which I am satisfied he is obliged to do, on the second ex parte application to Mr. Justice Dubé. Full and frank disclosure does not require the disclosure of material that is simply irrelevant to the test for issuance of an ex parte jeopardy collection order.
[9]
For the foregoing reasons, the jeopardy collection orders in question are confirmed and in all other respects the applicant's applications are dismissed.
Applications dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/saf
[End of document]