[1]
MacKay, J.
: This application by the owner of the defendant ship, a fishing vessel M.V. "Atlantic Bounty", is for an order releasing the ship from arrest without security, or alternatively for an order releasing the ship from arrest upon provision of security in a form and an amount as determined by the court.
[2]
The vessel was arrested March 22, 1991, and remains under arrest at St. Lawrence, Newfoundland. When this matter came on for hearing in Halifax on April 9, 1991, counsel for the applicant urged that release of the vessel be ordered without security, or alternatively with security only in a nominal amount, on the grounds that the claims of the plaintiff corporation as set out in the statement of claim filed in St. John's, March 21, 1991, are not maritime claims giving rise to an action in rem. Insofar as any claim may be related to a mortgage on the ship "Atlantic Bounty" that claim is already secured by mortgage and the mortgage is said not to be in default.
[3]
In affidavits in support of the motion the owner of the vessel avers that the appraised value of the vessel in February 1990 was $445,000, a value increased by further work and equipment provided on the vessel since the appraisal. He further avers that the vessel is insured in the amount of $450,000 under a policy effective March 22, 1991, for one year and, in the event of loss, payees include the Bank of Nova Scotia and the plaintiff corporation as their respective interests may appear. As the owner of the vessel states, and as a copy of the transcript of registry relating to the Atlantic Bounty indicates, a first mortgage of the vessel is registered with the Bank of Nova Scotia as mortgagee in the amount of $144,450, plus interest as agreed, the plaintiff corporation holds a second mortgage registered in the amount of $150,000, plus interest as agreed, and a third mortgage is registered in the amount of $39,756.61, with interest as agreed, in favour of the Fisheries Loan Board of Newfoundland.
[4]
The owner of the vessel acknowledges by affidavit that the appraised value as of February 19, 1990, is disputed by the plaintiff. I note that the valuation established by the appraiser in 1990 was based on estimates of the depreciated replacement cost of the vessel without considering its market value. The owner further avers that he is unable to post bail in the amount of $450,000, his estimate of the appraised value of the vessel, and that with the fishing season now open, if he is unable to regain possession he will suffer grave financial consequences. His affidavit further indicates that he will be filing a defence in this matter denying that any mortgage to the plaintiff corporation is in default and questioning the jurisdiction of this court to entertain the action initiated by the plaintiff.
[5]
By affidavit in reply to the motion of the vessel's owner, the president of the plaintiff corporation avers that the defendants have failed to pay in full all amounts owed to the plaintiff despite demands made on behalf of the plaintiff, including a demand by registered mail dated April 3, 1990. Thereafter, in June 1990, the plaintiff corporation initiated action in the Supreme Court of Newfoundland against the owners of the M.V. "Atlantic Bounty" claiming, for a variety of claims, a total of more than three hundred thirty thousand dollars ($330,000). In July 1990, the plaintiff corporation took possession of the vessel pursuant to terms of a mortgage between the defendants and the plaintiff and some ten days later on August 3, 1990, the defendants retook possession of the vessel without the plaintiff's consent.
[6]
It is also averred that the defendants have been advised that the plaintiff would agree to security for the vessel, to effect its release from arrest, in accord with
Federal Court Rules
. The plaintiff corporation opposes the motion to release the M.V. "Atlantic Bounty" from arrest with or without security, or alternatively opposes the motion to release the vessel without security and requests that any release be accompanied by security in the amount of the total of its claims against the defendants or the appraised value of the vessel.
[7]
The total of the plaintiff's claims set out in the statement of claim, including interest as at March 22, 1991, but excluding interest both before and after judgment in relation to certain claims, is about $355,500. At the hearing of this matter counsel for the plaintiff acknowledged that one of its claims might not be enforceable by action in this court but that any order for release of the vessel ought to provide for bail in the amount of at least $295,000, the total of the plaintiff's other outstanding claims.
[8]
The statement of claim initiating this matter sets out the bases of the claims by the plaintiff in paragraphs 4 to 10 as follows:
"4. In pursuance of a written agreement executed by the plaintiff and the defendant dated December 9, 1982, the defendant agreed to sell his raw product to the plaintiff and the plaintiff advanced $50,000 to the defendant to purchase a crab boat then known as the M.V. 'Marilyn Marie II'.
"5. In pursuance of the said agreement the plaintiff advanced to the defendant, supported by a promissory note, the sum of $50,000 which said note included provision for the repayment of principal and interest as more particularly set out therein.
"6. In pursuance of a written agreement executed by the plaintiff and the defendant, dated June 30, 1989, the defendant agreed to sell his raw product to the plaintiff and the plaintiff advanced $150,000 to the defendant to enable the defendant to refurbish and improve the M.V. 'Atlantic Bounty'.
"7. In pursuance of the said agreement the plaintiff advanced to the defendant, supported by a promissory note, the sum of $150,000 which said note included provision for the repayment of principal and interest as more particularly set out therein.
"8. By oral agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant the plaintiff agreed to and did extend a line of credit to the defendant by providing advances to the defendant directly and direct payments to suppliers on behalf of the defendant to cover the cost of repairs and supplies for the M.V. 'Atlantic Bounty'. The defendant agreed to reimburse the plaintiff for money advanced on the defendant's behalf.
"9. By oral agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant the plaintiff agreed to and did pay an insurance premium due on the defendant's M.V. 'Atlantic Bounty' to the defendant's insurer. The defendant agreed to reimburse the plaintiff for the premium so paid.
"10. By oral agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant the plaintiff leased crab pots to the defendant with any crab pots not being returned being charged as agreed between the plaintiff and the defendant at cost to the defendant."
[9]
In the affidavit to lead warrant, filed in these proceedings in St. John's on March 21, 1991, to support the warrant for arrest of the vessel, the president of the plaintiff corporation avers, inter alia:
"2.
That
the nature of the claim against the defendant is one of a default in payment of a written agreement executed by the plaintiff and the defendant dated December 9, 1982, supported by a promissory note, a written agreement executed by the plaintiff and the defendant dated June 30, 1989, supported by a promissory note, and a line of credit extended to the defendant by the plaintiff.
"3.
That
to date the defendant has not satisfied the terms of the mortgage, and the monies owing to the plaintiff/applicant as indicated in paragraph 2 herein remain outstanding."
[10]
The alleged claims set out in the statement of claim by the plaintiff corporation are five in number. Two of them, set out respectively in paragraphs 4 and 5, and in paragraphs 6 and 7, concern written agreements under which funds were advanced by the plaintiff to the defendant in reliance on promissory notes by which the defendant undertook to repay principal and interest. Incidentally, the first of these agreements, in 1982, related to a loan to acquire the vessel then bearing the name M.V. "Marilyn Marie II", which later was apparently renamed the M.V. "Atlantic Bounty". The second agreement, in 1989, provided funds for refurbishing and improving the vessel. The other three claims all involve oral agreements under which the defendant agreed to reimburse the plaintiff, for advances made to the defendant and to suppliers on his behalf to cover costs of repairs and supplies for the vessel (paragraph 8), for reimbursement of an insurance premium due on the vessel paid by the plaintiff on behalf of the defendant (paragraph 9), and for leasing of crab pots and payment by the defendant to plaintiff for any pots not returned as agreed (paragraph 10).
[11]
Counsel for the applicant submits that none of the claims as set out in the statement of claim constitutes a maritime claim giving rise to an action in rem. Indeed, it is urged that each of the claims is a simple contract claim against the owner of the vessel, not referred to in the statement of claim as attaching in any way to the vessel itself, and these claims are said not to be within the jurisdiction of this court to determine. These arguments go to the question of the validity of the arrest or to the jurisdiction of this court to consider the claims advanced by the plaintiff. The motion the court is asked to consider, with notice to the respondent/plaintiff, is a motion for release from arrest, which implicitly acknowledges the validity of the arrest, and at least at this stage the jurisdiction of the court. This is not a motion to quash the arrest, or to strike the statement of claim for want of jurisdiction as was the situation in cases cited by counsel for the applicant,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  consider upon what terms, if any, release of the vessel from arrest should be made, assuming at this stage that the arrest is valid.
[12]
At the hearing, counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the agreement in writing referred to in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the statement of claim expressly relates to a mortgage on the vessel between the parties, a matter known to the defendant and of which there is evidence of the registration of the mortgage from the register of the vessel. That mortgage is said to be in default, a situation at least obliquely referred to in the affidavit to lead warrant, though as noted the applicant owner by affidavit disputes that. Counsel for the plaintiff also submits that the claims set out in paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of the statement of claim are all claims for necessaries, a characterization which counsel for the defendant disputes but which counsel for the plaintiff argues it has a right to seek to establish through trial.
[13]
Counsel for the applicant, while not directly acknowledging or denying the existence of a mortgage, emphasizes that a mortgage is not referred to in the statement of claim and in any event any mortgage between the parties is not in default. I note that the only express reference to a mortgage being in default is included in the affidavit to lead warrant, supporting the arrest of the vessel, though that reference is not in any way detailed. While the statement of claim may not adequately set out reference to a mortgage between the parties and its default, in my view the court cannot at this preliminary stage ignore that the underlying cause for one of the plaintiff's claims is a mortgage which is alleged to be in default. That certainly provides a basis for an action in rem within ss. 22 and 43(2) of the
Federal Court Act
. Nor can the court ignore the possibility that the plaintiff may seek to amend its statement of claim to incorporate express reference to the registered mortgage between the parties and to its default. There is in my view an arguable basis, at least at this stage, of a claim by the plaintiff which would support an action in rem.
[14]
Two other issues were briefly raised at the hearing. The first concerned the discretion of the court in accord with rules 1004 and 1006(1) and (2):
"Rule 1004. In any admiralty proceeding, bail may be taken to answer any judgment in the proceeding and the court may withhold the release of any property under arrest until such bail is given.
"Rule 1006(1) A release for property arrested by warrant (hereinafter referred to as a 'release') may be issued by the court.
"(2) A release may be issued by a prothonotary or an officer of the Registry who has been authorized by the court to issue warrants under rule 1003 (hereinafter referred to as the 'issuing officer') unless there is a caveat under rule 1009 outstanding against the release of the property,
(a) on payment into court of the amount claimed or of the appraised value of the property arrested, or where cargo is arrested for freight only, of the amount of the freight verified by affidavit;
(b) on one or more bail bonds being filed for the amount claimed, or for the appraised value of the property arrested, and on the allowance of the same if objected to, or if not objected to, on proof that 24 hours' notice of the names and addresses of sureties has been previously served on the party at whose instance the property was arrested;
(c) on the application of the party at whose instance the property was arrested;
(d) on the consent in writing of the party at whose instance the property was arrested; or
(e) on discontinuance or dismissal of the action in which the property was arrested."
[15]
Counsel for the applicant submitted that the court had jurisdiction to release property arrested by warrant on such terms as the court considered appropriate and, as noted, urged that in this case appropriate terms were for release of the vessel without security or on the basis of nominal security only. Counsel for the respondent/plaintiff argued that while the court had discretion to determine whether or not the property arrested by warrant should be released it did not have discretion without consent to release property on security filed for less than the amount claimed or for the appraised value of the property arrested. In my view, the court has discretion to release property held on warrant of arrest and to do so on such terms as it thinks appropriate. I so conclude from rules 1004 and 1006(1) which vest authority, without restriction, in the court to establish bail and to provide for release of property arrested. The restrictions as to amount, i.e., that claimed or the appraised value of the property arrested, is set out only in rule 1006(2) relating to action that may be taken by an officer of the court as a matter of regular procedure, not requiring approval by the court or a presiding judge.
[16]
The final issue argued at the hearing concerns the form and amount of security to be provided if release of the vessel is to be ordered. The general purpose of an action in rem in maritime matters is to provide security for claims of a creditor who has a claim ultimately attaching to a ship or its cargo. The claim, if action is initiated by the creditor, may at his option lead to arrest of the vessel to provide security. Once arrested the general practice is to accept security to take the place of the vessel, the rem, in an amount equal to the appraised value of the vessel or, if the claims of the plaintiff be less than that, adequate to meet those claims in the event that those may be successfully established at trial. Absent the consent of the arresting party, the circumstances in which that general practice would be varied must be quite extraordinary, otherwise the underlying purpose of an action in rem may be defeated. No such extraordinary circumstances were established in this case. Contesting the validity of the arrest of the vessel, or the jurisdiction of the court in relation to the claims raised, if that argument is successful, may lead to the cancellation of arrest and release of the vessel but that would only be with a hearing on an appropriate motion, with notice to the opposing party. In my view, the same arguments in relation to a motion to release from arrest do not go to the quantum of security to be posted as a condition of release. In such a motion the arrest is deemed to be valid and the claims of the plaintiff, at least at this stage in proceedings, must be anticipated as being capable of being established.
[17]
I am not persuaded that this is a case in which this court should depart from normal practice. At the hearing counsel for the plaintiff indicated that release of the vessel might be made without further objection by the plaintiff on the posting of bail in accord with the
Federal Court Rules
in the amount of two hundred and ninety-five thousand dollars ($295,000). That seems to me an appropriate resolution for the terms on which the vessel should be released in light of the claims advanced by the plaintiff and still espoused at the hearing of this matter.
[18]
An order has been issued granting the application and ordering release of the vessel upon provision by the applicant of bail in the form established by Federal Court Rule 1005, and in an amount of two hundred and ninety-five thousand dollars ($295,000).
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]