[1]
Wetston, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of the Chief of the Defence Staff's decision to release the applicant from his service in the Canadian Armed Forces under item 5(f) of the table to article 15.01 of the
Queen's Orders and Regulations for the Canadian Armed Forces
("
QR&Os
"). The decision was made May 18, 1993 and communicated to the applicant May 19, 1993. The applicant is requesting an Order setting aside his release from the Canadian Forces, and an Order prohibiting the respondents from taking any further release proceedings against him until he has been provided with both the benefit of the Recorded Warning and Counselling and Probation procedures under the
Canadian Forces Administrative Orders
("
CFAOs
") and with the reasons for his release in accordance with article 15.36(8) of the
QR&Os
.
Background
[2]
The applicant enrolled in the Canadian Forces on August 8, 1974, in the Communications Research trade group. Prior to the commencement of release proceedings, the applicant was employed at Canadian Forces Station Leitrim ("CFS Leitrim") as a communicator research operator, under the command of Lieutenant Colonel A.A. Smith.
[3]
During his military career, the applicant appears to have had a history of disciplinary incidents, as outlined by the affidavit of Lieutenant Colonel A.A. Smith. Relatively minor disciplinary incidents involving the applicant began in 1977. That year, the applicant received his first Counselling and Probation for substandard level of dress and unsatisfactory cleanliness in his barrack room. Some four months later, the applicant was placed on Recorded Warning for lack of responsibility. Particularly, the applicant had been late, had failed to report for duty on several occasions and had failed to take initiative.
[4]
A year later, in late 1978, the applicant was placed on Recorded Warning for sleeping at his position as Block Task Controller. The applicant's May 1979 personnel evaluation reflects that he had been labelled an administrative burden by the Canadian Forces. That evaluation also notes that the applicant was experiencing financial difficulties, for which he received counselling. In June 1979, the applicant was placed on Recorded Warning for drug use.
[5]
Despite minor incidents in the early 1980s, such as untidy dress, difficulty listening to and following instructions and a need to be constantly supervised, the applicant's record indicates he received no Recorded Warnings nor any further Counselling and Probation. In fact, in 1986, the applicant was awarded a Canadian Forces Decoration in recognition of 12 years of service.
[6]
Nevertheless, in 1989, while posted with a field unit, the applicant's American supervisor on a joint Canada-US exercise submitted a written complaint regarding his conduct. As a result, the applicant was charged, summarily tried, and convicted of conduct unbecoming a member of the Canadian Forces. Because the applicant was due to be posted at CFS Leitrim, he was not placed on Counselling and Probation for the incident. However, the applicant was denied a promotion to the rank of Master Corporal.
[7]
In May 1990, the applicant wrote a cheque that was returned to CFS Leitrim NSF. He was verbally warned of his shortcomings and financial responsibilities in July 1990. In August 1990, the applicant's promotion to Master Corporal was again deferred. In November 1990, the applicant was charged and found guilty of being disrespectful to a superior officer. In December that year, while attending a Basic Radio Signals and Communications Systems course, the applicant was regularly counselled regarding his poor attitude, standard of dress and general disregard for authority. During one of his counselling sessions, the applicant was formally disciplined for insubordination.
[8]
In late July 1991, the applicant was placed on Counselling and Probation for conduct unbecoming a member of the Canadian Forces. The Counselling and Probation report reflected the applicant's convictions under the
Excise Act
, R.S.C. 1985, for possession of a still suitable for manufacturing spirits and for possession of unlawfully manufactured spirits. The report also cited the applicant for poor work habits and for being an administrative burden to the Canadian Forces.
[9]
In June 1992, the applicant wrote a cheque to the Forces Exchange that was returned NSF. The applicant was counselled once again regarding financial responsibility. In September 1992, Dr. Hellens, the Base Surgeon at CFB Ottawa, requested that the applicant be taken off shift work and assigned to day duties. The request was made by Dr. Hellens after two meetings with the applicant regarding his sleep loss problems apparently caused by personal problems. Lieutenant Colonel Smith agreed, noting that the applicant would be given one last chance to get his life in order. The applicant was reassigned and placed on a three month probation under the supervisor of the Station Warrant Officer.
[10]
Apparently, the applicant was briefed that should his performance not improve over the probationary period, he would be recommended for release. The applicant was also advised to continue regular professional counselling sessions to resolve his personal problems. Because of his financial problems, it was recommended that the applicant continue to seek financial counselling. A Change of Circumstances Report was prepared regarding the applicant's financial situation and his reassignment to the day shift.
[11]
On November 5, 1992, CFS Leitrim received a telephone call regarding the applicant's unpaid dental bills. The applicant was subsequently counselled by Captain Jones, the Station Financial Counsellor, who suggested professional financial counselling. The same day, the applicant's immediate supervisor, Sergeant Morin, also counselled the applicant and indicated to him that due to both his financial problems and his substandard work performance, his career was in jeopardy. The applicant states that he does not recall any such conversation with Sergeant Morin.
[12]
On November 30, 1992, following a discussion with Lieutenant Colonel Smith, Chief Warrant Officer Whitlaw, the applicant's Branch Head at the time, interviewed and advised the applicant that based on his substandard performance and his being an administrative burden, as documented in his personnel file, his release under item 5(f) of the table to article 15.01 of the
QR&Os
was being seriously considered. The applicant was also informed that he could only expect to continue to be employed if he lived up to basic standards expected of a person with the rank of corporal.
[13]
In January 1993, CFS Leitrim was advised that the applicant had allowed other cheques payable to the Forces Exchange and the CFS Leitrim Unit Fund to be returned NSF. Professional Credit Counselling was arranged for the applicant. In February 1993, credit counsellors recommended to the applicant that he consult a trustee in bankruptcy. In early March 1993, Lieutenant Colonel Smith became aware that the applicant was making false representations to his superiors. Contrary to what his superiors understood, the applicant was not attending regularly scheduled personal counselling sessions.
[14]
On March 5, 1993, the applicant was placed under arrest by the Gloucester Police following an altercation in the CFS Leitrim parking lot. On March 15, 1993, the applicant conducted himself disrespectfully towards another service member and a superior officer regarding what he perceived to be an error on his T4 income slip. It was following these final incidents that Lieutenant Colonel Smith determined that the applicant was unsuitable for further military service and the release process was begun.
[15]
On March 19, 1993, Lieutenant Colonel Smith, in his capacity as the Commanding Officer of CFS Leitrim, met with the applicant and personally served him with a Notice of Intent to Recommend Release. The notice indicated that the proposed release was proceeding under item 5(f) of the table to article 15.01 of the
QR&Os
. Item 5(f) provides as follows:
"Applies to the release of an officer or non-commissioned member who, either wholly or chiefly because of factors within his control, develops personal weaknesses or behaviour or has domestic or other personal problems that seriously impair his usefulness to or impose excessive administrative burden on the Canadian Forces."
The written reasons contained in the Notice of Intention to Release read:
"Despite factors being within your control you have demonstrated consistent unwillingness to change or improve your unsatisfactory behaviour or performance. This, combined with your severe financial problems, have caused an excessive administrative burden to the CF"
Pursuant to article 15.36(2)(c) of the
QR&Os
, the applicant was provided with 14 days to object, in writing, to Lieutenant Colonel Smith's recommendation for release.
[16]
On April 8, 1993, the applicant submitted written representations, to Lieutenant Colonel Smith, outlining the reasons for his objections to release. The applicant's representations essentially indicated that while he realized the military had been tolerant of his past performance and that he took full responsibility for his behaviour, he felt that his 18 years of service warranted one more opportunity to prove himself.
[17]
Despite the applicant's objections, Lieutenant Colonel Smith signed a recommendation for compulsory release of the applicant under item 5(f) of the table to article 15.01 of the
QR&Os
. The recommendation was forwarded up the chain of command pursuant to article 15.36(6), together with the applicant's written representations submitted April 8, 1993, and Lieutenant Colonel Smith's further comments which were contained in a covering memorandum. The applicant did not receive a copy of these further comments of Lieutenant Colonel Smith.
[18]
On May 18, 1993, Lieutenant Colonel Smith was informed by telex message that his recommendation had been accepted by the Chief of the Defence Staff. Further to Lieutenant Colonel Smith's instruction, the acting Station Warrant Officer met with the applicant on May 19, 1993 and provided the applicant with a copy of the telex, containing the Chief of the Defence Staff's decision to release him, despite his objections.
Issues
[19]
Did the respondents breach a duty of fairness owed to the applicant. The applicant argues that by failing to follow mandatory procedures, as set out in their regulations and administrative orders, the respondents have breached their duty of fairness by:
i) denying the applicant the benefit of CFAO 15-2 Annex A, s. 2(13); and
ii) denying the applicant reasons for his release in accordance with
QR&O
article 15.36(8).
Analysis
[20]
Essentially, the applicant argues that he was not released lawfully as required by s. 23(1) of the
National Defence Act
, R.S.C., 1985, c. N-5, which reads:
"23(1) The enrolment of a person binds the person to serve in the Canadian Forces until the person is, in accordance with regulations, lawfully released."
[21]
Release generally, is governed by Chapter 15 of the
QR&Os
. In particular, article 15.36 governs the release procedure applicable to the applicant. Article 15.36 provides in part:
"15.36(1) This article applies to the proposed release of any non-commissioned member who is ... under:
(e) Item 5(f) (Unsuitable for Further Service); of the table to article 15.01
"(2) When a commanding officer proposes to recommend release ... the commanding officer shall:
(a) prepare a written Notice of Intent to Recommend Release, which shall include a statement of the reasons for the recommendation;
(b) personally deliver that Notice directly to the non-commissioned member concerned; and
(c) require a non-commissioned member, if he objects to the recommendation, to reply to the commanding officer in writing within 14 days, stating why he objects.
"(6) A Notice of Intent to Recommend Release prepared by the commanding officer in accordance with subparagraph 2(a) of this article ..., together with the reply of a non-commissioned member concerned, ..., and with any comments from the commanding officer and, ... be forwarded to the Chief of the Defence Staff in the manner prescribed in orders issued by him.
"(8) When the Chief of the Defence Staff receives a reply in writing from a non-commissioned member to whom a Notice of Intent to Recommend Release has been delivered in accordance with this article, which reply objects to the proposed release under the Item recommended, the non-commissioned member concerned, ..., shall be advised of the reasons that the recommendation for release will proceed with despite the non-commissioned member's objections, but that the non-commissioned member has the right to make an application for redress of grievance in accordance with article 19.26."
Recorded Warning And
Counselling And Probation
[22]
The applicant's first contention is that he was not given the appropriate Recorded Warning ("RW") or Counselling and Probation ("C&P"), prior to Lieutenant Colonel Smith signing the Notice of Intent to Recommend Release, as required by CFAO 15-2, Annex A, s. 2(13). As such, the applicant argues that in failing to follow their own regulatory scheme, the respondents have denied the applicant procedural fairness.
In the applicant's submission, the word "shall" in s. 2(13) is mandatory. The applicant submits that since he was released without an RW or C&P his release is flawed and must be set aside.
[23]
The respondents, on the other hand, focuses on the word "[n]ormally", arguing that CFAO 15-2, s. 2(13) is not mandatory. In the respondents' submission, the wording of s. 2(13) gives them the right not to order RW or C&P in exceptional circumstances. The respondents submit that the applicant's extensive disciplinary history is an exceptional case. Alternatively, the respondents submit that in accordance with CFAO 26-17, which governs RW and C&P, neither RW nor C&P will be ordered twice for the same or related shortcomings. It is the respondents' submission that the applicant has been provided the benefit of 3 RWs and 2 C&Ps for related shortcomings over his years of service. As such, the respondents submit the Canadian Forces have complied with the requirements of CFAO 15-2 Annex A s. 2(13) and CFAO 26-17 paragraph 2(d).
[24]
In order to determine whether the respondents have breached their duty of fairness to the applicant
,
by denying him the appropriate RW or C&P, it is necessary to consider the CFAO provisions at issue, and the disciplinary history of the applicant.
[25]
CFAO 15-2 are the administrative orders relevant to release. Specifically, s. 2(13) of Annex A to CFAO 15-2, reads:
"2(13)
Normally
, a notice of intent to recommend release under item 2, 5(d) or 5(f)
shall
not be given until counselling has been initiated in accordance with CFAO 26-17, Recorded Warning and Counselling and Probation - Other Ranks ..., and the counselling has not been successful." (emphasis added)
The relevant portions of CFAO 26-17 read in part:
"1. A recorded warning (RW) and counselling and probation (C&P) are administrative devices designed to raise a member's performance or conduct to an acceptable standard....
"2. The following policies apply to both RW and C&P:
. . . . .
b. An RW or C&P shall not be ordered twice for the same or related shortcomings
.
. . . . .
d. Normally, an RW and C&P should precede any recommendation for release that is based on a member's shortcomings.
"3. An RW or C&P may be ordered for any of the following reasons:
a.
Performance or Personal Deficiencies
. Although matters involving conduct, leadership traits, self-confidence, etc. are normally resolved by training, counselling, disciplinary action or other measures, any of the foregoing shortcomings may, by their seriousness or repetition, result in an RW or C&P.
b.
Drugs
. An RW or C&P for unauthorized use of drugs shall be processed in accordance with the special policies, procedures and forms in CFAO 19-21, supplemented by the provisions of para. 6 below.
. . . . .
d.
Indebtedness
. In cases of indebtedness, the CO shall ensure that the provisions of CFAO 19-4 have been followed." (emphasis added)
[26]
CFAO 26-17 paragraph 2(b), clearly states that where RW or C&P has been ordered once, it will not be ordered again for the same or related shortcoming. Therefore, has the applicant been given the benefit of RW or C&P for those shortcomings related to his release?
[27]
I am of the opinion that the respondents have complied with the requirements outlined in CFAO 15-2 and CFAO 26-17. The applicant was most recently provided with C&P on July 24, 1991. Specifically, the July 1991 C&P report indicates that the applicant was being formally counselled and placed on probation for:
"conduct unbecoming a member of the CF and damaging to the reputation of the CF and its members; lackadaisical work habits, lack of motivation and need for direct supervision; and, being an Administrative burden on the system."
Furthermore, the July 1991 C&P report was ordered following the applicant's Ontario Court, Provincial Division convictions under ss. 158(1)(e) and 163(1)(a) of the
Excise Act
, R.S.C. 1985, for having in his possession a still suitable for manufacturing spirits and for having in his possession spirits unlawfully manufactured. The July 1991 C&P, coupled with the applicant's total career Rws (3) and past C&P, along with the continuous personal and financial counselling until his 1993 release, establishes that the applicant had every opportunity to address, through RW and C&P, those matters which were adversely affecting his performance.
QR&O Article 15.36(8)
[28]
The second issue, raised by the applicant, involves the interpretation and application of article 15.36(8) of the QR&Os. The relevant provision provides:
"15.36 (8) When the Chief of the Defence Staff receives a reply in writing from a non-commissioned member to whom a Notice of Intent to Recommend Release has been delivered in accordance with this article, which reply objects to the proposed release under the Item recommended, the non-commissioned member concerned, ...,
shall be advised of the reasons that the recommendation for release will proceed with despite the non-commissioned member's objections
, but that the non-commissioned member has the right to make an application for redress of grievance in accordance with article 19.26." (emphasis added)
[29]
Counsel for the applicant submits that compliance with article 15.36(8) is mandatory and that the applicant has at no time been advised in writing or otherwise as to the reasons why he is considered unsuitable for further service, nor has he been given the opportunity to respond. In the applicant's submission, a member of the Canadian Forces, faced with involuntary release, has the right to know the case against him and the right to make representations before the final decision to release is made:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(2d) 353; 106 D.L.R.(3d) 385; 13 C.R.(3d) 1, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 671; 78 C.L.L.C. 14,181.
[30]
With respect to article 15.36(8), the respondents submit that the facts in this case do not support the applicant's allegation of any breach of fairness. In respondents' submission, not only did the Notice of Intent to Recommend Release contain written reasons, which were discussed with the applicant, and to which he submitted written objections, but the reasons were also discussed with him on May 19, 1993, by the acting Station Warrant officer who communicated the decision to proceed with release despite the applicant's written objections. The respondents argue that the duty to give reasons, either under article 15.36(8) or in accordance with fairness principles, should be flexible and is to be decided in the context of each case. In this context, the respondents submit, the duty to give reasons is satisfied if the overall substance of the reasons are communicated to the applicant:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 81; 69 D.L.R.(4th) 489; [1990] 3 W.W.R. 289.
[31]
In order to determine whether the failure to supply written reasons, in the way counsel for the applicant requests, has breached a duty of fairness owed to the applicant, one has to look at the scheme of the regulations and their purpose.
[32]
Let me make a few observations about article 15.36(8): firstly, the section does not require that the reasons for release be provided in writing to the member concerned; secondly, article 15.36(8) does not indicate any particular form of those reasons; and thirdly, there is no indication how the reasons should be communicated. Article 15.36(8) simply states that reasons shall be communicated to the applicant. Does this mean that specific written or oral reasons must be provided directly by the Chief of the Defence Staff to the applicant? Another matter to be considered is whether compliance with the provision in question is mandatory or directory? The failure to comply with a mandatory requirement can be fatal to the validity of the action taken. However, if the condition is directory, rather than mandatory, non-observance may not result in the decision being set aside. H.W.R. Wade,
Administrative Law
, 6th Ed. (Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1993) notes the following at page 246, regarding mandatory versus directory provisions (footnotes are omitted):
"The distinction is not so clear-cut as this suggests, since the same condition may be both mandatory and directory: mandatory as to
substantial
compliance, but directory as to
precise
compliance. Where, for example, a local authority were empowered to assess coast protection charges on landowners within six months but did so after 23 months, the condition, and the assessments were void; but had the excess been a few days only, they would probably have been valid. The court may readily find some reasons for overlooking trivial or unimportant irregularities." (emphasis added)
In this case the legislation or regulations do not make it plain what the effect of non-observance might be. According to Wade at page 246:
"It is a question of construction, to be settled by looking at the whole scheme and purpose of the
Act
and by weighing the importance of the condition, the prejudice to private rights, and the claims of the public interest."
[33]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Chief Justice Iacobucci, as he then was, speaking for the court noted at page 226:
". . . . .
"Whether the legislation is penal or not is irrelevant. What is relevant is that the decision involved is of importance to the appellant and has serious consequences to him. Moreover, there is little conviction in the 'mandatory - directory' dichotomy to answer the question before us. At bottom, what we are seeking is legislative intention. According to the
Interpretation Act
, 'shall' is to be construed as imperative ... But whether failure to comply with a command entails nullity, and if so, to what extent, surely depends on the legislative scheme as a whole."
[34]
In this case, what is the purpose of providing reasons to the applicant? Amongst other things, reasons provide the applicant with notice of the Chief of the Defence Staff's decision, as well as notification that the reasons given by Lieutenant Colonel Smith for his recommendation have been accepted, despite the objections provided by the applicant. The Chief of the Defence Staff may also, but not necessarily, have additional reasons for approving the release. Moreover, knowledge of the reasons for release allows the applicant to determine the basis for a grievance, if any, under s. 29 of the
National Defence Act
. The question for the court then is: did the applicant receive reasons within the meaning of article 15.36(8)?
[35]
The applicant received a copy of a telex memorandum sent from the Chief of the Defence Staff, at NDHQ, to Lieutenant Colonel Smith. This telex indicated that the Chief of the Defence agreed with the recommendation to release. The telex states:
"1. Release Under QR And O 15.01 Item 5F For Subj Member Approved. NDHQ Release Instruction From D Pers A3 Will Follow Separately.
"2. Subj Member Is To Be Advised That the Recommendation For Release Was Proceeded With Despite His Objections.
"3. Subj Member Is To Be Advised As To The Reason For Release And Of His Right To Make An Application For Redress Of Grievance."
[36]
On May 18, 1993, Lieutenant Colonel Smith instructed CWO Whitlaw, in his capacity as the applicant's branch head, to advise the applicant of the decision to release him and the reasons therefore. According to the telex message, the applicant received a copy of and was advised of the Chief of the Defence Staff's decision to release him on May 19, 1993. It is apparent from the telex that there is a notation by the acting SWO indicating "[m]ember has copy of msg.", followed by what appears to be the applicant's signature.
[37]
Does the telex memorandum, the oral reasons provided by the acting SWO, the written reasons contained in the Notice of Intent to Recommend Release, the interview and discussion with Lieutenant Colonel Smith, and the written representations submitted in opposition to release constitute sufficient compliance with article 15.36(8) of the
QR&Os
? It is the court's opinion that they do. Considering the overall scheme and purpose of the regulations, article 15.36(8), as suggested in
Wade
, supra., is capable of being characterized as both mandatory and directory. Compliance with article 15.36(8) is mandatory in that it requires that reasons "shall" be given, however, it is directory insofar as precise compliance. In this instance, the respondents have substantially complied with article 15.36(8), and the applicant has been provided with the reasons for his release.
[38]
The court does not believe that the failure to provide specific written reasons by the Chief of the Defence Staff has amounted to any breach of the duty of fairness. Once the applicant was advised that the Chief of the Defence Staff had approved his release, despite his objections, the reasons for release had already substantially been made known to him. There is no prejudice to the applicant as a result of the failure to disclose specific written reasons in this case. This becomes even more clear when one examines the applicant's actions, namely that he provided further written objections as part of a grievance of the Chief of the Defence Staff's decision. A review of these further written objections demonstrates that the applicant was fully aware of the reasons why Lieutenant Colonel Smith decided to recommend release and those reasons were accepted by the Chief of the Defence Staff.
[39]
Accordingly, this application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/dlr
[End of document]