 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FC 232)
Indexed  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Bédard, J.
February 28, 2011.
Counsel:
Jean-Marc Eddie, for the applicant;
Nicola Di Iorio, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Perley-Robertson, Hill & McDougall, LLP/s.r.l., Ottawa, Ontario, for the applicant;
Heenan Blaikie, Montreal, Quebec, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Bédard, J.
[Translation]: The applicant, the Canadian Union of Postal Workers (the CUPW), has brought proceedings to have the respondent, the Canada Post Corporation (the CPC), condemned for contempt of court under Rules 466 to 469 of the
Federal Courts Rules
, SOR/98-106 (the Rules).
I.
Background
[2]
The parties are bound by a collective agreement. In February 2004, the CUPW filed a grievance that was allowed by Arbitrator André Bergeron (the arbitrator). The arbitrator rendered an initial award on September 16, 2008 and he rendered a second one on September 1, 2009, after the CUPW had brought the matter before him again to complete his first award.
[3]
On October 21, 2009, the CUPW filed the two awards in question in the Court under section 66 of the
Canada Labour Code
, R.S. 1985, c. L-2, and Rule 242 of the Rules.
[4]
Being of the opinion that the CPC was refusing to comply with the arbitrator's awards, the CUPW brought these contempt proceedings. First, it filed a motion under Rule 467 of the Rules for a show cause order naming the CPC's labour relations director. The CPC consented to this motion and an order was issued by Justice Beaudry requiring the labour relations director, Karen Casselman, to appear to hear proof that the CPC had disobeyed Arbitrator Bergeron's awards and to be prepared to present a defence.
[5]
An initial hearing took place on October 21, 2010, in Ottawa. It was understood at the outset that the issue would be severed in two, that I would first deal with the issue of the CPC's guilt and that a second hearing would be scheduled to rule on the penalty if I were to find that the CPC was in contempt of court.
[6]
After the CUPW completed its case, the CPC filed a motion for nonsuit, which I dismissed in the order
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The hearing continued on February 7, 2011. The CPC chose to present a defence and it called Ms. Casselman as a witness.
[7]
For the reasons that follow, I find that the CPC is not in contempt of court.
II.
Awards on which the contempt proceeding is based
[8]
The CUPW filed a grievance in which it alleged that the CPC had breached clause 37.01(a) of the collective agreement when it modified the Isolated Posts Vacation Travel Allowance Policy (the Policy) without its consent. This clause of the collective agreement reads as follows:
37.01 Conditions Not Covered
(a) The existing working conditions concerning the payment of a premium, the payment of an allowance or the payment of any other financial benefit that are not covered by this collective agreement shall remain in effect until such time as they are otherwise renegotiated between the parties.
(b) The parties shall conduct meaningful consultation about any changes planned in other existing working conditions that are not covered by this agreement.
[9]
The CUPW argued that before 2004, the Policy was based on the Treasury Board's Isolated Posts Directive (S-30), which included a provision that employees assigned to isolated posts and the members of their family, at the time of their annual leave, would receive an allowance equal to an economy class airline ticket without restrictions ("Y" class) for round-trip travel between their assigned post and the nearest major urban centre. Under the terms of this directive, employees could apply the allowance to the type of trip of their choice and they received the amount of their actual expenses or the cost of a "Y" class airline ticket, whichever was lower. Employees could also receive a travel advance.
[10]
The CUPW argued that in 2004, the CPC modified the Policy so that the conditions were less advantageous to employees because it no longer provided a travel allowance payment, but instead the payment of an annual lump-sum allowance, and because the amount of the allowance was lower than the amount employees had been receiving up to that point. In this respect, the CUPW claimed that the allowance was calculated based on the cost of the least expensive airline ticket for round-trip travel between the isolated post and the nearest urban centre, and not on the cost of a "Y" class airline ticket. Given that the CPC had modified the Policy without the CUPW's consent, it was in breach of clause 37.01(a) of the collective agreement.
[11]
The CPC claimed that the Policy, as it had always been applied, did not correspond to the Treasury Board's Isolated Posts Directive (S-30), but rather to the CPC's policy on unionized employee travel (E-1), and that it had not modified the Policy, but merely simplified its application.
[12]
In the September 16, 2008 award, the arbitrator allowed the grievance and dismissed the CPC's claims. He further decided that the Policy, in its pre-2004 version, corresponded to the Treasury Board's Isolated Posts Directive (S-30) and not the CPC's policy on unionized employee travel (E-1), and that by modifying the Policy without the CUPW's consent, the CPC had breached clause 37.01(a) of the collective agreement.
[13]
In his reasons, the arbitrator acknowledged that the CPC had the authority to modify the Policy for strictly administrative purposes by switching from an allowance system to a lump-sum payment system, but he indicated that this "simplification" could not result in a reduction of the financial benefits that had been available to employees up to that point. He found that the CPC had unilaterally modified the working conditions set out in the Policy and was in breach of clause 37.01(a) of the collective agreement.
[14]
In the disposition of the award, the arbitrator ordered the CPC to modify its Policy to take into account the following two elements: the right of employees to receive, for themselves and their dependants, an allowance equal to the cost of a "Y" class airline ticket between their isolated post and the nearest urban centre, and the right for them to apply this allowance to the trip of their choice, including a package trip. The arbitrator also ordered the CPC to reimburse the employees for the amounts they would have received had the Policy recognized these two rights, and he retained jurisdiction over the amounts owing in the event of disagreement.
[15]
The implementation of the award resulted in a disagreement between the parties. First, the parties did not agree on amounts owing to employees, but this disagreement is not relevant to the contempt proceeding because it is currently being argued before the arbitrator.
[16]
Second, there was also a disagreement regarding the following components of the Policy. After the award was rendered, the CPC decided to return to an expense reimbursement process whereby employees would be entitled to an allowance equal to the cost of a "Y" class airline ticket or the employees' actual expenses calculated in accordance with the CPC policy on unionized employee travel (E-1), whichever is lower. The CUPW objected to any reference to the policy on unionized employee travel (E-1). It claimed that, before 2004, employees received the cost of a "Y" class airline ticket or the amount of their actual expenses, whichever was lower, and that the actual eligible expenses were not subject to, or restricted by, the policy on unionized employee travel (E-1). The CUPW also alleged that the CPC no longer allowed employees to receive travel advances, whereas this practice was allowed before the 2004 modifications. The CUPW asked the CPC to modify these two components of the Policy, but it refused.
[17]
Faced with this impasse, the CUPW again brought the matter before the arbitrator and asked him to complete the disposition of his award of September 16, 2008, so as to add an order compelling the CPC to modify the Policy to provide for the right of employees to receive a travel advance and to eliminate references to the policy on unionized employee travel (E-1) in calculating actual expenses. In support of its request, the CUPW argued that the arbitrator had failed to rule on some questions raised by the grievance and that he had jurisdiction to complete his award. The CPC objected to the motion, arguing that the arbitrator was functus officio.
[18]
In the award rendered on September 1, 2009, the arbitrator allowed the CPC's objection and dismissed the CUPW's motion. However, he explained that he did not have to answer the CUPW's questions because he had already implicitly ruled on these questions in his award of September 16, 2008.
III.
Analysis
[19]
The CUPW recognizes that it must prove beyond a reasonable doubt the three constituent elements of contempt: (1) the existence of the order, (2) the respondent's knowledge of the order and (3) the respondent's knowing disobedience of the award. It also acknowledges that case law requires that the order in question be clear, enforceable and unambiguous.
[20]
It also argues that the following principles must guide the Court in its review of the order:
a. The order must be read and interpreted as a whole;
b. The Court must not interpret the order narrowly;
c. The Court must take the context into account;
d. The party that is the subject of an order must comply with the letter and the spirit of the order.
[21]
The CUPW bases its argument on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 301, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (available on Quicklaw).
[22]
It argues that the award of September 16, 2008, must be interpreted taking into account the award of September 1, 2009, and that it has all the necessary characteristics to give rise to contempt of court. Furthermore, it argues that the award of September 1, 2009, clarified the scope of the award of September 16, 2008 and that, in order to comply, the CPC must calculate the allowance amount based on the actual expenses incurred by employees and allow them to receive an advance.
[23]
The CUPW is of the view that given that the CPC deliberately refuses to comply with the arbitrator's award, it must be found in contempt of court. It insists that it does not have to prove intent as defined in criminal law and that in the matter of contempt of court, evidence of conscious, knowing and intentional disobedience is sufficient, which, in its opinion, was amply demonstrated in this case. It bases its contention on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  DLR (4th) 106,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 75,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 267 and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FTR 303.
[24]
The CPC does not interpret the scope of the arbitrator's award in the same way. It contends that the award of September 1, 2009, added nothing further to the award of September 16, 2008, and that it has complied with the orders issued in the award of September 16, 2008. The CPC also argues that the award of September 16, 2008, is more declaratory than enforceable and is ambiguous. The CPC also claims that the CUPW has used the contempt proceeding to put pressure on the CPC in order to expedite the outcome of the proceeding on the amount of damages. I am immediately rejecting this serious accusation, which is not supported by the evidence.
[25]
Contempt proceedings are governed by Rules 466 to 469 of the Rules. The parameters applicable to civil contempt are well established in the case law. A contempt proceeding is a very serious matter that is quasi-criminal in character (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). A party claiming that another party is guilty of contempt must prove beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of an order, the other party's knowledge of the order and the other party's knowing disobedience of the order. The case law requires that the decision alleged to have been disobeyed must be neither ambiguous nor merely declaratory (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 76) [
Telus Mobility
].
[26]
I am of the opinion that the arbitrator's awards have neither the scope nor the enforceability ascribed to them by the CUPW, even if I analyze them taking into account the context, letter and spirit of the awards. It is useful to reproduce the following passage from the award of September 16, 2008, in which the arbitrator summarized his thinking and discussed the evidence adduced:
[TRANSLATION]
[652] In summary, I have therefore come to the conclusion that the CPC was entitled, for strictly administrative purposes, to simplify the management of the vacation travel allowances granted to employees working in isolated posts, by replacing the process that had been used up to that point with the payment of an annual lump-sum allowance. However, this "simplification" was not, under paragraph 37.01(a) of the collective agreement, to result in a reduction of the financial benefits available to employees up to that point. In this case, the evidence revealed that, to maintain these benefits, the allowance would need to be equal to the cost of a "Y" class airline ticket for each employee and his or her dependants, for round-trip travel between the isolated post and the nearest major urban centre, on the date of the employee's choice, and that the employee would need to be entitled to apply this allowance to the type of trip of his or her choice, including package trips, from the departure point of his or her choice.
[27]
In this paragraph, the arbitrator states the following two principles: (1) the CPC was entitled to modify its Policy for administrative purposes, but (2) this modification could not result in a reduction of the financial benefits available to the employees up to that point. The scope of this statement is sufficiently broad to cover all modifications made to the Policy resulting in a reduction of financial benefits. However, the arbitrator limited the scope of his statement by indicating that the evidence had shown that there were two elements missing in the Policy in order to preserve the financial benefits available to employees: the right to an allowance equal to the cost of a "Y" class ticket and the right to apply the allowance to the type of trip of the employee's choice.
[28]
The disposition of the award reads as follows:
[TRANSLATION]
[653] For all these reasons,
- I allow national grievance No. N00-03-00005;
- I order the CPC to modify its vacation travel allowance policy in order to take into account:
· the right of employees working in isolated posts to receive, for themselves and their dependants, an allowance equal to the cost of a "Y" class airline ticket ("Full Fare Economy Ticket") for round-trip travel between their isolated post and the nearest major urban centre on the date of their choice;
· the right of these employees to apply this allowance to the trip of their choice, including a package trip.
- I acknowledge the CPC's right to make the withholdings prescribed by law from these allowances;
- I order the CPC to reimburse to the employees working in isolated posts, within fifteen working days following the date of this decision, any amount to which the latter would have been entitled had the policy implemented by the CPC recognized the above-mentioned rights, with interest at the statutory rate;
- I retain my jurisdiction over the amounts owing, in the event of a disagreement between the parties.
[29]
The disposition of the award is clearly limited to the two components mentioned at paragraph 652 of the award. The arbitrator ordered the CPC to modify the Policy in two specific respects: the right to an allowance equal to the price of a "Y" class ticket and the right of employees to apply that allowance to the trip of their choice. The disposition does not contain any order of more general scope that would, for example, require the CPC to maintain all the financial benefits arising under the Policy as it applied before 2004, or to reinstate the 2004 version of the Policy.
[30]
It is precisely because the award of September 16, 2008 did not set out any conclusions regarding these two aspects that the CUPW asked the arbitrator to complete his first award.
[31]
It is useful to reproduce the passage in the September 1, 2009 award in which the arbitrator states that he already implicitly answered the questions raised by the CUPW:
[TRANSLATION]
[32] If, as the Quebec Court of Appeal acknowledged in
Contrôle Technique Appliquée
, [
sic
] citing Justice Paré's comment, "
the reasons are equally as important as the disposition of a judgment if they are embodied in it and are essential to its support
",
I could only [*4,33*] if I were to allow the CUPW's motion [*4,33*] repeat what I already said in my decision.
[33] Prior to the modifications it made to its isolated post allowances in 2003, the CPC, as shown by communiqué S-14 issued by Glen Driedger, the compensation policy manager, applied the Treasury Board's Isolated Posts Directive, and therefore, under paragraph 37.01(a) of the collective agreement,
could not modify the financial benefits that were available to employees working in isolated posts under this directive.
[Emphasis added.]
[32]
With respect, I consider that by refusing to add to the disposition of his award of September 16, 2008, the arbitrator did not provide a complete determination of the proceeding and did not extend the enforceability of his initial award. He did indicate that he thought he had implicitly answered the CUPW's requests, and he repeated the principle he had previously stated in the award of September 16, 2008, to the effect that the modifications made to the Policy could not have the effect of reducing the financial benefits that employees received prior to 2004. In my opinion, this finding is merely declaratory and not enforceable.
[33]
I recognize the principle stated by the Quebec Court of Appeal in
Contrôle Technique Appliqué ltée v Québec (Attorney General)
, [1994] RJQ 939, 47 ACWS (3d) 621, to which the arbitrator refers. According to this principle, the reasons of a judgment may be used for the purpose of supporting the disposition. While it may be true that the reasons may be used to support a disposition, they cannot replace or be substituted for the disposition.
[34]
In
Telus Mobilité
, the Federal Court of Appeal indicated, at paragraph 4, "[a] finding of contempt of court cannot be based on a court order that is ambiguous, or an order that is merely declaratory. It must be clear on the face of the order what is required for compliance" (see also:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 696,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 319).
[35]
In the case at bar, the arbitrator's award of September 16, 2008, contained a very clear disposition which ordered the CPC to modify the Policy in a very specific way. This disposition did not in any way specify how actual expenses were to be calculated or that employees were entitled to an advance. In any case, this latter element would have been completely incongruous, since the arbitrator clearly recognized the CPC's right to replace the allowance system with the payment of an annual lump-sum and the concept of an advance is incompatible with a lump-sum payment system.
[36]
In the absence of a general order compelling the CPC to modify the Policy
so as to preserve all the financial benefits arising from policy S-30
, I believe that it is impossible, even in reading the additional award of September 1, 2009, to extend the scope of the award of September 16, 2008, to a point where it can be inferred that the arbitrator was also ordering the CPC to modify the Policy to specify that employees were entitled to receive an advance and have their actual expenses reimbursed. In my opinion, this would unduly add to the award of September 16, 2008, which the arbitrator himself refused to do by declaring himself to be functus officio.
[37]
Moreover, the arbitrator acknowledged the limited scope of his award of September 16, 2008, when he invited the CUPW to file a grievance:
[TRANSLATION]
[34] These are the reasons that led me to the conclusions contained in my decision of September 16, 2008,
and if, as the CUPW claims, the employer is not complying with this directive
and "[t] he existing working conditions concerning the payment of a premium, the payment of an allowance or the payment of any other financial benefit that are not covered by this collective agreement" [par. 37.01a)]
that it contains, it must file a grievance and not ask me each time to complete my decision in order to include a new aspect of the policy that, in its opinion, the employer has not complied with.
[Emphasis added.]
[38]
The remarks of Justice Cattanach in
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local Union, No. 529 v Central Broadcasting Co.
, [1977] 2 FC 78 (available on Quicklaw), appear to me to be entirely applicable to the case at bar:
58
...When the Board's order is filed and registered with this Court it is for the purpose of enforcement by the processes of this Court. Viewed realistically, even when filed and registered in this Court the order remains the order of the Board. Because the order of the Board is final and not subject to question or review by any court, except in accordance with section 28 of the Federal Court Act, it is not the function of a judge of the Trial Division to amend the order of the Board to make that order enforceable. The order of the Board, even when filed and registered under section 123, remains inviolate. That, in my view, is the clear intention of Parliament as expressed in section 122 of the Canada Labour Code. In my view, the proper forum in which to amend an order of the Board is the Board itself and I expressed that view, to which I still adhere, on several occasions to counsel for the applicant during the course of the hearing of the motion. It is not the function of the Trial Division to anticipate what the Board may have meant as expressed in its order and to substitute what it thinks the Board may have meant to do, but did not do, by amending the Board's order accordingly. To do so would be to usurp the function of the Board.
...
82
If this Court is to punish a person for not carrying out an order of the Board, which, by virtue of section 123 of the Canada Labour Code, becomes an order of this Court for the purpose of enforcement when filed and registered, that order must direct what is to be done in clear and unambiguous terms and this, for the reasons I have given, the Board has failed to do.
[39]
The CUPW argued that in his award of September 1, 2009, the arbitrator confirmed the enforceability of the award of September 16, 2008. That is true, but the enforceability of the decision cannot extend beyond its scope. The arbitrator's comment was related to the conclusions of the award of September 16, 2008, and the jurisdiction he retained over the amount of damages:
[TRANSLATION]
[35] As for the decision I rendered on September 16, 2008, I find that, in light of the Isolated Posts Directive (S-30) used by the CPC in the past, it is perfectly enforceable and that if the parties do not come to an agreement on its application, they have only to ask me to intervene to determine the amounts owing.
[40]
For all of these reasons, I consider that, having regard to the employees' right to receive an advance and have their travel expenses reimbursed on the basis of the actual expenses, the awards rendered by Arbitrator Bergeron do not have the enforceability necessary to give rise to a finding of contempt of court. The enforceability of the award is limited to the specific orders contained in the disposition of the award of September 16, 2008. And the evidence shows that the CPC has complied with the orders included in that disposition.
[41]
The disposition of the award did not include the right to an advance and the reimbursement of travel expenses based on actual expenses. The arbitrator did state that the CPC could not modify the financial benefits arising from the Policy (in its pre-2004 version), but this component of the award is declaratory. I also consider that the award of September 1, 2009, is ambiguous. The arbitrator referred to certain passages of the award of September 16, 2008, and indicated that he already implicitly answered the questions raised by the CUPW, but he did not in any way indicate whether he considered that the evidence showed that, prior to 2004, the employees were entitled to an advance and that there was no limit placed on their actual expenses. Nor did he indicate whether he considered that these two elements were financial benefits within the meaning of clause 37.01(a) of the collective agreement. As indicated above, it is not for the Court to complete the award or to determine what the arbitrator meant.
[42]
The CUPW has therefore not succeeded in showing beyond a reasonable doubt that the three constituent elements of contempt of court have been met and that the CPC must be condemned.
[43]
In my view, the CUPW's best course of action for obtaining a determination that the CPC is still in breach of clause 37.01(a) of the collective agreement is grievance arbitration, as the arbitrator himself suggested.
ORDER
[44]
THE COURT ORDERS
that the contempt proceeding be dismissed with costs to the Respondent.
.........................
Syndicat des Travailleurs et Travailleuses des  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  travailleurs et travailleuses des postes (le Syndicat), a entrepris des procédures visant à faire condamner la défenderesse, la Société canadienne des postes (la Société), pour outrage au tribunal en vertu des règles 466 à 469 des
Règles des Cours fédérales,
DORS/98-106 (les Règle
s
).
I.
Le contexte
[2]
Les parties sont liées par une convention collective. En février 2004, le Syndicat a déposé un grief qui a été accueilli par l'arbitre André Bergeron. L'arbitre a rendu une première sentence arbitrale le 16 septembre 2008 et il en a rendu une seconde le 1er septembre 2009, après que le Syndicat l'eut saisi à nouveau pour qu'il complète sa première sentence.
[3]
Le 21 octobre 2009, le Syndicat a déposé les deux sentences arbitrales en cause à la Cour conformément à l'article 66 du
Code canadien du travail,
L.R., 1985, ch. L-2, et à la règle 242 des Règles.
[4]
Estimant que la Société refusait de se conformer aux sentences arbitrales, le Syndicat a entamé les présentes procédures d'outrage au tribunal. Il a d'abord présenté une requête en vertu de la règle 467 des Règles pour l'obtention d'une ordonnance de justification visant la directrice des relations de travail de la Société. La Société a consenti à cette requête et le juge Beaudry a rendu une ordonnance enjoignant la directrice des relations de travail, Karen Casselman, à comparaître pour entendre la preuve à l'effet que la Société aurait désobéi aux sentences arbitrales de l'arbitre Bergeron et à être prête à présenter une défense.
[5]
Une première audition a eu lieu le 21 octobre 2010 à Ottawa. Il a été convenu dès le départ que le débat serait scindé en deux, que je trancherais d'abord la question de la culpabilité de la Société et qu'une seconde audition serait fixée pour traiter de la sanction si je concluais que la Société était coupable d'outrage au tribunal.
[6]
Après que le Syndicat eut terminé sa preuve, la Société a présenté une requête en non-lieu que j'ai rejetée dans l'ordonnance
Syndicat des travailleurs et travailleuses des postes c Société canadienne des postes
, 2011 CF 25 (CanLII), 2011 CF 25. L'audition s'est poursuivie le 7 février 2011. La Société a choisi de présenter une défense et elle a fait entendre Mme Casselman.
[7]
Pour les motifs qui suivent, je conclus que la Société n'est pas coupable d'outrage au tribunal.
II.
Les sentences arbitrales fondant les procédures en outrage
[8]
Le Syndicat a déposé un grief dans lequel il alléguait que la Société avait contrevenu à la clause 37.01a) de la convention collective en modifiant la Politique relative aux indemnités payables aux fins de vacances annuelles aux employés travaillant dans des postes isolés (la Politique) sans obtenir son accord. Cette clause de la convention collective se lit comme suit:
37.01 Conditions non visées:
a) Les conditions de travail existantes concernant le paiement d'une prime, le paiement d'une indemnité ou le paiement d'un autre avantage financier qui ne sont pas prévues à la présente convention collective demeurent en vigueur jusqu'à ce que les parties en conviennent autrement.
b) Les parties à la présente convention collective tiennent des consultations significatives au sujet de tous changements envisagés dans les conditions d'emploi ou de travail qui ne sont pas traitées dans la présente convention collective.
[9]
Le Syndicat soutenait qu'avant 2004, la Politique était calquée sur la Directive du Conseil du Trésor sur les postes isolés (S-30) qui prévoyait notamment que les employés affectés à des postes isolés et les membres de leur famille bénéficiaient, à l'occasion de leurs vacances annuelles, d'une indemnité équivalente au prix d'un billet d'avion de classe économique sans restriction (classe « Y »)pour une liaison aller-retour entre leur poste d'affectation et le grand centre urbain le plus près. Au terme de cette directive, les employés pouvaient appliquer l'indemnité au type de voyage de leur choix et ils recevaient le moins élevé des montants entre leurs dépenses réelles et le coût d'un billet de classe « Y ». Les employés pouvaient aussi bénéficier d'une avance de voyage.
[10]
Le Syndicat soutenait qu'en 2004, la Société avait modifié la Politique de sorte que les conditions qui y étaient maintenant prévues étaient moins avantageuses pour les employés, entre autres parce qu'elle ne prévoyait plus le versement d'une indemnité de voyage, mais plutôt le versement d'une allocation annuelle forfaitaire et que le montant de l'allocation était moins élevé que les indemnités que les employés recevaient jusqu'alors. À cet égard, le Syndicat prétendait que l'allocation était calculée sur la base du coût du billet d'avion le moins cher pour une liaison aller-retour entre leur poste isolé et le centre urbain le plus près et non plus sur le coût d'un billet de classe « Y ». Comme la Société avait modifié la Politique sans son consentement, elle contrevenait à la clause 37.01a) de la convention collective.
[11]
La Société prétendait pour sa part que la Politique, telle qu'elle s'était toujours appliquée, correspondait non pas à la directive sur les postes isolés du Conseil du trésor (S-30), mais plutôt à la politique de la Société sur les déplacements des employés syndiqués (E-1) et qu'elle n'avait pas modifié la Politique, mais seulement simplifié son application.
[12]
Dans la sentence arbitrale du 16 septembre 2008, l'arbitre a accueilli le grief et rejeté les prétentions de la Société. Il a en outre déterminé que la Politique, dans sa version d'avant 2004, correspondait à la directive sur les postes isolés du Conseil du Trésor (S-30) et non à la politique sur les déplacements pour les employés syndiqués (E-1) et qu'en modifiant la Politique sans obtenir l'accord du Syndicat, la Société avait contrevenu à la clause 37.01a) de la convention collective.
[13]
Dans ses motifs, l'arbitre a reconnu que la Société avait le pouvoir de modifier la Politique au plan strictement administratif en passant d'un système de versement d'indemnités à un versement d'allocation forfaitaire, mais il a indiqué que cette « simplification » ne pouvait se traduire par une diminution des avantages financiers qui avaient jusqu'alors été accordés aux employés. Il a conclu que la Société avait modifié les conditions de travail prévues à la Politique de façon unilatérale, et ce, en contravention à la clause 37.01a) de la convention collective.
[14]
Dans le dispositif de la sentence, l'arbitre a ordonné à la Société de modifier sa politique pour tenir compte des deux éléments suivants: le droit des employés de recevoir pour eux-mêmes et leurs personnes à charge une indemnité correspondant au coût d'un billet d'avion de classe « Y » entre leur poste isolé et le centre urbain le plus près et le droit pour eux d'utiliser cette indemnité pour effectuer le voyage de leur choix, y compris un voyage tout compris. L'arbitre a également ordonné à la Société de rembourser aux employés les sommes qu'ils auraient dû recevoir si la Politique leur avait reconnu ces deux droits et il a réservé sa compétence sur les sommes dues en cas de mésentente.
[15]
La mise en œuvre de la sentence arbitrale a engendré un désaccord entre les parties. D'abord, les parties ne se sont pas entendues sur les sommes dues aux employés, mais ce désaccord n'est pas pertinent aux fins des procédures d'outrage puisque le débat se fait actuellement devant l'arbitre.
[16]
Un désaccord est également survenu relativement aux volets suivants de la Politique. Après que la sentence arbitrale eut été rendue, la Société a décidé de retourner à un processus de remboursement des dépenses selon un régime qui prévoyait que les employés auraient droit à une indemnité équivalente à la somme la moins élevée entre le coût d'un billet d'avion de classe « Y » et les dépenses réelles des employés calculées conformément à la politique de la Société sur les déplacements des employés syndiqués (E-1). Le Syndicat était en désaccord avec toute référence à la politique sur les déplacements des employés syndiqués (E-1). Il prétendait qu'avant 2004, les employés recevaient le moindre du coût du billet de classe « Y » ou de leurs dépenses réelles et que les dépenses réelles admissibles n'étaient ni assujetties, ni limitées par la politique sur les déplacements des employés de la Société (E-1). Le Syndicat reprochait également à la Société de ne plus permettre aux employés de recevoir des avances de voyage, alors que cette pratique était permise avant les modifications de 2004. Le Syndicat a demandé à la Société de modifier ces deux volets de la Politique, mais la Société a refusé.
[17]
Devant l'impasse, le Syndicat a de nouveau saisi l'arbitre et lui a demandé de compléter le dispositif de sa sentence du 16 septembre 2008 afin d'y ajouter une ordonnance qui enjoindrait la Société à modifier la Politique pour prévoir le droit des employés de recevoir une avance de voyage et pour éliminer la référence à la politique sur les déplacements des employés syndiqués (E-1) dans le calcul des dépenses réelles. Au soutien de sa demande, le Syndicat invoquait que l'arbitre avait omis de se prononcer sur certaines questions soulevées par le grief et qu'il avait compétence pour compléter sa sentence. La Société s'est opposée à la demande en invoquant que l'arbitre était
functus officio.
[18]
Dans la sentence arbitrale rendue le 1er septembre 2009, l'arbitre a accueilli l'objection de la Société et rejeté la demande du Syndicat. Il a par ailleurs pris soin de préciser qu'il n'avait pas à répondre aux questions soulevées par le Syndicat parce qu'il s'était déjà prononcé sur ces questions de façon implicite dans sa sentence du 16 septembre 2008.
III.
Analyse
[19]
Le Syndicat reconnaît qu'il doit prouver hors de tout doute raisonnable les trois éléments constitutifs de l'outrage soit: (1) l'existence de l'ordonnance, (2) la connaissance de l'ordonnance par la partie défenderesse et (3) le défaut délibéré de la partie défenderesse de se conformer à la sentence. Il admet aussi que la jurisprudence exige que l'ordonnance en cause soit claire, exécutoire et non ambiguë.
[20]
Il soutient par ailleurs que les principes suivants doivent guider la Cour dans son examen de l'ordonnance:
a. L'ordonnance doit être lue et interprétée comme un tout;
b. La Cour ne doit pas donner une interprétation restrictive à l'ordonnance;
c. La Cour doit tenir compte du contexte;
d. La partie visée par une ordonnance doit obéir à l'ordonnance et à son esprit.
[21]
Le syndicat appuie sa proposition sur
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CanLII), 2006 FC 1115, 297 FTR 301 et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (disponible sur Quicklaw).
[22]
Il soutient que la sentence arbitrale du 16 septembre 2008 doit être interprétée en tenant compte de la sentence arbitrale du 1er septembre 2009 et qu'elle possède toutes les caractéristiques requises pour être l'objet d'un outrage au tribunal. Il soutient en outre que la sentence du 1er septembre 2009 a clarifié la portée de la sentence du 16 septembre 2008 et que la Société doit, pour s'y conformer, calculer le montant des indemnités en fonction des dépenses réelles encourues par les employés et leur permettre de bénéficier d'une avance.
[23]
Selon le Syndicat, comme la Société refuse délibérément de se conformer à la sentence arbitrale, elle doit être reconnue coupable d'outrage au tribunal. Le syndicat insiste qu'il n'a pas à prouver l'intention au sens où on l'entend en droit criminel et qu'en matière d'outrage, la preuve d'une désobéissance consciente, délibérée et qui ne doit pas être accidentelle suffit, ce qui, à son avis, est largement démontré en l'espèce. Il appuie ses prétentions sur
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CanLII), 2003 CAF 234, 227 DLR (4th) 106,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CanLII), 2003 CF 1335, 242 FTR 75,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CanLII), 2007 FC 858, 160 ACWS (3d) 267 et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CanLII), 2009 FC 800, 349 FTR 303.
[24]
La Société ne fait pas la même lecture de la portée de la sentence arbitrale. Elle soutient que la sentence du 1er septembre 2009 n'a rien ajouté à la sentence du 16 septembre 2008 et maintient qu'elle s'est conformée aux ordonnances émises dans la sentence du 16 septembre 2008. La Société soutient au surplus que la sentence arbitrale du 16 septembre 2008 est plutôt de nature déclaratoire qu'exécutoire et qu'elle est ambiguë. La Société invoque également que le Syndicat a utilisé la procédure d'outrage au tribunal pour exercer sur elle de la pression en vue d'accélérer le dénouement du litige relatif au quantum des dommages. J'écarte d'emblée cette accusation sérieuse que la preuve n'appuie pas.
[25]
La procédure d'outrage au tribunal est régie par les règles 466 à 469 des Règles. Les paramètres applicables à l'outrage civil sont bien établis par la jurisprudence. La procédure en outrage au tribunal est un processus très sérieux qui possède un caractère quasi pénal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). La partie qui invoque qu'une autre partie s'est rendue coupable d'outrage doit démontrer hors de tout doute raisonnable l'existence d'une ordonnance, la connaissance de l'ordonnance par la partie défenderesse et le défaut délibéré de la défenderesse de respecter l'ordonnance. La jurisprudence exige que la décision dont on invoque le non-respect ne soit ni ambiguë, ni purement déclaratoire (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (CanLII), 2004 CAF 59, 129 ACWS (3d) 76) [
Telus Mobilité
] ).
[26]
Je considère que les sentences arbitrales n'ont ni la portée, ni le caractère exécutoire que leur prête le Syndicat, et ce, même si je les analyse en tenant compte du contexte, de la lettre et de l'esprit des sentences. Il est utile de reproduire le passage suivant de la sentence arbitrale du 16 septembre 2008 dans lequel l'arbitre résume sa pensée et discute de la preuve qui a été présentée:
[...]
[652] En résumé, j'en viens donc à la conclusion que la Société avait droit, sur le plan strictement administratif, de simplifier la gestion des indemnités de voyage pour fins de vacances annuelles accordées aux employés travaillant dans un poste isolé, en remplaçant le processus jusque là utilisé par le versement d'une indemnité forfaitaire annuelle. En revanche, cette « simplification » ne devait pas, en vertu du paragraphe 37.01a) de la convention collective, se traduire par une diminution des avantages financiers accordés jusque là à ces employés. En l'espèce, la preuve a révélé que pour maintenir ces avantages, l'indemnité devait être équivalente au coût d'un billet d'avion de classe « Y », pour chaque employé et ses personnes à charge, pour un aller-retour entre son poste isolé et le grand centre urbain le plus près, à la date de son choix, et que l'employé devait avoir le droit d'appliquer cette indemnité au type de voyage de son choix, incluant les voyages tout compris, à partir du point de départ de son choix.
[...]
[27]
Dans ce paragraphe, l'arbitre énonce les deux principes suivants: (1) la Société pouvait modifier sa Politique au plan administratif, mais (2) cette modification ne pouvait avoir pour effet de réduire les avantages financiers dont les employés bénéficiaient jusqu'alors. Cet énoncé a une portée suffisamment large pour couvrir toute modification apportée à la Politique ayant entraîné une réduction des avantages financiers. L'arbitre a toutefois limité la portée de son énoncé en indiquant que la preuve avait révélé que deux éléments manquaient à la Politique pour préserver les avantages financiers dont bénéficiaient les employés: le droit à une indemnité équivalente au coût d'un billet de classe « Y » et le droit pour les employés d'appliquer l'indemnité sur le type de voyage de leur choix.
[28]
Le dispositif de la sentence se lit comme suit:
[653]
Pour tous ces motifs,
- J'accueille le grief national n° N00-03-00005;
- J'ordonne à la Société de modifier sa politique en matière d'indemnité de voyage pour fins de vacances annuelles afin de tenir compte:
· du droit des employés travaillant dans les postes isolés de recevoir, pour eux-mêmes et leurs personnes à charge, une indemnité équivalant au coût d'un billet d'avion de classe « Y » (("
Full Fare Economy Ticket"
) pour un aller-retour entre leur poste isolé et le grand centre urbain le plus près, à la date de leur choix;
· du droit de ces employés d'utiliser cette indemnité pour effectuer le voyage de leur choix, incluant un voyage tout compris.
- Je reconnais le droit de la Société d'effectuer sur ces indemnités les retenues imposées par la loi;
- J'ordonne à la Société de rembourser aux employés travaillant dans les postes isolés, dans les quinze jours ouvrables suivant la date de la présente décision, toute somme à laquelle ces derniers auraient eu droit si la politique mise en place par la Société leur avait reconnu les droits susmentionnés, le tout portant intérêt au taux prévu par la loi;
- Je conserve ma compétence sur les sommes dues, en cas de mésentente entre les parties.
[29]
Le dispositif de la sentence est clairement limité aux deux volets mentionnés au paragraphe 652 de la sentence. L'arbitre a enjoint à la Société de modifier sa politique à deux égards précis: le droit à une indemnité équivalente au prix d'un billet de classe « Y » et le droit pour les employés d'utiliser cette indemnité pour faire le type de voyage de leur choix. Le dispositif ne contient aucune ordonnance de portée plus générale qui aurait, par exemple, ordonné à la Société de maintenir tous les avantages financiers qui découlaient de la Politique telle qu'elle s'appliquait avant 2004, ou encore, de restaurer la Politique dans sa version de 2004.
[30]
C'est précisément parce que la sentence arbitrale du 16 septembre 2008 ne prévoyait aucune conclusion à l'égard de ces deux volets que le Syndicat a demandé à l'arbitre de compléter sa première sentence.
[31]
Il est utile de reproduire le passage de la sentence arbitrale dans lequel l'arbitre énonce qu'il a déjà répondu implicitement aux questions soulevées par le Syndicat:
[...]
[32] Si, comme le reconnaît la Cour d'appel du Québec dans l'affaire
Contrôle technique appliquée
[
sic
] en citant le commentaire de M. le juge Paré, «
les motifs sont considérés au même titre que le dispositif d'un jugement lorsqu'ils font corps avec le dispositif et qu'ils sont nécessaires à son soutien
»,
je ne pourrais- si je faisais droit à la requête syndicale- que répéter ce que j'ai déjà dit dans ma décision.
[33] Avant les modifications qu'elle a apportées au régime d'indemnité de poste isolé en 2003, la Société - comme en fait foi le communiqué S-14 émis par M. Glen Driedger, gestionnaire responsable de la politique sur la rémunération - appliquait la « Directive sur les postes isolés » émise par le Conseil du trésor, si bien qu'en vertu du paragraphe 37.01a) de la convention collective,
elle ne pouvait modifier les avantages financiers que procurait cette directive aux employés travaillant dans les postes isolés.
[...] [Je souligne]
[32]
Avec respect, je considère qu'en refusant d'ajouter au dispositif de sa sentence du 16 septembre 2008, l'arbitre n'a pas apporté une solution complète au litige et il n'a pas étendu la portée exécutoire de sa sentence initiale. Il a bien indiqué qu'il estimait avoir répondu implicitement aux demandes du Syndicat et il a réitéré le principe qu'il avait déjà énoncé dans la sentence du 16 septembre 2008 à l'effet que les modifications apportées à la Politique ne pouvaient avoir pour conséquence de réduire les avantages financiers dont bénéficiaient les employés avant 2004. À mon avis, cette conclusion est essentiellement de nature déclaratoire et non exécutoire.
[33]
Je reconnais le principe énoncé par la Cour d'appel du Québec dans
Contrôle Technique Appliqué ltée c Québec (Procureur général)
, [1994] RJQ 939, 47 ACWS (3d) 621, et sur lequel l'arbitre dit s'appuyer. Ce principe veut que les motifs d'un jugement puissent servir d'appui à un dispositif pour en comprendre la portée. Ces motifs peuvent servir d'appui à un dispositif, mais ils ne peuvent pas pour autant remplacer ou tenir lieu de dispositif.
[34]
Dans
Telus Mobilité
, la Cour d'appel fédérale a indiqué, au paragraphe 4,« [qu'] un constat d'outrage au tribunal ne peut s'appuyer sur une ordonnance judiciaire qui est ambiguë, ou sur une ordonnance qui est simplement déclaratoire. La conduite dictée doit être énoncée clairement dans l'ordonnance »(voir également:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 696,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 319).
[35]
En l'espèce, la sentence arbitrale du 16 septembre 2008 comportait un dispositif très clair qui ordonnait à la Société de modifier la Politique de façon très spécifique. Ce dispositif ne prévoyait rien quant à la façon de calculer les dépenses réelles ni quant au droit à une avance. Ce dernier élément aurait d'ailleurs été complètement incongru puisque l'arbitre a clairement reconnu le droit pour la Société de remplacer le régime de versement d'une indemnité par celui du paiement d'une allocation forfaitaire annuelle et que le concept d'avance est inapplicable dans le cadre d'un régime forfaitaire.
[36]
En l'absence d'une ordonnance générale enjoignant à la Société de modifier sa politique
de façon à préserver tous les avantages financiers découlant de la politique S-30,
j'estime qu'il est impossible, même à la lecture de la sentence additionnelle du 1er septembre 2009, d'étendre la portée de la sentence arbitrale du 16 septembre 2008 pour en inférer que l'arbitre ordonnait aussi à la Société de modifier la Politique pour prévoir le droit des employés de recevoir une avance et de se faire rembourser leurs dépenses réelles. Ce serait à mon avis indûment ajouter à la sentence du 16 septembre 2008, ce que l'arbitre a lui-même refusé de faire en se déclarant
functus officio
.
[37]
L'arbitre a d'ailleurs reconnu la portée limitée de sa sentence du 16 septembre 2008 lorsqu'il a invité le Syndicat à déposer un grief:
[...]
[34] Ces motifs sont ceux qui m'ont amené aux conclusions contenues dans ma décision du 16 septembre 2008
et si, comme le prétend le syndicat, l'employeur ne respecte pas cette directive
et «
les conditions de travail existantes concernant le paiement d'une prime, le paiement d'une indemnité ou le paiement d'un autre avantage financier qui ne sont pas prévues à la présente convention collective
» [par. 37.01a)]
qui s'y trouvent, il doit déposer un grief et non pas me demander chaque fois de compléter ma décision pour y inclure un nouvel aspect de la politique que, selon lui, l'employeur n'aurait pas respecté.
[...] [Je souligne]
[38]
Les propos du juge Cattanach dans
Fraternité internationale des ouvriers en électricité, section locale 529 c Central Broadcasting Co.
, [1977] 2 FC 78 (disponible sur Quicklaw), m'apparaissent tout à fait applicables en l'espèce:
[...]
58
[...] Le fait de déposer et d'enregistrer devant cette Cour une ordonnance du Conseil vise à en assurer l'exécution par les brefs de cette Cour. Si on examine la question de façon réaliste, l'ordonnance, même après son dépôt devant cette Cour, reste l'ordonnance du Conseil. Or, l'ordonnance du Conseil est définitive et ne peut pas être mise en question ni révisée par un tribunal, si ce n'est conformément à l'article 28 de la Loi sur la Cour fédérale; il n'entre donc pas dans les attributions d'un juge de la Division de première instance de la modifier pour la rendre exécutable. L'ordonnance du Conseil, même lorsqu'elle est déposée et enregistrée aux termes de l'article 123, reste intacte. [...] Le tribunal compétent pour modifier une ordonnance du Conseil, c'est le Conseil lui-même. J'ai exprimé ce point de vue (auquel j'adhère toujours) à l'avocat de la requérante, à plusieurs reprises au cours de l'audition de la requête. Il n'appartient pas à la Division de première instance de deviner ce qui se cache sous le libellé de l'ordonnance, et de la modifier de façon à dire ce que le Conseil voulait dire, mais n'a pas dit. Un tel procédé équivaudrait à usurper les fonctions du Conseil.
[...]
82
Si cette Cour doit punir une personne pour ne pas avoir exécuté une ordonnance du Conseil qui, en vertu de l'article 123 du Code canadien du travail est devenue, après son dépôt et son enregistrement, une ordonnance de cette Cour aux fins d'exécution, cette ordonnance doit prescrire les actes à accomplir en termes clairs et non ambigus, ce que, pour les raisons que j'ai données, le Conseil a négligé de faire.
[...]
[39]
Le syndicat a soutenu que dans sa sentence du 1er septembre 2009, l'arbitre avait confirmé le caractère exécutoire de la sentence du 16 septembre 2008. Cela s'avère exact, mais le caractère exécutoire de la décision ne peut s'étendre au-delà de sa portée même. Le commentaire de l'arbitre était lui-même lié aux conclusions de la sentence du 16 septembre 2008 et à la compétence qu'il s'était réservé quant au quantum des dommages:
[...]
[35] Quant à la décision que j'ai rendue le 16 septembre 2008, j'estime, à la lumière de la Directive sur les postes isolés (S-30) utilisée par la Société par le passé, qu'elle est parfaitement exécutoire et que si les parties ne parviennent pas à s'entendre sur son application, elles n'ont qu'à me demander d'intervenir pour établir les sommes dues.
[...]
[40]
Pour l'ensemble de ces motifs, je considère qu'eu égard au droit des employés de bénéficier d'une avance et de se faire rembourser leurs dépenses de voyage sur la base de leurs dépenses réelles, les sentences rendues par l'arbitre Bergeron ne revêtent pas le caractère exécutoire requis pour donner lieu à un constat d'outrage au tribunal. Le caractère exécutoire de la sentence est limité aux ordonnances précises que l'on retrouve dans le dispositif de la sentence du 16 septembre 2008. Or, la preuve révèle que la Société s'est conformée aux ordonnances comprises dans ce dispositif.
[41]
Le dispositif de l'ordonnance n'incluait pas le droit à une avance et au remboursement des dépenses de voyage sur la base des dépenses réelles. L'arbitre a déclaré que la Société ne pouvait pas modifier les avantages financiers découlant de la Politique (dans sa version d'avant 2004), mais ce volet de la sentence est de nature déclaratoire. Je considère également que la sentence arbitrale du 1er septembre 2009 est ambiguë. L'arbitre renvoie à certains passages de la sentence du 16 septembre 2008 et il indique qu'il a déjà répondu implicitement aux questions soulevées par le Syndicat, mais il n'indique absolument pas s'il considère que la preuve a démontré qu'avant 2004, les employés avaient droit à une avance et que leurs dépenses réelles n'étaient assujetties à aucune limite. Il n'indique pas non plus s'il considère que ces deux éléments constituent des avantages financiers au sens de la clause 37.01a) de la convention collective. Tel qu'indiqué précédemment, il n'appartient pas à la Cour de compléter la sentence arbitrale ou de chercher ce que l'arbitre a voulu dire.
[42]
Le Syndicat n'a donc pas réussi à démontrer hors de tout doute raisonnable que les trois éléments constitutifs de l'outrage au tribunal avaient été remplis de manière à ce que la Société doive être condamnée.
[43]
La meilleure voie à suivre par le Syndicat pour faire déterminer si la Société contrevient toujours à la clause 37.01a) de la convention collective m'apparaît être l'arbitrage de grief, comme l'arbitre l'a d'ailleurs lui-même suggéré.
ORDONNANCE
[44]
LA COUR ORDONNE
que la procédure en outrage au tribunal soit rejetée.
Le tout avec dépens à la défenderesse.
[End of document]