 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Paulin Ndoja, Valbone Ndoja, Geraldo Ndoja and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 163)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Roy, J.
February 15, 2013.
Counsel:
Omar Shabir Khan, for the applicants;
Melissa Mathieu, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Omar Shabir Khan, Hamilton, Ontario, for the applicants;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Roy, J.
: This is an application for judicial review made pursuant to section 72 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27, of a decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (the "Board" or "RPD"). In its decision rendered on February 27, 2012, the Board refused the application for refugee protection made by Paulin Ndoja and his family.
[2]
The applicants are Paulin Ndoja (the "principal applicant"), his wife Valbone and their children Amarildo and Geraldo. They are citizens of Albania.
[3]
It is not disputed that the principal applicant, while he was carrying out his mandatory military service during the communist regime in Albania, would have been jailed and eventually released when the communist regime toppled. The principal applicant was tortured and forced to perform hard labour, starved and kept in solitary confinement during this time. He suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of the treatment he received in 1998.
[4]
The applicant's family was known to be anti-communist and, as a result, the principal applicant suffered at the hands of the then communist regime. A blood feud with a neighbouring family, presumably fuelled by the same political differences, resulted from the principal applicant's brother killing one of the men in that neighbouring family. Members of the said neighbouring family caused a severe injury to Geraldo when, in January 2002, as they were looking for the principal applicant, Geraldo fell from his mother's arms. He suffered serious burns which required medical treatment in the United States. According to the record, the mother, Valbone, and Geraldo left for the United States six months after the injury was suffered and the principal applicant and Amarildo followed three years later.
[5]
The applicants failed in their application for asylum in the United States. They then came to Canada and made a claim for refugee protection the same day, October 21, 2009.
[6]
The applicants state in their Memorandum of Argument that "credibility is not an issue. The RPD did not conduct a credibility assessment in the Decision. The sole determinative issue is whether there is adequate state protection in Albania." The Court agrees. In spite of some conflicting statements in the written materials produced on behalf of the applicants, the parties stated clearly that credibility is not an issue in this case.
Applicants' argument
[7]
Basically, the applicants argue that the Board erred in concluding that there is adequate state protection in view of the on-going blood feud in Albania. In doing so, the applicants rely principally on the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  as they try to draw an analogy between their situation and that present in that case. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , judicial review was granted where the Court concluded that the Immigration and Refugee Board failed to fully consider the evidence before it, in the context of a family feud having occurred in Albania and, in particular, it failed to address individual circumstances in spite of an acknowledgement that there are cases of insufficient police protection. In that case, the principal applicant's family had gone to the police twice, only to be advised that the case was closed.
[8]
In essence, the applicants in this case submit that the Board committed an error in that it was critical of the fact that the applicants had not sought protection from the authorities back in 2002, and the three years following. Furthermore, the applicants submit that the panel overlooked the fact that the principal applicant was detained and tortured by the Albanian police for political reasons and it failed to consider that factor in assessing why the applicants would not have gone to those same authorities for protection.
[9]
During the hearing before the Board, the principal applicant explained that he had not approached the authorities for protection in Albania with regard to the blood feud with the neighbouring family because the authorities would do nothing to help them, and because it might aggravate the said neighbouring family. An attempt at reconciliation led by the Committee for National Reconciliation proved to be unsuccessful.
[10]
Relying on documentary evidence, the applicants argue that Albanian authorities are unable to deal with blood feuds effectively or offer protection to its citizens. Finally, the applicants complain that the Board did not address sufficiently their submissions in denying them refugee status. As a result, they claim, their submissions were not adequately considered.
Respondent's argument
[11]
The respondent argues that the presumption of state protection has not been rebutted in this case. Indeed, the applicants never went to the police or any other authorities following the incident of June 2002. Contrary to the applicants' argument, the Board specifically assessed their particular circumstances and found that they chose not to go to the police. It was opened to the Board, according to the respondent, to find that the applicants had not exhausted all avenues offered by the state. All in all, the Board noted both positive and negative evidence and it acknowledged that the overall picture of state protection was mixed with respect to blood feuds in Albania.
Issues
[12]
The applicants put the following issues before the Court:
a. Did the Board err in concluding there is adequate state protection for the applicants due to the on-going blood feud in Albania between his family and another family?
b. Is the Board's failure to refer to counsel's submissions a reviewable error?
Analysis
[13]
As repeated abundantly by the applicants' counsel at the hearing, the sole issue in this case is the availability of state protection, a mixed question of fact and law.
[14]
As has been found in many cases considering the issue of state protection in the context of a family feud, the standard of review is one of reasonableness. It follows that the decision will go undisturbed if it falls "within the range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 47). The decision must be sufficiently justified, transparent and intelligible. The question is not whether or not the applicants had established a subjective fear. Rather they had to satisfy the Board that the presumption of adequate state protection had been rebutted in this case. That such a presumption exists should not be disputed.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , one can read at paragraph 50:
... a claimant might advance testimony of similarly situated individuals let down by the state [page 725] protection arrangements or the claimant's testimony of past personal incidents in which state protection did not materialize. Absent some evidence, the claim should fail, as nations should be presumed capable of protecting their citizens. ... Absent a situation of complete breakdown of state apparatus, ... it should be assumed that the state is capable of protecting a claimant.
[15]
There is no allegation of a complete breakdown on state apparatus in Albania, such that the existence of the presumption is not challenged. The question then becomes whether the Board was unreasonable it reaching its conclusion that the presumption has not been rebutted. I do not think that such unreasonableness has been shown in this case.
[16]
Not only are we faced with a case where the applicants failed to seek state protection between 2002 and 2005, but the documentary evidence submitted in order to show that Albania is incapable of protecting its citizens is at this stage mixed. Case-by-case analysis is required.
[17]
The Board addressed its mind to the issue before concluding at paragraph 16 of its decision that "mechanisms of state protection do exist, although in any one case they may not be effective, or may not operate." Perfection is not the test. Mere attempts at improving the situation may not suffice. But mechanisms that are efficient without being perfect will. Deficiencies exist, concluded the Board, but that does not mean that state protection is non existent.
[18]
Indeed in this case the principal applicant did not submit evidence personal to him and his family other than the incident in 2002. He stayed in Albania until December 2005, yet there is not any indication that he was in jeopardy then, or that there is danger now. The issue of the blood feud was really a generalization without much in terms of details or currency. The fact that he did not go to the authorities for the matter to be prosecuted or addressed suggests that the subjective fear of persecution was not prevalent, especially in view of the fact that the principal applicant and one of his children remained in Albania for some three years.
[19]
As for the documentary evidence provided to the Board, it does not allow the conclusion that state protection is inefficient. The burden on the applicants is both evidentiary and legal: not only does the applicant need to introduce evidence that protection will be inadequate, but that evidence must be probative enough to meet the standard of balance of probabilities (see
Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[20]
The applicants' counsel, in his able submissions to the Court, insisted at some length on <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,
supra
. He saw in that case a significant similarity which, he argues, must lead the Court to grant the remedy sought.
[21]
It was noted by respondent's counsel that the facts of the two cases differ, in that the applicant's family complained to the police twice in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . I am not convinced that the cases can be distinguished on that sole basis. I find much more telling that the Court has found in more recent cases that state protection in Albania can be found to exist (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The nature of refugee protection is not static: it is forward-looking. Clear and convincing evidence of the state's inability to protect is needed.
[22]
More importantly perhaps, the
ratio decidendi
in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is concerned with the adequacy of the reasons given by the Board to conclude that state protection was sufficient. As we have found out since, "reasons may not include all the arguments, statutory provisions, jurisprudence or other details, the reviewing judge would have preferred, but that does not impugn the validity of either the reasons or the result under a reasonableness analysis" (see
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 16).
[23]
The evidence before the Board allowed it to come to the conclusion it reached. It is one of those decisions that falls within a range of possible outcomes. As it was put in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by my colleague Justice Gleason:
[11] ... the reviewing court must afford significant deference to the tribunal's factual findings, particularly where, as here, the impugned determination falls within the core of the tribunal's expertise. Assessments of risk and of the availability of adequate protection for refugee claimants in foreign states lies at the very core of the competence of the RPD and are matters that Parliament has mandated to fall within the RPD's jurisdiction (see IRPA at para 95(1)(
b
);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[24]
The applicants complained that the Board failed to refer to counsel's submissions, refute them specifically. It seems to me that the Board addressed squarely the gist of the submissions of counsel. Decision-makers do not have to refer to every piece of evidence that is contrary to their finding and to give a full explanation of how they have been dealt with (see
Newfoundland and Labrador
, above, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In this case, the Board explained itself sufficiently for everyone to know why the application was denied or, in the words of Justice Abella, for the Court, in
Newfoundland and Labrador
,
supra
, at paragraph 16:
... if the reasons allow the reviewing court to understand why the tribunal made its decision and permit it to determine whether the conclusion is within the range of acceptable outcomes, the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> criteria are met.
[25]
In the case at bar, the reasons of the Board were intelligible in my view and transparent. Indeed, it was reasonable for the Board to conclude that clear and convincing evidence has not been adduced to rebut the presumption of state protection (
Ward
,
supra
).
[26]
The fact that the principal applicant had been detained and allegedly tortured by the communist regime of Albania can hardly be retained against a subsequent regime. I see little point in the Board discussing this type of evidence.
[27]
As a result, the application for judicial review has to be dismissed.
[28]
I agree with counsel for the parties that this is not a matter for certified questions pursuant to section 74 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
.
JUDGMENT
[29]
The application for judicial review of the decision made by the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada on February 27, 2012 is dismissed.
.........................
Paulin Ndoja, Valbone Ndoja,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire présentée en vertu de l'article 72 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés,
LC 2001, c 27, à l'égard d'une décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié du Canada (la « Commission » ou la « SPR »). Dans sa décision, rendue le 27 février 2012, la Commission a rejeté la demande d'asile présentée par Paulin Ndoja et sa famille.
[2]
Les demandeurs sont Paulin Ndoja (le « demandeur principal »), son épouse, Valbone, et leurs enfants, Amarildo et Geraldo. Ils sont citoyens d'Albanie.
[3]
Il n'est pas contesté que le demandeur principal, alors qu'il accomplissait son service militaire obligatoire sous le régime communiste en Albanie, aurait été incarcéré puis libéré lors du renversement du régime communiste. Le demandeur principal a, durant cette période, été torturé et soumis aux travaux forcés, affamé et gardé en isolement cellulaire. Il souffre de l'état de stress post-traumatique en conséquence des traitements qu'il a subis en 1998.
[4]
La famille du demandeur était réputée être anticommuniste et le demandeur principal a conséquemment souffert aux mains du régime communiste d'alors. L'assassinat de l'un des hommes d'une famille voisine par le frère du demandeur principal a donné lieu à une vendetta, probablement alimentée par les mêmes différends politiques, avec cette famille. En janvier 2002, des membres de la famille voisine ont causé une blessure grave à Geraldo lorsque celui-ci est tombé des bras de sa mère pendant qu'ils recherchaient le demandeur principal. Geraldo a subi des brûlures graves qui ont nécessité un traitement médical aux États-Unis. Selon le dossier, la mère, Valbone, et Geraldo sont allés aux États-Unis six mois après la blessure subie par ce dernier et le demandeur principal ainsi qu'Amarildo ont suivi trois ans plus tard.
[5]
La demande d'asile présentée aux États-Unis par les demandeurs a été rejetée. Ils sont alors venus au Canada et ont présenté une demande d'asile le jour de leur arrivée, soit le 21 octobre 2009.
[6]
Dans leur exposé des arguments, les demandeurs déclarent: [traduction] « la crédibilité n'est pas une question litigieuse. La SPR n'a pas procédé à une évaluation de la crédibilité dans sa décision. La seule question déterminante consiste à savoir s'il existe une protection de l'État suffisante en Albanie ». La Cour est d'accord avec les demandeurs. En dépit de quelques déclarations incompatibles dans les documents écrits présentés au nom des demandeurs, les parties ont énoncé clairement que la question de la crédibilité n'était pas litigieuse en l'espèce.
Les arguments des demandeurs
[7]
Au fond, les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission a commis une erreur en concluant à l'existence d'une protection suffisante de l'État, étant donné la vendetta qui fait toujours rage en Albanie. À l'appui de cette prétention, les demandeurs invoquent principalement la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  afin de tirer une analogie entre leur situation et celle dont il était question dans cette affaire. Dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la Cour a accueilli la demande de contrôle judiciaire après être parvenue à la conclusion que la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié n'avait pas pleinement considéré les éléments de preuve dont elle disposait, dans le contexte d'une vendetta familiale ayant eu lieu en Albanie, et, plus précisément, qu'elle n'avait notamment pas traité des circonstances individuelles bien qu'elle eût reconnu l'insuffisance de la protection policière dans certains cas. Dans l'affaire <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la famille du demandeur principal était allée voir la police deux fois, mais elle s'est faire dire que le dossier était clos.
[8]
En l'espèce, les demandeurs font essentiellement valoir que la Commission a commis une erreur en critiquant le fait qu'ils n'avaient pas demandé la protection des autorités en 2002 et au cours des trois années suivantes. De plus, les demandeurs soutiennent que le tribunal n'a pas tenu compte de fait que le demandeur principal avait été détenu et torturé par la police albanaise pour des raisons politiques et qu'il n'a pas retenu ce facteur pour déterminer la raison pour laquelle ils n'ont pas sollicité la protection de ces mêmes autorités.
[9]
À l'audience devant la Commission, le demandeur principal a expliqué qu'il ne s'était pas adressé aux autorités pour obtenir leur protection en Albanie relativement à la vendetta avec la famille voisine parce que les autorités n'auraient rien fait pour les aider et que cela aurait pu fâcher cette famille. Une tentative de réconciliation menée par le Comité de réconciliation nationale a été infructueuse.
[10]
S'appuyant sur la preuve documentaire, les demandeurs allèguent que les autorités albanaises sont incapables de régler efficacement le problème des vendettas ou de protéger leurs citoyens. Ils reprochent enfin à la Commission d'avoir rejeté leur demande du statut de réfugié sans avoir suffisamment traité de leurs observations écrites. En conséquence, ils font valoir que leurs observations écrites n'ont pas été considérées de manière appropriée.
Les arguments du défendeur
[11]
Le défendeur soutient que la présomption de la protection de l'État n'a pas été réfutée en l'espèce. D'ailleurs, les demandeurs ne se sont jamais plaints à la police ou à toute autre autorité à la suite de l'incident de juin 2002. Contrairement à l'argument des demandeurs, la Commission s'est penchée de manière expresse sur leurs circonstances particulières et a conclu qu'ils avaient choisi de ne pas aller voir la police. Selon le défendeur, il était loisible à la Commission de conclure que les demandeurs n'avaient pas épuisé tous les recours offerts par l'État. Dans l'ensemble, la Commission a noté les éléments de preuve favorables de même que défavorables et elle a reconnu que, dans l'ensemble, la situation de la protection de l'État était mitigée en ce qui avait trait aux vendettas en Albanie.
Les questions litigieuses
[12]
Les demandeurs ont présenté les questions litigieuses suivantes à la Cour:
a. La Commission a-t-elle commis une erreur en concluant que la protection de l'État dont les demandeurs pouvaient disposer était adéquate, compte tenu de la vendetta faisant rage en Albanie entre leur famille et une autre famille?
b. Le défaut de la Commission de faire référence aux observations de l'avocat constitue-t-il une erreur susceptible de révision?
Analyse
[13]
Comme l'avocat des demandeurs l'a maintes fois répété à l'audience, la seule question litigieuse en l'espèce est celle de la disponibilité de la protection de l'État, une question mixte de fait et de droit.
[14]
Comme il a été conclu dans plusieurs affaires portant sur la question de la protection de l'État dans le contexte d'une vendetta familiale, la norme de contrôle est celle de la décision raisonnable. Il s'ensuit que la décision ne sera pas modifiée si elle appartient « aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 47). La décision doit être suffisamment justifiée, transparente et intelligible. La question ne consiste pas à savoir si les demandeurs ont établi l'existence d'une crainte subjective. Ils devaient plutôt convaincre la Commission que la présomption de la protection de l'État avait été réfutée dans le présent cas. Le fait qu'une telle présomption existe ne devrait pas être contesté. Dans
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, la Cour suprême s'est exprimée de la sorte au paragraphe 50:
[...] un demandeur pourrait présenter le témoignage de personnes [page 725] qui sont dans une situation semblable à la sienne et que les dispositions prises par l'État pour les protéger n'ont pas aidées, ou son propre témoignage au sujet d'incidents personnels antérieurs au cours desquels la protection de l'État ne s'est pas concrétisée. En l'absence d'une preuve quelconque, la revendication devrait échouer, car il y a lieu de présumer que les nations sont capables de protéger leurs citoyens. [...] En l'absence d'un effondrement complet de l'appareil étatique, [...] il y a lieu de présumer que l'État est capable de protéger le demandeur.
[15]
Il n'a pas été allégué que l'appareil d'État s'était complètement effondré en Albanie et l'existence de la présomption n'est donc pas contestée. La question devient alors celle de savoir s'il était déraisonnable de la part de la Commission de conclure que la présomption n'a pas été réfutée. Je ne pense pas qu'on ait démontré en l'espèce ce caractère déraisonnable.
[16]
Dans la présente affaire, non seulement les demandeurs n'ont pas sollicité la protection de l'État entre 2002 et 2005, mais la preuve documentaire invoquée pour démontrer l'incapacité de l'Albanie à protéger ses citoyens est à ce stade mitigée. Une analyse au cas par cas est requise.
[17]
La Commission s'est penchée sur la question, pour ensuite conclure au paragraphe 16 de sa décision qu' « il existe des mécanismes de protection de l'État, même s'il peut arriver qu'ils ne soient pas efficaces ni fonctionnels ». La perfection n'est pas le critère. De simples tentatives pour améliorer la situation ne sont pas nécessairement suffisantes, mais des mécanismes qui sont efficaces sans être parfaits le sont. La Commission a conclu qu'il y a des déficiences, mais cela ne signifie pas que la protection de l'État est inexistante.
[18]
D'ailleurs, en l'espèce, le demandeur principal n'a pas présenté d'éléments de preuves qui le concernaient personnellement ainsi que sa famille, sauf au sujet de l'incident de 2002. Il est demeuré en Albanie jusqu'au mois de décembre 2005, mais rien n'indique qu'il était alors en danger, ou qu'il l'est actuellement. La question de la vendetta était, tout compte fait, une généralisation sans guère de détails ou de pertinence. Le fait que le demandeur principal ne se soit pas adressé aux autorités pour qu'elles intentent des poursuites ou qu'elles règlent l'affaire donne à penser que la crainte subjective de la persécution n'était pas très forte, surtout à la lumière du fait que le demandeur principal et l'un de ses enfants sont demeurés en Albanie pendant environ trois ans.
[19]
Quant à la preuve documentaire soumise à la Commission, elle ne permet pas de conclure que la protection de l'État est inefficace. Le fardeau qui incombe aux demandeurs est probatoire ainsi que juridique: les éléments de preuve présentés par le demandeur ne doivent pas simplement démontrer que la protection de l'État est insuffisante, ces éléments doivent aussi être assez convaincants pour satisfaire au critère de la prépondérance des probabilités (voir l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[20]
Dans les excellentes observations qu'il a présentées à la Cour, l'avocat des demandeurs a longuement insisté sur l'importance de la décision
Precectaj,
précitée. Il décelait dans cette affaire une similarité significative qui, selon lui, doit amener la Cour à accorder la réparation sollicitée.
[21]
L'avocat du défendeur a noté que les faits des deux affaires différaient, puisque dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , la famille du demandeur s'était plainte deux fois à la police
.
Je ne suis pas convaincu qu'il est possible de distinguer les deux affaires sur ce seul fondement. Je trouve beaucoup plus significatif le fait que la Cour a statué dans des décisions plus récentes qu'il était possible de conclure à l'existence de la protection de l'État en  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). La nature de la protection des réfugiés n'est pas immuable, elle est prospective. Il faut une preuve claire et convaincante pour conclure à l'incapacité de l'État à protéger ses citoyens.
[22]
Fait ayant peut-être encore plus d'importance, la
ratio decidendi
de la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> concernait le caractère adéquat des motifs donnés par la Commission pour conclure que la protection de l'État était suffisante. Comme il a été précisé depuis cette décision, « [i]l se peut que les motifs ne fassent pas référence à tous les arguments, dispositions législatives, précédents ou autres détails que le juge siégeant en révision aurait voulu y lire, mais cela ne met pas en doute leur validité ni celle du résultat au terme de l'analyse du caractère raisonnable de la décision » (voir l'arrêt
Newfoundland and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 16).
[23]
La preuve présentée à la Commission lui permettait de parvenir à la conclusion qui a été la sienne. Il s'agit de l'une des décisions qui appartiennent aux issues possibles. Comme ma collègue la juge Gleason l'écrit dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[11] [...] la cour de révision doit faire preuve d'une grande déférence à l'égard des conclusions de fait du tribunal particulièrement lorsque, comme en l'espèce, la décision contestée se retrouve au cœur même de l'expertise du tribunal. L'évaluation des risques auxquels sont exposés les demandeurs d'asile de même que de l'existence d'une protection adéquate de l'État étranger se retrouvent au cœur même de la compétence de la SPR et il s'agit de questions que le Parlement a portées à la compétence de la SPR (voir l'alinéa 95(1)
b
) de la  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[24]
Les demandeurs se sont plaints que la Commission n'avait pas fait référence aux observations de l'avocat et qu'elle ne les avait pas réfutées expressément. Il me semble que la Commission a traité sans détour de l'essentiel des observations de l'avocat. Les décideurs n'ont pas à faire référence à chaque élément de preuve qui est contraire à leur conclusion et à expliquer exhaustivement comment ils en ont tenu compte (voir
Newfoundland and Labrador
, précité, et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). En l'espèce, la Commission a donné des explications suffisantes pour que chacun sache pourquoi la demande a été rejetée ou, pour reprendre les propos de la juge Abella dans ses motifs rédigés au nom de la Cour suprême du Canada dans
Newfoundland and Labrador
, précité, au paragraphe 16:
[...] les motifs répondent aux critères établis dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> s'ils permettent à la cour de révision de comprendre le fondement de la décision du tribunal et de déterminer si la conclusion fait partie des issues possibles acceptables.
[25]
En l'espèce, j'estime que les motifs de la Commission étaient intelligibles et transparents. En vérité, il était raisonnable de la part de la Commission de conclure à l'absence d'une preuve claire et convaincante réfutant la présomption de la protection de l'État (voir
Ward,
précité).
[26]
Le fait que le demandeur principal a été détenu et prétendument torturé par le régime communiste en Albanie peut difficilement être reproché à un régime postérieur. Je ne vois pas en quoi il aurait été utile que la Commission aborde ce type de preuve.
[27]
Par conséquent, la demande de contrôle judiciaire doit être rejetée.
[28]
Je conviens avec les avocats des parties qu'il ne s'agit pas d'une affaire soulevant des questions à certifier en application de l'article 74 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés.
JUGEMENT
[29]
La demande de contrôle judiciaire déposée à l'égard de la décision rendue le 27 février 2012 par la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié du Canada est rejetée.
[End of document]