[1] MacKay, J.
: By this application for judicial review the applicant seeks an order to quash the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division ("the tribunal"), dated May 18, 1993, that he is not a Convention refugee within the definition included in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
and an order that the applicant's claim be reconsidered by a newly constituted panel.
[2]
The applicant is a male citizen of China, a sailor, who left his ship in May 1991 in Vancouver, then travelled to Toronto where a week or so later he claimed to be Convention refugee on the basis of his fear of persecution by reason of his political opinion.
[3]
The tribunal's decision specifically accepts the applicant's testimony as trustworthy. An outline of his story is that while he was a student in 1986 he participated in student pro-democracy demonstrations for which he received a warning from his school authorities and a disciplinary punishment from the Communist Youth Group. His hopes of obtaining a teaching position on graduation in 1988 were not realized, he believes because his record included note of the earlier disciplinary punishment. In that year he began work as a sailor, a radio operator on ships. Returning to port in Guangzhou in January 1989, he visited his family in Fujian and later, in April, with colleagues and students he wrote pro-democracy slogans supporting the movement then underway in Beijing. Slogans were posted at the local university and some were discovered in the room the applicant shared with two colleagues. They were reprimanded by the manager, the applicant was required by the leader of his work unit to write a self criticism for his role in slogan writing and his membership in the Communist Youth Group was revoked. In May 1989 he returned to sea as a radio operator. While his vessel was in Australia from late May to late June he was invited by some students to go to Sydney to participate in a demonstration. Though he did not go he was accused by a party secretary of collaborating with students and of attacking the Communist party, but he continued his work aboard ship. When he returned to port in Guangzhou in March 1990 he was sent on a program of self criticism and political study for two weeks. He visited his family in June and July but otherwise remained in Guangzhou until December 1990 when he shipped out again as a ship's radio operator.
[4]
When his ship left Japan in April 1991 it was common knowledge that two of the applicant's colleagues, apparently earlier engaged in the 1989 slogan writing venture, had defected, leaving their ships when in foreign ports. On the applicant's own ship, conditions changed. The captain collected all the seamen's books and was said to have retained them (though with no explanation the claimant's own seaman's book subsequently came into the possession of Immigration Canada), and shore leave in foreign ports was prohibited. These events and the applicant's belief that during the Gulf War authorities in China had moved to punish those earlier engaged in pro-democracy activities, led him to become fearful that he would be persecuted for his political beliefs. Interestingly enough, he had not earlier considered the disciplinary measures he encountered as a result of his activities to be persecution. Because of his new fear of persecution when his ship was in Vancouver in May 1991 he jumped ship and remained in Canada. That resulted in a delay of some three days in departure of his ship, until a replacement radio operator reported for service, a result that might well lead to particular discipline or punishment if he were to return to China.
[5]
In its decision the tribunal reviewed the evidence adduced by the applicant then stated "... it appears that the claimant has received from the respective authorities whatever punishment was due for his participation in the pro-democracy movement". It noted that he said that "prior to April 1991 he had no fear or persecution in China", and it then stated the issue as "whether the claimant has a well-founded fear of persecution because he jumped ship in Vancouver", and later added a subsequent issue "whether the claimant may be liable to excessive punishment, which may amount to persecution, because of his previous pro-democracy participation". It reached a negative conclusion in relation to both issues it identified and the tribunal concluded that it was "not persuaded that there is a reasonable possibility that the [applicant] would be persecuted by reason of his political opinion if he was to return to China".
[6]
That decision is said to be in error in that the tribunal did not properly identify the principal issue before it, i.e., whether the claimant had a well founded fear of persecution for reasons of his political opinion. This issue was not, as the tribunal identified it, whether he had a well-founded fear of persecution for jumping ship in Vancouver. Further, on the basis of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), it is urged that the decision misstated the test for Convention refugee status in concluding it was not persuaded that there is a reasonable possibility the applicant would be persecuted by reason of his political opinion if he were to return to China. With these submissions I agree, and I note that the respondent conceded in written submissions and at the hearing that the tribunal misstated the test for a Convention refugee.
[7]
The respondent did urge, however, that despite that error the conclusions of the tribunal were reasonable on the basis of the evidence before it and that the decision as a whole was supportable in light of established jurisprudence. The evidence that could support the conclusions of the tribunal was reviewed. For the applicant, it was urged that the decision essentially ignored the basis of the applicant's claim by not assessing the grounds stated for his fear of persecution in April/May 1991 in light of his previous experience in pro-democracy activities and the events resulting from those. It did so by discounting his previous activities, contrary to the principle established by
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 781 (F.C.A.) and then relating his fear of persecution to results of his jumping ship in Vancouver without reference to his stated reasons for so doing, the grounds of his fear of persecution. I am persuaded that the tribunal did err by not assessing the very basis claimed by the applicant as the grounds of his fear of persecution. I am further persuaded that, while the evidence before the tribunal may be said to support the conclusion it reached, such an assessment is not for this court which, on an application for judicial review, aside from procedural issues, must be concerned with the decision rendered by the tribunal and the reasons expressed for its conclusion.
[8]
Thus, in my opinion, the tribunal erred in law by misstating the test for a Convention refugee, by identifying incorrectly the principal issue to be addressed, and by neglecting to assess the bases of the applicant's claim to fear persecution on political grounds. For these reasons, an order goes allowing the application, setting aside the impugned decision and referring the matter back to the Convention Refugee Determination Division for reconsideration by a newly constituted panel.
[9]
At the conclusion of the hearing counsel for the parties each indicated that no general question for certification and consideration by the Court of Appeal was raised by this application. No question is certified.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jean Merlini/saf
[End of document]