[1]
Strayer, J.
: Two motions were argued before me in this matter: the defendants' motion under rule 440(1) for a dismissal of the action for want of prosecution; and the plaintiff's motion under rule 491(1) for a pretrial conference. Obviously the orders sought are mutually exclusive.
[2]
This action was commenced in the Exchequer Court on December 4, 1969. In it the plaintiff alleges infringement of its patent number 714,454 with respect to a snowmobile suspension mechanism. The patent was issued on July 27, 1965 and expired on July 27, 1982, some nine years ago. In their defence the defendants denied infringement and attacked the validity of the plaintiff's patent, on the basis, inter alia, that the alleged invention described in the patent was in public use or on sale in Canada more than two years prior to the filing of the application for the patent, such application having been filed on September 19, 1963. The gist of the defendants' case in this respect, as I understand it, is that the suspension system in question had been developed by Bombardier in the 1950's and early 1960's, during part of which time the principal shareholder of the plaintiff was employed by Bombardier. It is alleged that the suspension system in question was publicly used and tested prior to September 19, 1961, a date two years prior to the application for the patent. By virtue of the
Patent Act
as it then provided (see e.g., R.S.C. 1970, c. P-4, para. 28(1)(c)) such public use if established would preclude the granting of a valid patent.
[3]
The pleadings were in my view closed on March 1, 1971, when the plaintiff filed a reply to the defendants' statement of defence as well as a defence to their counterclaim. Further amended pleadings and amended particulars of objection to the patent were filed through the 1970's, the last such amendment by the defendants being filed on September 27, 1979. The only subsequent pleading was a response to the amended statement of defence and counterclaim which was filed by the plaintiff on January 12, 1990. Extensive examinations for discovery took place through the 1970's and early 1980's. It appears that I issued the last order in respect of completion of discovery answers on June 23, 1986 and that the defendants completed substantial compliance with my order in that respect on November 26, 1986. There were some discussions between counsel during 1987 on the possibility of abbreviating the trial. While counsel for the plaintiff pressed, and continues to press, for a greatly simplified trial in which there would be four questions addressed and most of the evidence would be documentary or that of experts, the defendants have not been prepared to agree to such a process. The defendants take the position that they will require substantial oral evidence from witnesses of fact with respect to the events of the late 1950's and early 1960's in order to show, as they allege, that the suspension system in question had been developed and used publicly by the defendants prior to September 19, 1961.
[4]
After it had become apparent that there would not be agreement on an abbreviated trial, counsel for the plaintiff wrote to counsel for the defendants on April 13, 1988 requesting a list of the documents that the defendants intended to use at the trial and requesting the defendants to join in a joint application for a trial date. Accordingly on May 2, 1988 counsel for the defendants sent a draft joint application for a trial date. To this date the plaintiff has not responded to that proposed joint application. The only formal step taken in the proceedings since that time was the filing of the plaintiff's response to the defendants' amended statement of defence which response was dated January 12, 1990 and filed on May 2, 1990, 13 months before the defendants filed their present motion for dismissal.
[5]
Rule 440 provides:
"440(1) If the defendant does not, within three months after the close of pleadings, receive notice of trial or have knowledge of an application for an order fixing the date for trial, he may, before notice of trial, or of an application for an order fixing the date for trial, apply to the court to dismiss the action for want of prosecution; and on the hearing of such application, the court may order the action to be dismissed accordingly, or make such other order on such terms as seem just.
"440(2) No application may be made under this rule unless the applicant is of the view that the plaintiff is not prosecuting the action with due dispatch and, save in exceptional circumstances, unless, at least two weeks before service of the notice of motion, the applicant has served notice in writing on the plaintiff that, unless the plaintiff takes the necessary steps to bring the action on for trial, such an application will be made."
[6]
While the defendants clearly meet the conditions of rule 440(1) for bringing an application to dismiss an action for want of prosecution, they have not given two weeks notice to the plaintiff of their intention to make such an application as is required by rule 440(2). However that rule allows the court to relieve an applicant of such a requirement "in exceptional circumstances". I believe that exceptional circumstances exist here. The extraordinary delays by the plaintiff in the prosecution of this action would of itself be such a circumstance (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 272 (F.C.T.D.)). Also, I assume that one of the reasons for the requirement in rule 440(2) of a warning notice is to give the plaintiff an opportunity to take some further step in the action. In the present case, the plaintiff would have been precluded by rule 331A from taking such a step without itself giving one month's notice to the defendants, because there had been no "proceeding" in the action for over one year. The last formal "proceeding" in this matter appears to have been the filing of the plaintiff's response to the amended statement of defence on May 2, 1990, more than one year prior to the defendants' application under rule 440(1) filed on June 3, 1991. I therefore find that there were exceptional circumstances justifying the bringing of this motion without prior notice.
[7]
The jurisprudence is well established that, in an application under rule 440(1) to dismiss an action for want of prosecution, there are three criteria which the court should apply: it should determine whether there has been an inordinate delay, whether that delay was inexcusable, and whether the defendants are likely to be seriously prejudiced by the delay (see e.g.,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 78 (F.C.T.D.), and cases referred to therein).
[8]
I am satisfied there has been an inordinate delay here by the plaintiff. It is clear that months and sometimes years have elapsed without the plaintiff having taken any steps to bring the matter to trial. While it appears that both sides proceeded in a rather desultory fashion up to 1982, the defendants had by that time completed examination for discovery of the plaintiff, and had filed all their amended pleadings and particulars of objection to the patent. The plaintiff did not complete discovery of the defendants until June, 1984. Certain undertakings were given by the defendants during discovery which they did not fulfill, taking the position that they were not undertakings, but the plaintiff did not seek an order for completion until March, 1986. The defendants then complied before the end of 1986 with my order in this respect. There are inexplicable delays since that time. It was clear to the plaintiff by the end of 1987 that there would be no simplified and abbreviated trial. Yet after counsel for the defendants sent to counsel for the plaintiff, on May 2, 1988, a draft of a joint application for a trial date, there was no response from the plaintiff - notwithstanding that over eighteen years had elapsed since commencement of the action and over twenty-seven years had elapsed since some of the key events.
[9]
The plaintiff has not demonstrated to my satisfaction that in total, nor in particular during the period after May, 1988, the delays involved were excusable. It appears that the plaintiff has retained three different counsel in this case over the years. While that may explain some of the delays and the problems encountered by present counsel, it in no way excuses the plaintiff from responsibility. The onus is on the plaintiff to demonstrate that the delay was excusable (See e.g.,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  here.
[10]
I am also satisfied that the defendants will be seriously prejudiced by this delay. The defendants have demonstrated to my satisfaction that for them to have a reasonable opportunity to make out their defence they will have to prove events taking place prior to September, 1961. They have provided evidence on this motion which satisfies me that there is only limited documentary evidence covering the period in question and that they will have to rely to a large extent on viva voce evidence of fact-witnesses. Recent efforts by the defendants have indicated that among some fifty witnesses their counsel had interviewed up to 1979 in preparation of their case, four are now dead and some nineteen cannot be located and yet another will be unable to testify for health reasons. The main contention of the plaintiff in respect of this problem is that the defendants are making their case unnecessarily complicated and that they should rely on alternative devices such as an agreement narrowing the issues to the four questions identified by the plaintiff, proof primarily by documents, and the use of expert witnesses. The defendants do not accept this as a reasonable means of proceeding and in my view the plaintiff cannot force the defendants to conduct their case in a way convenient to the plaintiff: the defendants are entitled to attempt to make every reasonable defence and the court cannot require them to do otherwise.
[11]
I therefore conclude that this action must be dismissed for want of prosecution. I conclude that the defendants should not be entitled to their full costs, however. It appears to me that, had the defendants really wished to have this action disposed of more quickly, they could have taken steps ten or more years ago to try to force it on for trial. The delay has worked to their advantage. While they had no obligation to take such steps, their failure to take them has greatly strengthened their present ability to demonstrate injustice to themselves if the case proceeds. They will therefore be entitled to one-half of their normal costs throughout, subject to any contrary specific directions given by the court in any previous interlocutory proceeding.
[12]
The application of the plaintiff for the fixing of a pretrial conference must therefore be dismissed. No costs will be awarded in respect to that motion.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]