 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Gjergj Celaj, Alma Celaj, John Celaj and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 807)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Zinn, J.
June 25, 2012.
Counsel:
D. Clifford Luyt, for the applicants;
Christopher Ezrin, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
D. Clifford Luyt, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Zinn, J.
: The applicants are a family of four. Gjergj Celaj and his wife Alma Celaj are citizens of Albania. Their children, John and Peter, are citizens of the United States by birth. Their claims for protection pursuant to sections 96 and 97(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 were rejected by the Immigration and Refugee Board.
Background
[2]
The adult applicants left Albania and entered the United States in 2002. The following year they made asylum applications claiming that they feared persecution in Albania because the principal applicant was formerly a police officer and they feared harm at the hands of criminals whom he had arrested but were subsequently released. They also claimed to fear the Socialist Party, as the principal applicant had worked for the rival Democratic Party. In 2004, their claims were denied and they were unsuccessful in appeals to the Board of Immigration Appeals and the United States Court of Appeals, Third Circuit by January of 2007. Both of the adult applicants' sons were born while they were in the US.
[3]
The applicants entered Canada in January 2008 and filed refugee claims on a different basis. They alleged that in October of 2006, the principal applicant's brother, Pjeter Celaj, shot and killed a neighbour, Prec Melaj, in self-defence because of a long-standing land dispute. The Melaj family immediately declared a blood feud against the Celaj family thus forcing male members of the Celaj family into self-confinement. The Celaj family's attempts to reconcile the blood feud and to seek police protection were unsuccessful.
[4]
The Board held that the sons' claims must fail as there was no evidence that they would be persecuted in the US. With respect to the parents' claims the Board found that the determinative issues were credibility and, in the alternative, state protection. The Board found that the principal applicant was not credible and, alternatively, that there was state protection available in Albania. Those two findings give rise to the two issues raised by the applicants who seek to set aside the Board's decision.
Credibility
[5]
The applicants submit that none of the five reasons the Board identified for finding that the principal applicant lacked credibility justifies the conclusion reached, either individually or cumulatively.
Failure to Tell American Authorities About the Alleged Blood Feud
[6]
The applicants remained illegally in the US after the court dismissed their appeal. The principal applicant testified that in early 2007 immigration enforcement officials surrounded his home looking for him, although he was not present at the time. Despite this, the principal applicant did not seek to bring his blood feud fears to the attention of the US authorities. He explained that the US authorities do not take blood feuds into consideration, but the Board rejected this explanation. The Board cited evidence indicating that the Chair of the Committee of Nationwide Reconciliation, Mr. Gjin Marku, told the European Parliament that the US has indeed provided asylum to those threatened by blood feuds. The Board noted that although it had other serious credibility concerns with the evidence of Mr. Marku, it saw no reason for Mr. Marku to mislead European legislators on this particular point. The Board found that the principal applicant's failure to tell US authorities about his blood feud fears, even as they sought to deport him, belies his claim to be afraid for his life in Albania.
[7]
The applicants submit that there are multiple problems with this finding. First, they point out that they made their asylum claim in the US in 2002, four years before the blood feud was declared and therefore could not have included it in their claim in the US. I note, however, that there is nothing in the Board's reasons that suggests that the Board was unaware of that fact or was perversely indicating that they ought to have raised as a ground of asylum an event that had not yet occurred.
[8]
Second, it is submitted that the Board did not address what application or claim it expected the applicants to make, based on the blood feud, in order to prevent their removal from the US. They say that this was necessary if the Board wanted to draw an adverse inference with respect to credibility on this basis. I disagree. The Board was making a very simple observation. When a person is about to be removed to a country where his life is at risk, one reasonably expects, regardless of any possible processes that may be available, that the deportee will tell the removing authorities that they are removing him to a place of danger. A failure to do so may reasonably warrant an inference that the deportee has no fear.
[9]
Third, it is submitted that even if Mr. Marku is correct in asserting that US authorities had granted protection to potential blood feud victims, the legal basis for doing so remains unexplained because the US does not have an expanded concept of "person in need of protection" as in Canada. The issue is not, as the applicants suggest, whether the US could grant protection but rather whether the principal applicant could be expected to seek protection. The Board was not suggesting that the principal applicant could bring an application for protection in the US, rather it was making the quite straight forward observation that people do not typically remain silent when they are about to be placed in a situation where their life is at risk.
[10]
For the same reasons, I reject the final submission that there is no basis upon which the Board could conclude that the principal applicant's failure to mention the blood feud to US immigration authorities in 2007 speaks negatively to the genuineness of his fear upon return to Albania, because his US lawyer had advised him that US immigration authorities did not consider blood feuds to be grounds for asylum.
Incident in 1999 Not Included in PIF
[11]
The principal applicant testified that in 1999 his brother attempted to build a house on the land claimed by the Melaj family. They threatened to kill the brother and he did not build the house at that location. However, the Board noted that the principal applicant could not explain why this important incident is not described in his PIF, other than to say that he wrote about things that were more problematic. The Board found that this was not a reasonable explanation as these are key elements of the story and from this drew a negative credibility inference.
[12]
The applicants' claim is rooted in an alleged blood feud, the events leading up to the blood feud declaration and most particularly the shooting committed by the principal applicant's brother in 2006 which directly precipitated the declaration. These seem to be the key events and these were the focus of the applicant's PIF. Nonetheless, the principal applicant did mention other, arguably peripheral events in his PIF related to the land dispute and blood feud, including an allegation that the cause of the shooting had its origins in a land dispute that started in the early 1990s when the government distributed lands confiscated by the communists, that former owners refused to obey the law and claimed ownership to the land, and that "this was the case with the lands where our family back home has built the house on."
[13]
The applicants felt that these events were significant enough to mention in the PIF. The incident where the principal applicant's brother's life was threatened if he built on the disputed land, in my assessment, is more directly related and significant than these peripheral events which were mentioned. For that reason, I am unable to conclude that the Board's assessment that it was a key event is unreasonable; a negative inference on credibility was warranted given the failure to mention it.
Inconsistent Evidence on Disputed Land
[14]
The principal applicant drew a sketch of the property involved for the Board, described the disputed land, and also provided a land certification document from Albania. However, the Board found that his evidence was inconsistent with the certification document with respect to the location of streets and/or families that bordered his family's property. According to the official document, the family's property is bounded in the north by the Gjeka family. However, according to the applicant's testimony and sketch, the north side of the property is bounded by a street with the Melaj family on the other side of the street. The applicant could not explain why the Melaj family's name does not appear on the official document, although he guessed that different names were used in older registration methods. He insisted that the Melaj family and the Gjeka family are the same.
[15]
The Board was not persuaded by the principal applicant's explanation that the Melaj family was listed under its former name from the old registry. The Board noted that the land certification document, which was dated September 12, 2008, refers to Mr. Fran Zef Celaj, the principal applicant's father's current name, as the owner of the disputed property. He too had a former family name which presumably would have appeared if the names were taken from the old registry.
[16]
The Board's conclusion was reasonable and the issue goes to the root of the applicants' allegations. Specifically, based on the record, the Board was entitled to draw an adverse credibility inference from the fact that the principal applicant's evidence as to the names and location of neighbours bordering the disputed property was not consistent with the land certification document.
Vague and Inconsistent Evidence about Police Interaction
[17]
In his PIF, the principal applicant claims that immediately after the early October 2006 murder, his family asked the police for protection but the police showed no interest. He further alleges that in late December of that year, police forces were again asked to provide protection but no protection was offered.
[18]
At his hearing, the principal applicant testified that his brother called the local police on the day of the murder to ask for protection. The applicant gave vague testimony about his family "perhaps" asking at other times for protection. When pressed, he testified that his sister went to the local police station a few days after the incident. He does not know when or if police were next contacted, nor does he know whether anyone from his family went to higher police officials or to the authorities. The Board found that not only was the applicant's oral testimony vague on the matter of police protection but it was not consistent with the information in his PIF narrative.
[19]
The Board found that the applicants' documents did not assist in this respect. For example, a letter from the police makes no mention of approaches by the family or requests for assistance. While the principal applicant explained that the police do not want to acknowledge the existence of a blood feud, the Board stated that this does not explain the omission, particularly since the letter refers to self-confinement, which is an important element of blood feuds. The Board referred to numerous other letters submitted by the applicants that addressed the issue of blood feuds in some way but noted that none of them made reference to the family's alleged efforts to obtain state protection. As such, the Board found that the applicants' family did not approach the police for protection and the applicants' vague and inconsistent evidence on this issue further damages their credibility.
[20]
The applicants submit that the Board failed to recognize that the principal applicant himself was not in Albania during these events and therefore could not be expected to have detailed knowledge of when or how many times the police were contacted for help. Contrary to the Board's reasons, the principal applicant did not say that his family had "perhaps" asked the police for help again; he was certain they had, but did not know the details of how often or when the police were contacted. Further, with respect to the Board supporting its conclusion on this issue by referring to the fact that the applicant's documents did not corroborate that such approaches had been made, the applicants submit that the Board erroneously focused on what the documents did not say, rather than what they did say which, it is submitted, is a reviewable error:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The purpose of the documents was primarily to corroborate the existence of the blood feud and the dangers faced by the Celaj family as a result-not to show interaction with the police.
[21]
My review of the transcript of the hearing confirms that the principal applicant's evidence with respect to the efforts of his family to seek police protection was vague at times. There were minor inconsistencies in his evidence and PIF; however, these alone would have been unlikely to raise any credibility concerns. I agree with the applicants that the oral testimony was clear that the family in Albania did seek police assistance.
[22]
However, the Board also looked at a letter from a lawyer retained by the applicants to assist them in obtaining documents and noted that it makes no reference to any attempts to seek protection. The Board notes that "the claimant could not explain this omission." In my view, this was both appropriate and telling. This is correspondence from someone whom the applicants had retained to assist them. They are presumed to know that the applicants would have to establish that state protection was not available. As no other document spoke to any efforts to seek protection and as the applicants were not in the country at the time, it is reasonable to expect, as the Board did, that reference to such efforts would be found in the lawyer's letter, if in fact any efforts were made. The Board's finding that on the balance of probabilities the applicants' family in Albania did not approach the police for protection is reasonable based on the evidence before it. If that finding stands, then the principal applicant's evidence to the contrary does indeed go to credibility.
Further Document Difficulties
[23]
At the initial sitting of his hearing, the principal applicant was asked why he had not provided documents, such as police or prosecutor reports and death certificates. At the next sitting, almost a year later, the principal applicant was able to provide such documents but these documents only raised further credibility issues.
[24]
A death certificate allegedly for the murdered Prec Melaj does not show a cause of death although the Board cited documentary evidence that indicates that a cause is almost always shown on such documents. The letter from a district prosecutor references the death but the principal applicant could not explain why there was no reference to the alleged blood feud. When asked why a letter from the Committee of Nationwide Reconciliation states that the conflict between the families began in 1999 when, according to the principal applicant, it began in the early 1990s, he only explained that the situation escalated in 1999 when his brother attempted to build a house on the disputed land. The Board found this explanation unsatisfactory.
[25]
I agree with the respondent that the Board was entitled to consider the conflicting documentary evidence provided and to draw an adverse inference based on it. In particular, the Board appropriately noted that a death certificate allegedly for the man shot by the principal applicant's brother does not show a cause of death even though documentary evidence from the Research Directorate indicates that "the primary cause of death was recorded in almost all cases."
Conclusion on Credibility Findings
[26]
While there were minor issues with the Board's findings, they are not sufficient cumulatively to overturn its conclusion that the principal applicant lacked credibility.
State Protection
[27]
In the alternative, the Board found that the applicants' claim should be rejected on the basis of their failure to rebut the presumption of state protection.
[28]
The applicants submit that the Board erred in its refusal to believe their evidence that his family sought police protection. However, as observed above, I find that the Board's decision in this respect was reasonable.
[29]
They also submitted that the Board erred in its finding that documentary evidence citing Mr. Marku and the Committee of Nationwide Reconciliation (CNR) was not credible and in its reliance on a supposed change of opinion by one of the experts cited in the documentary evidence. However, I note that ultimately the Board concluded that the objective evidence regarding state protection in Albania is mixed. More specifically, the Board acknowledged that:
[T] here is much evidence to suggest that those fearing blood feuds face serious problems, and that the protection provided by the state is far from perfect. However, there is also reliable evidence to indicate that the state has taken important steps to provide protection, and that those steps are having concrete positive results.
[30]
Finally, the applicants submit that the Board erred in failing to acknowledge evidence which contradicted its conclusions. In particular, they point to a paragraph of a document relied on by the Board, the "Alston Report" of 2010, which states at paragraph 26:
Finally, the Government could play a stronger role in outreach, especially in facilitating efforts to achieve family reconciliation, which thus far has been almost completely left to families themselves and civil society. A number of interlocutors informed me that they had approached the Government for assistance to end their self-isolation through reconciliation, but the State did little in response.
However, I note that the Alston Report also states that "blood feud killings will soon be largely a thing of the past." Neither was specifically referenced by the Board; however, as has often been said, the Board is entitled to weigh the evidence before it and it is not required to refer to every piece of evidence.
[31]
I find that the Board's decision was within "a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and the law" as a reasonable decision was described in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Neither party proposed a question for certification.
JUDGMENT
[32]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
this application is dismissed, and no question is certified.
.........................
Gjergj Celaj, Alma Celaj,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demandeurs forment une famille. Gjergj Celaj et son épouse, Alma Celaj, sont des citoyens de l'Albanie. Leurs enfants, John et Peter, sont des citoyens des États-Unis de naissance. Leurs demandes d'asile fondées sur l'article 96 et le paragraphe 97(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27, ont été rejetées par la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié.
Le contexte
[2]
Les demandeurs adultes ont quitté l'Albanie et sont arrivés aux États-Unis en 2002. L'année suivante, ils ont demandé l'asile, affirmant qu'ils craignaient d'être persécutés en Albanie parce que le demandeur principal était un ancien policier et qu'ils craignaient d'être agressés par des criminels qu'il avait arrêtés et qui avaient ensuite été mis en liberté. Ils prétendaient également craindre le Parti socialiste, étant donné que le demandeur principal avait travaillé pour son rival, le Parti démocratique. En 2004, leurs demandes d'asile ont été rejetées et, en janvier 2007, leurs appels devant la Commission d'appel de l'immigration et la Cour d'appel des États-Unis pour le troisième circuit avaient été rejetés. Leurs deux fils sont nés pendant qu'ils étaient aux États-Unis.
[3]
Les demandeurs sont venus au Canada en janvier 2008 et ont présenté des demandes d'asile ayant un fondement différent. Ils alléguaient que, en octobre 2006, le frère du demandeur principal, Pjeter Celaj, avait, pour se défendre, tué par balle un voisin, Prec Melaj, à la suite d'une dispute de longue date au sujet d'un terrain. La famille Melaj avait immédiatement déclaré une vendetta contre la famille Celaj, forçant ainsi les hommes de cette famille à vivre reclus. La famille Celaj avait tenté en vain de mettre un terme à la vendetta et d'obtenir la protection de la police.
[4]
La Commission a statué que les demandes d'asile des fils devaient être rejetées car la preuve ne démontrait pas qu'ils seraient persécutés aux États-Unis. En ce qui concerne les demandes d'asile des parents, elle a conclu que les questions déterminantes étaient celle de la crédibilité et, subsidiairement, celle de la protection de l'État. La Commission a estimé que le demandeur principal n'était pas crédible et, subsidiairement, qu'il était possible d'obtenir la protection de l'État en Albanie. Ces deux conclusions soulèvent les deux questions formulées par les demandeurs, lesquels cherchent à faire annuler la décision de la Commission.
La crédibilité
[5]
Les demandeurs soutiennent qu'aucune des cinq raisons données par la Commission pour conclure au manque de crédibilité du demandeur principal ne justifie la conclusion à laquelle elle est parvenue, ni séparément ni cumulativement.
Le défaut de parler de la présumée vendetta aux autorités américaines
[6]
Les demandeurs sont demeurés illégalement aux États-Unis après le rejet de leur appel. Le demandeur principal a indiqué dans son témoignage que, au début de 2007, des agents d'exécution en matière d'immigration avaient encerclé sa résidence, car ils étaient à sa recherche, mais il n'était pas présent à ce moment-là. Malgré cela, il n'a pas cherché à mentionner sa crainte liée à la vendetta aux autorités américaines. Il a expliqué que les autorités américaines ne tiennent pas compte des vendettas, mais la Commission a rejeté cette explication. Elle a fait référence à la preuve indiquant que le président du Comité de réconciliation nationale, M. Gjin Marku, avait déclaré au Parlement européen que les États-Unis avaient bien accordé l'asile aux personnes exposées à une menace en raison d'une vendetta. La Commission a aussi mentionné que, même si elle avait d'autres sérieuses réserves quant à la crédibilité de la preuve de M. Marku, elle ne voyait aucune raison pour laquelle ce dernier aurait trompé les législateurs européens sur ce point précis. La Commission a conclu que le fait que le demandeur n'avait pas mentionné aux autorités américaines sa crainte liée à la vendetta, même si celles-ci voulaient le renvoyer, remettait en question le fait qu'il craignait pour sa vie en Albanie.
[7]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que cette conclusion pose de nombreux problèmes. Premièrement, ils font valoir qu'ils ont présenté leur demande d'asile aux États-Unis en 2002, soit quatre ans avant que la vendetta soit déclarée, de sorte qu'ils ne pouvaient pas en faire mention dans cette demande. Je souligne cependant que rien dans les motifs de la Commission ne laisse croire que celle-ci ignorait ce fait ou qu'elle a indiqué de manière abusive que les demandeurs auraient dû invoquer, au soutien de leur demande d'asile, un fait qui n'était pas encore survenu.
[8]
Deuxièmement, les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission n'a pas indiqué quelle demande ou quel argument elle s'attendait à ce qu'ils présentent à cause de la vendetta afin d'éviter leur renvoi des États-Unis. Ils affirment qu'il fallait que la Commission le fasse pour pouvoir tirer une conclusion défavorable relativement à la crédibilité pour cette raison. Je ne suis pas de cet avis. La Commission faisait une observation très simple. Lorsqu'une personne est sur le point d'être renvoyée vers un pays où sa vie est en danger, on s'attend raisonnablement, peu importe les recours à sa disposition, à ce qu'elle le dise aux autorités. Si elle ne le fait pas, on peut raisonnablement conclure qu'elle n'a aucune crainte.
[9]
Troisièmement, on soutient que, même si M. Marku a raison lorsqu'il affirme que les autorités américaines ont déjà accordé une protection à des victimes potentielles de vendetta, la raison pour laquelle ces autorités ont agi ainsi demeure inexpliquée parce que la notion élargie de « personne à protéger » qui existe au Canada n'existe pas aux États-Unis. Or, contrairement à ce que les demandeurs laissent entendre, la question n'est pas de savoir si les États-Unis pouvaient accorder une protection, mais plutôt si l'on pouvait s'attendre à ce que le demandeur principal demande une protection. La Commission n'a pas laissé entendre que le demandeur principal pouvait présenter une demande de protection aux États-Unis. Elle a plutôt dit simplement et clairement que, en règle générale, les gens ne restent pas silencieux lorsqu'ils sont sur le point de se trouver dans une situation où leur vie est en danger.
[10]
Pour les mêmes raisons, je rejette la dernière prétention selon laquelle la Commission n'avait aucune raison de conclure que le fait que le demandeur principal n'avait pas mentionné la vendetta aux autorités américaines de l'immigration en 2007 jette un doute sur l'authenticité de sa crainte de retourner en Albanie, parce que son avocat américain lui avait dit que les autorités américaines de l'immigration ne considéraient pas qu'une vendetta justifiait l'octroi de l'asile.
L'omission d'un incident survenu en 1999 dans le FRP
[11]
Le demandeur principal a indiqué que, en 1999, son frère a tenté de construire une maison sur le terrain revendiqué par la famille Melaj. Il a reçu des menaces de mort de la part de celle-ci et il n'a pas construit la maison à cet endroit. La Commission a toutefois fait remarquer que le demandeur principal ne pouvait pas expliquer pourquoi cet incident important n'était pas décrit dans son FRP, autrement qu'en disant qu'il avait parlé de choses plus problématiques. La Commission a jugé que cette explication n'était pas raisonnable car il s'agit d'éléments clés du récit, et elle a tiré une conclusion défavorable concernant la crédibilité en conséquence.
[12]
La demande d'asile des demandeurs est fondée sur une présumée vendetta, sur les faits ayant mené à la déclaration de celle-ci et, plus particulièrement, sur les coups de feu tirés par le frère du demandeur principal en 2006 desquels découle directement la déclaration. Ces faits semblent être les plus importants et le demandeur a mis l'accent sur eux dans son FRP. Il a toutefois mentionné d'autres faits dans son FRP concernant la dispute au sujet du terrain et de la vendetta qui sont vraisemblablement moins importants; il a notamment allégué que les coups de feu avaient été tirés à cause d'une dispute au sujet d'un terrain qui avait commencé au début des années 1990, lorsque le gouvernement octroyait des terres qui avaient été confisquées par les communistes, que les anciens propriétaires refusaient de se conformer à la loi et revendiquaient le terrain et que [traduction] « c'était le cas des terrains sur lesquels notre famille a construit la maison en Albanie ».
[13]
Les demandeurs estimaient que ces faits étaient suffisamment importants pour être mentionnés dans le FRP. Or, à mon avis, l'incident au cours duquel la vie du frère du demandeur principal a été menacée s'il construisait une maison sur le terrain faisant l'objet de la dispute est plus pertinent et plus important que les faits d'importance secondaire qui ont été mentionnés. En conséquence, je ne puis conclure que la Commission a agi de manière déraisonnable en considérant qu'il s'agissait d'un fait important; l'omission de ce fait justifiait une conclusion défavorable au regard de la crédibilité.
La preuve contradictoire relative au terrain faisant l'objet de la dispute
[14]
Le demandeur principal a fait un croquis de la propriété en question à l'intention de la Commission, a décrit le terrain faisant l'objet de la dispute et a également fourni un titre foncier de l'Albanie. La Commission a toutefois estimé que sa preuve n'était pas compatible avec le titre foncier pour ce qui est l'emplacement des rues bordant la propriété de sa famille ou des familles habitant autour de cette propriété. Selon le document officiel, la propriété de la famille est bordée au nord par la terre de la famille Gjeka. Selon le dessin et le témoignage du demandeur toutefois, le côté nord de la propriété est bordé par une rue de l'autre côté de laquelle habite la famille Melaj. Le demandeur ne pouvait pas expliquer pourquoi le nom de la famille Melaj ne figurait pas sur le document officiel, mais il a supposé que des noms différents étaient utilisés lorsque les anciennes méthodes d'enregistrement étaient en vigueur. Il a insisté sur le fait que la famille Melaj et la famille Gjeka sont une seule et même famille.
[15]
L'explication du demandeur principal selon laquelle la famille Melaj était inscrite sous son ancien nom tiré de l'ancien registre n'a pas convaincu la Commission. Celle-ci a fait remarquer que le titre foncier, qui était daté du 12 septembre 2008, indiquait que M. Fran Zef Celaj, le nom habituel du père du demandeur principal, était le propriétaire du terrain en litige. Lui aussi avait un ancien nom qui aurait probablement été inscrit si les noms avaient été pris dans l'ancien registre.
[16]
La conclusion de la Commission était raisonnable et la question concerne le fondement des allégations des demandeurs. Plus particulièrement, la Commission pouvait, à la lumière du dossier, tirer une conclusion défavorable au regard de la crédibilité du fait que la preuve du demandeur principal concernant les noms des voisins et l'emplacement des terres bordant la propriété faisant l'objet de la dispute ne concordait pas avec le titre foncier.
La preuve vague et incohérente concernant les rapports avec la police
[17]
Dans son FRP, le demandeur principal indique que, immédiatement après le meurtre commis au début d'octobre 2006, sa famille a demandé la protection de la police, mais que celle-ci n'a rien fait. Il allègue en outre que, à la fin du mois de décembre de la même année, les forces policières ont de nouveau été priées d'assurer une protection, mais qu'aucune protection n'a été offerte.
[18]
À l'audience, le demandeur principal a déclaré que son frère avait téléphoné au poste de police local le jour du meurtre afin de demander une protection. Le témoignage du demandeur au sujet du fait que sa famille avait « peut-être » demandé la protection de la police à un autre moment était vague. Questionné à ce sujet, le demandeur a affirmé que sa sœur s'était rendue au poste de police local quelques jours après l'incident. Il ne sait pas si la police a été jointe par la suite ni à quel moment ces mesures auraient été prises, et il ignore également si un membre de sa famille s'est adressé aux autorités supérieures de la police ou à d'autres autorités. La Commission a estimé que non seulement le témoignage du demandeur concernant la protection de la police était vague, mais il ne concordait pas avec l'information contenue dans l'exposé circonstancié de son FRP.
[19]
La Commission était d'avis que les documents des demandeurs n'étaient d'aucune aide à cet égard. Par exemple, une lettre de la police ne parle pas de démarches faites par la famille ou de demandes d'aide. Bien que le demandeur principal ait expliqué que la police ne voulait pas reconnaître l'existence d'une vendetta, la Commission a indiqué que cela n'expliquait pas l'omission, étant donné en particulier qu'il est question de réclusion dans la lettre - la réclusion est un élément important des vendettas. La Commission a fait référence à de nombreuses autres lettres produites par les demandeurs, qui traitaient de la question des vendettas de différentes façons, mais elle a noté qu'aucune de ces lettres ne faisait référence aux efforts que la famille aurait déployés pour obtenir la protection de l'État. En conséquence, la Commission a conclu que la famille des demandeurs ne s'était pas adressée à la police pour obtenir une protection et que la preuve vague et incohérente des demandeurs sur cette question minait davantage leur crédibilité.
[20]
Les demandeurs font valoir que la Commission n'a pas reconnu que le demandeur principal ne se trouvait pas en Albanie lors de ces faits et qu'elle ne pouvait donc pas s'attendre à ce qu'il sache en détail quand la police avait été contactée pour de l'aide ou combien de fois elle l'avait été. Contrairement à ce que la Commission a écrit dans ses motifs, le demandeur principal n'a pas dit que sa famille avait« peut-être » à nouveau demandé l'aide de la police; il était certain qu'elle l'avait fait, mais il ne savait pas exactement combien de fois ou quand la police avait été contactée. En outre, en ce qui concerne le fait que la Commission a appuyé sa conclusion sur cette question en mentionnant que les documents du demandeur ne confirmaient pas que de telles démarches avaient été faites, les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission a, à tort, mis l'accent sur ce que les documents n'indiquaient pas, et non sur ce qu'ils indiquaient, ce qui constitue une erreur susceptible de contrôle selon eux:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Les documents avaient principalement pour but de confirmer l'existence de la vendetta et les dangers auxquels la famille Celaj était exposée en conséquence, non de démontrer les rapports avec la police.
[21]
Ma lecture de la transcription de l'audience confirme que la preuve du demandeur principal concernant les efforts déployés par sa famille pour obtenir la protection de la police était vague à certains égards. Il y avait des incohérences mineures dans sa preuve et dans son FRP; ces seules incohérences n'auraient probablement pas soulevé de doutes quant à sa crédibilité. Je suis d'accord avec les demandeurs lorsqu'ils disent qu'il ressortait clairement du témoignage que la famille en Albanie avait demandé l'aide de la police.
[22]
Cependant, la Commission a aussi examiné une lettre rédigée par un avocat retenu par les demandeurs pour les aider à obtenir des documents. Elle a constaté que cette lettre ne fait état d'aucune démarche entreprise dans le but d'obtenir une protection. Elle souligne que « [l] e demandeur d'asile n'a pas pu expliquer cette omission ». À mon avis, cette remarque était appropriée et révélatrice. La lettre émane d'une personne dont les demandeurs ont retenu les services pour les aider. Ils sont présumés savoir qu'ils devront établir qu'ils ne pouvaient pas obtenir la protection de l'État. Comme aucun autre document ne fait état d'efforts déployés pour obtenir cette protection et que les demandeurs ne se trouvaient pas dans le pays à l'époque, il est raisonnable de s'attendre, comme la Commission l'a fait, à ce qu'il soit question de ces efforts dans la lettre de l'avocat - si de tels efforts ont été faits. Compte tenu de la preuve dont elle disposait, la Commission a raisonnablement conclu que, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, la famille des demandeurs en Albanie ne s'était pas adressée à la police pour obtenir une protection. Si cette conclusion est maintenue, la preuve contraire du demandeur principal touche en fait à la crédibilité.
Les autres problèmes concernant les documents
[23]
À la première séance de l'audience, on a demandé au demandeur principal pourquoi il n'avait pas produit de documents comme des rapports de police ou de poursuite et des certificats de décès. À la séance suivante, qui a eu lieu près d'un an plus tard, le demandeur principal a produit de tels documents, lesquels ont toutefois seulement suscité des doutes additionnels au sujet de la crédibilité.
[24]
Un document présenté comme le certificat de décès de Prec Melaj ne précise pas la cause du décès, alors que la Commission a cité des documents qui indiquaient qu'une cause est presque toujours indiquée dans les certificats de décès. La lettre d'un procureur de district fait état du décès, mais le demandeur principal ne pouvait pas expliquer pourquoi il n'y avait aucune mention de la présumée vendetta. À la question de savoir pourquoi une lettre du Comité de réconciliation nationale indique que le conflit entre les familles avait débuté en 1999 alors que, selon le demandeur principal, il avait commencé au début des années 1990, ce dernier a expliqué seulement que la situation s'était aggravée en 1999 lorsque son frère avait essayé de construire une maison sur le terrain faisant l'objet de la dispute. La Commission n'a pas jugé cette explication satisfaisante.
[25]
Je conviens avec le défendeur que la Commission pouvait tenir compte de la preuve documentaire contradictoire qui avait été produite et tirer une conclusion défavorable sur la foi de cette preuve. En particulier, la Commission a fait remarquer à juste titre que le certificat de décès présenté comme étant celui de l'homme tué par le frère du demandeur principal à l'aide d'une arme à feu ne précisait pas la cause du décès, même si la preuve documentaire émanant de la Direction des recherches indique que « la cause principale du décès [est] inscrite dans la plupart des cas ».
La conclusion globale concernant la crédibilité
[26]
Les conclusions de la Commission présentent des problèmes mineurs, mais ceux-ci ne sont pas suffisants lorsqu'ils sont considérés ensemble pour que la Cour annule la conclusion globale de la Commission selon laquelle le demandeur principal n'était pas crédible.
La protection de l'État
[27]
Subsidiairement, la Commission a conclu que la demande d'asile des demandeurs devait être rejetée parce qu'ils n'avaient pas réussi à réfuter la présomption relative à la protection de l'État.
[28]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission a commis une erreur en refusant d'ajouter foi à leur preuve selon laquelle la famille avait demandé la protection de la police. Toutefois, comme je l'ai mentionné précédemment, j'estime que la décision de la Commission à cet égard était raisonnable.
[29]
Les demandeurs soutiennent également que la Commission a commis une erreur en concluant que la preuve documentaire citant M. Marku et le Comité de réconciliation nationale n'était pas crédible et en s'appuyant sur un présumé changement d'opinion de l'un des experts cités dans cette preuve. Je constate cependant que la Commission a finalement conclu que la preuve objective relative à la protection de l'État en Albanie n'était pas uniforme. Elle a reconnu plus particulièrement ce qui suit:
Bon nombre d'éléments de preuve portent à croire que les personnes qui craignent les vendettas sont aux prises avec de graves problèmes et que la protection fournie par l'État est loin d'être parfaite. Toutefois, des éléments de preuve fiables indiquent également que l'État a déployé d'importants efforts pour assurer une protection et que ces efforts ont donné des résultats favorables et concrets.
[30]
Enfin, les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission a commis une erreur en ne disant rien des éléments de preuve qui contredisaient ses conclusions. Ils attirent l'attention de la Cour en particulier sur le paragraphe 26 d'un document sur lequel la Commission s'est appuyée, le rapport Alston de 2010, où il est écrit:
[traduction] Enfin, le gouvernement pourrait jouer un rôle plus important en matière de sensibilisation, en particulier en aidant les familles à se réconcilier, ce dont les familles elles-mêmes et la société civile se sont occupées presque seules jusqu'à maintenant. Un certain nombre d'interlocuteurs m'ont dit qu'ils avaient communiqué avec le gouvernement pour obtenir de l'aide dans le but de mettre fin à leur isolement volontaire au moyen de la réconciliation, mais l'État a déployé peu d'efforts à cet égard.
Je constate cependant que le rapport Alston indique aussi que [traduction] « les meurtres liés aux vendettas seront bientôt en grande partie chose du passé ». La Commission n'a pas fait référence à ces passages du rapport. Toutefois, comme on l'a souvent répété, la Commission peut soupeser la preuve qui lui est présentée et elle n'est pas tenue de faire référence à chaque élément de preuve.
[31]
J'estime que la décision de la Commission appartenait aux « issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit » et était donc raisonnable selon
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Aucune partie n'a proposé une question à des fins de certification.
JUGEMENT
[32]
LA COUR STATUE que
la présente demande est rejetée, et aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]