Relief Requested
[1]
Strayer, J.
: The applicant seeks certiorari to quash a decision made by an officer of the respondents and communicated to him in a letter of February 14, 1989, refusing his application for permanent residence in Canada. He also seeks mandamus requiring the respondents to consider and process his application for permanent residence in accordance with the law and to determine if it would be contrary to law to grant landing to him.
Background Facts
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of the People's Republic of China. He worked in Canada from 1983 to 1985 as a microbiology technologist at McMaster University. He then moved to the United States working at the University of Illinois under some form of temporary visa. By letter from his Toronto lawyers dated July 27, 1987, he applied to the Canadian Consulate General in New York for permanent residence in Canada as an independent immigrant, stating his intended occupation to be Medical Laboratory Technologist. He was interviewed at the Consulate on September 29, 1987, by Sara Trillo, an Immigration Programme Officer. During the course of the interview she assessed him, as required by s. 8(1)(a) of the
Immigration Regulations
, on the basis of the factors listed in Column I, Schedule I of the
Regulations
, awarding him 73 units. This was enough to satisfy the requirements under s. 9(1)(b)(i) for the issue of a visa for permanent residence. She says that she indicated to him he had passed his interview and it would then be necessary for him, his wife, and his daughter (the latter being in China) to pass a medical test and a security check.
[3]
Thereafter some 15 months elapsed in which very little progress was made. Medical clearances were obtained for the applicant and his wife and ultimately for their daughter in China, the latter being achieved only after great difficulty and with some special efforts by Ms. Trillo. He was informed by a letter dated July 12, 1988, that he and his wife had been "provisionally accepted as immigrants". The letter went on to say:
"If Canadian security and medical examination requirements are met, visas for permanent residence in Canada will be issued ..."
However, when he and his solicitor both enquired of Ms. Trillo in October, 1988, as to what was happening she advised them that there still remained the "background" or security clearance and that this would take "a few months". The applicant was becoming more anxious as his visa permitting him to work in the United States expired in September 1988. On two occasions in correspondence he offered to pay any "costs or fees" in order to expedite the matter. On or about December 2, 1988, he sent a Christmas card to Ms. Trillo with a note thanking her for her efforts. Enclosed in the Christmas card was the sum of (U.S.) $500. Ms. Trillo immediately brought this to the attention of her superior, Mr. R.A. Nauman, Program Manager, Social Affairs, in charge of immigration at the Consulate. The matter was then put in the hands of Howard M. Spunt, Consul (Immigration) at whose direction the applicant was asked to come to the Consulate for an interview on December 29, 1988.
[4]
Without going into all the factual disputes over this interview, it appears to me that Mr. Spunt did not either in the notification to Mr. Chen nor in the opening segment of the interview indicate that his primary concern was the apparent bribe which the applicant had offered to Ms. Trillo nor did he even indicate that he knew of the receipt of the money by Ms. Trillo. He reviewed Mr. Chen's application and reassessed it with results similar to those achieved by Ms. Trillo. In particular he awarded the applicant seven out of ten points, just as Ms. Trillo had done, under the category of "Personal Suitability", being Item 9 in Column I of Schedule I of the
Regulations
. He gradually got into the subject of the apparent bribe, asking the applicant if he had given any gifts to Ms. Trillo or if he had misplaced any funds recently. The applicant at first denied any such thing but eventually admitted that he had sent the money to Ms. Trillo. He explained that this was an oriental custom to give gifts during the holiday season to special friends. He said that he and his wife had much appreciated the efforts Ms. Trillo had made on their behalf. (Since that time he has also suggested that he had given the money so that if there were any special costs involved in expediting the matter, for example, through the use of a long distance telephone or telex, the money could be used for that purpose). Later in the interview he apologized for what he then recognized as his wrongful behaviour. The money was returned to him and he signed a receipt for it. At the end of the interview he was told by Mr. Spunt that his application would be reviewed in the light of this interview.
[5]
On January 26, 1989, Mr. Spunt wrote a memorandum to Mr. Nauman purportedly to seek the approval of Mr. Nauman, as Senior Immigration Officer, for the exercise under s. 11(3) of the
Immigration Regulations
of the special discretion of refusal to issue an immigrant visa to an applicant even though he has obtained the necessary units of assessment required by s. 9 of the
Regulations
. Such approval must be sought in writing in accordance with s. 11(3). Mr. Nauman endorsed this memo the same day with the words "I agree" and gave instructions for a suitable refusal letter to be drafted. Subsequently on February 14, 1989, the refusal letter was sent and it is the decision embodied in that letter which the applicant seeks to have quashed in the present proceedings. As I understand that letter, it involves a refusal of permanent residence for essentially two reasons: first, that the applicant had lied to an immigration officer contrary to s. 9(3) of the
Act
and that this meant that he had not complied with a requirement of the
Act
and was therefore inadmissible pursuant to s. 19(2)(d) of the
Act
; and second, that Mr. Spunt was exercising his discretion under s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
to refuse Mr. Chen's application even though the latter had been awarded the required number of units of assessment because, in the words of s. 11(3)
"... there are good reasons why the number of units of assessment awarded do not reflect the chances of the [applicant] ... of becoming successfully established in Canada ..."
[6]
It is worth noting in passing the potential for frustration and even desperation on the part of applicants for permanent residence arising out of a process such as this. Although the applicant was successfully interviewed and tentatively approved in accordance with the unit assessment on September 27, 1987, the necessary security clearance for him and his family was not ultimately received by the Consulate until May 9, 1989. In the meantime the applicant, his wife, and his daughter had all obtained medical clearances which, through the passage of time, had expired on October 2, 1988 (in the case of the applicant and his wife) and on March 5, 1989 (in the case of the daughter in China). In the meantime also the applicant was faced with potential difficulties in the United States, his visa having expired there in September 1988, a year after he was first interviewed for permanent residence in Canada. This may help to explain Mr. Chen's conduct, even if it does not excuse it.
[7]
I will set out any other pertinent facts as they appear relevant to my conclusions. This application was argued in part together with that of Parmjit Singh Mangat, T-3163-90, and some of the reasons herein will also apply in that case.
Conclusions
[8]
I have concluded that the decision of Mr. Spunt set out in the letter of February 14, 1989, must be quashed for several reasons.
[9]
First, there was a denial of fairness. I accept, as argued by the respondents, that this was an administrative process only and that it was open to one visa officer, Mr. Spunt, to review an application originally processed by another visa officer, in order to reach a final conclusion. It is obvious that with an organization as large as the Employment and Immigration Commission, with retirements and rotation of officers at particular posts, an application which is initially considered by one officer may be the subject of a later final decision by another officer, taking into account new information or changed circumstances. I also accept that it is not for the court to sit on appeal from findings of fact made by a visa officer. But notwithstanding all that, I believe that fairness required in these circumstances that the visa officer, at the time of the interview on December 29, 1988, tell the visa applicant at the outset the real purpose of the interview and the major concern of the officer, namely the alleged bribe. If one were carrying out an interview to probe general issues such as the existence of humanitarian grounds it might be appropriate to proceed by indirection, but this was more than an ordinary interview: it was the review of an earlier favourable assessment where the applicant had been "provisionally accepted" (in the language of Ms. Trillo's letter of July 12, 1988). That acceptance was now put in jeopardy by one event - the alleged bribe. The results of the meeting were potentially very important for the applicant and he should have known what it was that concerned the visa officer and required explanation. He may well have wondered, for example, as the interview progressed, as to whether it was his conduct or that of Ms. Trillo which was being questioned. The visa officer, Mr. Spunt, may have as he says acted out of good motives to allow Mr. Chen to explain his conduct and not to "lose face". But when Mr. Spunt was possessed of a fact which, if unexplained, was in his mind sufficient to reject Mr. Chen's application, it was incumbent on him to state that fact and give Mr. Chen every opportunity to explain in that fashion. Fairness required no less.
[10]
The remaining alleged causes of invalidity, although argued under various rubrics by counsel, really come down to the question of whether Mr. Spunt's decision was based on reasons which are authorized by the
Act
and the
Regulations
either expressly or impliedly.
[11]
To answer this question I would begin by considering the first reason given by Mr. Spunt in the letter of February 14th refusing the application for permanent residence. As mentioned above, that reason is based on s. 19(2)(d) of the
Immigration Act
which provides that immigrants shall not be granted admission if they
"cannot or do not fulfil or comply with any of the conditions or requirements of this Act or the regulations ..."
The failure to comply relied upon by Mr. Spunt in the case of the applicant is found in s. 9(3) of the
Act
which provides:
"Every person shall answer truthfully all questions put to that person by a visa officer and shall produce such documentation as may be required by the visa officer for the purpose of establishing that his admission would not be contrary to this Act or the regulations."
Thus it was said that the applicant failed to comply with the
Act
because he did not answer truthfully when first asked about a gift sent to Ms. Trillo. It appears to me, however, that I am obliged to apply the rationale adopted by the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  include the requirement to tell the truth as set out in s. 9(3). The court said that s. 19(2)(d) speaks in the present tense and refers to the moment when a final decision is made on admissibility and not to events prior to that. Further, and more importantly, the court said that the sole purpose of s. 19(2)(d)
"... is to render inadmissible all those who do not meet the conditions of admissibility prescribed by or under the
Act
". [see footnote 2]
The Court of Appeal did not consider a false answer to a question to involve a condition of admissibility. It did recognize that there might be circumstances in which a false answer might justify refusal of admission, but such an answer did not have the "automatic effect" of barring admission pursuant to s. 19(2)(d).
[12]
The other reason given by Mr. Spunt for his decision involved the exercise of his discretion under s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
. This raises very difficult questions as to the proper interpretation of that subsection which provides as follows:
"11(3) A visa officer may
(a) issue an immigrant visa to an immigrant who is not awarded the number of units of assessment required by section 9 or 10 or who does not meet the requirements of subsection (1) or (2), or
(b) refuse to issue an immigrant visa to an immigrant who is awarded the number of units of assessment required by section 9 or 10,
if in his opinion, there are good reasons why the number of units of assessment awarded do not reflect the chances of the particular immigrant and his dependants of becoming successfully established in Canada and those reasons have been submitted in writing to, and approved by a senior immigration officer."
More specifically, the basic question is - on what grounds can the visa officer exercise his discretion in forming the opinion that there are "good reasons" why the number of units awarded do not reflect adequately the chances of an immigrant becoming "successfully established" in Canada? It is inconceivable that this was intended to give a visa officer an unlimited mandate to decide whether a particular immigrant is generally suitable or not as a future member of Canadian society, given the existence of other, extensive, provisions in the
Act
for identifying those who are suitable or unsuitable. It may first be observed that s. 11(3) cannot be taken to overlap the grounds of mandatory exclusion set out in the description of the "inadmissible classes" found in s. 19. Indeed that section has its own provision, s. 19(3), for temporary exceptions to be made by a "senior immigration officer or an adjudicator" to those exclusionary rules. Instead the discretion provided to a visa officer in s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
must be seen as integral to the exercise by the Governor-in-Council of his regulation-making authority under s. 114(1)(a) of the
Act
to establish selection standards (the source of the "point system" or "units of assessment"). That paragraph authorizes the Governor-in-Council to make regulations
"(a) providing for the establishment and application of selection standards based on such factors as family relationships, education, language, skill, occupational experience and other personal attributes and attainments, together with demographic considerations and labour market conditions in Canada, for the purpose of determining whether or not an immigrant will be able to become successfully established in Canada."
The selection standards so opted and applicable to the applicant by s. 8(1)(a) and s. 9(1)(b)(i) of the
Regulations
are found in Column I, Schedule I of those
Regulations
. The factors identified in Column I are: "education", "specific vocational preparation", "experience", "occupational demand", "arranged employment or designated occupation", "demographic factor", "age", "knowledge of English and French languages", "personal suitability", and "relative". While it is nowhere clearly spelled out, the selection standards authorized for use by s. 114(1)(a) of the
Act
, and the actual factors identified in Schedule I of the
Regulations
, appear to be essentially related to the ability of an immigrant to make a living in Canada or to be economically sustained other than by the state. Of the factors in Column I there might be some ambiguity about "knowledge of English and French languages", although such knowledge apart from being socially important is obviously very important for the making of a living. The criteria for assessing points for "age" obviously give a preference to those in their prime working years. The factor of "personal suitability", while seemingly ambiguous, according to the criteria set out in Column II authorizes the awarding of units
"... to reflect the personal suitability of the person and his dependants to become successfully established in Canada based on the person's adaptability, motivation, initiative, resourcefulness and other similar qualities."
These enumerated criteria of personal suitability, while not wholly irrelevant to social success, seem primarily related to the ability to support oneself. The term "and other similar qualities" should, I think, be read ejusdem generis with the enumerated criteria which precede it.
[13]
Given this emphasis on economic factors as identified by both Parliament and the Governor-in-Council for determining whether an immigrant can become "successfully established" in Canada, it is difficult to read the discretionary power granted to a visa officer by s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
as allowing him to ignore the number of units of assessment and to determine, for essentially non-economic reasons, that an immigrant does not have a chance of becoming successfully established in Canada. While the subsection only requires that the visa officer have "good reasons", those reasons must be such as lead him to believe that the immigrant cannot become successfully established in the economic sense. They do not include such reasons as that an immigrant will probably not be a good neighbour, a good resident, or ultimately a good citizen of Canada; or that the immigrant is a bad or immoral person if judged on his past conduct. Section 19 excludes persons in carefully specified situations on the basis of their past conduct or their potential for criminality or sedition. If they are to be excluded for such reasons, it must be done under the process contemplated by s. 19 and not through a visa officer exercising his discretion under s. 11(3) of the
Regulations
because he feels that a particular immigrant is undesirable. Presumably the security check which is regarded as a precondition for admission is intended to facilitate the application of the criteria in provisions such as ss. 19(1)(c)-(g) or 19(2)(a) and (b), just as the medical examinations assist in the application of s. 19(1)(a). The security check results in this case had not even been received by the Consulate when Mr. Spunt rendered his decision.
[14]
The decision in question as purportedly made under s. 11(3) is flawed for other reasons. That subsection requires that prior to the exercise of such discretion a visa officer must submit his reasons in writing to a senior immigration officer who must approve them. This Mr. Spunt purported to do in his memorandum of January 26, 1989, to Mr. Nauman. But the reasons submitted by him in that memorandum for a negative exercise of discretion are invalid as unrelated to the purposes of s. 11(3).
[15]
The first reason he gives is that Mr. Chen lied at the interview with him. Apart from the unfairness of that interview, which I have dealt with above, for the reasons which I have set out as to the nature of permissible criteria for judging successful establishment I do not consider that lying to a visa officer is per se proof of inability to become suitably established. There is little doubt that what Mr. Chen did was wrong but Mr. Spunt in no way demonstrated to a senior immigration officer how this shortcoming would prevent Mr. Chen from making a living in Canada or cause him to become a burden to the Canadian state.
[16]
A second reason given for the exercise of discretion was that, in the view of Mr. Spunt, the applicant "may have committed an offence" against the
Immigration Act
and an offence under s. 121(1)(a)(i) of the
Criminal Code
(dealing with attempted bribery of government officials). Again, this is not a proper reason for the negative exercise of discretion under s. 11(3). As I have said before, s. 19 of the
Immigration Act
specifically precludes certain people, carefully defined, who have in the past committed, or are likely in the future to commit, certain kinds of serious crimes. I do not accept that visa officers can under s. 11(3), whether in the name of "personal suitability" or otherwise, add at will to the prohibited categories of past or future malefactors. Furthermore, it is not acceptable on grounds of fairness for a visa officer to make such determinations of guilt.
[17]
The third reason given by Mr. Spunt to Mr. Nauman for the exercise of discretion was that the applicant
"has displayed personal suitability which is incompatible with what is required for an immigrant in his category."
This raises difficult questions as to the relationship between an assessment made in accordance with ss. 8 and 9 and Schedule I, and a finding under s. 11(3) that such an assessment of units should not be determinative of whether a person can become successfully established. If the unit assessment is wrong, then the visa officer should change that assessment. In this case Mr. Spunt reviewed the assessment of "personal suitability" made by Ms. Trillo as seven units out of ten and he confirmed it. I fail to see how he can then offer as a reason for a negative exercise of discretion that the applicant does not have a sufficient degree of personal suitability. It is conceivable that the discretionary power under s. 11(3) could properly be used where an immigrant was so lacking in one of the factors listed in Column I that a 0 rating would not adequately reflect the negative impact of that deficiency on his ability to become successfully established. But it appears to me that a precondition for exercising the discretion on that ground would be to rate that factor at 0 in the assessment.
[18]
The discretionary power in s. 11(3) is an extraordinary one which, it has been held, must be exercised in strict conformity with the requirement of submitting written reasons to a senior immigration officer and getting his approval [see footnote 3]. I have no doubt this means that the reasons given for such exercise of discretion must be the real reasons, and must be lawful reasons which these were not.
[19]
The applicant also put some reliance on the doctrine of "legitimate expectations", said to be based on statements allegedly made by Ms. Trillo at the end of the interview on September 27, 1987, and on her letter of July 12, 1988, advising the applicant that he and his wife had been "provisionally accepted". Given my other conclusions, I need not address this issue.
Disposition
[20]
I will therefore grant the order of certiorari quashing the decision recorded in the letter from Mr. Spunt to the applicant of February 14, 1989. I will also issue an order of mandamus requiring that the respondents consider and process the application of the applicant for permanent residence in Canada in accordance with law; and more specifically that he be given a new interview, and that his application be determined, by a different visa officer at a different visa office in the United States most convenient for the parties.
[21]
The respondents have requested that the issue of costs be addressed after a substantive disposition of this application. I will therefore leave it to the applicant to endeavour to get agreement on an order as to costs and if this can be done it can be submitted in writing under rule 324. If not, the parties can arrange for the matter to be spoken to at an appropriate time.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
Footnotes
1.	[1981] 2 F.C. 807; 37 N.R. 551.
2.	Ibid, at 810.
3.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , January 8, 1991,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , January 8, 1991, A-240-89 (F.C.A.).
[End of document]