 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FC 362)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
de Montigny, J.
March 18, 2008.
Counsel:
Anick Boilard, for the applicant;
Michèle Joubert, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Étude Légale Stewart Istvanffy, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant;
John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
de Montigny, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board) dated August 14, 2007, by which the Board concluded that the applicant was not a Convention refugee within the meaning of section 96 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2001, c. 27 (the Act). The Board also concluded that the applicant was not a person in need of protection within the meaning of paragraphs 97(1)(a) and (b) of the Act.
[2]
For the following reasons, I have reached the conclusion that this application for judicial review had to be dismissed.
I. Facts
[3]
The applicant was born on October 11, 1967, in the city of Conakry, in the Republic of Guinea. She is the eldest of a family of seven children. Her mother died in 1982, and when her father died in 1991, her uncle took custody of her and her siblings.
[4]
The applicant had to abandon her studies in 1988 because of a lack of money. She then did various tasks at home to help pay for the studies of her brothers and sisters. It was only in 2002 that she managed to continue her own studies and pass a secretarial course. She then obtained employment as a secretary with the Guinean ministry of education.
[5]
In October 2005, the applicant's uncle announced that it was time she married. He told her that he had decided to give her hand in marriage to one of his friends, Kaba Sandou, a prosperous man 27 years her senior who already had two wives. Because this marriage entailed a financial benefit for her uncle, he threatened to disown the applicant if she refused to marry. As a result of the pressure from her family, the applicant finally consented to this marriage which she did not want, because she feared reprisals from her family if she refused.
[6]
Accordingly, the applicant married Mr. Kaba on December 26, 2005. She quickly realized that her new husband was violent and treated his wives like slaves. Mr. Kaba felt humiliated by the fact that the applicant wanted to continue to work and took this as an affront. It was impossible to determine the precise moment when the applicant began to be mistreated, as the accounts varied from the very day of the marriage to a few weeks later.
[7]
When the applicant complained about mistreatment by her husband, her uncle said that she had to accept it and stop being stubborn. On July 3, 2006, Mr. Kaba allegedly cut her on the face with a razor blade. One week later, she went to the Hamdallaye police station in order to file a complaint of spousal abuse. The person who was supposed to take her complaint made her wait for some time and came back with her husband half an hour later. The husband brought her home and beat her savagely, pulling some of her hair out.
[8]
The day after this incident, while the applicant was dressing to go to work, her husband ordered her to stay at home and burned her chest and abdomen with an iron. He also threatened to kill her if she continued to humiliate him and forbade her to work.
[9]
On August 5, 2006, a friend of the applicant, worried because the applicant was no longer coming to work, went to visit her at home. She suggested that the applicant leave the country to escape her violent husband and promised to help her. On August 21, 2006, the applicant went to her friend's home. Her friend gave her a French passport, an airline ticket to Canada and the telephone number of one of her friends who was available to help the applicant once she arrived in Canada. She therefore left Guinea on August 21, 2006, and claimed refugee protection on August 23.
II. The impugned decision
[10]
The Board rejected the applicant's claim for refugee protection because she was found not to be credible, and because of the numerous contradictions, inconsistencies and implausibilities noted. It rendered its decision on the basis of the following evidence:
- The contradictory statements made at the port of entry in her Personal Information Form (PIF) and during the applicant's testimony concerning when the violent episodes allegedly began;
- The failure to mention, at the port of entry and in the PIF, the sexual assault of which she was allegedly a victim. The Board was of the opinion that the applicant's explanations for this omission were insufficient and contradictory;
- In her PIF, the applicant wrote that she had left the house on July 10, 2006, and had been confined only after that date. However, at the hearing before the RPD, she stated that she had been confined by her husband from July 3 to 19, 2006;
- The applicant allegedly gave an unsatisfactory explanation about the fact that she had been paid for the entire month of July even though she had not reported for work since July 2, 2006;
- In spite of the applicant's scars, which are consistent with her story of being slashed with a razor blade and burned with an iron, the Board concluded that, considering the applicant's total lack of credibility, her scars had not been caused in the alleged circumstances;
- The applicant contradicted herself with regard to her luggage and identity documents;
- There was no explanation as to why the applicant failed to bring along a copy of her marriage certificate and photographs of her wedding when she left Guinea;
- The applicant did not remember the number and names of the witnesses who were present at her wedding;
- The Board found the fact that the mayor had placed two seals on the marriage certificate (Exhibit P-3) to be implausible;
- Because the Board was unable to identify the applicant in the marriage photographs submitted in evidence, it attached no probative value to them.
III. Issues
[11]
Considering the written and oral submissions by the parties, the following issues must be decided for the purpose of this application for judicial review:
(a) Did the Board fail to consider the
Women Refugee Claimants Fearing Gender-Related
Persecution
guidelines (Guideline 4)?
(b) Did the Board err in failing to consider all the evidence on record?
(c) Did the Board meet the requirements of procedural fairness?
IV. Analysis
[12]
When issues of credibility and the assessment of evidence are involved, it is well established that the Court will intervene only if the decision was based on an erroneous finding of fact that it made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the material before it (
Federal
Courts Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, paragraph 18.1(4)(
d
)). This high degree of deference to the administrative decision-maker is entirely warranted in this case, given the Board's expertise and the fact that it had the advantage of hearing the applicant.
[13]
As far as the issue of procedural fairness is concerned, it is now well established that the Board is not entitled to make a mistake, and it is up to this Court to determine what the requirements of procedural fairness were and whether or not they were met:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[14]
As far as Guideline 4 is concerned, the applicant alleged that the Board had not taken it into consideration even though it had specifically mentioned having taken it into consideration in its decision. In the applicant's opinion, the Board should have been more sensitive in its assessment of her testimony, especially concerning the sexual assault she had allegedly suffered. She submitted that she did not mention it during her first interview with an immigration officer and in her PIF because of the shame she felt and the ensuing trauma. This trauma also explained her lack of knowledge of the names and the number of the witnesses to her forced marriage.
[15]
It is true that simply writing that Guideline 4 was taken into consideration in assessing a claim for refugee protection is not sufficient when the decision shows a lack of sensitivity on the part of the Board. However, the Board cannot be considered to be lacking sensitivity simply because it found the applicant not to be credible because she failed to mention important facts, not only at the port of entry, but also in her PIF, particularly after having stated at the beginning of the hearing that her PIF was complete.
[16]
At her interview with an immigration officer, the applicant stated that her problems had begun two weeks following her forced marriage, when her husband had cut her on the cheek and burned her with an iron. However, in her PIF, she wrote that after a few weeks of marriage she had discovered that her husband was violent. Then, during her testimony, the applicant stated that she had been sexually assaulted on her wedding night and mistreated on a daily basis after that.
[17]
The Board confronted the applicant with these contradictory accounts in order to determine the reason why she had failed to mention a fact as important as a rape during her first interview and in her PIF. The applicant first of all explained that she had realized some two weeks following her wedding that her husband also mistreated his other wives and that she could not continue to live with him. When questioned once again by the Board, the applicant explained that she had told the immigration officer that her problems had begun on her wedding day. Then, with regard to her failure to write this in her PIF, she stated that she did not know what the interpreter who had helped her had written and that she had not understood when the Board asked her if the content of her PIF was true. Finally, she stated that she was ashamed, because rape is something which is not talked about in Guinean society.
[18]
The Board concluded that, considering the many contradictory versions, it was possible to seriously doubt the applicant's version. The Board also noted that "[t] he fact that she was allegedly ashamed to record in her narrative that her husband had raped her on her wedding day did not prevent her from pointing out that she had allegedly been beaten and mistreated on that day."
[19]
If it were not for the numerous contradictions in the applicant's testimony, shame could have very well explained why the applicant had not mentioned, before the hearing was held, the rape of which she had been a victim on her wedding day. However, it was only after having tried to give other explanations for her forgetfulness that she gave this explanation, which undermines her credibility even more. In addition, it must be taken into account that the applicant was 38 years old at the time of her marriage and that she had had 12 years of schooling. She did not submit a psychological assessment, which could have corroborated the stress responsible for the memory lapses related to her wedding day. In these circumstances, the Board did not lack sensitivity in doubting the truthfulness of her narrative. Accordingly, I cannot accept the applicant's submissions to the effect that the Board did not take Guideline 4 into consideration in dealing with her claim.
[20]
Secondly, the applicant submitted that the Board had failed to consider the medical report and the photographs of her scars, her employer's system for dealing with absences, and her marriage certificate.
[21]
The applicant submitted a medical report stating that the [translation] "examination showed the presence of scars which were consistent with (1) a history of laceration with a razor blade on the left cheek, (2) a history of burns from a hot iron on the left breast and extending to the abdomen under the left breast." Although it admitted the existence of these scars, the Board concluded that because of the applicant's total lack of credibility, it did not believe that these scars had been caused in the circumstances alleged by her. Although the violence of the acts that caused her injuries is troubling, I cannot conclude that the Board's decision is unreasonable, considering the applicant's total lack of credibility.
[22]
The Board also concluded that it was improbable that the applicant would have been paid by her employer for the entire month of July, as shown by her pay slips for that month, although she stated that she had not returned to work since July 2, 2006, and had not provided her employer with a medical report. The applicant alleged that she had simply called in sick without submitting any medical evidence to confirm that. It is true that the Board's conclusion to the effect that even in an African context it was improbable that an employer would pay a salary to an employee who is absent for an entire month without having any evidence of his or her inability to work was not based on any documentary evidence. However, I am not satisfied that this conclusion reached by the Board was unreasonable.
[23]
With regard to the marriage certificate, this is what the Board concluded:
The claimant testified that the mayor, who had performed the civil wedding, had affixed the two seals found in Exhibit 3. The first reads [Translation] "Mayor, Commune of Matam," and the second, [Translation] "Chief Registrar of the Conakry Court of Appeal, Court of First Instance of Conakry," which is irreconcilable, since Mr. Toure, who signed the marriage certificate, identified himself simply as the mayor in the document.
[24]
At the hearing, the applicant stated that she did not know the difference between the two seals affixed to her marriage certificate. She stated that she simply signed it and that she had never mentioned that the mayor had placed the two seals on the document. Considering article 2822 of the
Civil Code of Québec
, which provides that "[a]n act purporting to be issued by a competent foreign public officer makes proof of its content against all persons and neither the quality nor the signature of the officer need be proved", I do not think that the Board could have rejected the marriage certificate submitted by the applicant because it was not authentic without having any other evidence to that effect. But there is more.
[25]
The Board also expressed doubts about not only the marriage certificate, but also the birth certificate, the national identity card and the wedding photographs submitted by the applicant because of a contradiction between the applicant's statements at her initial interview with an immigration officer and her testimony at the hearing. During her testimony, the applicant explained that she had looked for her documents on the morning of her interview with the immigration officer but found only her passport. She later found the rest of her documents, including her marriage certificate, mixed up with her clothing. Because she stated that she had travelled with a single carry-on bag, the Board was of the opinion that it was implausible for her to have lost her documents among her clothes. The applicant then subsequently stated, on the one hand, that she had left for Canada with her marriage papers and, on the other hand, that she had asked her friend to send them to her at the request of her Canadian lawyer. As a result of these contradictions, the Board drew a negative inference about the origin of these documents.
[26]
I do not think that the Board erred in finding the applicant not to be credible, and I am of the view that it properly assessed the evidence before it. Even if one accepts that some of the inconsistencies and contradictions in the applicant's narrative could be explained by the horrible violence she states she suffered, her story is nevertheless difficult to understand, given the different versions alleged and the implausibility of her explanations.
[27]
In passing, I note that the applicant's passport, issued on May 16, 2003, states that her civil status is that of a married woman. However, according to the applicant's version, she had married on December 26, 2005. Although this fact had not been noted by the Board, it also tends to confirm the lack of credibility of the applicant's narrative.
[28]
Finally, the applicant submitted that she had not been given a fair hearing, because the interpreter was Malian and spoke a different dialect than she did. According to her, this was an infringement of the
audi alteram partem
rule and in itself would warrant intervention by the Court.
[29]
Unfortunately for the applicant, I think that this argument must fail. At question 1(j) of her PIF concerning the "language and dialect you now speak most fluently," the applicant answered that it was French. In addition, as appears from the PIF and the applicant's statement made at the hearing, she did not use an interpreter to complete her PIF because she said that she understood the content of this document.
[30]
At the hearing, she did not raise any objection and even confirmed in answer to a question put by the Board that she understood the interpreter very well. She had been asked on several occasions to wait for the translation of the questions before answering. Even though she chose to testify in her language, she nevertheless agreed to listen to the submissions made by her counsel at that time in French.
[31]
In these circumstances, it is too late to object to the fact that the interpreter at the Board hearing was Malian. She cannot now raise this argument for the first time in this application for judicial review. Not only did she have to show that the principles of natural justice had been breached, which she did not, but she also had to do so in a timely manner, that is, at the hearing.
[32]
For all these reasons, I would dismiss this application for judicial review. Counsel for the parties did not raise any questions for certification, and none will be certified.
ORDER
[33]
THE COURT ORDERS that
the application for judicial review be dismissed.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire à l'encontre d'une décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (le Tribunal), en date du 14 août 2007, par laquelle le Tribunal a conclu que la demanderesse n'était pas une réfugiée au sens de la Convention, tel que défini à l'article 96 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, L.C. 2001, c. 27 (la Loi). Le Tribunal a également conclu que la demanderesse n'avait pas la qualité de personne à protéger, conformément aux alinéas 97(1)a) et b) de la Loi.
[2]
Pour les motifs qui suivent, j'en suis arrivé à la conclusion que cette demande de contrôle judiciaire devait être rejetée.
I. Faits
[3]
La demanderesse est née le 11 octobre 1967 dans la ville de Conakry, en République de Guinée. Elle est l'aînée d'une famille de sept enfants. Sa mère est morte en 1982, et au décès de son père, en 1991, elle a été prise en charge avec ses frères et sœurs par son oncle.
[4]
La demanderesse a dû abandonner ses études en 1988 faute de ressources financières. Par la suite, elle fera divers travaux à domicile afin d'aider à payer les études de ses frères et sœurs. Ce n'est qu'en 2002 qu'elle pourra poursuivre ses études et compléter avec succès une formation en secrétariat. Elle décrocha par la suite un emploi de secrétaire au sein du Ministère de l'Éducation.
[5]
En octobre 2005, l'oncle de la demanderesse lui a annoncé qu'il était temps qu'elle se marie. Il lui a précisé qu'il avait d'ailleurs décidé de la donner en mariage à un de ses amis, monsieur Kaba Sandou, un homme prospère de 27 ans son aîné ayant déjà deux épouses. Comme ce mariage entraînait des bénéfices financiers pour son oncle, ce dernier menaça la demanderesse de la répudier si elle refusait de se marier. Suite aux pressions exercées par sa famille, la demanderesse a finalement accepté ce mariage qu'elle ne souhaitait pas, car elle craignait les représailles de sa famille en cas de refus.
[6]
Le 26 décembre 2005, la demanderesse a donc épousé monsieur Kaba. Elle s'est rapidement rendue compte que son nouvel époux était violent et traitait ses femmes comme des esclaves. Monsieur Kaba s'est senti humilié du fait que la demanderesse veuille continuer à travailler, et y a même vu un affront. Le moment où la demanderesse a commencé à être maltraitée n'a pu être déterminé avec certitude, les versions variant entre le jour même du mariage et quelques semaines après.
[7]
Lorsque la demanderesse s'est plainte des mauvais traitements que lui faisait subir son époux, son oncle lui a répondu qu'elle devait l'accepter et arrêter de s'entêter. Le 3 juillet 2006, monsieur Kaba lui aurait coupé le visage avec une lame de rasoir. Une semaine plus tard, elle se rendit au Commissariat d'Hamdallaye afin de porter plainte pour violence conjugale. La personne qui devait enregistrer la plainte la fit attendre un moment et revint avec son mari une heure et demie plus tard. Ce dernier l'a ramena à la maison, la battit sauvagement et lui arracha des cheveux.
[8]
Le lendemain de cet incident, alors qu'elle s'habillait pour se rendre à son travail, son mari lui ordonna de rester à la maison et lui brûla la poitrine et le ventre avec un fer à repasser. Il l'a également menacée de mort si elle continuait à l'humilier et lui a interdit de travailler.
[9]
Le 5 août 2006, une amie de la demanderesse, inquiète de ne plus la voir au travail, lui rend visite à la maison. Elle lui suggère de s'enfuir du pays pour échapper à son mari violent et elle lui promet de l'aider. Le 21 août 2006, la demanderesse se rend au domicile de son amie. Cette dernière lui remet alors un passeport français, un billet d'avion pour le Canada ainsi que le numéro de téléphone d'un de ses amis disposé à aider la demanderesse à son arrivée au Canada. Elle quitte donc la Guinée le 21 août 2006, et sollicite la protection à titre de réfugiée le 23 août.
II. La décision contestée
[10]
Le Tribunal a rejeté la demande d'asile de la demanderesse en raison de son manque de crédibilité, ainsi que des nombreuses contradictions, incohérences et invraisemblances relevées. Il s'est fondé sur les éléments suivants:
- Les déclarations contradictoires faites au point d'entrée, dans le Formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP) et lors du témoignage de la demanderesse en qui concerne le moment où les épisodes de violence auraient commencés;
- L'omission de mentionner, au point d'entrée et dans le FRP, l'agression sexuelle qu'elle aurait subie. Le tribunal a considéré que les explications de la demanderesse concernant cette omission étaient insuffisantes et contradictoires;
- La demanderesse a écrit dans son FRP qu'elle est sortie de chez elle le 10 juillet 2006 et qu'elle aurait été séquestrée uniquement après cette date. Lors de l'audition devant la SPR, elle a toutefois mentionné avoir été séquestrée par son mari du 3 au 19 juillet 2006;
- La demanderesse aurait fourni une explication insatisfaisante concernant le fait qu'elle ait été rémunérée pour le mois de juillet en entier alors qu'elle ne s'est pas présentée au travail à partir du 2 juillet 2006;
- Malgré les cicatrices de la demanderesse, qui sont compatibles avec son histoire de lacération par lame de rasoir et de brûlures par fer à repasser, le Tribunal conclut qu'au regard de l'absence totale de crédibilité de la demanderesse, ces cicatrices n'ont pas été causées dans les circonstances alléguées;
- La demanderesse s'est contredite en ce qui concerne ses bagages et ses documents d'identité;
- Aucune explication n'a été fournie pour expliquer pourquoi la demanderesse a omis d'apporter son extrait de mariage et des photographies de son mariage lors de son départ de la Guinée;
- La demanderesse ne se souvient pas du nombre et du nom des témoins présents lors de son mariage;
- Le tribunal a trouvé invraisemblable que le maire ait apposé deux cachets sur l'extrait de mariage (pièce P-3);
- Comme le tribunal n'a pu identifier la demanderesse sur les photos de mariage déposées en preuve, il ne leur a données aucune force probante.
III. Questions en litige
[11]
Au vu des représentations écrites et orales des parties, les questions suivantes doivent être tranchées dans le cadre de la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire:
a) Le Tribunal a-t-il omis de considérer les
Directives concernant les
Revendicatrices du statut de réfugié craignant d'être persécutées en raison de leur sexe
(les Directives n 4)
?
b) Le Tribunal a-t-il erré en omettant de considérer toute la preuve au dossier?
c) Le Tribunal a-t-il respecté les exigences de l'équité procédurale?
IV. Analyse
[12]
Lorsque des questions de crédibilité et d'appréciation de la preuve sont en litige, il est bien établi que la Cour n'interviendra que si la décision est basée sur une conclusion de fait erronée, tirée de façon abusive ou arbitraire, ou encore si la décision a été rendue sans que le tribunal ne tienne compte des éléments de preuve dont il disposait (
Loi sur les Cours fédérales,
L.R.C. 1985, c. F-7, art. 18.1(4)(d)). Cette déférence élevée à l'endroit du décideur administratif se justifie pleinement eu égard à la décision que l'on voudrait faire réviser dans la présente instance, compte tenu de l'expertise du Tribunal et du fait qu'il a eu l'avantage d'entendre la demanderesse.
[13]
En ce qui concerne la question relative à l'équité procédurale, il est maintenant bien établi que le Tribunal n'a pas droit à l'erreur et qu'il revient à cette Cour d'établir quelles étaient les exigences de l'équité procédurale et si elles ont été respectées:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[14]
En ce qui concerne les Directives n° 4, la demanderesse a allégué que le Tribunal n'en avait pas tenu compte malgré qu'il ait mentionné expressément les avoir prises en considération dans sa décision. À son avis, le Tribunal aurait dû faire preuve d'une plus grande sensibilité dans l'appréciation de son témoignage, notamment en ce qui concerne l'agression sexuelle qu'elle allègue avoir subie. Elle a soutenu ne pas l'avoir mentionnée lors de sa première entrevue avec un agent d'immigration et dans son FRP à cause de la honte qu'elle éprouvait, et du traumatisme qui en est résulté. Ce traumatisme expliquerait également son ignorance du nombre ainsi que du nom des témoins présents lors de son mariage forcé.
[15]
Il est vrai que le simple fait d'écrire que les Directives n 4 ont été prises en considération dans l'examen d'une demande de réfugié ne sera pas suffisant lorsque la décision dénote un manque de sensibilité de la part du Tribunal. En revanche, on ne saurait conclure à un manque de sensibilité du Tribunal pour le seul motif qu'il n'a pas jugé crédible la demanderesse parce qu'elle a omis de mentionner des faits importants, non seulement au point d'entrée, mais également dans son FRP, et ce, après avoir déclaré en début d'audience que son FRP était complet.
[16]
Lors de son entrevue avec un agent d'immigration, la demanderesse a déclaré que ses problèmes avaient commencé deux semaines après son mariage forcé alors que son mari lui aurait lacéré la joue et l'aurait brûlée avec un fer à repasser. Elle a cependant inscrit dans son FRP qu'elle a découvert après quelques semaines de mariage que son mari était violent. Puis, lors de son témoignage, la demanderesse a déclaré avoir été agressée sexuellement le soir de son mariage et maltraitée quotidiennement par la suite.
[17]
Le Tribunal a confronté la demanderesse à ces versions contradictoires afin de déterminer la raison pour laquelle elle aurait omis de mentionner un élément aussi important qu'un viol lors de sa première entrevue et dans son FRP. La demanderesse a d'abord expliqué qu'elle s'était rendue compte deux semaines après son mariage que son mari maltraitait également ses autres femmes et qu'elle ne pouvait pas continuer de vivre avec lui. Questionnée de nouveau par le Tribunal, la demanderesse a expliqué avoir dit à l'agent d'immigration que ses problèmes avaient commencé le jour de son mariage. Puis, concernant son omission de l'écrire dans son FRP, elle a déclaré ne pas savoir ce que l'interprète l'ayant aidé avait écrit, et qu'elle n'avait pas compris lorsque le Tribunal lui avait demandé si le contenu de son FRP était véridique. Finalement, elle a expliqué qu'elle se sentait honteuse parce que l'on ne parle pas d'un viol dans la société guinéenne.
[18]
Le Tribunal a conclu qu'en présence d'autant de versions contradictoires, il était permis de douter sérieusement de l'histoire de la demanderesse. Il a également signalé que « [l] e fait qu'elle avait prétendument honte de relater dans son narratif que son mari l'avait violée le jour de ses noces, ne l'empêchait pas de mentionner qu'elle avait été supposément battue et maltraitée ce jour-là ».
[19]
N'eut été les nombreuses contradictions dans son témoignage, la honte aurait bien pu expliquer pourquoi la demanderesse n'avait pas mentionné le viol dont elle aurait été victime le jour de son mariage avant l'audition. Mais ce n'est qu'après avoir tenté de fournir d'autres explications de son oubli qu'elle a eu recours à cette explication, ce qui en affaiblit d'autant la crédibilité. Au surplus, il faut tenir compte du fait que la demanderesse était âgée de 38 ans lors de son mariage et qu'elle avait 12 années de scolarité. Elle n'a par ailleurs pas déposé d'évaluation psychologique qui aurait pu venir corroborer le stress à l'origine de ses pertes de mémoire reliées au jour de son mariage. Dans ces circonstances, le Tribunal n'a pas manqué de sensibilité en doutant de la véracité de son récit. Par conséquent, je ne peux faire droit aux prétentions de la demanderesse selon lesquelles le Tribunal n'aurait pas tenu compte des Directives n° 4 dans l'examen de sa demande.
[20]
Dans un deuxième temps, la demanderesse a prétendu que le tribunal avait omis de considérer le rapport médical et les photos de ses cicatrices, le système en place chez son employeur en cas d'absence et son acte de mariage.
[21]
La demanderesse a produit un rapport médical spécifiant que l' « examen révèle la présence de cicatrices compatibles avec 1) une histoire de lacération par lame de rasoir au niveau de la joue gauche, 2) une histoire de brûlure par fer à repasser chaud au niveau du sein gauche, et par débordement, au niveau de l'abdomen sous-jacent au sein gauche ». Bien qu'ayant admis l'existence de ces cicatrices, le Tribunal a conclu qu'en raison de l'absence complète de crédibilité de la demanderesse, il ne croyait pas que ces cicatrices aient été causées dans les circonstances alléguées par la demanderesse. Bien que la violence des actes à l'origine des blessures subies par la demanderesse soit troublante, je ne peux conclure que la décision du Tribunal est déraisonnable étant donné l'absence totale de crédibilité de la demanderesse.
[22]
Le Tribunal a également conclu qu'il était improbable que la demanderesse ait pu être payée par son employeur pour tout le mois de juillet, comme l'atteste son bulletin de solde pour ce mois, alors qu'elle a déclaré ne pas être retournée travailler à partir du 2 juillet 2006 et ne pas avoir fourni à son employeur de rapport médical. La demanderesse se serait en effet contentée d'appeler pour signaler qu'elle était malade, sans fournir de preuve médicale à l'appui. Il est vrai que la conclusion du Tribunal à l'effet qu'il était improbable, même en contexte africain, qu'un employeur ait pu verser un salaire à un employé absent pour un mois entier sans aucune preuve de son incapacité de travailler, ne repose sur aucune preuve documentaire. On ne m'a cependant pas convaincu que cette conclusion du Tribunal était déraisonnable.
[23]
Pour ce qui est de l'acte de mariage, voici ce que le Tribunal a conclu:
La demandeure a témoigné que le maire, qui avait célébré le mariage civil, avait apposé les deux cachets que l'on retrouve sur la pièce P-3. On peut lire sur le premier cachet « Le Maire, Commune de Matam » et l'autre « Le Greffier en Chef de la Cour d'appel de Conakry, Tribunal de Première Instance de Conakry », ce qui est inconciliable puisque monsieur Toure, qui a signé l'extrait de mariage, s'identifie simplement comme maire dans le document.
[24]
Lors de l'audition, la demanderesse a expliqué qu'elle ne connaissait pas la différence entre les deux sceaux apposés sur son extrait de mariage. Elle a précisé qu'elle s'était contentée de signer, et n'a d'ailleurs jamais mentionné que le maire avait apposé les deux sceaux sur le document. Compte tenu de l'article 2822 du
Code civil du Québec
, lequel stipule que « [l] 'acte qui émane apparemment d'un officier public étranger compétent fait preuve, à l'égard de tous, de son contenu, sans qu'il soit nécessaire de prouver la qualité ni la signature de cet officier », je ne crois pas que le Tribunal pouvait rejeter l'acte de mariage produit par la demanderesse au motif qu'il n'était pas authentique, et ce sans autre preuve à cet effet. Mais il y a plus.
[25]
Le Tribunal a également exprimé des doutes quant à la véracité non seulement de l'acte de mariage, mais également de l'acte de naissance, de la carte nationale d'identité, et des photos de mariage produites par la demanderesse, en raison d'une contradiction entre les déclarations de la demanderesse lors de son entrevue initiale avec un agent d'immigration et son témoignage à l'audition. Pendant son témoignage, la demanderesse a fait valoir qu'elle avait cherché ses documents le matin de son entrevue avec l'agent d'immigration, pour ne trouver que son passeport. Elle aurait par la suite retrouvé le reste des documents, dont son acte de mariage, au milieu de ses habits. Comme elle avait indiqué n'avoir voyagé qu'avec un seul bagage à main, le Tribunal a estimé qu'il était invraisemblable qu'elle ait égaré ses documents dans ses habits. Par la suite, la demanderesse a mentionné, d'une part, être partie pour le Canada avec ses papiers de mariage et, d'autre part, avoir demandé à son amie de les lui envoyer suite à la demande de son avocat canadien. Le Tribunal a tiré de ces contradictions et invraisemblances une inférence négative concernant la provenance des pièces.
[26]
Je ne crois pas que le Tribunal ait erré en concluant à l'absence de crédibilité de la demanderesse, et je considère qu'il a évalué avec justesse la preuve produite devant lui. Même en acceptant que certaines des incohérences et contradictions dans le récit de la demanderesse puissent s'expliquer par l'horreur de la violence qu'elle dit avoir subie, il n'en demeure pas moins que son histoire est difficilement compréhensible considérant les différentes versions alléguées et l'invraisemblance de ses explications.
[27]
Je note au demeurant que le passeport de la demanderesse, émis le 16 mai 2003, précise que son état civil est celui d'une femme mariée. Or, selon le récit de la demanderesse, elle se serait mariée le 26 décembre 2005. Bien que cet élément n'ait pas été relevé par le Tribunal, il tend également à confirmer l'absence de crédibilité du récit de la demanderesse.
[28]
Enfin, la demanderesse a fait valoir qu'elle n'avait pas eu droit à une audience équitable et juste du fait que l'interprète était d'origine malienne et que son dialecte différait du sien. Cela constituerait, à ses yeux, une violation de la règle
audi alteram partem
qui justifierait, à elle seule, une intervention de la Cour.
[29]
Malheureusement pour la demanderesse, je ne crois pas que cet argument puisse être retenu. À la question 1(j) de son FRP portant sur la « langue et dialecte parlés le plus aisément », la demanderesse a répondu le « français ». En outre, tel qu'il appert du FRP et de la déclaration de la demanderesse à l'audience, elle n'a pas eu recours à un interprète pour compléter son FRP parce qu'elle a dit avoir compris le contenu de ce document.
[30]
Lors de l'audience, elle n'a soulevé aucune objection et a même confirmé, suite à une question du Tribunal, qu'elle comprenait très bien l'interprète. Elle a été prévenue à plusieurs reprises d'attendre la traduction des questions avant de répondre. Et même si elle a choisi de témoigner dans sa langue, elle a néanmoins accepté d'entendre les observations de l'avocate qui la représentait alors en français.
[31]
Dans ces circonstances, il est trop tard pour s'objecter au fait que l'interprète devant le Tribunal était malien. Elle ne peut, dans le cadre de cette demande de contrôle judiciaire, soulever cet argument pour la première fois. Non seulement devait-elle démontrer qu'il y avait eu manquement aux principes de justice naturelle, ce qu'elle n'a pas réussi à faire, mais elle devait également en faire état en temps utile, soit lors de l'audience.
[32]
Pour tous ces motifs, je rejetterais la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire. Les procureurs des deux parties n'ont soulevé aucune question pour fins de certification, et aucune ne sera certifiée.
ORDONNANCE
[33]
LA COUR ORDONNE que
la demande de contrôle judiciaire soit rejetée.
[End of document]