Relief Sought
[1]
Gibson, J.
: At the outset of the hearing of this motion, there was some confusion as to what relief Her Majesty the Queen, as represented by the Minister of National Revenue, ("the applicant") sought from the court. In its Memorandum of Fact and Law dated January 27, 1993, (relied on in support of this motion), the applicant referred to four reliefs sought. In its Amended Notice of Motion dated May 3, 1993, the applicant sought only two reliefs. Counsel for the respondents, (I shall refer to Mary David as the "personal respondent" or "Mary David", Olympia Interiors Ltd. as the "corporate respondent" or "Olympia" and to both of them collectively as the "respondents" in the course of these reasons) indicated he had not been served with the May 3, 1993, document. Counsel for the applicant requested of the court that the motion proceed on the basis of the original Notice of Motion filed on January 17, 1993. The reliefs sought in that document are:
I. An order for summary judgment on the action:
II. Alternatively, an Order striking paragraphs 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 22, 23, 25, 30(d), 30(f), 31(d), 32(a), 32(b), and 32(d) from the Statement of Claim; and
III. A stay of the action pending an appeal to the Ontario Court of Justice (Divisional Court);
IV. An order for security for costs.
[2]
After a brief recess, counsel agreed that the motion would proceed on the basis of the reliefs outlined above. It was also agreed by counsel, and I so ordered, that security for costs would be dealt with by written submissions to be served and filed with the court as follows: the applicant will serve on the respondents and file with the court its submissions within 14 days of the release of my order and reasons on this motion; the respondents will serve on the applicant and file with the court their submissions within 14 days of the receipt of the applicant's submissions; reply by the applicant, if any, is to be served on the respondents and filed with the court within 14 days of receipt of the respondent's material.
Background
[3]
This motion brought by the applicant is the latest in a series of legal proceedings between these parties in this court and between the personal respondent and certain individuals, all but one of whom are or were servants of the applicant, in the courts of Ontario.
[4]
Mary David founded Olympia Interiors Ltd. in 1964 and at all relevant times has been its sole shareholder, sole director and President. Olympia was a designer, manufacturer and installer of customized architectural window coverings for use in commercial buildings. In accordance with the
Excise Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. E-13, Olympia was liable to pay federal sales tax on the selling price of the window coverings. The relevant portion of s. 26(6) (The
Excise Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1970, as amended, was further amended by S.C. 1980-81-82-83, c. 68, s. 8(5), which added clause 26(6)(c)(iii)(A), to the
Act
. This subsequently became clause 46(c)(ii)(A) of the
Excise Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. E-15.) of the
Excise Tax Act
reads:
"(6) For the purposes of determining the consumption or sales tax payable under this Part,
. . . . .
(c) in calculating the sale price of goods manufactured or produced in Canada, there may be excluded
. . . . .
(ii) under such circumstances as the Governor-in-Council may, by regulation, prescribe an amount representing
. . . . .
(A) the cost of erection or installation of goods incurred by the manufacturer or producer where the goods are sold at a price that includes erection or installation, or
. . . . ."
[5]
Regulations entitled
Erection and Installation Costs Regulations
, SOR/83-136, set out the procedure for determining a percentage of the sale price which the manufacturer could use for purposes of the exclusion contemplated by s. 26(6)(c)(ii)(A). This percentage-based exclusion will be referred to throughout these reasons as the "installation deduction rate". The schedule which formed part of the
Erection or Installation Costs Regulations
provided that, in relation to the goods here in question, a flat rate of 10% of the sale price would apply in the absence of supporting documentation for a higher installation deduction rate.
[6]
By letter dated September 30, 1983, Mary David, on behalf of Olympia, wrote to Mr. A. Zoberman of the Department of National Revenue, Customs and Excise, ("the Department") to express her desire to have an installation deduction rate in excess of 10% set for the goods Olympia produced.
[7]
By letters dated November 17, 1984 and December 18, 1984, officials of the Department wrote to Olympia, as represented by Mary David, to provide rulings relating to calculation of the federal sales tax applicable to Olympia.
[8]
On February 13, 1985, following a review of Olympia's records, Mr. Norman Leyton, a Senior Excise Auditor with the Department, wrote to Mr. R.C. Dickson, Supervisor, Technical Services Excise, for the Toronto Region of the Department, recommending that Olympia be allowed to use a 50% installation deduction rate in respect of its products. By letter dated April 22, 1985, Mr. Dickson wrote Olympia, to the attention of Mary David, to inform her of the Department's decision in this matter. The text of the letter reads:
"Mr. N. Leyton of our Technical Services Unit reviewed your records to determine an installation percentage for use in calculating your sales tax liability on commercial drapery and assorted window coverings of your manufacture sold on a supply and install basis.
"As a result of this review, it was determined that your company should use the 10% installation deduction authorized in Circular ET 62."
[9]
Olympia failed to submit its monthly federal sales tax returns for the first two months of 1985 and was subsequently convicted on September 9, 1985, in the Provincial Court of Ontario for failure to so file.
[10]
Throughout the remainder of 1985 and into 1986 the applicant and Olympia were at odds over what installation deduction rate Olympia should use, what taxes it owed and whether or not Olympia would cooperate in an audit by the Department. By letter dated March 12, 1986, from A.C. Martin, Technical Services Unit Manager, Toronto Region, Olympia was informed that a provisional 50% installation deduction rate was set for its roller shades and vertical blinds. The letter also stated that a federal sales tax audit was to be conducted and that the provisional rate was subject to change. By letter dated March 17, 1986, Mr. Martin again wrote to Olympia and stated that an installation deduction rate of 33⅓% was authorized for manufacturers of horizontal blinds who "established and maintained a regular sales tax-included installed selling price to users."
[11]
In November of 1985 Olympia was served with a ministerial letter of requirement, for production of books, records and "other information" required by the Department. An audit was performed on Olympia in March of 1986. As a result of the audit it was determined that for the period between August 1, 1982, and December 31, 1985, Olympia owed taxes in the amount of $63,085.77 plus interest and penalties of $39,372.79 for a total of $102,458.56.
[12]
By letter dated September 16, 1986, from Olympia, signed by Mary David, to Mr. R. Ribchester, Olympia disputed that assessment of tax, interest and penalties, owing and instead offered to pay an amount of $57,640.32. (At the hearing of this motion, counsel for the respondents did not dispute the essential accuracy of the amount of taxes owned. However, he explained that because of the perceived lack of cooperation from the department, the respondents were of the opinion that the interest and penalties were unwarranted.)
[13]
At sometime in 1986, the Department received an anonymous telephone call advising that some of the records of Olympia had been altered. In an "Information to Obtain a Search Warrant" sworn on August 21, 1986, it is stated that as a result of the informant's information, there were reasonable grounds for believing that among other things, Olympia had altered records in an effort to evade paying tax. The respondents do not deny that some of the records were altered, but they insist that the alterations were made to help "regular" auditors of the Department determine the exact nature of the transactions and that in no case was any amount altered on any invoice.
[14]
In late August, 1986, a search warrant was executed against Olympia's premises. The "Information" sets out that virtually all the business records of Olympia for the period March 1, 1982, to December 31, 1985 were relevant to the investigation being conducted. In the result, a substantial quantity of records was seized.
[15]
Norman Leyton, in a letter dated September 2, 1987, notified Olympia of an amended assessment of tax, dated September 4, 1987, which indicated that Olympia was now in arrears to the applicant for the amount of $316,373.80. By letter dated September 4, 1987, from A.C. Martin to Olympia, to the attention of Mary David, the Department revoked the provisional installation deduction rate of 50% for certain of Olympia's installation and transportation expenses. Olympia was thus left with the base statutorily authorized 10% installation deduction rate, unless it provided documentation which could support a higher deduction rate.
[16]
The amended tax assessment was not paid.
[17]
On December 4, 1992, an Amended Certificate of Default certifying the September 4, 1987, assessment of Olympia's tax liability under the
Excise Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. E-13, was filed with this court and became a judgment of the court.
[18]
On August 14, 1987, the Honourable Elmer Mackay, Minister of National Revenue, certified that in his opinion there was sufficient evidence to justify prosecution of the respondents under ss. 56(2) and 57(9)(a) and s. 62 of the
Excise Tax Act
. On August 25, 1987, an information was sworn charging Mary David as Director of Olympia and Olympia with 73 counts under the above mentioned provisions of the
Excise Tax Act
.
[19]
The trial on the criminal charges commenced in October of 1989. The trial proceeded through 11 nonconsecutive days of prosecution evidence and ended on June 4, 1990, when the Crown stayed some of the charges against Mary David and Olympia and withdrew the rest. The defence was not called upon. The seized records of Olympia were not returned to it after the staying and withdrawal of the charges as it was the position of the Crown that the stayed charges could be revived up to one year from the date of staying. The Crown, on September 27, 1990, after commencement of a motion for return of the material, agreed to its return to the respondents. The material was returned within approximately two weeks of that date.
[20]
On April 17, 1990, Mary David filed an Assignment in Bankruptcy naming Murray H. Kideckel as her trustee. She was discharged from bankruptcy on December 12, 1990. Also in April of 1990, Olympia's assets were seized by creditors and it ceased to operate as a business.
[21]
On December 24, 1990, the respondents gave notice that an action in this court would be commenced against several named individuals all of whom, with one exception, were employees of the applicant, as well as against the applicant. A Statement of Claim was issued on January 2, 1991. On June 12, 1992, the Federal Court of Appeal confirmed that the court lacked jurisdiction in the claims against the named individuals and struck out the respondent's claim with leave to recommence proceedings against the applicant.
[22]
The present action was commenced by a Statement of Claim which was filed with the court on June 16, 1992. An amended Statement of Claim was subsequently filed on September 16, 1992. The Statement of Claim is for damages for breach of duty under the
Excise Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. E-15, and, on behalf of the corporate respondent, for deprivation of an entitlement under that
Act
.
[23]
In the Ontario Court of Justice, General Division, Statements of Claim were filed by Mary David against Michael Schwantes and Reverend Eberhard Schwantes on June 23, 1992, margaret Woolcott on July 24, 1992, and Alexander C. Martin and Leon Kluger on August 17, 1992. In a decision dated April 21, 1993, Madame Justice Caswell of the Ontario Court, General Division, refused to grant summary judgments dismissing the plaintiff's claims, or a stay of proceedings in those actions. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice, General Division, Mr. Justice Paisley, in unreported decisions dated October 22, 1992, (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  statute barred by s. 7 of the Ontario
Public Authorities Protection Act
, (P.A.P.A.)
, R.S.O. 1990, c. P-38, or by s. 112(1) of the
Excise Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. E-15. These decisions were overturned by the Ontario Court of Justice Divisional Court in a decision dated May 17, 1993. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Div. Ct.).
Analysis
[25]
Submissions before me were directed essentially to four subject areas: The request for summary judgment on the ground that the pleadings disclose no serious issue to go to trial; the request for summary judgment on the basis that any cause of action disclosed is statute barred; the request in the alternative to strike certain paragraphs from the statement of claim; and the request for a stay pending disposition of related proceedings in the courts of Ontario. I will deal with each of these subject areas in turn.
1. Summary Judgment - Failure To
Disclose A Serious Issue To Go
To Trial
[26]
As indicated above, an application for summary judgment on the basis of failure to disclose a serious issue to go to trial in related proceedings in the Ontario Court of Justice against certain named individuals was dealt with by Madam Justice Caswell in reasons dated April 21, 1993. She refused to grant summary judgment. The facts before Madam Justice Caswell were essentially those set out above except in respect of one defendant, Reverend Eberhard Schwantes. The facts as they relate to him are not relevant to his motion.
[27]
Madam Justice Caswell refers to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , wherein, Mr. Justice Henry, at pages 238 and 239, set out the principles to be considered by a judge on a motion for summary judgment under rule 20 of the Ontario
Rules of Civil Procedure
. While that rule is not of course, applicable here, I find the statement of principles instructive:
"In my view, the general thrust of the seminal decisions of the court on Rule 20, where the moving party is the defendant, may be summarized thus for present purposes:
- Rule 20 contemplates a radically new attitude to motions for judgment; the objective is to screen out claims that in the opinion of the court, based on evidence furnished as directed by the rule, ought not to proceed to trial because they cannot survive the 'good hard look'.
- There is no arbitrary or fixed criterion that the motions judge must apply. It is a case by case decision to be made on the law and the facts that he is able to find on the evidence submitted to him in support of the claim or defence, whether the plaintiff has laid a proper foundation in its affidavit and other evidence to sustain the claims made.
- It is not sufficient for the responding party to say that more and better evidence will (or may) be available at trial. The occasion is now. The respondent must set out specific facts and coherent evidence organised to show that there is a genuine issue for trial.
- Apparent factual conflict in evidence does not end the inquiry.
- The court may, on a common sense basis, draw inferences from the evidence.
- The court may look at the overall credibility of the plaintiff's action, i.e., does the plaintiff's case have the right of truth about it such that it would justify consideration by the trier of fact?
- Matters of credibility requiring resolution in a case of conflicting evidence ought to go to trial; however, that depends upon the circumstances of the case; the court in taking the 'hard look' at the merits must decide if any conflict is more apparent than real, i.e., whether there is really an issue of credibility that must be resolved in order to adjudicate on the merits.
- Motions under Rule 20 must be made sparingly and judiciously; the court will control abuse of this process if necessary by its order for costs."
[28]
Counsel for the respondents argued before me that the onus on the applicant seeking the same relief in the Federal Court is higher than that which can be derived from the foregoing statement. The relevant provision is rule 341, and specifically, rule 341(b), of the
Federal Court Rules
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 663. Rule 341 reads as follows:
"341. A party may, at any stage of a proceeding, apply for judgment in respect of any matter
(a) upon any admission in the pleading or other documents filed in the court, or in the examination of another party, or
(b) in respect of which the only evidence consists of documents and such affidavits as are necessary to prove the execution or identity of such documents.
without waiting for the determination of any other question between the parties."
[29]
In support of his contention he cites
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , among other cases. I agree that these cases support his contention.
[30]
Although, generally speaking, the facts in this case are not in dispute, there are two widely varying interpretations of those facts. Those varying interpretations extend on the part of the respondents to allegations that the facts disclose malice or a primary purpose on the part of Crown servants that is other than that of carrying the law into effect. Such an interpretation, if substantiated, would meet one of the four elements which must be proved for success in an action for malicious prosecution as set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the defendant and must have terminated in favour of the plaintiff are essentially not in dispute. The remaining element, absence of reasonable and probable cause, is, once again, a matter of widely varying interpretation.
[31]
It was common ground between counsel before me that malicious prosecution is at the base of this action even though that is not readily apparent from the respondent's pleadings. Given the foregoing, I cannot conclude that the pleadings and other documents before me fail to disclose a serious issue to go to trial, that issue being, whether the respondents' interpretation of the facts can be established in a degree sufficient to support a finding of malicious prosecution.
[32]
Accordingly, the application fails on this ground.
2. Summary Judgment - Any Cause Of
Action Is Statute Barred.
[33]
Counsel for the applicant submits that the respondent's claim is statute barred by s. 7 of the
P.A.P.A.
and/or by s. 112(1) of the
Excise Tax Act
, s. 7 of the
P.A.P.A.
reads as follows:
"7(1) No action, prosecution or other proceeding lies or shall be instituted against any person for an act done in pursuance or execution or intended execution of any statutory or other public duty or authority, or in respect of any alleged neglect or default in the execution of any such duty or authority, unless it is commenced within six months next after the cause of action arose, or in case of continuance of injury or damage, within six months after the ceasing thereof.
"(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to an action, prosecution or proceeding against,
(a) a sheriff for an act, neglect or default in certifying as to a writ of execution that binds land; or
(b) a land registrar for an act, neglect or default in connection with his or her duties under the Registry Act and the
Land Titles Act
."
[34]
The relevant provisions of the
Excise Tax Act
, at all times relevant to these proceedings, read as follows:
"111(1) No writ shall be issued against, nor any process served on, any officer for anything done or purporting to be done in the exercise of his duty as an officer until one month after notice in writing has been served on him, in which notice shall be clearly and explicitly stated the cause of action, the name and place of residence of the person who intends to bring action and the name of his attorney, solicitor or agent.
"(2) No evidence of any cause of action shall be produced except of such cause of action as is contained in the notice, and no verdict or judgment shall be given for the plaintiff, unless he proves on the trial that the notice was given, in default of which proof the defendant is entitled to a verdict or judgment and costs.
"112(1) Every action referred to in subs. 111(1) shall be brought within three months after the cause thereof arose and shall be laid and tried in the place or district where the acts complained of were committed.
"(2) The defendant in an action may plead the general issue and give the special matter in evidence.
"(3) If the plaintiff in an action is nonsuited or discontinues the action, or if, on demurrer or otherwise, judgment is given against the plaintiff, the defendant may recover costs and have such remedy for the costs as any defendant has in other cases where costs are given."
[35]
The
P.A.P.A.
is made relevant to the case at bar by s. 32 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
, S.C. 1980, c, 8, which reads as follows:
"32. Except as otherwise provided in this Act or in any other Act of Parliament, the laws relating to the prescription and limitation of actions in force in a province between subject and subject apply to any proceedings by or against the Crown in respect of any cause of action arising in that province, and proceedings by or against the Crown in respect of a cause of action arising otherwise than in a province shall be taken within six years after the cause of action arose."
[36]
Section 32 as quoted above, reflects the text of that section as reenacted by S.C. 1990, c. 8 which came into force on February 1, 1992. The same amending statute changed the title of the statute in question from the
Crown Liability Act
to its current title. Counsel agreed before me that the changes made on repeal and reenactment have no impact in the case at bar. I agree with their position. Thus, the question of whether the old law or the new law here applies is of no consequence.
[37]
Generally speaking, s. 32 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
, as did its predecessor section of the
Crown Liability Act
, applies to the situation before me to make limitation periods that apply in a province, in this case Ontario, as between subject and subject, applicable in cases against the federal Crown, unless otherwise provided in an Act of Parliament. Counsel before me agreed, and once again I agree, that there is no overriding provision of an Act of Parliament that is here applicable.
[38]
As indicated above, in related proceedings before the Ontario courts against two personal defendants, the Ontario Court of Justice Divisional Court, in a judgment released May 17, 1993, found the claims of the personal respondent herein to be statute barred under both s. 7 of the
P.A.P.A.
and, in the one case where it was applicable, under s. 112(1) of the
Excise Tax Act
. Mr. Justice Steele, speaking for the court, made it very clear that antecedent proceedings in the Federal Court of Canada against the two personal defendants were "... of no consequences to the proceedings in this (the Ontario Court of Justice) Court." Counsel for the personal respondent herein had apparently conceded that if no link could be drawn to the antecedent proceedings in the Federal Court, his client's action in the Ontario Court of Justice was commenced after the expiration of both limitation periods. It is not conceded that antecedent proceedings in this court are of "no consequence" in these proceedings. Thus, the Divisional Court judgment is not "on all fours" with the case at bar.
[39]
First then, it must be determined when the limitation periods commenced to run. Counsel for the applicant submits that the limitation periods began to run, or were triggered, upon the staying of the criminal charges against the respondents on June 4, 1990. Counsel for the respondents argues that since certain of the charges were only stayed, and since fresh charges were laid against the respondents up to December of 1989, the limitation period should only commence running one year from the laying of the final charge, i.e., December 1990. Assuming this to be correct, the respondents then submit that notice of action was given to the applicant, (as well as to a number of individuals named in the January, 1991 Statement of Claim) on December 24, 1990. That claim was dismissed by the Federal Court of Appeal on June 12, 1992 for lack of jurisdiction in respect of certain named individuals, with leave to commence the current action against the applicant. A fresh statement of claim instituting the case at bar was filed on June 16, 1992 (As indicated above, an amended statement of claim was filed with the court on September 16, 1992.). Counsel for the respondents argues that the original notice given on December 24, 1990, survived and was still sufficient to ensure compliance with the time limit prescribed by the
P.A.P.A.
upon the filing of the fresh statement of claim.
[40]
In response, counsel for the applicant states that the charges laid after 1987 were withdrawn and only charges stemming from the 1987 information were carried through to prosecution and eventually stayed. Therefore, she argues, the relevant commencement date for the limitation period remains June 4, 1990, the date of the staying of the criminal charges. She adds that since nothing in the December 24, 1990, notice and the original January, 1991 statement of claim seeks to extend the commencement of the limitation period, the respondents present claim filed in June of 1992 is statute barred. This is the "earlier proceedings are of no consequence" line of reasoning that found favour with the Ontario Divisional Court although in that case, of course, the earlier proceedings were not in that court.
[41]
In respect of the appropriate date to which to anchor the limitation period, I am in agreement with the applicant. The only charges that were prosecuted were based in the 1987 information, and these were stayed as of June 4, 1990. It is from this date that the various limitation periods commence to run. On this basis, even the December 24, 1990 notice and the January, 1991 Statement of Claim were out of time under the relevant provisions of both the
P.A.P.A.
and the
Excise Tax Act
.
[42]
Notwithstanding this, the respondents, based on the decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , maintain that the applicant cannot avail itself of the protection of the
P.A.P.A.
The applicant responds by stating that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> goes counter to the jurisprudential stream in this area of law and that I should be guided instead by the principles enunciated by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 481 (S.C.C.).
[43]
The facts in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> are straightforward. Mr. Berardinelli was a tenant occupying a unit owned by the Ontario Housing Corporation, pursuant to the
Housing Development Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. 213. In a common area of the Toronto development in which he lived, Mr. Berardinelli fell on a patch of ice. A writ of summons was issued more than sic months after the fall occurred, and the Housing Corporation claimed the protection of s. 11 (equivalent to the present s. 7) of the
P.A.P.A.
, R.S.O., 1970, c. 213. The issue in that case involved the interplay of s. 11 of the
P.A.P.A.
and s. 6(2) of the
Housing Development Act
which granted to the Housing Corporation "such powers and duties as are deemed expedient to ... plan, construct, and manage any building development or housing project."
[44]
The choice confronting the Court, as described by Mr. Justice Estey for the majority at page 492 of the decision, was whether s. 11 of the
P.A.P.A.
was to be read so broadly that the most minuscule action taken by the Housing Authority would attract the six month limitation period, or whether invocation of s. 11 of the
P.A.P.A. should be limited to actions of the Housing Authority
under the
Housing Development Act
which had a public impact and connotation.
[45]
In commenting upon the scope of s. 11 of the
P.A.P.A.
, again at page 492, Mr. Justice Estey had this to say:
"Section 11, being a restrictive provision wherein the rights of action of a citizen are necessarily circumscribed by its terms, attracts a strict interpretation and any ambiguity found upon the application of the proper principles of statutory interpretation should be resolved in favour of the person whose right of action is being truncated."
[46]
In support of her position as to the applicability of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , counsel for the applicant referred to the following passage at page 493:
"Section 11 therefore would appear to extend to persons corporate and unincorporate and in the case of the former whether established as a Crown agency or otherwise. However, this court is not required to determine the matter with finality, since the respondent is clearly a Crown agency ..."
[47]
It was argued that this passage stood for the proposition that there was no bar to the applicability of provincial limitation legislation to the applicant simply because it is the Crown. I agree. However, with respect, I fail to see how this advances the applicant's cause. The stumbling block in the case at bar, as will be seen in the discussion of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , below, is the phrase "between subject and subject" as found in s. 32 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
. It appears clear to me that only once the hurdle of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
is overcome, can the applicant take advantage of the limitation period in s. 7 of the
P.A.P.A.
.
[48]
Later in the decision, Mr. Justice Estey came to the conclusion that duties which had a "public interest" were properly protected by the six month limitation period found in s. 11 of the
P.A.P.A.
, whereas, subordinate or incidental acts of a private nature did not enjoy the protection of the shorter limitation period. At page 497 he wrote:
"... Nevertheless, it [snow removal] is not one of the primary duties exercised in the public interest which quickly comes to mind when one contemplates the range of activities involved in the planning, construction and management of a housing complex located in Metropolitan Toronto or its environs. It is not, in my view, a phase of activity which has 'a direct public purpose' or which has a 'public aspect' in the words of the majority of this court in the
McGonegal
decision, supra. It is predominately in character a 'subordinate' or 'incidental' act or 'of a private interest', to refer again to the words of Rand, J., in that case."
[49]
As I interpret the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, it stands for the proposition that only actions of a public interest nature or having a public aspect that are taken by the Crown attract the shorter limitation period. I fail to see how this proposition advances the position of the applicant beyond a point it has already achieved. There was no dispute between the parties as to whether or not the actions of the applicant herein were of a public or private nature. In my opinion, in the case at bar, there can be no dispute as to the public nature of the actions taken by the applicant.
[50]
As indicated earlier, the respondents rely upon the Ontario Court of Appeal's decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case, while driving a Canada Post vehicle, an employee of Canada Post "rear ended" a vehicle driven by Melita Sjouwerman. The defendants, Canada Post and the employee argued that the statement of claim filed by the plaintiffs was barred by reason of s. 11(1) (equivalent to the present s. 7(1)) of the
P.A.P.A.
The plaintiffs maintained that the
P.A.P.A
was not applicable to the defendants and that the appropriate limitation period was the two year period found in the
Highway Traffic Act
of Ontario, R.S.O. 1980, c. 406.
[51]
As in the case at bar, in
Sjourwerman
, the provincial legislation was made relevant by s. 19(1) of the then
Crown Liability Act
, now amended as s. 32(1) of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
.
[52]
The court, at page 295, phrased the issue as:
"Whether the words 'between subject and subject' incorporate the limitation period of the
P.A.P.A.
or of the
H.T.A.
"
[53]
After canvassing a number of authorities as to the meaning of the word "subject", the court concluded, at page 297, that:
"In the light of these definitions, clearly what Parliament intended with reference to an action 'between subject and subject' was an action between 'persons' or 'individuals'. That that was the intention can be seen in the French version of both ss. 11(a) and 19(1), which states that analogous phrase as 'entre particulars', i.e., 'between individuals'.
. . . . .
"Therefore, just as, in response to a request to speak on the subject of the Queen, Oscar Wilde proclaimed that 'the Queen is not a subject', so must I conclude that neither are Her servants or agents in their capacities as such."
[54]
In the decision of the Ontario Divisional Court referred to above in actions against certain individuals that are parallel to this one, that court distinguished <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> on the basis that it "concerned the application of the
Crown Liability Act
..., because the action was against a Crown agency and one of its servants". As opposed to the actions in the Ontario courts, the case at bar directly involves the Crown and therefore, in that respect, is indistinguishable from
Sjourwerman
.
[55]
But with great respect, I do not agree with the Ontario Court of Appeal's interpretation of the phrase "between subject and subject" in the context of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
. It is not at all clear to me that Parliament's intention, in utilizing this phrase in s. 32 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
and in the predecessor section was to restrict the application of provincial limitation statutes at the federal level to actions between persons or individuals. Given that the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
under both that title and its previous title is concerned largely with the liability of the federal Crown and its servants, and given that the federal Crown is neither an individual nor a person, it would appear to me to be illogical to incorporate by reference provincial limitation laws if the consequence of that incorporation is to be that s. 32 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
is only applicable to individuals or persons.
[56]
As I interpret it, Parliament's intention in enacting s. 32 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
and its predecessor section was to provide that in situations involving limitation periods, the relevant provincial limitation periods apply to the federal Crown as they would to any other litigant in an action arising in a province. In support of this I refer to s. 3 of that
Act
which states in part:
"The Crown is liable in tort for the damages for which, if it were a private person of full age and capacity, it would be liable ..."
[57]
In the case at bar the relevant provincial legislation is the
P.A.P.A.
It would appear to me that, given my finding that the relevant date from which the limitation periods are to run is June 4, 1990, and since the present action was started on June 16, 1992, or, even if it can be linked to the earlier notice and statement of claim, no earlier than December 24, 1990, the claim of the respondents is, at least in the absence of special circumstances, statute barred.
[58]
Assuming that I am correct in my finding that, at least at this point in the analysis, the limitation period in the
P.A.P.A.
applies, the respondents contend that this is not the end of the matter. They argue the special protection of a shortened limitation period is to be interpreted strictly so as not to apply in any action based upon mala fides, the rationale being that mala fides conduct cannot be deemed to have been done within the parameters of a statute.
[59]
In support of this position, counsel for the respondents' written submissions referred to a 1981 decision of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case, a person who was involuntarily admitted to a psychiatric institution for one day, later commenced an action against the attending physician and other "lay" individuals. Section 58 of the Ontario
Mental Health Act
, R.S.O. 1970, c. 269, provided for a six month limitation period in which a person could start an action against a person or facility "for anything done or omitted to be done in pursuance or in intended pursuance of this Act or regulations". The Ontario High Court found that the physician in that case warranted the protection of the
Mental Health Act's
limitation period since there was no accusation of mala fides against him. As for the other defendants, Mr. Justice Linden found that their alleged actions were not within the parameters of the
Mental Health Act
and thus, they should not reap its benefits. At page 623 he stated:
"... Such conduct would be an abuse of power, not an exercise of power, and hence it would not be deserving the special protection afforded by the short limitation period. In short, if a person knows he is doing something that is not authorized by statute he cannot shelter himself by pretending that he is acting pursuant to the statute."
[60]
Later at page 624, this was added:
"... Nothing in these reasons should be taken to accept as truth these allegations, which may or may not be true. Whether the plaintiff will be able to prove these allegations at trial is an entirely separate matter which I am not called upon to decide on this motion. All that is decided here is that the plaintiff is entitled to prove the allegations at trial."
[61]
I note that in an unreported 1992 decision, the New Brunswick Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 328 A.P.R. 97 (C.A.), adopted Mr. Justice Linden's rationale. In that case, the question was whether a person purportedly acting outside the scope of the relevant legislation could rely upon a six month limitation period in that legislation as a defence to an action brought against her. After quoting the passage at page 623 which is reproduced above, the court at page 5 stated:
"While I entertain some doubts whether the allegations against Ms. Allen that are raised in the pleadings can be elevated to mala fides, that issue, is one that can only be determined after hearing the evidence. After hearing such evidence, the trial judge may well conclude that the protections in s. 66(1) and (2) are available to Ms. Allen. All I am saying to use the words of Linden, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , is that the appellants are 'entitled to try and prove the allegations at trial'." (The provisions referred to are of the New Brunswick
Mental Health Act
, R.S.N.B. 1993, c. M-10, which provide for a six month period for bringing an action, in much the same manner as the
Ontario Act
did in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .)
[62]
I find that I too am in agreement with the rationale of Mr. Justice Linden and that his rationale in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> here applies. The allegations in the Statement of Claim are of a most serious nature. If malicious prosecution is proven at trial then the limitation period prescribed in the
P.A.P.A.
should not be available as a defence. Whether malicious prosecution can be proven, however, cannot be determined without discoveries and the benefit of a trial. Therefore, because of the nature of the allegations herein, I find that, despite my conclusion that the
P.A.P.A.
would otherwise apply and that the limitation period provided therein expired before commencement of this action and indeed before commencement of any other action to which this one could conceivably be related, it would be inappropriate to bar a continuation of this action based on a statutory limitation period, which may, or may not, be applicable, depending upon whether mala fides is proven at the trial itself.
[63]
The relevant statutory provisions for the second limitation issue are ss. 111(1) and 112(1) of the
Excise Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1985, as quoted above.
[64]
For the reasons above, despite the fact that on the face of the provisions they would appear to apply equally as s. 7(1) of the
P.A.P.A.
would appear to apply through the medium of s. 32 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
, I conclude once again that it would be inappropriate to allow the applicant to take advantage of a limitation period that, depending on the outcome of the trial itself, might in fact not be applicable.
3. Proposal To Strike Paragraphs 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 22, 23, 25,
30(d), 30(f) 31(d), 32(b) and 32(d)
From the Statement of Claim
[65]
Counsel for the applicant took the position that all of these paragraphs should be struck because they are res judicata in that they refer to or challenge the deduction rate applied to Olympia in arriving at the assessment of tax, interest and penalties which was certified and registered as a judgment of this court. Her position then is that the deduction rate in question has been adjudicated. Since the cited paragraphs, in her submission, do nothing more than attack the basis of the certificate, they are designed to relitigate a decided matter.
[66]
Counsel for the respondents denies that the paragraphs in question attack the basis of the certificate and urges that they are central to the claim and go to the question of malicious prosecution and the motivation of servants of the applicant.
[67]
Counsel for the applicant relied on rule 419(1)(f) of the
Federal Court Rules
which provides as follows:
"419(1) The court may at any state of an action order any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that,
. . . . .
(f) it is otherwise an abuse of the Court,
and may order the action to be stayed or dismissed or judgment to be entered accordingly."
[68]
Generally, it has been found that the court will only strike pleadings in plain and obvious cases where the case is beyond doubt. In
Inuit Tapirisat of Canada and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 1, Mr. Justice Esley stated that:
"As I said, all the fact pleaded in the statement of claim must be deemed to have been proven. On a motion to strike such as this a court should, of course, dismiss the action and strike out any claim made by the plaintiff only in plain and obvious cases and where the court is satisfied that 'the case is byond doubt':
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (App. Div.)."
[69]
In Sopinka, Lederman and Bryant's
The Law of Evidence in Canada
(1992), at page 990, the following is stated regarding res judicata in respect of civil matters:
"The constituent elements of estoppel by res judicata were enunciated by Aikens, J., in
Re Bullen
:
(i) that the alleged judicial decision was what in law is deemed such;
(ii) that the particular judicial decision relied upon was in fact pronounced, as alleged;
(iii) that the judicial tribunal pronouncing that decision had competent jurisdiction in that behalf;
(iv) that the judicial decision was final;
(v) that the judicial decision was, or involved, a determination of the same question as that sought to be controverted in the litigation in which estoppel is raised;
(vi) that the parties to the judicial decision, or their privies, were the same persons as the parties to the proceeding in which the estoppel is raised, or their privies, or that the decision was conclusive in rem."
[70]
Clearly, the issue here in question turns on whether the test in paragraph (v) quoted above is met. In my view it is not. The questions at issue are quite different.
[71]
On this point I can do nothing more than simply agree with the position put forward on behalf of the respondents. To strike the paragraphs in question would decimate the respondent's claim. It would, indirectly, amount to a granting of the motion for summary judgment on the grounds that the pleadings disclose no serious issue to go to trial. Certainly without the paragraphs in question the argument in favour of such a position would be much stronger.
[72]
Given that I have concluded against granting such a result directly, I am not prepared to accede to this element of the applicant's request. I find that the paragraphs in question do not attack the basis of the certificate but rather are supportive of allegations of malicious prosecution.
4. Stay Of Proceedings Pending
Disposition Of Related Proceedings
In The Courts Of Ontario
[73]
Finally, the applicant requests a stay of proceedings in this court until parallel proceedings in the courts of Ontario may work their way through to conclusion. (The requested relief is actually narrower than I have stated it to be but, as a result of submissions before me, I have interpreted it broadly.) As I understand this position, the rationale is that the proceedings in the Ontario courts are broader in scope than the issues in question in this action. Therefore, if the actions in that forum are without basis, it would be helpful to have such a decision in the consideration of matters before this court. Counsel for the applicant also submitted that the applicant may suffer some prejudice if decisions in this court were to conflict with decisions in another forum, when the subject matter is substantially the same in both forums.
[74]
An equivalent request was made to the Ontario Court of Justice on the basis of these proceedings and was denied. Madam Justice Caswell, in the decision referred to above, dealt with the issue of staying proceedings in part in the following terms:
"In order to justify a stay, the onus is on the defendants to satisfy the court that the continuance of the action would be oppressive or vexatious and, hence, be an injustice, or that it would be an abuse of process of the court. In addition, the stay must not cause an injustice to the plaintiff:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  vexatious in itself. I do not agree.
"In addition, there is real prejudice to the plaintiff should the plaintiff not be permitted to proceed in these courts since claims against the individual defendants are both different and wider in scope than the claim against the Queen in the Federal Court.
. . . . .
"While there may be some prejudice to the defendants, it would be wrong to stay the plaintiff's substantive claims for procedural reasons only. Accordingly, the stay of proceedings is denied."
[75]
The same reasoning applies to a stay in this court. Prejudice to the personal respondent (plaintiff) would arguably be greater if the proceedings were stayed in this court, given the quantum of her claim against the applicant (defendant). The corporate respondent is, as I understand it, not a party to the parallel proceedings so prejudice in its case could be even greater. Prejudice to the applicant, which is not a party to the parallel proceedings, is arguably less than the prejudice flowing from failure to grant the stay in favour of the individual defendants in the parallel proceedings.
[76]
For the foregoing reasons, I am not prepared to grant a stay.
Conclusion
[77]
In the result, summary judgment on the action is denied, as are an order striking paragraphs from the statement of claim and a stay of the action pending an appeal or any other steps in the parallel proceedings before the Ontario Court of Justice.
[78]
As indicated earlier in these reasons, the issue of security for costs will be dealt with following written submissions served and filed in accordance with my order in that regard. Counsel may wish to consider making submissions as to costs in respect of this motion at the same time.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slm
[End of document]