[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is an application brought by the Institute of Canadian Advertising ("ICA") seeking an order allowing it to participate or intervene in the action. The issue relates to an attack by the plaintiff on the constitutional validity of the Tobacco Products Control Act, S.C. 1980, c. 20, which prohibits the advertising of tobacco products in Canada.
[2]
The plaintiff Rothmans, Benson & Hedges Inc. ("Rothmans") has challenged the constitutional validity of the Act on the basis that it is ultra vires and offends ss. 2(b) and 15(1) of the Charter. Rothmans also asserts that the legislation cannot be upheld under s. 1 of the Charter. It seeks to establish the right to advertise its product based principally upon the theory that its advertising does not promote more tobacco consumption, but rather encourages existing tobacco consumers to choose between competing tobacco manufacturers.
[3]
The ICA, the applicant in this motion, is Canada's national association representing full service advertising agencies. The institute is made up of sixty-two member agencies who contribute annually for its maintenance. As part of its activities, it has been an active spokesperson on behalf of the Canadian advertising industry in response to various legislative and regulatory measures which appear to threaten the industry's independence and freedom to advertise. The ICA has been involved in the public debate concerning advertising restrictions on such products as beer, alcohol, lotteries, feminine hygiene products, toys and tobacco, and has made representations to governments and government agencies in support of its mandate.
[4]
It is the applicant's contention that the court should allow it to intervene in order to voice its concerns about the constitutional validity of the Tobacco Products Control Act and the effect of this legislation on commercial free speech and the right to advertise lawful products. The ICA maintains that it is important and useful for it to participate as an intervenor in support of the legitimate role of advertising in society. According to the applicant the Rothmans' statement of claim suggests that its arguments based upon ss. 2(b) and 15(1) of the Charter are relatively narrow in focus and may not take into account the broader concerns raised by the Act regarding the regulation of commercial advertising. The institute maintains that the Act has a direct financial impact on ICA members retained by the tobacco industry and this indirectly affects the ICA's finances by reducing membership revenue received from these agencies.
[5]
The applicant contends that it has satisfied the criteria applied by the courts in intervention applications. The institute and its members are directly affected by the outcome of the actions; the ICA's position is different in some respects from that of Rothmans and permitting it to argue its position would enable the court to more fully consider the constitutionality of the Tobacco Products Control Act; that the important matters in issue in this action and their broad ramifications suggest that a party with an interest in commercial free speech should be permitted to intervene.
[6]
Finally, the applicant argues that the courts have recognized in Charter cases that the principles normally applied in intervention motions need not be strictly adhered to and other considerations may apply. The ICA argues that it is well placed to assist the court in considering the full range of arguments applicable to the constitutionality of the Tobacco Products Control Act and since the court's ultimate decision in this regard will impact more than the immediate parties to the proceedings, the court should allow intervention by the ICA.
[7]
The defendant argues against the ICA being allowed to intervene in the action on the grounds that the ICA's application for intervention is premature for three reasons. First, the cross-examination of Mr. Keith McKerracher, President and Chief Executive Officer of the ICA, revealed that it proposes to wait and see if Rothmans' attack will be sufficiently broad or whether the ICA itself would need to expand on it. Second, while the ICA has "information" presently available to it, there is no clearly identifiable evidence that the ICA wishes to adduce any which may be different. Third, the defendant maintains that the ICA wishes to determine on an ad hoc basis what role it will play in the litigation.
[8]
It is the defendant's position that the ICA cannot satisfy the test set out in the jurisprudence which would justify allowing it to intervene nor has it demonstrated that the parties are unable to adequately address the issues before the court.
[9]
Federal Court rule 1101 provides for interventions by various attorneys general when constitutional questions are involved; Admiralty rule 1010 allows intervention of persons entrusted in the rem or in the monies paid into court where a ship is involved. There is however, no specific provision in the Federal Court Rules providing for intervenors generally, such as rule 18 of the Supreme Court of Canada Rules.
[10]
However, rule 5 of the Federal Court Rules, which is often referred to as the "gap" rule, provides that where any matter arising is not otherwise provided for by any provision in any Act or the Rules and orders of the court, the practice and procedure shall be determined by analogy either to other provision of the Rules or to the practice and procedure in force for similar proceeding in the court of the province in which the subject matter most particularly relates. In this regard rule 13.01(1) of the Ontario Rules of Civil Procedure, O. Reg. 560/84 as amended, permits the court to grant leave to a nonparty to intervene in a proceeding on the ground that it has an interest in the subject matter of the proceeding or its outcome. That rule provides as follows:
"13.01(1) Where a person who is not a party to a proceeding claims,
(a) an interest in the subject matter of the proceeding;
(b) that he or she may be adversely affected by a judgment in the proceedings; or
(c) that there exists between him or her and one or more of the parties to the proceeding a question of law or fact in common with one or more of the questions in issue in the proceeding,
the person may move for leave to intervene as an added party.
"(2) On the motion, the court shall consider whether the intervention will unduly delay or prejudice the determination of the rights of the parties to the proceeding and the court may add the person as a party to the proceeding and may make such order as is just."
[11]
In addition to the gap rule, a number of criteria established by the jurisprudence must be taken into account in considering such a motion.
1. Is the proposed intervenor directly affected by the outcome of the trial?
2. Is the position of the proposed intervenor adequately defended by one of the parties to the case?
3. Are the interests of justice better served by the intervention of the proposed intervenor?
4. Can the court hear and decide the cause on its merits without the intervention of the proposed intervenor?
[12]
In my view, the applicant in this case has not satisfied these criteria. The only criteria which it has satisfied is the first one; there seems little question that the ICA has a direct financial interest in the outcome of the main action. However, that is not sufficient in and of itself to justify permitting the ICA to intervene. I cannot see any position taken by the applicant which will not ultimately be argued by the plaintiff; the plaintiff is alleging the constitutional invalidity of the legislation because it interferes with the plaintiff's freedom of expression. In my opinion, this is basically the same argument being submitted by the ICA and I am satisfied that the applicant's views will be adequately represented by the plaintiff in the main action.
[13]
Furthermore, I am not convinced that the interests of justice will be better served by allowing the applicant to intervene. No evidence was presented at the hearing demonstrating that the ICA was privy to information which the plaintiff or the defendant could not access. It is my opinion that the court will be able to hear and decide the case on its merits without the intervention of the ICA.
[14]
For the above reasons the applicant's motion is dismissed. Costs to the defendant.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]