A. The Proceeding
[1]
Evans, J.
: This is a motion for summary judgment brought pursuant to the
Federal Court Rules
, 1998, rule 216 by Bayer Inc., the plaintiff in a proceeding commenced by way of a statement of claim in which it seeks declaratory relief against the Minister of Health (hereinafter "the Minister") in relation to the interpretation and application of C.08.004.1 of the
Food and Drug Regulations
C.R.C., c. 870, (as amended) (hereinafter "the
Regulations
").
[2]
The motion is made pursuant to
Federal Court Rules
1998, rule 216, which provides that:
"(2) Where on a motion for summary judgment the court is satisfied that the only genuine issue is
. . . . .
(b) a question of law, the court may determine the question and grant sum­mary judgment accordingly."
"(2) Lorsque, par suite d'une requête en jugement sommaire, la cour est con­vaincue que la seule véritable question litigieuse est:
. . . . .
b) un point de droit, elle peut statuer sur celui-ci et rendre un jugement sommaire en conséquence."
The Minister does not dispute the suit­ability of this matter for disposition by summary judgment. Since only questions of law remain to be decided, I shall dispose of the matter on this motion.
B. An Overview
[3]
This litigation concerns the process by which manufacturers of new drugs obtain the approval of the Minister to sell and advertise them in Canada, and the degree of protection from competition that the
Regulations
con­fer on a manufacturer who is the innovator of a new drug, and obtains the first approval to sell it. It is the plaintiff's position that, in most situations, and certainly in the instant case, the
Regulations
confer on the first manufacturer a five year period free from competition from other manufacturers of drugs that are functionally identical to the drug that the first manufacturer has been authorized to sell in Canada.
[4]
The Minister, on the other hand, con­tends that the plaintiff's drug does not fall within the scope of the provision in the
Regulations
on which the plaintiff relies, and even if it does, the provision in question only confers the protection claimed by the plaintiff in highly unusual situations, and certainly not in the instant case.
[5]
The outcome of this dispute will be of potentially great significance for the pharmaceutical industry as a whole. If the plaintiff succeeds, companies that manu­facture and market brand-name drugs stand to benefit from the absence of competition for five years from the time that they obtain approval to market a new drug. However, manufacturers of generic drugs, which do not conduct, analyse or finance the tests done to satisfy the Minister of the safety and effectiveness of the drug, will be commer­cially harmed if they are subject to this delay before they can be given approval by the Minister to market a drug that is the equivalent of a drug for which approval has already been given.
[6]
In addition, of course, this dispute is equally significant for the way that the balance is struck between the public interests in ensuring that, on the one hand, phar­maceutical innovation is encouraged through appropriate financial rewards and, on the other, that drugs are available at prices that are kept in check by competition.
[7]
I should note that the plaintiff did not serve notice of this motion on the Canadian Drug Manufacturers Association, which represents generic drug manufacturers. After the completion of argument, the court was advised that counsel for two generic manu­facturers had been instructed to move to intervene in, or to be made parties to, this litigation. I have decided that it would be inappropriate to delay this judgment pending the determination of those motions, or to dismiss this motion so that the proceedings may be recommenced with the participation of generic drug manufacturers.
C. The Regulatory Framework
(i) The Food And Drug Regulations
[8]
The current regulatory framework within which the scheme for the approval of drugs is administered was introduced in 1995 in Schedule 843 of SOR 95-411. One of the objectives of the scheme was to ensure that it was consistent with the obligations im­posed on Canada by Article 1711 of the
North America Free Trade Agreement
(
NAFTA
)). Essentially, the scheme provides that a manufacturer of a "new drug" is re­quired to obtain a Notice of Compliance (NOC) from the Minister of Health before being allowed to sell and advertise it in Canada. The part of the definition of a "new drug" relevant to this case is contained in C.08.001(c) of the
Regulations
. This pro­vides that:
"'new drug' means
(c) a drug, with respect to which the manufacturer prescribes, recommends, proposes or claims a use as a drug, or a condition of use as a drug, including dosage, route of administration, or dura­tion of action and that has not been sold for that use or condition of use in Canada, for sufficient time and in suf­ficient quantity to establish in Canada the safety and effectiveness of that use or condition of use of that drug."
"'drogues nouvelles' veut dire
c) une drogue pour laquelle le fabricant prescrit, recommande, propose ou déclare un usage comme drogue ou un mode d'emploi comme drogue, y compris la posologie, la voie d'administration et la durée d'action, et qui n'a pas été vendue pour cet usage ou selon ce mode d'em­ploi au Canada pendant assez longtemps et en quantité suffisante pour établir, au Canada, l'innocuité et l'efficacité de cet usage ou de ce mode d'emploi pour ladite drogue."
[9]
C.08.002 provides that, in order to obtain a NOC, a manufacturer must file with the Minister a "new drug submission" (NDS) containing the information needed by the Minister to assess the safety and ef­fectiveness of the drug. The
Regulations
goes on to define the content of the NDS, which includes both a description of the drug and its proposed use, and full details of the tests carried out to establish its safety and effectiveness. The conduct of these tests, involving both animals and laboratory tests ("pre-clinical tests") and humans ("clinical tests"), and the reporting of the results, are often very expensive. In this case, for example, the NDS submitted by the plaintiff ran to some 366 volumes of description, test data and other information, and includes the results of clinical tests conducted over eight years and involving 2,200 patients.
[10]
Not all applications for approval to sell and advertise a "new drug" need be so costly and time-consuming. C-08.002.1 provides that a manufacturer of a "new drug" may file an abbreviated new drug submission (ANDS) which compares the drug in question to another drug for which the Minister has already issued a NOC, and which is mar­keted in Canada by the innovator of the drug. The drug to which the comparison is made in the ANDS is called the "Canadian reference product": C.08.001.1.
[11]
The primary function of the ANDS is to establish that the drug to which it relates is the functional equivalent of the drug to which it is being compared. Accordingly, instead of containing the results of tests carried out to demonstrate the drug's safety and effectiveness, the ANDS contains "com­parative studies" which are designed to prove that the drug is the pharmaceutical and bioequivalent of the "Canadian reference product". The length of a typical ANDS is very much less than that of a typical NDS. "Subject to C.08.004.1", C.08.004(1) pro­vides that the Minister will grant a NOC if the manufacturer's ANDS is in compliance with the
Regulations
.
[12]
C.08.003.1 confers on the Minister a discretion "in the course of the examination of a NDS or ANDS, to examine any in­formation or material filed previously with the Minister by any manufacturers" in a NDS or ANDS, in order to establish the safety and effectiveness of the new drug for which the second NDS or ANDS was filed.
[13]
This brings me to the aspect of the scheme that is at the heart of the dispute in this case. It is C.08.004.1(1), to which, as noted above, C.08.004(1) is made subject, and the parts relevant to this litigation read as follows:
"(1) Where a manufacturer files a new drug submission, an abbreviated new drug submission, a supplement to a new drug submission or a supplement to an ab­breviated new drug submission for the purpose of establishing the safety and effectiveness of the new drug for which the submission or supplement is filed, and the Minister examines any information or material filed with the Minister, in a new drug submission, by the innovator of a drug that contains a chemical or biological substance not previously approved for sale in Canada as a drug, and the Minister, in support of the manufacturer's submission or supplement, relies on data contained in the information or material filed by the innovator, the Minister shall not issue a notice of compliance in respect of that submission or supplement earlier than five years after the date of issuance to the innovator of the notice of compliance or approval to market that drug, as the case may be, issued on the basis of the in­formation or material filed by the innovator for that drug."
"(1) Lorsque le fabricant dépose une pré­sentation de drogue nouvelle, une pré­sentation abrégée de drogue nouvelle ou un supplément à l'une de ces présentations en vue de faire déterminer l'innocuité et l'efficacité de la drogue nouvelle qui en est l'objet, et que le ministre examine les renseignements et le matériel présentés, dans une présentation de drogue nouvelle, par l'innovateur d'une drogue contenant une substance chimique ou biologique dont la vente comme drogue n'a pas été préalablement approuvée au Canada et s'appuie sur les données y figurant pour étayer la présentation ou le supplément du fabricant, il ne peut délivrer un avis de conformité à l'égard de cette présentation ou de ce supplément avant l'expiration du délai de cinq ans suivant la date à laquelle est délivré à l'innovateur l'avis de con­formité ou l'approbation de commercialiser cette drogue, selon le cas, d'après les renseignements ou le matériel présentés par lui pour cette drogue."
(ii)
NAFTA
Article 1711
[14]
As already indicated, C.08.004.1(1) was included in the new regulatory framework for the approval of new drugs in order to ensure compliance with Canada's obligations under
NAFTA
. Article 1711 deals with various aspects of the protection of trade secrets from improper disclosure and use. Of particular relevance to this litigation are paragraphs 5 and 6 of Article 1711.
"5. If a Party requires, as a condition for approving the marketing of pharmaceutical or agricultural chemical products that utilize new chemical entities, the submis­sion of undisclosed test or other data necessary to determine whether the use of such products is safe and effective, the Party shall protect against disclosure of the data of persons making such submissions, where the origination of such data involves considerable effort, except where the dis­closure is necessary to protect the public or unless steps are taken to ensure that the data is protected against unfair commercial use.
"6. Each Party shall provide that for data subject to paragraph 5 that are submitted to the Party after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, no person other than the person that submitted them may, with­out the latter's permission, rely on such data in support of an application for product approval during a reasonable period of time after their submission. For this purpose, a reasonable period shall normally mean not less than five years from the date on which the Party granted approval to the person that produced the data for approval to market its product, taking account of the nature of the data and the person's efforts and expenditures in producing them. Subject to this pro­vision, there shall be no limitation on any Party to implement abbreviated approval procedures for such products."
"5. Lorsqu'une Partie subordonne l'ap­probation de la commercialisation de produits pharmaceutiques ou de produits chimiques pour l'agriculture qui com­portent des éléments chimiques nouveaux, à la communication de données non divulguées résultant d'essais ou d'autres données non divulguées nécessaires pour déterminer si l'utilisation de ces produits est sans danger et efficace, cette Partie protégera ces données contre toute divul­gation, lorsque l'établissement de ces données demande un effort considérable, sauf si la divulgation est nécessaire pour protéger le public, ou à moins que des mesures ne soient prises pour s'assurer que les données sont protégées contre toute exploitation déloyale dans le commerce.
"6. Chacune des Parties prévoira, en ce qui concerne les données visées au paragraphe 5 qui lui sont communiquées après la date d'entrée en vigueur du présent accord, que seule la personne qui les a communiquées peut, sans autorisation de cette dernière à autrui, utiliser ces données à l'appui d'une demande d'approbation de produit au cours d'une période de temps raisonnable suivant la date de leur communication. On entend généralement par période de temps raison­nable, une période d'au moins cinq années à compter de la date à laquelle la Partie en cause a donné son autorisation à la per­sonne ayant produit les données destinées à faire approuver la commercialisation de son produit, compte tenu de la nature des données, ainsi que des efforts et des frais consentis par cette personne pour les pro­duire. Sous réserve de cette disposition, rien n'empêchera une Partie d'adopter à l'égard de ces produits des procédures d'homo-logation abrégées fondées sur des études de bioéquivalence et de bio-dis­ponibilité."
[15]
The plaintiff argues that, to the extent that there is any ambiguity in the interpreta­tion of C.08.004.1, either patent or latent, it should be resolved in a way that is consistent with Article 1711. The Minister contends that there is no ambiguity in the meaning of C.08.004.1, and that Article 1711 is there­fore irrelevant, although he also seemed to take the position that, in any event, there is no conflict between the Article and the
Regulations
.
D. The Facts
[16]
The relevant facts, on which the parties do not materially disagree, are as follows. The plaintiff, Bayer Inc., has filed with the Minister a NDS in respect of drug X to be used in connection with disease X. Bayer is the innovator of drug X, which is not the subject of a patent. The drug contains an active ingredient that has been used pre­viously in drug Z, which has been marketed in Canada for use in connection with certain animal diseases. The same active ingredient has also been used in drug Y, which has been marketed outside Canada in connection with a human disease other than that for which its use is proposed in the NDS that Bayer has filed with the Minister.
[17]
I should point out that an order of this court has provided for the confidentiality of the names of the drugs referred to above by letters, their active ingredients and the diseases for which they are used or are proposed to be used. Restrictions have ac­cordingly been placed on documents filed in connection with this proceeding that contain references to matters that are subject to the confidentiality order. Hence, no further details will be provided in this judgment, which, in any event, are not material to the resolution of the issues in dispute.
[18]
Bayer filed as evidence a lengthy af­fidavit by Dr. Timothy Shannon, Vice-President, Medical and Scientific Affairs, Bayer Inc. It was not the subject of cross-examination, and the truth of its content has not been challenged by the Minister. Among other things, it outlines the process of new drug approval discussed above, and describes a meeting that took place on February 25, 1997 between representatives of Bayer, and officials of the Ministry of Health. The purpose of this meeting was to discuss the interpretation that the Minister placed on C.08.004.1. In particular, Bayer was anxious to know whether the Minister shared its view that, if a NOC was issued with respect to drug X, then a NOC could not be issued to another manufacturer of an equivalent drug within five years of the issue of Bayer's NOC. The Minister did not take this view. Hence, the issue of a statement of claim by Bayer asking the court to make certain declarations about the meaning of C.08.004.1, and its applicability to drug X.
[19]
The Minister submitted as an af­fidavit a transcript of the examination for discovery of Ms. Dorothy Walker that was conducted by counsel for Bayer. Ms. Walker is Manager of the Submission Management Division of the Bureau of Pharmaceutical Assessment within the Ministry of Health, and as such she is familiar with, and was able to describe, the drug assessment process, including applications for a NOC contained in a NDS or an ANDS. Whether such a transcript could be admitted as evi­dence on a motion was the subject of some dispute between the parties, but since I have not found it necessary to rely on the portions of Ms. Walker's discovery to which Mr. Dimock, counsel for Bayer, objected, I need not decide this issue.
E. The Issues
[20]
Counsel for Bayer formulated four questions of law that he asked the court to answer in this motion for summary judg­ment. In the course of oral argument, it was agreed that the first question in the plaintiff's memorandum of fact and law should be reformulated slightly and divided into two parts. With this modification and the reversal of the order of Questions 3 and 4, the questions are as follows:
"QUESTION 1
(a) Is drug X a 'new drug' within the meaning of C.08.001?
(b) Does the fact that drug X contains a chemical or biological substance con­tained in a drug previously approved for sale in connection with an animal disease exclude it from the scope of C.08.004.1?"
If Question 1(a) is answered in the af­firmative and Question 1(b) is answered in the negative, then the following questions must also be answered. Cumulatively, they deal with the larger issue of whether C.08.004.1, in effect, confers a five-year monopoly in Canada on an innovator-manu­facturer in respect of a new drug for which a NOC has been issued to it.
"QUESTION 2
After the issuance of the Notice of Com­pliance for Drug X for use in the treatment of Disease X,
would the Minister of Health (the 'Minister') need to rely on data con­tained in or derived from the plaintiff's New Drug Submission for Drug X
, to establish the safety and effectiveness of a drug product of a second manufacturer who files an Abbreviated New Drug Sub­mission or Abbreviated Supplemental New Drug Submission comparing its drug product to the plaintiff's Drug X?
"QUESTION 3
Is the Minister prohibited from issuing a Notice of Compliance to a second manu­facturer who files an Abbreviated New Drug Submission
or Abbreviated Sup­plemental New Drug Submission com­paring its drug product to the plaintiff's Drug X
only if he examines the in­formation or material filed in the New Drug Submission of the plaintiff in the course of considering the Abbreviated New Drug Submission?
"QUESTION 4
Is the Minister prohibited from issuing a Notice of Compliance to a second manu­facturer who files an Abbreviated New Drug Submission
or Abbreviated Sup­plemental New Drug Submission com­paring its drug product to the plaintiff's Drug X,
until five years after the issuance of the Notice of Compliance for Drug X for use in the treatment of Disease X to the plaintiff?
"
F. Analysis
QUESTION 1(a)
[21]
There was no dispute between the parties that drug X was a "new drug" within the meaning of C.08.001, and fell within the definition contained in paragraph (c), which I have set out at [8]. The significance of this conclusion is that C.08.004.1 only applies when a submission has been made by a manufacturer for the purpose of establishing the safety and effectiveness of a "new drug". Accordingly, I answer this question in the affirmative.
QUESTION 1(b)
[22]
Paradoxically, whether drug X is "a drug" for the purpose of C.08.004.1 is a more difficult question. The parties agreed that the relevant definition is contained in s. 2 of the
Food and Drug Act
, R.S.C. 1985, F-27, which is the enabling statute for the
Regulations
on which this litigation is based. Section 2 provides as follows:
"'drug' includes any substance or mixture of substances manufactured, sold or repre­sented for use in
(a) the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of a disease, disorder or ab­normal physical state, or its symptoms,
in human beings or animals
," (emphasis added)
"'drogue' Sont compris parmi les drogues les substances ou mélanges de substances fabriqués, vendus ou présentés comme pouvant servir:
a) au diagnostic, au traitement, à l'at­ténuation ou à la prévention d'une maladie, d'un désordre, d'un état physique anormal ou de leurs symptômes,
chez l'être humain ou les animaux
;" (non souligné dans l'original)
[23]
C.08.004.1 only applies in respect of "a drug that contains a chemical or biological substance
not previously approved for sale in Canada as a drug
, ...". The problem is that drug X does contain an active ingredient that is found in drug Z, which has been approved for sale in Canada, but only in connection with certain animal diseases. Counsel for the Minister maintains that, since "a drug" is defined as a substance sold for use in the treatment of diseases in "humans
or
animals", then drug X contains a substance that has been previously approved for sale in Canada, and accordingly C.08.004.1 does not apply to the NDS filed by Bayer for a NOC for drug X.
[24]
Counsel for Bayer argued that this result made little sense in the context of the statutory scheme: how could the fact that a drug contains a substance that had been approved for use in connection with animals, he asked, have any bearing on whether it should be regarded as previously approved for sale so that it may safely be used in connection with humans? Counsel for the Minister replied, in effect, that he had no answer to that question, but the result was dictated by the plain meaning of the
Food and Drug Act
. Mr. Dimock suggested that a better reading of the provision would be that, when material is filed by the innovator of a drug intended for human use, the relevant inquiry should be to ask whether it contains a substance that had previously been approved for sale for
human
use. In other words, he wished to read in the word "human" to qualify "drug", whenever the context so required.
[25]
This seems to me an interpretation that is more consistent with the overall purposes of the statutory scheme than the literal, acontextual approach urged by Mr. Woyiwada for the Minister. Accordingly, when approval is being sought for a drug that has not been sold previously to treat a human disease, it is a "drug" for the purpose of this regulatory framework, even though it may have been sold previously to treat an animal disease. I therefore answer Question 1(b) in the negative.
[26]
Having found that the plaintiff has crossed the threshold, and brought drug X within the scope of C.08.004.1, I must now address the remaining questions posed by the plaintiff in this motion on the interpretation of C.08.004.1. These questions raise issues of much wider potential significance.
[27]
I should say at the outset that, since the principal purposes of this part of the
Food and Drug Regulations
are to ensure that drugs marketed in Canada are safe and effective, and to introduce a simpler and more cost effective process for the approval of generic drugs, Bayer's contention that it also confers on innovators the right to mar­ket a drug in Canada for five years without competition is somewhat surprising. Rights of this kind are normally conferred with respect to products that are protected by a patent.
[28]
Nonetheless, counsel for Bayer main­tains that if Questions 2 and 3 are answered as he contends that they should be, this is precisely the effect of C.08.004.1. Any doubt about the meaning of this provision is to be resolved, counsel argues, by referring to Article 1711 of the
NAFTA
, with which C.08.004.1 was intended to comply, and which is designed to protect manufacturers who have made a significant investment in testing the safety and efficacy of a new drug from being subject to unfair competition as a result of the improper disclosure and use of the secret information that they have had to file with the Minister in order to obtain approval to market the drug that they have developed.
QUESTION 2
[29]
The issue here is whether, in con­sidering an ANDS, the Minister "in support of the manufacturer's submission ...
relies on information contained in the information or material filed by the innovator ...
" Counsel for Bayer asks the court to rule that, if Bayer is granted a NOC for drug X, and a second manufacturer files an ANDS naming drug X as the "Canadian reference product", it is inevitable that, in assessing the ANDS of the second manufacturer, the Minister "relies" on data contained in the information or material filed in its NDS by Bayer as the innovator of drug X. This is because the only information that the Minister has on the safety and efficacy of the drug is that contained in Bayer's submission. The second manu­facturer's abbreviated submission will merely purport to establish that its drug is the phar­maceutical equivalent and bioequivalent of drug X, and will not contain any in­dependent evidence of the safety and ef­fectiveness of this new drug.
[30]
Accordingly, the plaintiff's argument goes, even though it may be said that the Minister "relies" on the fact that a NOC has already issued in respect of drug X as proof of the safety and effectiveness of the drug, the NOC will only have been issued to Bayer on the strength of the proof of drug X's safety and effectiveness contained in the information in Bayer's NDS. Hence, in a substantive sense, the Minister will nearly always
rely
on information filed by the innovator of a drug when considering an ANDS filed by a second manufacturer of a functionally equivalent drug.
[31]
Counsel argued that it was not possible for the Minister to rely on the fact that "the Canadian reference product" was being marketed in Canada as proof of its safety and effectiveness. For one thing, a second manufacturer could file an ANDS a day after the NOC had been issued for the "Canadian reference product", in which case there would have been no time for the drug to be tested by marketing. Furthermore, it is ap­parent from a "Policy Issues" document, dated August 21, 1991, and emanating from the Drugs Directorate of the Ministry, that the Minister only considers that the safety and effectiveness of a drug has been established by the market after it has been marketed for seven years. The document states:
"'sufficient time' for a new drug, as de­fined in s. C.08.001 of the
Food and Drug Regulations
, will be interpreted as
a minimum of seven years from the date of the initial marketing in Canada
(drug notification).
After this time, the drug product will no longer be regarded as a new drug
." (emphasis added)
[32]
In response, Mr. Woyiwada insisted that, in the normal case, the Minister did not "rely" on the information in the innovator's NDS when considering the issuance of a NOC to a second manufacturer on the basis of an ANDS naming the innovator's drug as the "Canadian reference product". Rather, the Minister "relies" on the information con­tained in the ANDS in deciding whether to grant a NOC, and does not refer to the material previously filed by the innovator.
[33]
At first blush, the Minister's argument may seem very formalistic, in the sense that, in granting approval to a generic drug manu­facturer because its product is the functional equivalent of a drug for which the Minister has already issued a NOC on the basis of the information supplied by the innovator, the Minister is indirectly, at least, "relying" on that information to establish the safety and effectiveness of the generic drug manu­facturer's product. The NOC, on which the Minister says that he relies, was itself issued on the basis of the confidential test data compiled by the innovator-manufacturer.
[34]
However, it is also important that this provision of the
Regulations
be read in the context of the overall scheme, which is to facilitate the approval process for new drugs when sought by manufacturers other than the innovators, and thus to reduce the cost of drugs to provincial governments and mem­bers of the public: see the
Regulatory Im­pact Analysis
filed with the
Regulations
in
Canada Gazette Part II
, vol. 129, part 18.
[35]
If Bayer's contention were accepted, then it would effectively undermine the efficacy of the ANDS provisions by im­posing a delay of five years on the issue of a NOC to a generic manufacturer. The scheme of the
Regulations
does not suggest that the issue of a NOC is normally so delayed: if this had been the intended result, the wording of C.08.004.1 is a very oblique way to express it.
[36]
The explanation of the intended scope of application of C.08.004.1 given in the
Regulatory Impact Analysis Statement
, which was issued contemporaneously with the
Regulations
, is certainly quite narrow in scope.
"This provision may provide the innovator with additional market protection in cases where the patent is near expiry. The fol­lowing example is used to illustrate this point:
The patent on an innovator's product A expires in 1997. The NOC for product A is issued in 1995 and contains a new chemical or biological substance. An abbreviated new drug submission is filed in 1996 for a second entry product B. If in order to assess the safety, efficacy and quality of product B, the Minister relies upon information contained in the in­novator's submission for product A, a NOC for product B would not be issued until the year 2000, thus giving the in­novator an additional 3 years market protection for product A.
"In the case where the Drugs Directorate intends to rely on the data of the innovator to support safety and efficacy claims, and this would result in a delay in the issuance of the NOC, the Drugs Directorate will notify the second-entry manufacturer in advance of the review. The Drugs Directorate will give the second-entry manufacturer the option of supplying additional information to support the claim without relying on the data previously submitted by the innovator. If the manu­facturer wishes to supply the required information directly, in accordance with the policy on management of information, the manufacturer will avoid the application of this provision."
"L'innovateur de par cette disposition pourrait bénéficier d'une protection com­merciale supplé-mentaire dans les cas où la période de brevet est à la veille de prendre fin. L'exemple suivant illustre ce point:
Le brevet du produit A d'un innovateur prend fin en 1997. L'avis de conformité pour le produit est octroyé en 1995 et contient une nouvelle substance chimique ou biologique. En 1996, une présentation de drogue nouvelle abrégée est soumise pour un produit générique B. Si afin d'établir le profil d'innocuité, d'efficacité et de qualité du produit B, le ministre se fonde sur les renseignements contenus dans la présentation de l'innovateur pour le produit A, un avis de conformité pour le produit B ne pourra être octroyé avant l'an 2000, procurant ainsi à l'innovateur une protection commerciale supplé­mentaire de 3 ans pour le produit A.
"Dans le cas où la Direction des médica­ments a l'intention de se fonder sur les données de l'innovateur pour appuyer les allégations concernant l'innocuité et l'ef­ficacité du produit et où cela entraînerait un retard dans l'octroi de l'avis de con­formité, la Direction des médicaments en informera le fabricant du produit générique avant l'examen. La Direction des médica­ments offrira au fabricant du produit générique la possibilité de fournir d'autres données à l'appui des allégations et ne se fondera pas sur les données déjà soumises par l'innovateur. Le fabricant aura le loisir de fournir directement les renseignements demandés, conformément à la politique sur la gestion de l'information; il se soustraira ainsi à l'application de cette disposition."
[37]
This explanation provides a useful aid to the interpretation of C.08.004.1, and supports my initial view that this provision was not intended to create a protection analogous to a patent for the benefit of nearly all innovators of new drugs who have obtained a NOC. Accordingly, I do not accept the submission that the Minister "relies" on the innovator's information for the purpose of C.08.004.1 when considering an ANDS for a NOC, when the Minister issues the NOC solely on the basis of the information contained in the ANDS. Given the overall purpose of the
Regulations
, the word adverb "indirectly" should not be read into C.08.004.1(1) so as to broaden the scope of the verb "relies".
[38]
Having answered this Question in the negative, it is not strictly necessary for me to consider the other Questions, since the plaintiff can only obtain the protection that it seeks if each Question is answered in its favour. However, in case I am wrong in my answer to Question 2, and because I heard full arguments from counsel on all the is­sues, I shall address the other Questions as well.
QUESTION 3
[39]
The question here is whether, for the purpose of C.08.004.1, the Minister will "
examine
any information or material filed with the Minister" in its NDS by Bayer as the innovator of drug X. If so, then C.08.004.1 will apply and, if other re­quirements of the provision are satisfied, the Minister may not issue a NOC to a generic manufacturer of an equivalent drug until five years have elapsed since the issue of the NOC to Bayer.
[40]
The undisputed evidence was that, in the normal case, officials of the Ministry of Health do not consult the information sup­plied by the innovator when they are de­ciding whether to issue a NOC on the basis of an ANDS. Their decision is based ex­clusively on the information contained in the ANDS, and their concern is to ensure only that it establishes the pharmaceutical equivalence and bioequivalence of the new drug to the "Canadian reference product". Therefore, counsel for the Minister argued, since the Minister does not physically open and consult the material previously filed by the innovator, it cannot be said that the Minister "examines" this material when considering a second manufacturer's ANDS.
[41]
Counsel for Bayer made two submis­sions on this point. First, he argued that the examination by the Minister referred to in C.08.004.1 is the examination that the Minis­ter made of the information filed by the innovator manufacturer
at the time that it filed its NDS
. Accordingly, he said, whether or not the Minister examines that material in the course of examining the generic drug manufacturer's ANDS is irrelevant: the examination to which C.08.004.1 refers will already have occurred in the course of the Minister's consideration of the innovator's NDS.
[42]
Based solely on the text of C.08.004.1 this seems an implausible interpretation. First, since the Minister must of necessity always examine the material filed by an innovator in deciding whether to issue a NOC, the clause in dispute is superfluous. Second, the past tense would have been required if the drafter had intended to refer to the prior examination of the innovator's information. On counsel's construction, the Minister's examination of the innovator's test data contained in its NDS must have occurred by necessity before the Minister "relies" on it in the course of considering an ANDS. The use of the present tense of both verbs, "examines" and "relies", indicates that the person who drafted C.08.004.1 envisaged that each would occur in the course of the Minister's considering the same submission, namely, the ANDS.
[43]
The reference in C.08.004.1 to the Minister's examination seems to be linked to the provision in C.08.003.1, which confers on the Minister a discretion to examine material filed previously by a manufacturer, in the course of examining another submis­sion by a different manufacturer in order to establish the safety or effectiveness of the drug to which this latter submission relates. However, this would seem to be an ex­ceptional procedure: in most cases, the Minister is asked to issue a NOC solely on the basis of the information contained in the ANDS filed in support of the application.
[44]
The second argument advanced by counsel for Bayer was based on paragraph 6 of Article 1711 of the
NAFTA
, which C.08.004.1(1) was intended to implement. In particular, he pointed out that Article 1711 does not include a requirement that the information supplied by the innovator-manu­facturer be "examined" as a condition precedent to the manufacturer's becoming entitled to five years' protection from com­petition from a generic manufacturer. And since C.08.004.1(1) was introduced in order to comply with Canada's obligations under the
NAFTA
, and Article 1711 in particular, counsel argued that the "examination" re­quirement should not be interpreted as im­posing an additional requirement beyond those clearly contained in paragraph 6. Hence, the interpretation proposed by coun­sel for Bayer should not be rejected simply because it does not add another requirement before C.08.004.1 can apply.
[45]
In response, counsel for the Minister relied on the plain meaning of C.08.004.1(1) and submitted that, since it contained no ambiguity, Article 1711 was irrelevant, even though the
Regulations
had been amended in order to comply with
NAFTA
. I should note that counsel for Bayer did
not
argue that, if counsel for the Minister was correct, then C.08.004.1(1) was invalid in so far as it provided less protection to innovator-manu­facturers than that contained in Article 1711.
[46]
Counsel for the Minister also noted that paragraph 6 of Article 1711 ends by stating that:
"Subject to this provision, there shall be no limitation on any Party to implement ab­breviated approval procedures for such products on the basis of bioequivalence and bioavailability studies."
"Sous réserve de cette disposition, rien n'empêchera une Partie d'adopter à l'égard de ces produits des procédures d'homo­logation abrégées fondées sur des études de bioéquivalence et de biodisponibilité."
He submitted that the argument advanced by Bayer would effectively undermine the ANDS procedure contained in C.08.004.1(1) by imposing a five year delay on the issue of a NOC to a second manufacturer of a drug, and that this was clearly not the intention of Article 1711.
[47]
Counsel for the Minister may have taken too narrow a view of the use that should be made of the terms of a treaty when interpreting a provision of domestic law that was intended to implement Canada's obligations under that treaty. In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 1371  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Gonthier, J., stated the relevant principles as follows:
"In interpreting legislation which has been enacted with a view towards implementing international obligations, as is the case here, it is reasonable for a tribunal to examine the domestic law in the context of the relevant agreement to clarify any un­certainty. Indeed where the text of the domestic law lends itself to it, one should also strive to expound an interpretation which is consonant with the relevant inter­national obligations.
"Second, and more specifically, it is rea­sonable to make reference to an inter­national agreement at the very outset of the inquiry to determine if there is an am­biguity, even latent, in the domestic legis­lation.
The Court of Appeal's suggestion that recourse to an international treaty is only available where the provision of the domestic legislation is ambiguous on its face is to be rejected
." (emphasis added)
[48]
It thus becomes necessary to consider the scope of the obligations imposed on the Parties by Article 1711 of the
NAFTA
, and in particular by paragraph 6. The general subject matter of Article 1711 is indicated by its heading, "Trade Secrets", and its overall objective is contained in paragraph 1, which states:
"Each Party shall provide the legal means for any person to prevent trade secrets from being disclosed to, acquired by, or used by others without the consent of the person lawfully in control of the in­formation in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices;"
"Chacune des Parties assurera à toute personne les moyens juridiques d'empêcher que des secrets commerciaux ne soient divulgués à des tiers, acquis ou utilisés par eux, sans le consentement de la personne licitement en possession de ces ren­seignements et d'une manière contraire aux pratiques commerciales honnêtes:"
The more specific paragraphs that follow should be interpreted against the background of this statement of the general duty imposed by Article 1711.
[49]
Paragraph 5 provides that "the Party shall protect against disclosure of the data of persons making such submissions when the origination of such data involves con­siderable effort", where, as here, domestic legislation requires "the submission of un­disclosed test or other data necessary to determine whether the use of such products is safe and effective" as a precondition for obtaining approval to market new drugs. In this case, there is no suggestion that the confidential data provided by Bayer in its NDS for drug X will be disclosed when an ANDS is filed by a generic drug manu­facturer's naming drug X as "the Canadian reference product".
[50]
Paragraph 6 states that each Party shall provide that "no person other than the person that submitted" the undisclosed test data referred to in paragraph 5 "shall rely on such data in support of an application for product approval during a reasonable period of time after their submission". The paragraph goes on to say that "a reasonable period" shall normally be no less than five years from the date when the Party granted approval to the person who produced the data. It ends, as we have already seen, by providing that "Subject to this provision, there shall be no limitation on any Party to implement abbreviated approval procedures for such products on the basis of bioequivalence and bioavailability studies".
[51]
Paragraph 7 of Article 1711 deals with a situation that is not relevant to this case, although it may shed some light on the proper interpretation of paragraph 6. It provides that, "where a Party relies on a marketing approval granted by another Party" the reasonable period of exclusive use shall commence from the date of the first marketing approval.
[52]
The first question to be asked is whether, as interpreted by the Minister, the statutory framework contained in Division 8 of the
Food and Drug Regulations
fails to provide the protection for Bayer conferred by Article 1711, paragraph 6.
[53]
In my opinion, Article 1711 does not confer the right to five years' exclusive marketing of a new drug from the date of the issue of a NOC on the basis of the test data contained in the innovator's NDS in a situation such as that in issue in this case.
[54]
Paragraph 6 appears to contemplate a situation in which
a competitor
"relies" on the data submitted by a manufacturer to obtain marketing approval. Indeed, following on from paragraph 5, which enjoins the Parties to "protect against disclosure" of such data, paragraph 6 appears simply to provide a remedy when a Party has failed to keep the data confidential by preventing the issue of an approval to a competitor for five years. This conclusion would be consistent with the general statement in paragraph 1 that each Party is to provide the legal means for pre­venting the unauthorized disclosure and use of trade secrets "in a manner contrary to honest commercial practices".
[55]
The operation of the ANDS process prescribed by C.08.003 does not in my opinion involve conduct that is prohibited by paragraph 6. In a situation such as that contemplated by this litigation, the Minister will not have failed to protect Bayer from the unauthorized disclosure of its test data, and a generic manufacturer will not "rely" on that data in an ANDS filed to obtain a NOC for a drug that is the pharmaceutical equivalent and bioequivalent of drug X. Rather, the manufacturer will rely on its comparative studies and bioavailability tests.
[56]
If Article 1711 had been intended to impose a delay of five years in most situations covered by the abbreviated submis­sion process, this intention would surely have been expressed more precisely. Indeed, as noted above, paragraph 7 of Article 1711 does deal quite specifically, but only in the international context, with a situation in which a Party relies on a prior marketing approval. It provides:
"Where a Party relies on a marketing approval granted by another Party, the reasonable period of exclusive use of the data submitted in connection with ob­taining the approval relied on shall begin with the date of the first marketing ap­proval relied on."
"Lorsqu'une Partie se fie à une approbation de commercialisation accordée par une autre Partie, la période raisonnable d'utilisation exclusive des données présentées en vue d'obtenir l'approbation en question commencera à la date de la première approbation de commercialisation."
[57]
If paragraph 6 were intended also to apply the five years' delay to a situation where a Party relies on a marketing approval that it had
itself
previously issued to a manufacturer that had been required to submit its undisclosed data in order to obtain approval, the text would surely have said so much more clearly. Indeed, it is significant in my opinion that paragraph 6 concludes by stating that, "Subject to this provision, there shall be no limitation on any Party to implement abbreviated approval procedures for such products." It is true that Bayer's interpretation of paragraph 6 would not formally prevent the use of abbreviated new drug submissions, but merely delay the grant of a NOC. However, in the pharmaceutical industry, new drugs are being developed all the time, and a period of five years is a long time to grant a de facto monopoly for a drug that is not protected by a patent. After five years, many drugs will have been superseded by more effective products.
[58]
Thus, an examination of Article 1711 does not lead me to conclude that the Minister's interpretation of C.08.004.1 is in breach of any obligation imposed by Article 1711. Accordingly, the text of the Treaty neither reveals a latent ambiguity in C.08.004.1, nor resolves a patent ambiguity in its language.
[59]
My conclusion is, therefore, that the Minister will only "examine" the data supplied by Bayer in connection with drug X, within the meaning of C.08.004.1, if, in the exercise of the discretion contained in C.08.003, for example, Ministry officials go back to consult that material in the course of considering an ANDS submitted by another company seeking approval for a drug that is the functional equivalent of Drug X. Moreover, this interpretation of C.008.04.1(1) does not deprive Bayer of any legal protection to which it is entitled by virtue of Article 1711.
QUESTION 4
[60]
In the fourth question, the plaintiff asks me to decide that the Minister is prohibited from issuing a NOC on the basis of an ANDS filed in respect of a drug that is the pharmaceutical equivalent and bioequivalent of drug X, until five years have elapsed from the issue of the NOC to Bayer for drug X. The answer to this question follows automatically from the answers given to Questions 2 and 3.
[61]
Since I have found that, in the normal course of considering an ANDS, the Minister does not usually "examine", nor "rely" on, the data supplied by the innovator, it follows that the Minister may issue a NOC as soon as a generic manufacturer is able to establish on the basis of an ANDS submitted in compliance with the
Regulations
, that its product is the pharmaceutical equivalent and bioequivalent of drug X.
G. Conclusion
[62]
I summarize my answers to the Questions posed in this motion as follows:
QUESTION 1 (a): Yes
QUESTION 1 (b): No
QUESTION 2: No
QUESTION 3: Yes
QUESTION 4: No
[63]
Accordingly, the plaintiff's motion for summary judgment is dismissed with costs.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/kaw
[End of document]