[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is a determination of the following question of law:
Does s. 158(2) of the Customs Act, R.C.S. 1970, c. C-40 bar this action?
This determination was directed by an order of Rouleau, J., of September 13, 1988.
[2]
This involves the interpretation of several sections of the former Customs Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-40. When read together many of these sections seem contradictory and inconsistent; the most charitable view is that they fail to reveal how they relate to each other. Despite the diligence of counsel and the clarity of their arguments, it is with some difficulty that I can relate the provisions of the Act in a rational way to the events in this case. My findings of law are as follows, related to the facts as confirmed by affidavit and which are not in dispute.
[3]
On April 28, 1986, six vessels of the plaintiff were seized under the Customs Act. On the same day the plaintiff paid $1,398,360.67 to the Department of National Revenue and the ships were released. By its letter of April 28, 1986, transmitting the deposit the plaintiff also advised that it wished to "appeal" the assessment of taxes and the seizure. I conclude that the legal effects of these steps were as follows. The notice of appeal given by the plaintiff had the effect as provided in s. 153(1) of the Act of precluding the "condemnation" to forfeiture of the money deposited, a condemnation which would otherwise have followed automatically one month after the deposit of the money. The deposit once made came within the provisions of s. 157 of the Act (the parties agree with this conclusion) which meant that, pursuant to s. 157(3) the deposit would remain in a bank "until forfeited in due course of law or released by order of the Minister". This implies as does s. 153(1) that the money was not yet forfeited.
[4]
A series of steps was then taken as provided in ss. 160-164 which appear in a part of the Customs Act preceded by the heading
"Proceedings Upon Seizure Or Alleged Penalty Or Forfeiture Incurred"
On May 20, 1986, Revenue Canada sent to the plaintiff several notices relating to the various vessels advising that the deposits in question "are subject to forfeiture under the Customs Act" because the vessels were unlawfully used in Canadian waters whereupon customs duties became payable. Each of these was described in the document as a "Notice of Seizure sent pursuant to s. 161 of the Customs Act" and advised the plaintiff that it had thirty days (as provided in s. 161) to furnish such evidence as it might wish. I take this notice to be within the contemplation of s. 160 to which s. 161 clearly relates. Section 160 applies wherever "it is alleged that any ... forfeiture has been incurred ...". In other words these notices advised the plaintiff that unless the Minister decided otherwise these deposits would be forfeited.
[5]
After many representations had been made by the plaintiff notices were issued on behalf of the Minister on October 10, 1986, pursuant to s. 163. As contemplated in s. 163(1) the Minister decided that $1,012,000 of the deposit should be returned and that the remainder should be forfeited. These notices did not indicate, however, whether the Minister was referring the question of the forfeited amounts to a court for decision. On October 23, 1986, the solicitors for the plaintiff advised Revenue Canada pursuant to s. 164 that it did not accept the decision with respect to the forfeiture and asked whether the Minister was prepared to refer that question to the Federal Court. On October 31, 1986, Revenue Canada replied to the effect that the Minister would not make such a reference.
[6]
On November 21, 1986, this action was commenced in which the plaintiff sought the recovery of $163,375. The statement of defence, inter alia, pleaded the limitation period in s. 158(2) and alleged that this action was out of time. It is this issue which I must determine.
[7]
Section 158 of the Act provides as follows:
"158(1) Any sum of money deposited in accordance with s. 157 shall, unless it is released as provided in s. 157, become the property of Her Majesty for the public uses of Canada, subject to the provisions of this Act with respect to the distribution of the proceeds of forfeited goods.
"158(2) No proceedings against the Crown for the recovery of any such money shall be instituted, except within six months from the date of the deposit thereof."
As it is common ground that the deposit whose recovery is sought in this action was made under s. 157, s. 158 expressly applies to its recovery. Further, it is common ground that the deposit was made on April 28, 1986, and that the limitation period prescribed in s. 158(2) would therefore have expired on October 28, 1986, over three weeks before this action was commenced.
[8]
The argument of the plaintiff essentially is that the "proceedings" referred to in s. 158(2) could include some of the steps taken by it under ss. 161-164 as referred to above. It is contended that these are "proceedings" because these sections appear in the Act under the heading "Proceedings upon Seizure or Alleged Penalty or Forfeiture Incurred". It is thus contended that as the plaintiff took such steps during the summer of 1986 through written and oral representations to persuade the Department of National Revenue to return the deposit, and since it advised the Department on October 23, 1986, pursuant to s. 164 that the Minister's decision was not accepted, it had taken "proceedings" within six months from the date of the deposit. It was argued further that the only relevant limitation period was that prescribed in s. 150 of the Act which requires that any "action, suit or proceeding ... against the Crown" for the recovery of a thing seized must be brought within three months after the Minister has given a decision "in relation to the condemnation of the thing seized". Therefore, according to this argument, the plaintiff had a full three months after October 10th, or perhaps after October 31st, to commence this action, and was well within that time in bringing the action on November 21, 1986.
[9]
I am not persuaded by this argument. While, as I have indicated, these sections are not the model of clarity, I cannot escape the conclusion that the words "proceedings against the Crown for the recovery of any such money ..." as found in s. 158(2) refer to an action in court. While I have noted carefully the authorities cited by counsel by the plaintiff with respect to possible meanings of the word "proceedings" I am satisfied that, in the context of this phrase, the word "proceedings" cannot be viewed in isolation. The phrase as quoted must be read as a whole and the plain meaning of that phrase is surely a reference to litigation. I might add that even if the steps taken pursuant to ss. 161-164 are "proceedings" they are not proceedings instituted by the taxpayer. These sections provide a means for the Department to review the assessment at different levels ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 117 (F.C.A.)) with the aid of submissions from the taxpayer. They are "instituted" by the notice by the Deputy Minister under s. 161 and are optional: s. 161(1) provides that "The Deputy Minister may thereupon notify the owner [of the impending forfeiture] ... and call upon him to furnish ... such evidence ... as he desires to furnish". If the Deputy Minister chooses not to notify the owner in this fashion, then the only recourse the owner of the money deposited has for its recovery is to commence action.
[10]
I have had some difficulty in reaching this conclusion because it could result in considerable inconvenience. It means that even though the Deputy Minister or the Minister may be still considering the submissions of the taxpayer pursuant to ss. 162 and 163 prior to making a decision, if the time is approaching a lapse of six months from the date of the deposit the taxpayer to preserve his right under s. 158(2) must commence action for the recovery of the deposit. He would be put to this trouble and expense even if later the Minister decided in his favour. I am unable, however, to avoid the plain meaning of s. 158(2) notwithstanding this potential absurdity. It does underline the importance of the Deputy Minister and the Minister making a decision as quickly as possible and not, as was done in this case, finally advising the taxpayer three days after the expiration of the limitation period that the Minister would not refer the matter to court.
[11]
At the same time I have come to the conclusion that s. 150 has nothing to do with this situation. Section 150 appears to me to refer only to actions for the recovery of articles seized and does not apply to the recovery of deposits. Therefore although it prohibits any action until the Minister has decided to condemn an article seized, it would not be applicable to preclude a taxpayer commencing action at any time after the making of a deposit for the recovery of the money deposited. While it is by no means apparent why different regimes, including different limitation periods, were prescribed for recovery of the article itself on the one hand, and the recovery of the deposit made in lieu of the seizure or continuation of the seizure of the article on the other, that appears to be what the Act provides.
[12]
In reaching this conclusion I am following a virtually identical 1917 decision of the Exchequer Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Act of that period. While the decision is over seventy years old I am unaware of any jurisprudence or statutory developments which suggest a different result.
[13]
The answer to the question put before me for determination is therefore "Yes".
[14]
Costs shall be in the cause.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]