[1]
Martin, J.
: The plaintiff, Mount Royal/Walsh Inc., claims in personam against Jensen Shipping Limited two hundred and ninety-one thousand two hundred and forty-three dollars and sixty-eight cents ($ 291,243.68) of which two hundred and sixty-four thousand and thirty-six dollars and sixty-six cents ($ 264,036.66) is claimed in rem against the ship "Jensen Star".
[2]
The amounts claimed are in respect of materials supplied to and repairs and equipping of the ship within the meaning of paragraphs 22(2)(m) and (n) of the Federal Court Act. The action in rem against the ship is taken under s. 43(2) of that Act.
[3]
At trial it was not disputed that the work done and the materials supplied in respect of the ship came within the meaning of paragraphs 22(2)(m) and (n) nor was it disputed that the work claimed to have been done was actually done by the plaintiff. Rather the defendant says:
a) the charges made by the plaintiff were excessive;
b) the defendant has already paid a portion of the amount claimed, and
c) because the beneficial owner of the ship at the time of the commencement of the action was Jensen Marine Holdings Limited and not Jensen Shipping Limited, on whose earlier instructions the work was done and the materials were supplied in respect of the ship, this court's in rem jurisdiction is removed by reason of s. 43(3) of the Federal Court Act.
[4]
John Hynes, the President and principal shareholder of the plaintiff, and Niels Jorgensen, the President and principal shareholder of Jensen Shipping had, until 1982, been the principal shareholders of the plaintiff which, until 1982, had operated a marine repair and shipping business. In 1982 the two principals decided to go their separate ways ... Hynes in the marine repair business and Jorgensen in the shipping business. With that in mind Jensen Shipping was incorporated for the exclusive ownership of Jorgensen and the ship, "Jensen Star", was transferred to the newly incorporated company in which Hynes held no shares. At the same time, Hynes, together with his wife, became the sole shareholders of the plaintiff company by virtue of having acquired the shares formerly held by Jorgensen in the company.
[5]
There is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the separation of these business and corporate partners was anything but amicable. Indeed the evidence is to the contrary for, after the separation, Jorgensen, through Jensen Shipping, brought the ships owned or chartered by Jensen Shipping to the plaintiff for equipping and repair. Over the period from August 1982 until June 1984, Jorgensen personally requested or authorized approximately 25 separate jobs on five different ships. The plaintiff's invoices for the work so authorized amounted in all to about $420,000.00. Of that total amount $264,036.66 represented materials supplied and repairs done in respect of the "Jensen Star", the first and last invoices for which were dated August 30, 1982 and May 21, 1984.
[6]
Because of their past and continuing association Hynes says that Jorgensen was given preferred treatment in the charges which were made for the work done for Jensen Shipping. Although Hynes himself personally worked on the jobs requested by Jorgensen, he did not charge for his time. Hynes also gave Jorgensen a reduced rate on the usual mark-up for labour charges and did not, at least until 1984, begin charging the two percent per month on accounts which were in arrears which interest charges were provided for in the invoices submitted by the plaintiff to Jensen Shipping.
[7]
Hynes' evidence is that as the Jensen Shipping account kept mounting he became more concerned and spoke to Jorgensen frequently with a view to getting it paid. Notwithstanding Jorgensen's failure to make any payment between August 1982 and March 1983, when the amounts due were about $200,000.00, Hynes loaned $54,000.00 to Jorgensen in April of 1983 on an interest-free note, interest free until demand. In fact the first payment on the account was not made until December 31, 1983, when the work invoiced by the plaintiff to Jensen Shipping totalled $265,159.66. At that time Jensen Shipping made a payment of $100,000.00.
[8]
Hynes says, and I accept his evidence, that with one exception Jorgensen never complained about any account being excessive until after this action was taken. The only account questioned by Jorgensen was the account of $112,765.00 submitted in respect of the ship "Mesange" on March 24, 1983. After discussing that account with Jorgensen, Hynes issued a credit note for $20,000.00 on February 22, 1984 and, according to Hynes, Jorgensen never raised the matter again until after the seizure of the ship in this action.
[9]
Jorgensen claims he raised the matter of the plaintiff's accounts being excessive on at least two occasions. He was vague about when these discussions took place and on his own admission he says he did not go into any detail or refer to any particular invoice but simply informed Hynes the invoices, with the exception of the "Mesange" account, were 20 to 25 percent too high.
[10]
At his examination for discovery Jorgensen declined to identify the specifics of any account as being excessive beyond saying that in his opinion they were excessive. At trial Jorgensen once again would not be specific with respect to which or what portions of any accounts were excessive but claimed his experience factor was sufficient to identify an overall excess charge of 20 to 25 percent on all accounts.
[11]
I do not accept Jorgensen's evidence in this respect. The normal action of a person receiving an account which he thinks is excessive is to bring it to the attention of the person rendering the account. This Jorgensen did when he received the account in respect of the "Mesange". As a result of that action the account was reduced by $20,000.00 a few months later. If Jorgensen truly felt that the other accounts, and about two thirds of them both in quantity and amount were sent after the "Mesange" account, were 20 to 25 percent excessive he had every incentive, as a result of his experience with the "Mesange" account, to ask for an adjustment on the subsequent accounts. Hynes denies that any requests or complaints were made by Jorgensen and I accept Hynes' evidence in this respect.
[12]
Exhibit P-31 is a reconciliation of accounts as of July 13, 1984, on Jensen Shipping's letterhead. Each of the accounts which the defendant now claims to be excessive is noted as being due to the plaintiff. Hynes says that each account was dealt with separately and when it was determined that there was no dispute about the account a red line was drawn through it. All of the accounts shown on Exhibit P-31 have red lines drawn through them.
[13]
In support of its claim that the plaintiff's accounts were excessive the defendant called a Mr. Anthony Michael Airey, a former sea going engineer and, at the time of giving his evidence, a marine consultant. Airey's evidence was very general in nature. His main thrust was that the invoices should have been in more detail. He allowed, however, that under the circumstances of two former partners dealing with each other it was understandable that there might not be as much detail as there would be between strangers.
[14]
I do not propose to deal in detail with the evidence called to support and contest the legitimacy of the plaintiff's accounts because I am satisfied that on the whole they were reasonable. The fact that Jorgensen, with one exception, did not dispute the accounts until after the action was instituted tends to confirm their legitimacy. The fact that even at trial Jorgensen was not prepared, except in overall general terms, to specify why any particular account was excessive also supports the plaintiff's claim.
[15]
Airey's evidence was not at all convincing and was badly shaken in cross-examination. In particular, and typical of the defendant's evidence, is that relating to the May 24, 1984, account for $114,116.00 rendered in respect of the "Jensen Star". In Airey's view that account should have been reduced by 50 percent while Jorgensen simply lumped that account with all the others as being from 20 to 25 percent excessive. In fact the back-up figures for the amount of that account had been prepared by Jorgensen himself as evidenced by his handwritten notes attached to it. In effect it was Jorgensen himself who, at least, assisted in fixing the amount of the account, the amount of which he now disputes.
[16]
Not only am I satisfied that the plaintiff's accounts are reasonable but I am satisfied that they were, with one exception, acceptable to Jorgensen. I am also satisfied that, with the one exception, Jorgensen made no objection to the accounts until after this action was taken and then only with a view to frustrating the plaintiff in its attempt to recover on them.
[17]
Accordingly, the defendant fails in its allegation that the accounts were excessive.
[18]
The defendant also claims that it has paid a portion of the account in such a way so as to reduce the amount of the in rem claim against the ship. Its argument in this respect depends upon the rules of attribution of payments, i.e. in what manner or to which of the plaintiff's accounts should the payments made by the defendant be allocated.
[19]
By December 31, 1983, the plaintiff had invoiced Jensen Shipping a total of $265,159.60, which amount did not include the $54,000.00 loan of April 21, 1983, or several accounts which arose out of the separation of the marine repair and shipping business. On December 31, 1983, Jensen Shipping paid to the plaintiff $100,000.00 and, on April 23, 1984, $60,000.00. The December 31, 1983, payment was by way of a cheque dated December 29, 1983.
[20]
The defendant did not specify at the time of either payment that the amount was tendered in discharge of any particular account or invoice. The plaintiff says, and its statement of June 20, 1984, to Jensen Shipping confirms it, that the amounts received were applied against the ship repair debt as opposed to the intercompany or loan accounts but, within the ship repair account, the amounts received from Jensen Shipping were not attributed to any particular invoice. Statements similar to the June 20, 1984, statements were submitted by the plaintiff to Jensen Shipping on April 23 and May 24, 1984.
[21]
On July 30, 1984, Jensen Shipping sent a photostatic copy of the December 29, 1983 cheque for $100,000.00 and asked that the money represented by the cheque be applied as to $54,000.00 against the note signed by N.B. Jorgensen and the balance of $46,000.00 against the outstanding accounts.
[22]
The plaintiff took no action to comply with the July 30, 1984, instructions from the defendant but instead, immediately prior to or at the time of instituting this action, elected to apply the payments totalling $160,000.00 firstly against the accounts rendered in respect of work done on ships other than the "Jensen Star" and, secondly, against the accounts rendered in respect of the work done on the "Jensen Star". This gave rise to a balance owing of $237,243.68 all of which could be accounted for by way of invoices for work done on the "Jensen Star". Accordingly the plaintiff claimed in rem against the ship for that amount plus interest.
[23]
Subsequently when the defendant, in other proceedings in the courts of Quebec and in these proceedings, formally advanced the claim that $54,000.00 of the $160,000.00 paid ought to be applied against the loan, the plaintiff applied for and was granted leave to amend its statement of claim in rem and in personam and to re-arrest the ship unless an additional sum of $26,792.98 was paid by the defendant as security.
[24]
Accordingly the plaintiff filed an amended statement of claim in rem and in personam claiming $291,243.68 against the defendant Jensen Shipping and $264,036.66 in rem against the ship. The reason that the in rem claim against the ship could not be increased by $54,000.00 was that the total work represented by invoices in respect of the "Jensen Star" was $264,036.66.
[25]
The plaintiff claims that common law rules determine how payments should be allocated when the debtor has not specified at the time of payment how it wishes them to be applied. Jensen Shipping claims that the Quebec Civil Code governs because the transaction between the debtor and creditor took place in the province of Quebec.
[26]
Counsel for Jensen Shipping contends that under the provisions of the Civil Code payments would be attributed, in this matter, in such a way as to reduce considerably the amount of the in rem claim by attributing the payments made to the accounts in the order of time, i.e. the oldest accounts being paid first.
[27]
At the time Reed, J., made her decision on the motion to reduce security in this matter counsel were in agreement that the state of jurisprudence with respect to the application of common law or the Civil Code to the attribution of such payments was in doubt. Since then that doubt has been removed by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case McIntyre, J., who delivered the majority decision of the court, said at page 782 S.C.R.:
"It is argued that in the absence of a special admiralty rule or provision the law enforced in the locality of the proceedings applies. This is the result, it is contended, of the adoption of an incomplete body of law from a unitary state into a federal system. Since the common law of negligence and bailment may be incidentally applied in admiralty cases, so also may the Civil Code be incidentally applied in cases arising in the Province of Quebec. The answer to this argument may be shortly stated. Canadian maritime law as adopted in Canada historically, and as finally brought into Canadian law by s. 2 of the Federal Court Act, includes common law principles as they are applied in admiralty matters. Thus, as discussed above, common law principles so incorporated are federal law and not an incidental application of provincial law.
"In conclusion then it may be said that the common law principles of negligence and bailment have become part of Canadian maritime law by adoption from England. Accordingly, Le Dain, J., in applying the common law principles of bailment and negligence, adopted the right course. In addition, this conclusion serves the practical interest of uniformity in Canadian admiralty and maritime law."
[28]
I conclude from those observations that the common law principles, as opposed to the provisions of the Civil Code, relating to the attribution of payments paid between debtor and creditor are a part of Canadian maritime law. Those principles, as applied in admiralty matters, are illustrated in The "Mecca.", [1897] A.C. 286, at 293, by the following passage from Lord Macnaghten's judgment:
"When a debtor is making a payment to his creditor he may appropriate the money as he pleases, and the creditor must apply it accordingly. If the debtor does not make any appropriation at the time when he makes the payment the right of application devolves on the creditor. In 1816, when Clayton's Cases, 1 Mer. 585, 608, was decided, there seems to have been authority for saying that the creditor was bound to make his election at once according to the rule of the civil law, or at any rate, within a reasonable time, whatever that expression in such a connection may be taken to mean. But it has long been held and it is now quite settled that the creditor has the right of election 'up to the very last moment', and he is not bound to declare his election in express terms. He may declare it by bringing an action or in any other way that makes his meaning and intention plain."
[29]
In that case the creditor had, after receipt of a payment on account, prepared a statement of account showing the amounts of the invoices for work done relating to two ships owned by the debtor. The invoices were listed in chronological order at the end of which they were totalled, the amount of the payment deducted and the balance shown. This is substantially if not almost precisely what the plaintiff has done in this case by its June 20, 1984 statement.
[30]
Under those circumstances, in The "Mecca.", Lord Halsbury at page 291 found:
"This is not an account current; there is no setting one item against another; credit is given for the 9001. at the end of all the items. They are all separate transactions, and, although on one piece of paper, seem to represent only historically the transactions as they occurred. [...]
"In this case it appears to me that the letter and account negative any appropriation of the 9001. to any particular part of the indebtedness, and, as the plaintiffs were entitled to appropriate, I think they have done so by this action;"
[31]
In this matter, when the payment of $100,000.00 was made, Jensen Shipping did not specify at that time how it was to be applied. Because Jensen Shipping did not specify the right to application devolved upon the plaintiff and that right could be exercised by the plaintiff at any time.
[32]
The July 1984 directive of Jensen Shipping to the plaintiff to allocate the December 31, 1983, payment in a certain manner was ineffective because Jensen Shipping had lost that right absolutely to the plaintiff in December of 1983. In July 1984, Jensen Shipping had no proprietary right to the funds represented by the December 29, 1983, cheque and thus was powerless to direct how those funds, which had on December 31, 1983, become the exclusive property of the plaintiff, should be applied.
[33]
The plaintiff received the funds in December of 1983, applied them generally to Jensen Shipping's account in the same way as the creditor applied the 9001. payment in The "Mecca." case and when the plaintiff commenced this action it, like the creditor in The "Mecca." case, thereby gave notice to Jensen Shipping that it had, as it was entitled so to do, appropriated the payment to the invoices in respect of ships other than the "Jensen Star" first and secondly to the invoices relating to the "Jensen Star".
[34]
As the directive of Jensen Shipping to apply a portion of the payment to the loan account was ineffective the plaintiff's in personam claim is reduced by $54,000.00 to $237,243.68 and the plaintiff's in rem claim is reduced to the same amount.
[35]
There remains to consider the defendant's third line of defence, that the plaintiff has no claim in rem against the ship because the beneficial owner of the ship at the time this action was commenced was not the beneficial owner of the ship at the time the claim arose.
[36]
Before I deal with that submission on the part of the defendant, however, I must deal with an application made by counsel for the defendant in the course of the trial to amend the statement of defence to show Jensen Shipping Limited and Jensen Marine Holdings Limited as defendants. Counsel for the defendant claimed it was his intention, when he filed his defence in July of 1985, to file it on behalf of Jensen Holdings as well as on behalf of Jensen Shipping and that he made that fact clear in paragraph 4 of the defence which pleaded the following:
"4. The beneficial ownership of defendant vessel was sold by this defendant to Jensen Marine Holdings Ltd. on 24 November 1983;"
[37]
Counsel for the plaintiff opposed the application to show Jensen Holdings as a defendant on the grounds that having previously identified Jensen Shipping as the owner of the vessel Jensen Shipping was precluded from later claiming that Jensen Holdings was the owner. Counsel for the defendant Jensen Shipping appeared to be concerned that unless Jensen Holdings was made a party to the action he, as counsel for Jensen Shipping, might not be able to argue that Jensen Holdings was the owner.
[38]
I must confess that I did not appreciate the significance of the application by counsel for Jensen Shipping at the time nor did I appreciate the significance of the opposition to the motion by counsel for the plaintiff.
[39]
For whatever reason counsel for Jensen Shipping sometimes filed documents as solicitor for the defendant and sometimes as solicitor for the defendants. The defence itself was filed as the "statement of defence of Jensen Shipping Limited" and filed by "solicitors for the defendants". It appears that counsel was laying the grounds for claiming either that Jensen Holdings was or was not before the court depending on which submission would be most advantageous at the time it had to be made.
[40]
In view of the documents filed with the court showing the transfer of the ship from Jensen Shipping to Jensen Holdings on November 24, 1983, the fact that counsel claims he intended to act on behalf of Jensen Holdings as well as Jensen Shipping, and the fact that the owner is named as one of the defendants, I am satisfied that Jensen Holdings is a party to the action and is represented by Barry & Associates as its solicitors.
[41]
The defendants' third defence is based upon s. 43(3) of the Federal Court Act which provides as follows:
"(3) Exception - Notwithstanding subsection (2), the jurisdiction conferred on the court by section 22 shall not be exercised in rem with respect to a claim mentioned in paragraph 22(2)(e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (k), (m), (n), (p) or (r) unless, at the time of the commencement of the action, the ship, air-craft or other property that is the subject of the action is beneficially owned by the person who was the beneficial owner at the time when the cause of action arose."
[42]
The evidence is clear that on November 24, 1983, Jensen Shipping sold the "Jensen Star" to Jensen Holdings and thus on August 9, 1984, when the plaintiff commenced this action, the transfer had already taken place. The question is whether, under the circumstances of this case, the court can exercise the jurisdiction admittedly conferred upon it under paragraphs 22(1)(m) and (n) in rem or if it is precluded from so doing by reasons of the transfer of the ship in November of 1983.
[43]
In my view this court has the right to exercise in rem jurisdiction notwithstanding the transfer because, for the purposes of s. 43(3), Jensen Shipping remained the beneficial owner of the ship or, in the alternative, Jensen Shipping and Jensen Holdings are estopped from claiming that Jensen Shipping was not the beneficial owner of the ship at the time this action was commenced.
[44]
On November 24, 1983, when the ship was sold by Jensen Shipping to Jensen Holdings there was executed at the same time a Bareboat Charter of the ship from Jensen Holdings to Jensen Shipping as charterer for a twelve-year period under the terms of which it was agreed that the ship would, during the charter period,
"be in the full possession and at the absolute disposal for all purposes of the Charterer and under their absolute control in every respect."
[45]
Although the vessel was transferred on paper from Jensen Shipping to Jensen Holdings its possession and control was immediately re-transferred from Jensen Holdings to Jensen Shipping. To the plaintiff, or any third party supplying or repairing the ship, there had been no perceptible change. The plaintiff who had in the past received orders from Jorgensen to effect repairs continued to receive orders from Jorgensen to do so. The plaintiff continued, after November 24, 1983, to bill Jensen Shipping for the repairs as if nothing had changed.
[46]
Jorgensen, who knew there had been a change, and who must be taken to have known that his authority through Jensen Shipping as charterer was less than his authority through Jensen Shipping as owner did not tell the plaintiff of the transfer. On that point Jorgensen's evidence is as follows:
"Well, in terms of selling the ship and when I pick up the phone to do ship repairs, I don't necessarily know the whole corporate structure and I'm not about to explain the whole thing to a ship repairer when I'd like him to come down and fix the ship."
[47]
The question of the in rem jurisdiction of the court under such circumstances was dealt with in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , by Mr. Justice Addy who reviewed the earlier cases which appeared to lead to the conclusion that unless the registered owner can be held personally liable no action in rem can be taken against the ship. He distinguished those cases on the basis that the plaintiffs knew the services were not being ordered by or on the credit of the owners or that the charter did not constitute a demise charter.
[48]
Although obiter, in Addy, J.'s, view a demise charter creates an ownership interest in a ship sufficient to support an in rem action. He accepted the fact that the English authorities were to the contrary but suggested it might well be time for our courts to depart from those authorities. He found that an action in rem might well be maintainable unless the supplier has notice or reason to suspect that the actual owner has forbidden the credit of the ship to be pledged. At page 37, Addy, J., states his views in the following terms:
"Where an owner turns over a ship to another person under a demise bare boat charter, knowing full well that it will be sailing to foreign ports and that it will be obliged to take on fuel and other supplies from time to time, it would seem, at first sight, in any event, to be impractical and unnecessarily restrictive of commerce and of the movement of ships to expect that the suppliers in all these cases would be required to receive prepayment in specie or to check with the actual registered owners at or through the port of registry in whatever corner of the world it might be, to enquire whether proper authority had been granted before supplying that ship with the essential requirements to enable it to continue on its voyage. Whether it be by virtue of presumed or implied authority or otherwise, unless the supplier is put on notice or has reason to suspect that the actual owner has forbidden the credit of the ship to be pledged, then it would seem that an action for such necessaries might well be maintainable in rem against the ship when its owner pro tempore, that is, the charterer by way of demise, would be responsible at law for those supplies."
[49]
This finding by Addy, J., was not necessary for his decision and was thus obiter. Nevertheless, I find myself in complete agreement with him and I adopt his reasoning in coming to the same conclusion. Having done so I find that the Bareboat Charter by demise from Jensen Holdings to Jensen Shipping creates a sufficient ownership interest by Jensen Shipping in the ship to support an in rem action against it for the amount of the plaintiff's claim.
[50]
I note also that clause 13 of the Charter prohibits the charterer from permitting liens to be placed upon the ship and that a notice to that effect was to have been displayed prominently in the chart room and in the master's day cabin of the vessel. There is no evidence that this was done or that the plaintiff was given any notice of the change or had any reason to suspect that Jorgensen's authority had changed after November 24, 1983. In fact Jorgensen either deliberately or carelessly led the plaintiff to believe that he continued to have the same authority after November 24, 1983, to bind the ship in an in rem action as he had before November 24, 1983. In my view Jorgensen cannot now be permitted to deny that authority and both Jensen Holdings and Jensen Shipping are estopped from raising as a defence to the plaintiff's claim that Jensen Shipping was not the beneficial owner of the ship "Jensen Star" at the time of the commencement of this action.
[51]
Not only was there nothing to alert the plaintiff that it was not dealing with the registered owner of the ship but if it had been dealing with the registered owner of the ship it would have been dealing with the same person, Jorgensen, who was President of both Jensen Holdings and Jensen Shipping.
[52]
Moreover, after the plaintiff commenced its action in rem against the ship on August 9, 1984, it was Jensen Shipping and not Jensen Holdings which applied to reduce the amount of the security and, in its notice of motion of August 27, 1984, the solicitors for Jensen Shipping identified Jensen Shipping as the owner of the ship.
[53]
Furthermore in its defence and counterclaim filed on October 19, 1984, the defendant is identified as "Jensen" in paragraph 2 and, in paragraph 9, "Jensen" is identified as the party who made the payments of $100,000.00 and $60,000.00 on the plaintiff's account. As these payments were made by Jensen Shipping one can only conclude that the "Jensen" identified in paragraph 2 of the defence was intended to and did refer to Jensen Shipping and not Jensen Holdings.
[54]
If there was any doubt that this was so it was, in my view, removed on December 19, 1984, in the following exchange at Jorgensen's examination for discovery:
"Q. Mr. Jorgensen, this is an examination for discovery under rule 465 of the Federal Court Rules. The named defendant is: The Owners and all Others Interested in the Ship 'JENSEN STAR'.
In your statement of defence, paragraph 2, you speak of defendants, 'hereinafter referred to as Jensen'.
By Jensen are you referring to the corporation Jensen Shipping Limited?
A. Yes.
Q. Is that a Canadian corporation?
A. Yes.
Q. And I understand that at all material times you were and still are the President of that corporation?
A. That is correct."
[55]
It was not until July of 1985 that the defendant Jensen Shipping raised the matter of the transfer of the ship from Jensen Shipping to Jensen Holdings in November of 1983 with a view to depriving the plaintiff of the security filed in this action.
[56]
In my view, in the circumstances of this matter, where Jorgensen dealt with the plaintiff in such a way as to deliberately lead the plaintiff to believe that Jensen Shipping was the owner of the ship, refused to disclose that Jensen Shipping's capacity had changed from owner to charterer and his authority to bind the ship was limited, and by his solicitors and his own evidence in these proceedings prior to July 1985 affirmed that Jensen Shipping was the owner of the ship, neither Jensen Shipping nor Jensen Holdings can now be heard to deny that Jensen Shipping was the owner of the ship at the time of the commencement of this action so as to defeat this court's in rem jurisdiction under s. 43(3) of the Federal Court Act.
[57]
Counsel for the plaintiff assures me that I have the right to fix pre and postjudgment interest notwithstanding that the invoices purport to charge interest at the rate of two percent per month on any amount outstanding after 15 days. He also urges me, if I allow interest at less than two percent per month, to award it commencing 15 days after the date of each invoice notwithstanding the fact that the plaintiff had elected not to charge interest on the overdue accounts in respect of the period prior to January 1, 1984.
[58]
In my view the plaintiff's decision not to charge interest until January 1, 1984, is a decision similar to its decision not to charge Jensen Shipping for the hours personally worked by Hynes and should not be interfered with. I am also of the view that an interest rate of two percent per month, bearing in mind the banking prime rates shown in Exhibit P-33, is excessive. I am satisfied that the plaintiff will be adequately compensated by being awarded interest on its claim from January 1, 1984, to the date of payment at one (1) percentage point above the prime bank rates from time to time prevailing as shown in Exhibit P-33. As these rates are shown only to November 13, 1987, interest after that date until payment will be on the same basis.
[59]
Pursuant to paragraph 2(b) of rule 337 of the Federal Court Rules the plaintiff is given leave to move for judgment in rem and in personam against the defendant Jensen Shipping Limited for two hundred and thirty-seven thousand two hundred and forty-three dollars and sixty-eight cents ($ 237,243.68) plus interest and costs.
Action allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]