[1]
MacKay, J.
: These reasons concern the disposition of several motions before the court on April 18, 1994, in Vancouver, British Columbia, in relation to two applications for judicial review. By earlier order of the court the two applications were directed to be heard together, on an expedited basis with a schedule for filing of documents and application records for a hearing to commence on May 4, 1994.
[2]
The principal motion, by Sunshine Valley Corporation in court file T-137-94, seeks leave to file, beyond the date fixed by earlier Order, an affidavit of the former Minister of Environment concerning a decision made by him while in office, a decision in question in court file T-2505-93 and of significance in T-137-94, by which the Minister approved a development plan for extending downhill skiing facilities within Banff National Park without a full public review. Other motions, presented by counsel for federal respondent in both files and by the applicant in court file T-2505-93, arise as a consequence of the principal motion.
[3]
The two applications for judicial review concern decisions made in relation to the expansion of recreational skiing facilities operated by Sunshine Village Corporation ("SVC") on land leased from Her Majesty within Banff National Park. The expansion of facilities, including clearing of land for downhill skiing, is planned for Eagle (Goat's Eye) Mountain within the leasehold boundaries. That expansion was originally included in a long-range development plan approved by the Minister responsible for national parks in 1978. Some steps in implementation of that plan, including a lease of the area and other agreements between the Canada Parks Service ("CPS") and SVC, were concluded in the 1980's, though major clearing for downhill skiing at Goat's Eye Mountain was not then begun. In the late 1980's a review of the long-range plan was initiated through an involved process, including consultations with the public and interested groups and environmental assessments by SVC conducted in accord with terms of reference provided by CPS. Finally, in 1992 a modified plan was submitted for approval to the then Minister of Environment and Minister responsible for the CPS, the Honourable Jean Charest, who approved the plan on August 31, 1992, without requiring at that stage, further public consultation prior to approval since the plan was not considered significantly different from the 1978 approved plan.
[4]
Thereafter, further agreements were concluded between CPS and SVC as preliminary steps in implementation of the plan as approved by the Minister in August, 1992, including a construction agreement. On October 7, 1993 a permit was issued for clearing by SVC of a portion of the ski runs, as specified in the construction agreement. That permit was effective from October 7 to November 15, 1993.
[5]
After clearance of trees had commenced under that permit but before it was concluded, the Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society ("CPAWS"), filed its Originating Notice of Motion (Court file T-2505-93) for judicial review, seeking orders to set aside the construction agreement and the permit for clearing, on the ground that an environmental assessment of the project was required, and had not been conducted, under the
Environmental Assessment and Review Process Guidelines Order
. CPAWS sought an interim injunction to prevent further cutting under the permit granted by CPS, an application for which SVC was added as a party respondent. That application for an interim injunction was dismissed by my colleague Mr. Justice Strayer for Reasons issued November 5, 1993.
[6]
Under the development plan, and, I assume also under the construction agreement, a second phase of clearing on steeper, higher slopes was to commence in the winter season when the snowpack was sufficient to permit environmentally safe operations without the construction of roads, removing the cut timber over the snow in winter, or, to the extent necessary, by helicopter in summer. That second phase required a further permit from CPS. On December 22, 1993, CPS published a public notice in local papers inviting comments from the public on the Goat's Eye development within 30 days. SVC objected since the development was already approved and construction underway. After the notice period, CPS indicated it would take time to review the comments received and to seek the determination of the Minister in accord with
EARP Guidelines
, and a permit for clearing on the second, winter, phase of the development was not issued.
[7]
On January 25, 1994, SVC filed its Originating Notice of Motion for judicial review of the decision not to issue a permit for the winter clearing program and on the same day the Minister responsible formally requested the Minister of the Environment to establish an environmental assessment panel to conduct a full public review of the Goat's Eye development proposal including the proposed addition to existing facilities. No permit was issued to allow SVC to proceed further with its development project in the winter season of 1993-94.
[8]
It was on the application of SVC that the court ordered an expedited hearing of this motion for judicial review which seeks a declaration that the
EARP Guidelines
do not apply to this development, and SVC also seeks orders requiring the issue of permits to allow it to proceed. That application for an expedited hearing was granted, a schedule for filing affidavits and records was established and CPAWS' application for judicial review was ordered to be heard with SVC's application on May 4, 5 and 6, 1994, some two weeks following the hearing of these motions.
[9]
Presumably after the expedited schedule for a hearing in May 1994 was established, SVC sought an affidavit, in support of its claim, from the Honourable Jean Charest. On April 9 the affidavit here in issue was sworn by the former Minister concerning the circumstances and his intentions in approving the Goat's Eye development plan on August 31, 1992. Copies of the affidavit were provided to counsel for the federal respondents in both application files and counsel for CPAWS on April 11, 1994. When they declined to consent to its filing beyond the time fixed by earlier order for filing of SVC's affidavits and its application record in Court file T-137-94, SVC filed this application for leave to file the Charest affidavit late. That application precipitated the other motions. On behalf of federal defendants an extension of time is sought to file their application record, originally ordered to be filed April 15, a date extended by order of my colleague Mr. Justice Pinard until disposition of these motions. They also seek to strike certain portions of the Charest affidavit if it is to be filed, and to adjourn the scheduled hearing if necessary. A motion on behalf of CPAWS seeks, if the Charest affidavit is filed, adjournment of the scheduled hearing to permit cross-examination on that affidavit and provision of a transcript from that examination, and an extension of time to file its application record. At the hearing on April 18, CPAWS supported the motion of counsel for the federal respondents that portions of the Charest affidavit be struck if it were filed. Both respondents to SVC's motion oppose the application to permit late filing of the Charest affidavit.
[10]
After hearing counsel for the parties SVC's application for leave to file late the affidavit of the Honourable Jean Charest was dismissed, whereupon the other motions, for consideration if that affidavit were permitted to be filed, were not further advanced and I consider them withdrawn, except for the motion for an extension of time to file application records, necessitated by reason of the uncertainty pending disposition of the principal motion concerning the Charest affidavit. In the result these reasons concern the grounds on which the principal motion was dismissed.
[11]
SVC seeks leave to file the affidavit in question which it regards "as extremely important ... in that it represents both a confirmation and explanation of the approvals given by the Minister of the day that the approval was given by him at that time or intended to be approved under the
EARP Guidelines Order
." It is argued that the circumstances are unusual in that the Minister of the day has now sworn an affidavit relating to his decision. I note, however, that it can be considered on no higher footing than if the former Minister were still in that office or if the current Minister had executed an affidavit in regard to the decision. In my view, the issue for the court is whether an affidavit of the Minister responsible for the office, i.e., the "federal board, commission or tribunal" whose decision is questioned by judicial review, should be permitted to be filed late.
[12]
There can be no questions that if the affidavit had been available within the time fixed by order for filing of affidavits and its application record by SVC, leave of the court would not have been required. Had it been so filed it would have been subject to review in light of any application the respondents here might have brought for striking portions or the whole of the affidavit for failure to comply with rule 332(1) of the
Federal Court Rules
which requires, except on an interlocutory motion, which this is not, that affidavits be confined to such facts as the witness is able of his own knowledge to prove. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) per Muldoon, J.). If filed, the affidavit, or portions of it, might also be open to challenge, as it is here, by extension of the principle which would preclude argument on behalf of the Minister directly in this matter, as in the case or any other "federal board, commission or tribunal" whose decision is questioned in an application for judicial review. (See
Re Northwestern Utilities Ltd. et al. and City of Edmonton
, [1979] 1 S.C.R. 684; 23 N.R. 564; 12 A.R. 449; 89 D.L.R.(3d) 161; at p. 178-179 S.C.R., per  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; at p. 589-590 (per Mahoney, J.A. (F.C.A.)).
[13]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) Mr. Justice Décary for the Court of Appeal dealt with criteria for considering leave for late filing of affidavits pursuant to rule 704(8) in an appeal from the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks under s. 56 of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, in which by rule 704 a time is limited for filing additional evidence. While this is not such a case, in my view the criteria there relied upon are applicable in this case, where leave is sought to file materials later than the date fixed by court order. Those requirements are that the court consider the reasons for the delay and the intrinsic worth of the affidavit, i.e. its relevance, admissibility and potential use to the court.
[14]
Respondents here, particularly CPAWS, argue that the delay in obtaining the affidavit of the former Minister is not adequately explained, particularly since the issue dealt with in the affidavit, the decision of August 31, 1992, has been before the court since CPAWS filed its application for judicial review in October 1993 in court file T-2505-93. Further, CPAWS notes no similar affidavit has been sought to be filed in relation to that application. SVC urges that it had no control on the timing of execution of the affidavit by Mr. Charest, that while it had been sought for some time, it was only executed on April 9, 1994. I am prepared to accept that, in the circumstances of the Honourable Mr. Charest's position since October 1993, the timing of execution of this affidavit was not a matter within the control of SVC.
[15]
I accept SVC's description of exhibits appended to the Charest affidavit, that they are all Parks Canada documents or documents previously submitted to Parks Canada, that they are already within documents produced by the federal respondents and that they introduce no new evidence or issues and thus cannot be seen to take the respondents by surprise. I accept as well the implication from this, that the documentary record is complete without the affidavit in question except insofar as the affidavit may add to the facts available from other documentary evidence.
[16]
Insofar as the affidavit itself shows the intent of the Minister of the day to comply with legal requirements relating to his decision, the affidavit adds nothing of significance for the court would assume that to be the case in the absence of very clear evidence to the contrary.
[17]
Insofar as the affidavit is to be relied upon by SVC as indicating what the law is, the view of the Minister of the day whose decision is in question has no weight in the deliberation of the court. Just as the Minister ought not to be represented directly in argument on the matter (
Re Northwestern Utilities
, supra) so his testimony by affidavit or cross-examination is inadmissible (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the affidavit objected to by the respondents of SVC's motion include these:
in paragraph 5 - "... I also came to the conclusion that both Sunshine's 1978 and 1992 plan were proposals to expand the skiing facilities within Sunshine's lease and that these activities conformed to the original purpose for which Sunshine (and its predecessors) were established in Banff National Park."
in paragraphs 6, 7, 8 - "which it is argued interpret certain Parks Canada documents in the record, with legal effects."
in paragraph 10 - "... I concluded that the preliminary screening found that no serious adverse environmental effects were anticipated for Sunshine, and that subsequent steps, screening for example, would not be necessary."
in paragraph 12 - "Accordingly, and with my understanding that the EARPGO had been correctly applied, on August 31, 1992, I made the decision to approve the 1992 Sunshine plan. ... Based on those facts, I made this statement on August 31, 1992 and in so doing I decided that under s. 13 of EARPGO that there was no need to conduct a full public review by a panel ..."
I have no doubt that at least some of those portions of the affidavit would be struck out if it were necessary to decide the matter. In any event, conclusions of the Minister of the day concerning documents in the record or concerning legal requirements as he understood them would be given no weight, if admitted, in the court's consideration by judicial review of a decision made by him.
[18]
I conclude, on considering the intrinsic worth of the affidavit in question, that it would add nothing of significance for the court in dealing with the applications of SVC and of CPAWS for judicial review. That being so, leave to file the affidavit late is denied. Had it been granted, CPAWS' right to cross examine on the affidavit, or those portions not struck, would have to be respected, and I have little doubt the scheduled hearing would be required to be adjourned, in fairness to all parties. The difficulties of rescheduling a three-day hearing within six to eight months would defeat the purposes for which an expedited hearing was originally sought by SVC, and granted.
[19]
At the hearing on April 18, when the court dismissed orally the application to file late the affidavit in question, other motions dependent upon the outcome of that principal motion were withdrawn, except for revision of the schedule for filing application records which resulted from hearing of the principal motion. Counsel agreed on a revised schedule which, on consent, was then ordered.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/dlr
[End of document]