[1]
Martin, J.
: The applicant, the Chief of the Sawridge Indian Band, applies pursuant to s. 44 of the Access to Information Act for a review of the decision made by the Head of the Access to Information and Privacy Secretariat to release to an undisclosed person requesting the information, a copy of the Band's membership rules. He also applies for an injunction restraining the respondent from disclosing the rules to any party and a mandamus requiring the respondent to comply with ss. 19, 20 and 28 of the Act.
[2]
When this matter came before me on January 28, 1987, there was some doubt that there çould be a review pursuant to s. 44. The hearing of the application was adjourned so that counsel could take appropriate action to remove that doubt and ensure the application would fall within the provisions of s. 44. Following the January 28, 1987, adjournment the respondent, on February 2, 1987, notified the person who had requested disclosure of the rules that the applicant had requested a review of its decision pursuant to s. 44 of the Act and that the third party had a right to appear. This notification was given the following terms:
"As you will see for the enclosed notices of motion and affidavits filed in the above-mentioned matters, the members of the Sawridge and Horse Lake Indian Bands object to the decision of the Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs to disclose to you the copies of their respective Band Membership Rules, and have asked the Federal Court to review the Minister's decision pursuant to s. 44 of the Access to Information Act.
"You are hereby notified that, by virtue of s. 44(3) of the Access to Information Act, you are entitled to appear as a party to the review. A copy of the Access to Information Act is enclosed herewith for your information."
[3]
If, by that application, counsel intended to cure any defects so as to allow a review under s. 44 she has not done so. Conditional upon the right of a third party (the person requesting disclosure of the information) to appear as a party to a review under s. 44 is that a notice be issued (for the purposes of this application) under s. 28(5)(b). As no notice was issued under that paragraph there can be no review under s. 44.
[4]
Section 44 is as follows:
"44(1) Any third party to whom the head of a government institution is required under paragraph 28(5)(b) or subsection 29(1) to give a notice of a decision to disclose a record or a part thereof under this Act may, within twenty days after the notice is given, apply to the court for a review of the matter.
"(2) The head of a government institution who has given notice under paragraph 28(5)(b) or subsection 29(1) that a record requested under this Act or a part thereof will be disclosed shall forthwith on being given notice of an application made under subsection (1) in respect of the disclosure given written notice of the application to the person who requested access to the record.
"(3) Any person who has been given notice of an application for a review under subsection (2) may appear as a party to the review."
and the relevant portions of s. 28 are:
"28(1) Where the head of a government institution intends to disclose any record requested under this Act, or any part thereof, that contains or that the head of the institution has reason to believe might contain
(a) trade secrets of a third party,
(b) information described in paragraph 20(1)(b) that was supplied by a third party, or
(c) information the disclosure of which the head of the institution could reasonably foresee might effect a result described in paragraph 20(1)(c) or (d) in respect of a third party,
the head of the institution shall, subject to subsection (2), if the third party can reasonably be located, within thirty days after the request is received, give written notice to the third party of the request and of the fact that the head of the institution intends to disclose the record or part thereof.
. . . . .
"(3) A notice given under subsection (1) shall include
(a) a statement that the head of the government institution giving the notice intends to release a record or a part thereof that might contain material or information described in subsection (1);
(b) a description of the contents of the record or part thereof that, as the case may be, belong to, were supplied by or relate to the third party to whom the notice is given; and
(c) a statement that the third party may, within twenty days after the notice is given, make representations to the head of the government institution that has control of the record as to why the record or part thereof should not be disclosed.
. . . . .
"(5) Where a notice is given by the head of a government institution under subsection (1) to a third party in respect of a record or a part thereof,
(a) the third party shall, within twenty days after the notice is given, be given the opportunity to make representations to the head of the institution as to why the record or the part thereof should not be disclosed; and
(b) the head of the institution shall, within thirty days after the notice is given, if the third party has been given an opportunity to make representations under paragraph (a), make a decision as to whether or not to disclose the record or the part thereof and give written notice of the decision of the third party.
. . . . .
"(7) A notice given under paragraph (5)(b) of a decision to disclose a record requested under this Act or a part thereof shall include
(a) a statement that the third party to whom the notice is given is entitled to request a review of the decision under s. 44 within twenty days after the notice is given; and
(b) a statement that the person who requested access to the record will be given access thereto or to the part thereof unless, within twenty days after the notice is given, a review of the decision is requested under s. 44."
[5]
The applicant's right to a judicial review of the respondent's decision to disclose the rules arises under s. 44(1) and only arises if a notice of the decision to disclose a record has been given under s. 28(5)(b) or s. 29(1). As s. 29(1) is clearly not applicable in this matter I need only consider s. 28.
[6]
Section 28 details, among other matters, the conditions under which the notice must be issued, the contents of the notice, and the time limits for representations to be made by the party opposing the release of the record. The essential condition precedent to the issuance of the notice is that the respondent has reason to believe the disclosure of the record might be contrary to his obligation under s. 20 not to disclose records. Only paragraphs (c) and (d) of s. 20(1) are relevant to this application.
"20(1) Subject to this section, the head of a government institution shall refuse to disclose any record requested under this Act that contains
. . . . .
(c) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to result in material financial loss or gain to, or could reasonably be expected to prejudice the competitive position of, a third party; or
(d) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to interfere with contractual or other negotiations of a third party."
[7]
As a result of receiving two requests for copies of the Band's rules the respondent sent three letters to the applicant dated respectively October 3, 1986, December 2, 1986 and December 15, 1986. In each letter the respondent stated that, in his view, the records requested did not come within any of the exemptions from disclosure provided for in the Act and thus would be disclosed. In the letter of December 15, 1986 the respondent reiterated his position and stated specifically that the documents requested did not come within the exemptions provided for in s. 20 of the Act.
[8]
Having come to the conclusion that s. 20 was not applicable, or perhaps more accurately, that he had no reason to believe s. 20 might be applicable, the respondent notified the applicant of the request and of his intention to accede to it. As the letters, or notices, to the applicant were not preceded by a determination essential to constitute them notices within the meaning of s. 28(5)(a), the right of review under s. 44, which arises only after the notice contemplated by s. 28(5)(a) is issued, is not available to the applicant and that portion of his application must therefore be dismissed.
[9]
Although the respondent purported to bring the matter under s. 44 by the letter of February 2, 1987, intending to give the third party a right to appear as a party to the review, the letter cannot have that effect because no notice had been given to the applicant under s. 28(5)(b).
[10]
The real issue to be determined in this matter is not whether the rules should or should not be disclosed, but whether the respondent should or should not have issued the notice contemplated by s. 28(5)(a). In this respect, and in support of his motion for the injunction and the mandamus, the applicant argues that the respondent should have determined the rules might contain information which would prohibit their release pursuant to ss. 20(1)(c) and (d) and thus he should have issued the notice under s. 28. Had the notice been issued pursuant to s. 28, as the applicant claims ought to have been done, it would have enabled the applicant to obtain a court review of the decision to release the rules. It is for that reason the applicant seeks an order compelling the respondent to comply with the provisions of ss. 19, 20 and 28 of the Act.
[11]
Once again a procedural point was raised in passing, and that was whether such a request should be instituted by application or in an action. Out of an abundance of caution the applicant, following the January 28, 1987, adjournment, commenced an action against the respondent claiming substantially the same relief as he claims by way of this application. In that action he has applied for an interim injunction asking for the relief pending trial. Both the present application and the application for the interim injunction in the action were heard together on March 18, 1987, at Edmonton. Because the applicant is before me seeking the same relief both by way of application and in an action I do not find it necessary to determine which of the two procedures is appropriate. Instead I will bypass that issue and deal directly with the merits of the applicant's submissions.
[12]
The Band's rules were developed under the provisions of the Indian Act. Pursuant to s. 10 of that Act the applicant's Band duly voted to accept the rules which had been prepared at a cost of approximately fifty thousand dollars ($ 50,000.00). After acceptance by the Band the rules were forwarded to the Minister who, on September 25, 1985, notified the applicant pursuant to s. 10(7) of the Indian Act that the Band had control of its own membership.
[13]
The applicant has been careful to see that the rules have not been made available to anyone, except on specified conditions, even to the point of recalling all copies which were made available to the Band electors for the purpose of voting on them. The reason given by the applicant for refusing to circulate the rules is his intention to recover the costs of their preparation from other Bands which might want to use them as a precedent when preparing their own rules.
[14]
In this respect all requests for copies of the rules are referred to the applicant who determines on what, if any, conditions the rules will be made available. He also determines, in respect of each request for a copy of the rules, the amount, if any, the person requesting the copy will be obliged to pay. The applicant claims a proprietary right to the rules and says that if they are released the Band would no longer be able to recover the expenses incurred in their preparation and could reasonably be expected to suffer financially. Alternatively, it is submitted that their release could reasonably be expected to interfere with negotiations which the applicant has with other Bands for their conditional release as a precedent.
[15]
To this argument the respondent says the rules are a "statutory instrument" within the meaning of the Statutory Instruments Act pursuant to ss. 24 and 25 of which they must be made available to any person for inspection upon payment of a modest prescribed fee of about one dollar ($ 1.00) per page. There being an obligation to make the rules available for this modest fee, counsel for the respondent submits the applicant has not shown he will suffer any material financial loss by reason of their disclosure under the Access to Information Act because the applicant is already under a duty to make them available on request. She applies the same reasoning to the applicant's claim that disclosure of the rules can be expected to interfere with the applicant's negotiations with other Bands to sell them copies of the rules.
[16]
To the argument that the applicant's proprietary rights to the rules will be effectively lost by their disclosure, counsel for the respondent refers to s. 17 of the Copyright Act which provides that the disclosure of any document under the provisions of the Access to Information Act is not to be taken as an authorization to any person to do anything that, by the Copyright Act, only the owner of the copyright has the right to do.
[17]
In reply counsel for the applicant submits that the rules are not a statutory instrument within the meaning of the Statutory Instruments Act; that if the rules are a statutory instrument and are to be made available then, by virtue of s. 68 of the Access to Information Act, which exempts from the provisions of the Act material available for purchase by the public, the respondent has no authority, under the Access to Information Act to release the rules.
[18]
Furthermore, submits counsel for the applicant, if the respondent's submission with respect to the obligation of the applicant to make the rules available is correct, then there is already in place a procedure for permitting access to the rules and, therefore, s. 2(2) of the Access to Information Act, which provides that the Act is not intended to replace existing procedures, should be read to exclude an application under the Access to Information Act for the rules which can be obtained through the existing procedure provided for in the Statutory Instruments Act.
[19]
If I have correctly understood counsel's arguments they appear to be directed to having me determine whether the respondent made the correct decision when he decided that the release of the rules was not constrained by virtue of s. 20(1)(c) or (d) of the Act. Presumably, if on my evaluation of the facts I should come to a different conclusion, I would be expected to direct the respondent to comply with the provisions of s. 28 by issuing the notice contemplated by s. 28(5)(a) so as to allow the applicant to have his review under s. 44.
[20]
While I may be permitted to take that type of course in a judicial review under s. 44 I have, in my view, a far more limited right to review the decision made by the respondent not to proceed under s. 28.
[21]
The right of this court under s. 44 of the Access to Information Act to review the decision of the respondent to release the rules is a statutory one. It arises, as already indicated, only when the respondent has proceeded under s. 28 and after exhausting the procedures provided for in that section the decision to release the document remains unchanged and is challenged by a third party such as the applicant in this matter.
[22]
Before proceeding under s. 28, however, the respondent must make a separate decision. He must decide if the information he intends releasing contains or might contain information which he can reasonably foresee might be expected, for the purposes of this application, to result in a material loss to the applicant or interfere with its contractual negotiations with other Bands for the use of the rules. That preliminary decision or determination is not reviewable under s. 44 which review, as I understand the legislation, would entitle the court in a proper case, to substitute its decision for the respondent's decision.
[23]
In effect the applicant asks that I review the preliminary decision i.e. the decision by the respondent not to proceed under s. 28 because the rules did not contain information the disclosure of which he could reasonably foresee might cause material loss to the applicant or interfere with his contractual negotiations.
[24]
Although the Access to Information Act gives the court no statutory right to review that decision there is a limited common law right of review of such decisions which has been described by Lord Wilberforce in Secretary of State for Education and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 513, at 521:
"... if the Secretary of State 'is satisfied'. This form of section is quite well known, and at first sight might seem to exclude judicial review. Sections in this form may, no doubt, exclude judicial review on what is or has become a matter of pure judgment. But I do not think that they go further than that. If a judgment requires, before it can be made, the existence of some facts, then, although the evaluation of those facts is for the Secretary of State alone, the court must enquire whether those facts exist, and have been taken into account, whether the judgment has been made on a proper self-direction as to those facts, whether the judgment has not been made on other facts which ought not to have been taken into account. If these requirements are not met, then the exercise of judgment, however bona fide it may be, becomes capable of challenge."
[25]
Although the words of the Act do not specifically require the respondent to "be satisfied", the release of the information might or would or would not offend s. 20(1)(c) or (d), that is precisely the decision the respondent is required to make before he determines whether or not to issue the notice under s. 28. Accordingly my review of the respondent's decision is limited to the principles set out in the passage quoted.
[26]
When the respondent first determined, on October 3, 1986, that the release of the rules would not give rise to a result described in s. 20(1)(c) or (d), he had before him the Band's membership rules and an application for their disclosure. From the correspondence sent to the applicant it is apparent that he considered the rules and the application and determined that the rules could be disclosed under the provisions of the Act. To paraphrase Lord Wilberforce's first test, there were existing facts upon which the respondent could make the decision, evaluation or determination which he did make, and in making that decision the respondent took those existing facts into consideration.
[27]
In addition to the rules themselves and the application for their disclosure the respondent, after he had made his preliminary decision, received on October 15, 1986, the following representation on behalf of the applicant:
"We appreciate that you have concluded the document does not fall within the statutory exemptions and accordingly you have not given the Band the notice contemplated by s. 28 of the Access to Information Act.
"While we have not had the opportunity to consider the matter carefully, having only received your letter yesterday, it appears possible to us that the band rules would be exempt under s. 20(1)(c) or (d) of the Act. Although we have not had the opportunity to review the matter with the degree of care which we would like before making a formal submission to you on the point, it does appear to us that public access to the band rules could well encourage frivolous or vexatious applications for membership or challenges to the propriety of the rules, the handling or defense of which could result in material financial loss to the Band.
"We would think that the existence of this possibility should be sufficient to permit the 'head of the institution' (whom we presume to be the Minister) to have 'reason to believe' that the documents 'might contain' information of the type described in s. 20(1)(c) or (d) and to justify invocation of the s. 28 procedure."
[28]
On October 17 the following additional representation was made to the respondent on behalf of the applicant:
"Further to my letter of October 15, 1986, and to our telephone conversation of October 16, I wish to bring to your attention another factor which I suggest you might well consider in determining whether the Sawridge Indian Band Membership Rules are a document within the description of ss. 20(1)(c) and (d) of the Access to Information Act.
"The Rules were developed by the Band at considerable expense. I am advised by Chief Twinn that he estimates the cost to have been somewhere in the area of $50,000. The Rules therefore have a significant monetary value. If other bands wish to use them in the development of their own Rules it is reasonable that the Sawridge Indian Band should be able to receive from such other bands a contribution towards the expenditure it incurred. It undoubtedly would consider the circumstances of the band making the request in determining the level of payment to require. Release of the Rules by your Department would, however, eliminate the possibility of recovery of any of the cost and would therefore result in material financial loss to the Band and interfere with contractual or other negotiations with other bands. Clearly the situation is within ss. 20(1)(c) and (d)."
[29]
The respondent replied to these representations on December 15, 1986, in the following terms:
"Further to your letter of October 17, 1986, in which you make representations concerning membership rules of the Sawridge Indian Band, please be advised that we have reviewed these representations carefully and have not altered our position that these documents do not fall within s. 20 of the Access to Information Act.
"Band membership rules which have received the approval of the Minister under the provisions of s. 10 of the Indian Act have the force and effect of regulations and a band can have no proprietary interest in regulations.
"Furthermore, as the membership rules are required to be approved by a majority of the members of the band, it is concluded that they have been posted, circulated or otherwise made public.
"The department will therefore release this information to the applicant on December 31, 1986."
[30]
There were thus additional facts before the respondent between the time of his October 3, 1986, decision and his confirmation of that decision on December 15, 1986. Because reference is made to the applicant's October 17 representation it is apparent that the respondent took that into account. Because there is no reference to the October 2 representation it might be argued that the respondent's failure to take it into account has thereby flawed his decision to the extent that I should refer the matter back to him with directions to reconsider taking that representation into account as well.
[31]
In my view that is not warranted. Firstly, the October 15 representation is so clearly untenable that the respondent may well have concluded it would be kinder not to specifically reply to it. The third paragraph in the respondent's December 15 reply is, in any event, an indication that it was considered. As well the correspondence indicates there were several telephone conversations between the solicitor for the applicant and the respondent's representatives in which the matter was likely raised and disposed of. Finally the October 15, 1986, representation was, admittedly, made in haste and was never raised again either in the affidavit evidence or in the applicant's submission to me as a reason for granting the relief requested. In this respect I have concluded that counsel for the applicant, having advanced that particular representation in haste, wisely recognized it as being without merit and prudently withdrew it.
[32]
I am satisfied, therefore, that in making his decision not to proceed under s. 28 of the Act, the respondent has met the tests described by Lord Wilberforce and I therefore have no reason to interfere with that decision. I have come to this conclusion without considering whether I would have made the same determination as the respondent because it is not the court's function to substitute its evaluation of the facts for that of the respondent.
[33]
However, even if I were permitted or obliged to do so I would have made the same determination. Although sealed by order of the court I am permitted to and did review the Band's rules. While I have no reason to doubt the applicant's affidavit evidence that the expenses associated with their preparation came to approximately fifty thousand dollars ($ 50,000.00) those expenses must have been incurred in respect of matters other than for actual drafting.
[34]
The actual preparation of the rules, of which there are 15 on three pages, once appropriate instructions had been received, could have been completed in a few hours. Other expenses incurred, such as the costs of meetings and travelling, might well have raised the costs associated with the preparation of the rules to the figure given but that would not enhance the intrinsic value of the rules as a precedent for a third party.
[35]
If the applicant has been able to obtain some benefit for his Band by allowing other Bands to use the rules as a precedent for drafting their own rules he has indeed been fortunate. In this respect the evidence is neither detailed nor convincing. Apparently a number of copies of the rules were given to other Bands. No money which could be directly attributed to the release by the applicant of the rules was received in return. Instead the evidence indicates that the Band received certain benefits by way of support for actions it has against the federal Government.
[36]
Given the information which the respondent had at the time he decided not to proceed under s. 28 of the Act, and in particular the rules themselves, and given the representations which were made subsequently, including the material in support of this application, the respondent could not then and could not now be expected to conclude that the release of the rules would or might effect any of the results described in s. 20(1)(c) or (d). To expect the respondent to conclude that the release of the rules would or might give rise to such results would be to expect him to engage in the height of speculation.
[37]
Thus I not only conclude that the respondent met the tests described by Lord Wilberforce but also that he has come to the appropriate conclusion and could not have come to any other conclusion.
[38]
The applications in causes T-2836-86 and T-268-87 are therefore dismissed.
Applications dismissed.
Editor: Catherine M. Bowlen/blk
[End of document]