[1]
Shore, J.
[Translation]:
WHEREAS
the Court approves the decision of Prothonotary Tabib, removing three short extemporaneous portions in her order of January 5, 2006, that were unwarranted;
[2]
WHEREAS
the first portion removed by the Court is in the first paragraph on page 3, between two commas (Translation) ", and as generously as possible,";
[3]
WHEREAS
the second portion which the Court removes is in the second paragraph on page 3, also between two commas (Translation) ", it is apparent that even assuming the facts alleged are true,";
[4]
WHEREAS
the third portion, also between two commas, which the Court removes, is in the second paragraph on page 5 (Translation) ", even assuming,";
[5]
IN VIEW OF
further the allegations of the plaintiff-applicant, like the evil of any racism in all humanity, this Court cites in the same vein a passage from the Supreme Court of Canada in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at paragraph 17:
"Regretfully, we must also mention that the motion and the documents filed in support of it include anti-Semitic sentiment and views that most might have thought had disappeared from Canadian society, and even more so from legal debate in Canada. Our society is a diverse one, home to the widest variety of ethnic, linguistic and cultural groups. In this society, to resort to discourse and actions that profoundly contradict the principles of equality and mutual respect that are the foundations of our public life shows a lack of respect for the fundamental rules governing our public institutions and, more specifically, our courts and the justice system."
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 335 N.R. 220; 2005 SCC 39).
[6]
THE COURT ORDERS
that, after removal of these three particular portions, the decision by Prothonotary Tabib stand and that the plaintiff-applicant's motion for appeal be dismissed with costs.
REASONS FOR ORDER
[7]
As it agrees with the decision by Prothonotary Tabib, the Court accepts most of the arguments of the defendant-respondent.
FACTS
[8]
In his statement of claim seeking damages, the plaintiff-applicant thus summarized his cause of action:
(Translation) "The plaintiff's cause of action is as follows: the ULTIMATE PURPOSE of this court action is to require the defendant, here the Government of Canada, to restore order, security and justice in Canada, which have long been undermined by the Jewish Mafia, as succinctly set out in paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 below.
"The Government of Canada, with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) and the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS), have a duty to prevent the criminal and murderous activities of the Jewish Mafia in Canada and in the world.
"The plaintiff is asking the Court to make a declaratory judgment to recognize the guilt of the defendant as a result of the inertia of officers of the RCMP and CSIS in the fight against the crimes of the Jewish Mafia for fifteen years.
"The plaintiff is asking the Court to render a judgment directing the Government of Canada to terminate all the criminal activities of the Jewish Mafia on Canadian soil and make affected governments around the world aware of the misdeeds of this criminal organization.
"The plaintiff is asking the Court to render a judgment directing the plaintiff to conduct an investigation to render the Jewish criminals harmless in Canada, especially in the Ottawa Police Force involved in cases 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252 in the Ottawa Superior Court. The Ottawa Police Hate Crimes Unit must be dissolved, as it only serves to promote the interests of the criminal Jewish Mafia.
"Jewish criminals in the Ottawa Police Force involved in cases 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252 made unlawful arrests and committed serious perjury in order to win these cases against the plaintiff and his female friend NGUYEN Thi Minh, who were victims of police conspiracy with the international Jewish Mafia in this matter. The plaintiff demands that the defendant be held jointly liable with the Ottawa Police (mis-en-cause in this case) for the claims referred to in cases 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252."
[9]
The plaintiff-applicant sought the following relief against the defendant-respondent, the Attorney General of Canada (AGC):
(Translation) "ALLOW the Plaintiff's action;
DECLARE:
the Government of Canada responsible for the present state of insecurity and injustice in Canada and the U.S., by not trying to resist the murderous intrigues of the Jewish Mafia;
the Government of Canada has failed to prevent attacks orchestrated by the Jewish Mafia, like that of September 11, 2001 in the U.S.;
the Government of Canada responsible for the plaintiff's misfortunes when he did not receive proper protection against crimes by the Jewish Mafia;
CONDEMN:
the Government of Canada for not having properly supervised the staff in its RCMP and CSIS organizations;
the Government of Canada for letting the Jewish Mafia conduct oppressive action against the plaintiff, who is a fighter for world peace and justice;
the Government of Canada to compensate the plaintiff: to pay compensation jointly with the other victims of unlawful arrest and perjury in cases 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252 (Ottawa Court House);
the pro-Jewish Mafia officers of the Ottawa Police for making unlawful arrests on July 14, 2003 and then fabricating evidence for perjury on October 28, 2004, offences which stained the honour of all Ottawa police officers;
ORDER:
the Government of Canada to restore justice, order and security for all persons in Canada;
the Government of Canada to cause to be eliminated the members of the Jewish Mafia involved in cases 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252 in Ottawa and cause the Jewish Mafia tool known as the Ottawa Police Hate Crimes Unit to be dissolved;
the Government of Canada to eliminate members of the Jewish Mafia from its entire administrative system, specially the RCMP and CSIS;
the Government of Canada to cause the plaintiff and his female friend Minh to be compensated for the damage sustained by reason of the deliberate acts of members of the Ottawa Police Force, claims mentioned in cases 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252 in Ottawa;
the Government of Canada to inform all interested countries of the secret procedures of the Jewish Mafia as described in the plaintiff's publications already given to the RCMP, in order to protect innocents in the world."
[10]
The Court agrees that, following the three aforesaid deletions (in accordance with the Reasons for Order, at pages 11 to 16), the order by Prothonotary Tabib is correct in law and in fact and, as she ruled, the plaintiff-applicant's statement of claim must be struck out on the ground that it disclosed no cause of action.
ISSUES
[11]
The issues are the following:
(i) What is the standard of review that should be applied by this Court to the order by Prothonotary Tabib pursuant to rule 51 of the
Federal Courts Rules (1998)
, SOR/98-106 (the
Rules
)?
(ii) Can the plaintiff-applicant file evidence - in the appeal at bar - which was not filed before Prothonotary Tabib?
(iii) In view of the fact that the defendant-respondent acknowledged that the question raised by the plaintiff-applicant - in the appeal at bar - is central to his case, does the plaintiff-applicant's statement of claim disclose a cause of action?
BRIEF STATEMENT OF PROPOSITIONS
(i)
What is the standard of review that should be applied by this Court to the order by Prothonotary Tabib pursuant to rule 51 of the
Federal Courts Rules (1998)
, SOR/98-106 (the
Rules
)?
[12]
Rule 51 reads as follows:
"51(1) An order of a prothonotary may be appealed by a motion to a judge of the Trial Division.
"(2) Notice of a motion under subsection (1) shall be
(a) served within 10 days after the day on which the order under appeal was made and at least four days before the day fixed for hearing the motion; and
(b) filed not later than two days before the day fixed for the hearing of the motion."
[13]
In addition, this Court has consistently approved the test laid down in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), by Mr. Justice Mark R. MacGuigan:
"... I am of the opinion that such orders sought to be disturbed on appeal only where it has been made to appear that
(a) as they are clearly wrong, in the sense that the exercise of discretion by the prothonotary was based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts, or
(b) in making them, the prothonotary improperly exercised his discretion on a question vital to the final issue of the case.
In each of these classes of cases, the Motions Judge will not be bound by the opinion of the prothonotary; but will hear the matter de novo and exercise his or her own discretion."
[14]
The order by Prothonotary Tabib is central to the final issue of this case.
(ii)
Can the plaintiff-applicant submit evidence - in the appeal at bar - which was not submitted before Prothonotary Tabib?
[15]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [2001] F.C.J. No. 330, the respondent objected to the new evidence submitted by the appellant in connection with an appeal de novo from an order made by Prothonotary Richard Morneau.
[16]
Mr. Justice Pierre Blais allowed this objection as follows:
"As counsel for the plaintiff very properly pointed out, when the Court decides that it must retry a case de novo in order to exercise its own discretion, it must hear the case as it stood at this time of the decision by the prothonotary; the consistent precedents on this point are clear:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 169:
'... A motion is commenced by a notice of motion, not a notice of appeal, and is to be supported by an affidavit setting out "all the facts on which the motion is based that do not appear from the record" . Despite this seeming ambiguity in the
Federal Court Rules
, I understand the procedure established thereby to be, as noted above, an appeal based on the material that was before the prothonotary. This is consistent with the decisions in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
In some circumstances new evidence may of course be entertained; see Federal Court Rule 1102 and the jurisprudence thereunder. Such circumstances do not, however, exist in the present case.
' [My emphasis.]
"
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 398:
'The present matter is an appeal from the Prothonotary's decision pursuant to subsection 336(5) of the
Rules
. For me to disturb the Prothonotary's order, I must be satisfied that his order was "clearly wrong" or that the order raises a question "vital to the final issue of the case".  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mr. Justice MacGuigan of the Federal Court of Appeal explained as follows the applicable standard of review where appeals are taken from discretionary orders of a prothonotary.
. . . . .
'In the present instance, there is no doubt in my mind that the Prothonotary's order raises a question vital to the final issue of the case since the effect of the Prothonotary's order is to terminate the plaintiff's action. However, I can only examine the Prothonotary's order in the light of the evidence which was before him when he made his order. Consequently, I cannot, and so advised the parties at the hearing, consider the affidavits which the plaintiffs seek to introduce into the record. I do not know why these affidavits were not filed by the plaintiffs in support of their September 22, 1995 application but, in my view, that evidence, if available, should have been placed before the Prothonotary.
'This is an appeal of the Prothonotary's decision and it is now too late to present evidence which should have been made earlier. In my view, the purpose of these new affidavits is to correct the shortcomings of the evidence submitted to the Prothonotary. The facts sworn to, for example in the Beesley affidavit, are facts which could have been put before the Prothonotary but were not. The affidavit covers the time period from the initiation of the litigation in 1988 to October 30, 1995.
'It was for these reasons that I informed the parties during the hearing that I would not allow the plaintiffs to introduce into the record supplementary affidavits.'"
(iii)
In view of the fact that the defendant-respondent acknowledged that the issue raised by the plaintiff-applicant - in the appeal at bar - is vital to his case, does the plaintiff-applicant's statement of claim disclose a cause of action?
[17]
Before answering this question, the defendant-respondent must determine the burden of proof it must meet.
Defendant-respondent's burden of proof on the first issue
[18]
In
Inuit Tapirisat of Canada and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mr. Justice Estey wrote at paragraph 4:
"As I have said, all the facts pleaded in the statement of claim must be deemed to have been proven. On a motion such as this a court should, of course, dismiss the action or strike out any claim made by the plaintiff only in plain and obvious cases and where the court is satisfied that 'the case is beyond doubt' ..."
[19]
The defendant-respondent argued that it is plain and obvious that the case discloses no cause of action and that in fact the order by Prothonotary Tabib was correct in law and in fact.
Does plaintiff-applicant's statement of claim disclose clause of action?
[20]
Rule 221 provides:
"221(1) On motion, the Court may, at any time, order that a pleading, or anything contained therein, be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that it
(a) discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, as the case may be,
(b) is immaterial or redundant,
(c) is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious,
(d) may prejudice or delay the fair trial of the action,
(e) constitutes a departure from a previous pleading, or
(f) is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court,
and may order the action be dismissed or judgment entered accordingly.
"(2) No evidence shall be heard on a motion for an order under paragraph (1)(a)."
[21]
In order to undertake review of the aforementioned issue, the relief asked must be analyzed by category:
(iv) declaratory relief;
(v) compensatory relief, in relation to the Ottawa police officers;
(vi) writ of mandamus.
Declaratory relief
[22]
The plaintiff-applicant is asking this Court to:
"DECLARE:
the Government of Canada responsible for the present state of insecurity and injustice in Canada and the U.S., by not trying to resist the murderous intrigues of the Jewish Mafia;
the Government of Canada has failed to prevent attacks orchestrated by the Jewish Mafia, like that of September 11, 2001 in the U.S.;
the Government of Canada responsible for the plaintiff's misfortunes when he did not receive proper protection against crimes by the Jewish Mafia;
CONDEMN:
the Government of Canada for not having properly supervised the staff in its RCMP and CSIS organizations;
the Government of Canada for letting the Jewish Mafia conduct oppressive action against the plaintiff, who is a fighter for world peace and justice ..."
[23]
In
Administration de pilotage des  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 74 F.T.R. 185 (T.D.), Mr. Justice Louis-Marcel Joyal cited Lord Dunedin in
Commercial and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (U.K.H.L.), on the substantive conditions that must be met for a declaratory order to be made:
"The question must be a real and not a theoretical question; the person raising it must have a real interest to raise it; he must be able to secure a proper contradictor, that is to say, someone presently existing who has a true interest to oppose the declaration sought."
[24]
The question raised by the plaintiff-applicant is not a real one and the plaintiff-applicant does not have a real interest in asking this Court to make this declaratory judgment.
Absence of real question
[25]
Rule 64 provides:
"64. No proceeding is subject to challenge on the ground that only a declaratory order is sought, and the Court may make a binding declaration of right in a proceeding whether or not any consequential relief is or can be claimed."
[26]
Also, in accordance with that Rule, the Court has held that it does not have jurisdiction to make a declaration as to facts.
[27]
Thus, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 49 F.T.R. 285 (T.D.), Mr. Justice Max Teitelbaum wrote:
"I am satisfied that I, as a judge of the Federal Court of Canada, do not have the jurisdiction to make such declarations.
I agree with the submission of counsel for the Defendant that only legal rights may be declared and that, in this case, the Plaintiff is seeking declarations of fact.
" (Emphasis by the Court)
(See also paragraph 22 of
Laurentian Pilotage Authority
, supra, and paragraph 27 of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 141 F.T.R. 258 (T.D.))
[28]
The declaration sought by the plaintiff-applicant only relates to facts:
- Canada is responsible for the current state of insecurity in this country and the U.S.;
- Canada has failed to take preventive measures against attacks;
- Canada is responsible for the plaintiff's misfortunes;
- Canada has not properly supervised the RCMP and CSIS;
- Canada has allowed a criminal organization to act oppressively against the plaintiff.
[29]
As this Court does not have the power under rule 64 of the
Rules
, and this is confirmed by the case law, to make a declaration as to facts, the statement of claim does not disclose a real question.
[30]
Therefore, the first substantive condition that must be met for a declaratory order to be made has not been met.
[31]
As the conditions for issuing a declaratory order are cumulative, the following analysis has but an academic interest.
[32]
A second substantive argument precludes the making of the declaration sought by the plaintiff-applicant.
No real interest raised
[33]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the applicant was seeking by way of judicial review to have quashed the statements contained in the conclusions of the report by the Commission of Inquiry into the Deployment of Canadian Forces in Somalia on the ground that they injured his reputation.
[34]
Mr. Justice Arthur Stone, speaking for a unanimous Court, made the following comments regarding the interest which must exist for a declaratory judgment to be granted:
"There was a time when declaratory relief was not available if it would have no legal effect, but this is no longer so.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  is not merely theoretical, and on which the court's decision gives practical guidance, then the court in its discretion can grant a declaration. A good instance is the recent case on the football transfer system decided by  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  particular case, the declaration might be of some use in removing a slur which was cast against the plaintiffs by the transfer. He also put us on the wider ground of the public interest that the power to transfer can only be used in the interest of administrative efficiency and not as a form of punishment. He said that it would be valuable for the court so to declare. Again on this point, but without determining the matter, it seems to me that there is an arguable case that a declaration might serve some useful purpose.'
Salmon, L.J., concurring, added at page 774:
'It is said: Even if the plaintiffs' rights under the regulations were infringed, what good could the remedies which are claimed by the plaintiffs do them? Can they benefit by these declarations? If a plaintiff seeks some declaration in which he has a mere academic interest, or one which can fulfil no useful purpose, the court will not grant the relief claimed. In this case, however, again without deciding the point in any way, it seems to me clearly arguable that, if the declarations are made, they might induce those in authority to consider the plaintiffs' promotion, there being some evidence that the alleged transfers by way of punishment have prejudiced, and whilst they remain will destroy, the plaintiffs' chances of promotion.'
"The principle was applied by Mr. Justice Pratte (as he then was) in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), at 186-187. The Motions Judge granted declaratory relief in respect of this error. I am satisfied that this remedy was available notwithstanding Cory, J.'s, characterization of a report of a commission of inquiry in
Krever
, supra, as having 'no legal consequences'. Cory, J., acknowledged at the same time that it is precisely because the reputation of a witness is at stake that procedural fairness must be accorded for, as he put it at paragraph 56: 'For most, a good reputation is their most highly prized attribute'. In my view the respondent does have an interest in protecting his reputation. It is also to be noted that rule 64 of the
Federal Courts Rules
, 1998 [SOR/98-106] provides for the granting of declaratory relief, whether or not any consequential relief is or can be claimed.
"It seems to me that while a declaration would not affect a legal right, it would serve the useful purpose of removing any possible, though perhaps unintended, harm that may have been caused to the respondent's reputation by the statement in the introductory chapter to Volume 4 of the Report. I would restrict the declaration accordingly."
[35]
From reading the foregoing passage, a declaratory order may be made even when it will have no practical effect on the parties
provided the plaintiff has a real interest in the said order being made
.
[36]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  interest was to remove from the transfer of a football player from one team to another any blame attaching to him.
[37]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, the plaintiff's interest was in restoring his reputation, damaged in the conclusions contained in the report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Deployment of Canadian Forces in Somalia.
[38]
In this case, the plaintiff's only interest is based on anti-Semitic beliefs which have no place in Canadian society, as noted by the country's highest court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra:
"Regretfully, we must also mention that the motion and the documents filed in support of it include anti-Semitic sentiment and views that most might have thought had disappeared from Canadian society, and even more so from legal debate in Canada. Our society is a diverse one, home to the widest variety of ethnic, linguistic and cultural groups. In this society, to resort to discourse and actions that profoundly contradict the principles of equality and mutual respect that are the foundations of our public life shows a lack of respect for the fundamental rules governing our public institutions and, more specifically, our courts and the justice system."
[39]
Therefore, the plaintiff-applicant did not raise any real interest warranting this Court to make the declaratory conclusions he is seeking.
[40]
In addition, the relief sought by the plaintiff-applicant, in view of this absence of interest, will have no practical effect on the rights of the parties.
[41]
Indeed, no practical effect would ensue if this Court were to find that:
- Canada is responsible for the current state of insecurity in this country and the U.S.;
- Canada has failed to take preventive measures against attacks;
- Canada is responsible for the plaintiff's misfortunes;
- Canada has not properly supervised the RCMP and CSIS;
- Canada has allowed a criminal organization to act oppressively against the plaintiff.
[42]
Therefore, in the light of this absence of any practical effect on the rights of the parties, together with the absence of any real questions to be decided and of any real interest of the plaintiff-applicant, declaratory relief sought by the plaintiff-applicant must be denied.
[43]
My analysis will bear on the compensatory relief asked in relation to the acts of the Ottawa police officers.
Compensatory relief sought in relation to the plaintiff's arrest
[44]
The plaintiff-applicant sought from this Court the following relief:
(Translation)
"CONDEMN:
the Government of Canada to compensate the plaintiff: to pay compensation jointly with the other victims of unlawful arrest and perjury in cases 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252 (Ottawa Court House) ...
the pro-Jewish Mafia officers of the Ottawa Police for making unlawful arrests on July 14, 2003 and then fabricating evidence for perjury on October 28, 2004, offences which stained the honour of all Ottawa police officers.
ORDER:
The Government of Canada to cause the plaintiff and his female friend Minh to be compensated for the damage sustained as a consequence of the deliberate acts of members of the Ottawa Police Force, claims mentioned in cases 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252 (Ottawa Court House)."
Facts pertaining to the relief sought
[45]
On July 14, 2003, the plaintiff was arrested by police officers of the City of Ottawa for a violation of s. 319 of the
Criminal Code
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 (public incitement of hatred): the plaintiff and his female friend were distributing pamphlets containing anti-Jewish propaganda on Parliament Hill (paragraph 40 of the plaintiff-applicant's statement of claim, supra; paragraph (ii) of the decision by  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Sup. Ct.)).
[46]
On February 12, 2004, the charges against the plaintiff were dropped (Translation) "as the Ontario prosecutor refused to approve the prosecution" (paragraph (iii) of decision by Mr. Justice Roy, supra).
[47]
In June and July 2004, statements of claim seeking damages (Nos. 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252) were filed against the City of Ottawa and the Ottawa Police Force by the plaintiff (paragraph (iv) of decision by Mr. Justice Roy, supra).
[48]
On February 3, 2005, these statements of claim seeking damages were struck out by Mr. Justice Roy following the submission by the defendants (Translation) "of a motion to dismiss" on the ground that they were prescribed (decision by Mr. Justice Roy, supra).
Exclusion of civil liability on the part of the defendant-respondent
[49]
In support of his argument pertaining to the liability of the defendant-respondent, the plaintiff-applicant alleged that the RCMP, Ottawa police officers and other persons described in his statement of claim acted wrongfully toward him.
Allegations of wrongful acts on the part of RCMP
[50]
The plaintiff-applicant argued that the RCMP was responsible for his arrest on July 14, 2003, in that the RCMP did not pay attention to a report prepared by the plaintiff-applicant, entitled (Translation) "The Vampires who have been Sucking American Blood for 45 years".
[51]
According to the allegations of the plaintiff-applicant, if the RCMP had taken his report into account, the attacks in the U.S. on September 11, 2001 would have been avoided, other mass killings such as that of the polytechnic would have been avoided, the sending of envelopes containing anthrax to the U.S. would have been avoided, and finally,
as alleged specifically in paragraph 70 of his statement of claim, (Translation) "the plaintiff would have won his case against the Ottawa Police" following his arrest for public incitement of hatred by distributing pamphlets containing anti-Jewish propaganda
.
[52]
The allegations of the plaintiff-applicant disclose no valid cause of action as to the alleged liability of the RCMP.
[53]
The enforcement of the
Criminal Code
is dealt with in the definition of the Attorney General contained in s. 2 of the
Criminal Code
:
"2 ... .
'Attorney General'
(a) subject to paragraphs (c) to (f), with respect to proceedings to which this Act applies, means the Attorney General or Solicitor General of the province in which those proceedings are taken and includes his or her lawful deputy,
(b) with respect to the Yukon Territory, the Northwest Territories and Nunavut, or with respect to proceedings commenced at the instance of the Government of Canada and conducted by or on behalf of that Government in respect of a contravention of, a conspiracy or attempt to contravene, or counselling the contravention of, any Act of Parliament other than this Act or any regulation made under such an Act, means the Attorney General of Canada and includes his or her lawful deputy ..."
[54]
Indeed, RCMP officers were in no way involved in the arrest of the plaintiff-applicant on July 14, 2003.
[55]
Thus, the defendant-respondent could in no way be held liable for the alleged wrongful acts committed when the plaintiff-applicant was arrested on July 14, 2003.
[56]
In any event, even if the RCMP had applied their mind to the work entitled (Translation) "Vampires who have been Sucking American Blood for 45 Years",
that would not have enabled the plaintiff to win his case
.
[57]
The plaintiff-applicant's actions for damages were struck out on the ground that they were statute-barred (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Roy, supra).
[58]
Accordingly, even if the RCMP had taken any action, the plaintiff-applicant's actions for damages would still have been struck out as being statute-barred.
[59]
Also, the defendant-respondent cannot be held responsible, as argued by the plaintiff-applicant, for alleged wrongful acts committed by the Ottawa police officers and persons described in his statement of claim.
Allegation of wrongful acts on the part of Ottawa police officers and persons described in plaintiff-applicant's statement of claim
[60]
Section 3 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings
Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-50, s. 3; S.C. 2001, c. 4, s. 36 (the
Act
), sets out the parameters of civil liability by the Crown in right of Canada.
"3. The Crown is liable for the damages for which, if it were a person, it would be liable
(a) in the Province of Quebec, in respect of
(i) the damage caused by the fault of a servant of the Crown, or
(ii) the damage resulting from the act of a thing in the custody of or owned by the Crown or by the fault of the Crown as custodian or owner; and
(b) in any other province, in respect of
(i) a tort committed by a servant of the Crown, or
(ii) a breach of duty attaching to the ownership, occupation, possession or control of property"
[61]
Section 2 of the
Act
defines the term "servant":
"2. ...
'servant' includes agent, but does not include any person appointed or employed by or under the authority of an ordinance of the Northwest Territories or a law of the Legislature of Yukon or of the Legislature for Nunavut ..."
[62]
The plaintiff-applicant alleged that Ottawa police officers and the following persons committed wrongful acts against him at the time of his arrest on July 14, 2003, which he described as unlawful:
- Det.-Sgt. Will Hinterberger of the Ottawa Police;
- Judge Jolicoeur of the Ontario Criminal Court;
- the Ottawa Police Chief;
- Prothonotary Beaudoin of the Ontario Court;
- Michael Berstein, deputy of the Attorney General of Ontario;
- the Ontario Civilian Commission on Police Services.
[63]
Ottawa police officers and the various individuals named by the plaintiff-applicant in paragraphs 51 to 57 of his statement of claim were not servants of the federal government.
[64]
Justice of the Peace Michel F. Jolicoeur is independent of the Crown in right of Canada (paragraphs 5 and 6,
Bélanger and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  500-17-025927-057).
[65]
The other individuals whom the plaintiff-applicant alleged were at fault, as described in paragraph 56, were employed by the Ontario provincial government and therefore were not servants of the federal government.
[66]
Finally, pursuant to s. 17(1) of the
Federal Courts
Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, this Court does not have jurisdiction to make an order against the persons named in paragraph 56 hereunder in that this Court's jurisdiction is limited to actions against the Crown in right of Canada:
"17(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act or any other Act of Parliament, the Federal Court has concurrent original jurisdiction in all cases in which relief is claimed against the Crown."
[67]
Indeed, this Court does not have jurisdiction to render a judgment against a judge who is independent of the Crown in right of Canada or employees of the Ontario provincial government.
[68]
Therefore, it is clear that this Court clearly cannot award compensation as a result of the plaintiff-applicant's arrest.
[69]
The plaintiff-applicant's statement of claim asked the Court to issue a writ of mandamus:
(Translation)
Writ of mandamus
[70]
The plaintiff is asking this Court to issue a writ of mandamus so as to:
"ORDER:
the Government of Canada to restore justice, order and security for all individuals in Canada;
the Government of Canada to cause to be eliminated the members of the Jewish Mafia involved in cases 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252 in Ottawa and cause the Jewish Mafia tool known as the Ottawa Police Hate Crimes Unit to be dissolved;
the Government of Canada to eliminate members of the Jewish Mafia from its entire administrative system, specially the RCMP and CSIS;
the Government of Canada to cause the plaintiff and his female friend Minh to be compensated for the damage sustained as a consequence of the deliberate acts of members of the Ottawa Police Force, claims mentioned in cases 04-CV-027972 and 04-CV-028252 in Ottawa;
the Government of Canada to inform all interested countries of the secret procedures of the Jewish Mafia as described in the plaintiff's publications already given to the RCMP, in order to protect innocents in the world."
[71]
There are substantive arguments as to why the writ of mandamus sought by the plaintiff-applicant clearly cannot issue.
Substantive reasons precluding the issuance of a writ of mandamus
[72]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal set out the tests which must be met for a writ of mandamus to issue.
[73]
These basic conditions that must be met before a writ of mandamus can issue are:
1. there must be a legal duty to act;
2. the duty must be owed to the applicant;
3. there is a clear right to performance of the duty;
4. no other remedy is available to the applicant;
5. the order sought will be of some practical value or effect;
6. in the exercise of its discretion the Court finds no equitable bar to the relief sought;
7. on a balance of convenience, an order in the nature of mandamus should (or should not) issue;
8. where the duty sought to be enforced is discretionary, the nature of the said duty and the way the discretion is exercised must be considered.
[74]
The relief sought is in flagrant violation of the right to life protected in Canada by s. 7 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, Part I, Schedule B of the
Canada Act, 1982
, 2982, c. 11 (U.K.) (the
Charter
), and in international law by s. 6 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
.
[75]
Section 7 of the
Charter
provides:
"7. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice."
[76]
Section 6 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
provides:
"1. Every human being has the inherent right to life. This right shall be protected by law. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life.
2. In countries which have not abolished the death penalty, sentence of death may be imposed only for the most serious crimes in accordance with the law in force at the time of the commission of the crime and not contrary to the provisions of the present Covenant and to the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
. This penalty can only be carried out pursuant to a final judgement rendered by a competent court.
3. When deprivation of life constitutes the crime of genocide, it is understood that nothing in this article shall authorize any State Party to the present Covenant to derogate in any way from any obligation assumed under the provisions of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
.
4. Anyone sentenced to death shall have the right to seek pardon or commutation of the sentence. Amnesty, pardon or commutation of the sentence of death may be granted in all cases.
5. Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by persons below eighteen years of age and shall not be carried out on pregnant women.
6. Nothing in this article shall be invoked to delay or to prevent the abolition of capital punishment by any State Party to the present Covenant."
[77]
In view of the foregoing, it is clear that the writ of mandamus sought by the plaintiff-applicant cannot issue from this Court.
[78]
For these reasons, the Court dismisses the plaintiff-applicant's motion for appeal with costs.
Motion dismissed.
Editor: Giovanni A. Merlini/gs