[1]
Blais, J.
: This application is an appeal brought by the appellant pursuant to s. 56 of the
Trade-marks Act
(hereinafter referred to as the "
Act
") from a decision of the Registrar of Trade-marks (hereinafter referred to as the "Registrar") dated September 4, 1997 wherein the Registrar refused the Application for Registration of the trademark FRUIT DOTS for breakfast cereals under Application No. 704, 156.
FACTS
[2]
An application was filed by the appellant on May 1, 1992 for registration of the trade-mark FRUIT DOTS in association with breakfast cereals based on a proposed use in Canada.
[3]
On February 23, 1993, the respondent filed a Statement of Opposition.
[4]
On or about June 11, 1993, the appellant filed a Counterstatement denying all allegations set out in the Statement of Opposition except the allegation that the respondent is the owner of record of Registration No. 215,186 for trademark FROOT LOOPS.
[5]
On August 12, 1997, an oral hearing was conducted at which both parties were represented.
[6]
On September 4, 1997 the Registrar refused the appellant's Application for Registration of the trademark FRUIT DOTS.
IMPUGNED DECISION
[7]
The Registrar found the appellant's trademark FRUIT DOTS to be confusing with the trademark FROOT LOOPS.
[8]
At page 7 of the decision, which can be found at page 17 of the Applicant's Record Volume I of VII, the Registrar came to the following conclusion:
"Pursuant to the authority delegated to me under s. 63(3) of the
Act
, I refuse the applicant's application."
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
[9]
Section 6(2) of the
Act
provides the test for the issue of confusion.
"6(2) The use of a trade-mark causes confusion with another trade-mark if the use of both trade-marks in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with those trade-marks are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class."
"6(2) L'emploi d'une marque de commerce crée de la confusion avec une autre marque de commerce lorsque l'emploi des deux marques de commerce dans la même région serait susceptible de faire conclure que les marchandises liées à ces marques de commerce sont fabriquées, vendues, données à bail ou louées, ou que les services liés à ces marques sont loués ou exécutés, par la même personne, que ces marchandises ou ces services soient ou non de la même catégorie générale."
[10]
Section 6(5) of the
Act
provides a list of factors to be considered in determining the issue of confusion.
"6(5) In determining whether trade-marks or trade-names are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trade-marks or trade-names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trade-marks or trade-names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trade-marks or trade-names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
"6(5) En décidant si des marques de commerce ou des noms commerciaux créent de la confusion, le tribunal ou le registraire, selon le cas, tient compte de toutes les circonstances de l'espèce, y compris:
a) le caractère distinctif inhérent des marques de commerce ou noms commerciaux, et la mesure dans laquelle ils sont devenus connus;
b) la période pendant laquelle les marques de commerce ou noms commerciaux ont été en usage;
c) le genre de marchandises, services ou entreprises;
d) la nature du commerce;
e) le degré de ressemblance entre les marques de commerce ou les noms commerciaux dans la présentation ou le son, ou dans les idées qu'ils suggèrent."
[11]
Section 16(3) of the
Act
pertains to the registration of a proposed trademark.
"16(3) Any applicant who has filed an application in accordance with section 30 for registration of a proposed trade-mark that is registrable is entitled, subject to sections 38 and 40, to secure its registration in respect of the wares or services specified in the application, unless at the date of filing of the application it was confusing with
(a) a trade-mark that had been previously used in Canada or made known in Canada by any other person;
(b) a trade-mark in respect of which an application for registration had been previously filed in Canada by any other person; or
(c) a trade-name that had been previously used in Canada by any other person."
"16(3) Tout requérant qui a produit une demande selon l'article 30 en vue de l'enregistrement d'une marque de commerce projetée et enregistrable, a droit, sous réserve des articles 38 et 40, d'en obtenir l'enregistrement à l'égard des marchandises ou services spécifiés dans la demande, à moins que, à la date de production de la demande, elle n'ait créé de la confusion:
a) soit avec une marque de commerce antérieurement employée ou révélée au Canada par une autre personne;
b) soit avec une marque de commerce à l'égard de laquelle une demande d'enregistrement a été antérieurement produite au Canada par une autre personne;
c) soit avec un nom commercial antérieurement employé au Canada par une autre personne."
[12]
Section 56 of the
Act
provides a very broad right of appeal which permits the court to exercise any discretion which the Registrar has under the
Act
.
"56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months."
"56(1) Appel de toute décision rendue par le registraire, sous le régime de la présente loi, peut être interjeté à la Cour fédérale dans les deux mois qui suivent la date où le registraire a expédié l'avis de la décision ou dans tel délai supplémentaire accordé par le tribunal, soit avant, soit après l'expiration des deux mois."
[13]
Sections 56(2), 56(3), 56(4) of the
Act
are technical provisions. Section 56(5) of the
Act
however grants the court a substantial degree of latitude in reviewing decisions of the Registrar, particularly when additional and substantive evidence has been filed.
"Additional evidence
"56(5) On an appeal under subsection (1), evidence in addition to that adduced before the Registrar may be adduced and the Federal Court may exercise any discretion vested in the Registrar."
"Preuve additionnelle
"56(5) Lors de l'appel, il peut être apporté une preuve en plus de celle qui a été fournie devant le registraire, et le tribunal peut exercer toute discrétion don't le registraire est investi."
APPELLANT'S POSITION
[14]
The appellant submits that the Registrar erred in fact and law in holding that its trademark FRUIT DOTS is confusing with the respondent's trademark FROOT LOOPS.
[15]
The appellant contends that the Registrar erred in fact and law in disregarding the effect of the presence and co-existence on the Trade-Mark Register (hereinafter referred to as the "Register") of similarly named breakfast cereal trademarks, and thus misapprehended the appropriate legal test on the issue of confusion.
[16]
The appellant further alleges that the Registrar erred in fact and law in finding that the appellant's proposed trademark FRUIT DOTS is confusing with the trade-mark FROOT LOOPS, despite having concluded that the word "FRUIT" or its phonetic equivalent "FROOT" is descriptive of the flavouring of the wares, that the visual appearance of the words "FRUIT" and "FROOT" are dissimilar as a result of the difference in spelling and that the words "DOTS" and "LOOPS" differ in appearance, sound, meaning, and ideas suggested.
[17]
Lastly, the appellant submits that because additional evidence of a substantial nature is before this court which was not before the Registrar, the standard of review of correctness is applicable and consequently, a trial de novo is appropriate.
RESPONDENT'S POSITION
[18]
The respondent submits that the Registrar's decision to refuse the appellant's Application for the trademark FRUIT DOTS was both reasonable and correct as there is confusion with its trademark FROOT LOOPS.
[19]
The respondent relies on the fact that its trademark FROOT LOOPS is a famous mark and has acquired distinctiveness through extensive use and advertising revealing that the Registrar's decision was reasonable and correct.
[20]
The respondent further alleges that the appellant's additional evidence is irrelevant or immaterial on various grounds and that there is insufficient evidence which would have materially affected the Registrar's overall decision as to confusion.
ISSUES
1. What is the material date for assessing confusion under s. 16(3) of the
Act
?
2. Did the Registrar err in refusing to register the appellant's trademark FRUIT DOTS?
ANALYSIS
1. What is the material date for assessing confusion under s. 16(3) of the
Act
?
[21]
The parties have submitted supplementary arguments which I have carefully examined.
Appellant's argument
[22]
The appellant holds that the material date should be September 4, 1997 (the date of the Registrar's decision). In so deciding, the additional evidence submitted by the appellant could therefore be considered for the purposes of assessing the issue of confusion.
Respondent's argument
[23]
The respondent, however, alleges that the additional evidence is irrelevant and of little weight for the purposes of assessing the issue of confusion as the evidence relates to the alleged state of the marketplace well after May 1, 1992 (the date of filing of the Application). Also, the additional evidence presented by the appellant fails to bear the same degree of similarity and so, little inference can be drawn from their existence.
Finding
[24]
Even if there is case law supporting the position that the material date should be the date of filing of the Opposition, and case law supporting the position that the material date should be the date of the Registrar's decision, as suggested by counsel for the appellant, most of the decisions are highly fact driven.
[25]
The appellant has failed to demonstrate why this court should depart from the express wording of s. 16(3) of the
Act
.
[26]
The case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 87 F.T.R. 124 (T.D.), is instructive. In
Paragon
, supra Pinard, J., clearly determined the material date as being the date of filing of the Application:
"[para. 20] [...] The material time therefore for considering the circumstances respecting this issue is as of the appellant's application filing date and the onus is on the appellant to establish that there is no reasonable likelihood of confusion between the trade marks at issue.
"[para. 21] In the context of this particular ground of opposition, the only new admissible evidence relevant to assessing the likelihood of confusion between the trade marks at issue, given my conclusions above on the first issue, is evidence of surrounding circumstances which existed at the material date, namely the filing date of the appellant's application for registration of the mark VICTOR HUGO & Design. Accordingly, no evidence concerning the use of the trade mark VICTOR HUGO & Design can be considered given the appellant did not commence using such mark until after filing its application for proposed use."
[27]
Therefore, I find that the material date is the date of filing of the Application and that the additional evidence submitted by the appellant that is subsequent to the material date shall be ignored.
2. Did the Registrar err in refusing to register the appellant's trademark FRUIT DOTS?
[28]
Yes, the Registrar did err in refusing to register the appellant's trademark FRUIT DOTS.
Onus
[29]
The onus of establishing lack of confusion falls on the shoulders of the appellant. This has been confirmed in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 381 (F.C.A.), where Hugessen, Décary and Létourneau, JJ.A., held:
"The onus is always upon an applicant for the registration of a trade mark to establish that, on the balance of probabilities, there is no likelihood of confusion with a previously used and registered trade mark. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 57 (F.C.T.D.), Cattanach, J., and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Cattanach, J.)."
[30]
Again in
Miss Universe
, supra the Federal Court of Appeal affirmed:
"The stronger the mark is, the greater the ambit of protection it should be accorded and the more difficult it will be for an applicant to discharge the onus."
[31]
It is clear that cereal and snack food products are food products which are closely related to one another, both in terms of the businesses themselves and the use of cereal products as snack foods and as ingredients in the snack foods. However, as stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 527 (F.C.A.) and discussed in more depth later, there are small differences which suffice to distinguish the trademarks from one another. Namely, in the case at bar it is the spelling of the first word "FRUIT"versus "FROOT", and the appearance, sound and meaning of the second word "DOTS" versus "LOOPS".
Definitions of DOTS, LOOPS, CIRCLES, HOOPS, RINGS, WHIRLS
[32]
The state of the Register shows that words which allude to the shape of cereals are also commonly used.
[33]
A search of the Register discloses many trademarks which co-exist with the respondent's FROOT LOOPS which contain the word "FRUIT" and were filed before the material date.
[34]
Some of these include:
TRADE-MARK NAME AND NUMBER
FILING DATE
FRUIT RINGS (TMA 318, 085)
1 May 1985 [see footnote 1]
FRUIT WHIRLS (TMA 408,435)
17 September 1991 [see footnote 2]
FRUITFUL BRAN (TMA 372, 340)
14 November 1988 [see footnote 3]
POST FRUIT & FIBRE (TMA 280, 625)
13 May 1981 [see footnote 4]
TOOTIE FRUITIES (TMA 376, 645)
12 May 1988 [see footnote 5]
[35]
Therefore it would seem that the trade-mark FRUIT DOTS is no different from some of the aforementioned trademarks since it too is composed of two (2) words: one (1) referring to the flavour of the cereal and one (1) referring to the shape of the cereal, specifically I refer to the trademarks FRUIT RINGS and FRUIT WHIRLS. And as such, the small differences will suffice to differentiate the trademarks FRUIT DOTS and FROOT LOOPS, particularly the different spelling of the first word and the different appearance, sound and meaning of the second word.
Section 6(2) of the Act - Confusion
[36]
The test for the issue of confusion is set out at s. 6(2) of the
Act
. Interpretation of this provision is found in the case of
Miss Universe
, supra, where the Federal Court of Appeal held:
"To decide whether the use of a trade mark or of a trade name causes confusion with another trade mark or another trade name, the court must ask itself whether, as a matter of first impression on the minds of an ordinary person having a vague recollection of that other mark or name 1, the use of both marks or names in the same area in the same manner is likely to lead to the inference that the services associated with those marks or names are performed by the same person, whether or not the services are of the same general class."
[37]
In addition, to determine whether trade-marks are confusing, this court is to have regard to all the surrounding circumstances of the case, including but not restricted to those specifically enumerated at s. 6(5) of the
Act
. This was affirmed by Rand, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (S.C.C.):
"[...] we must take into account the entire circumstances of the trade, including the prices, the class of people purchasing, and the ordinary manner in which they do that. [...]"
Paragraph 6(5)(a) of the Act - Inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks and the extent to which they have become known
[38]
It is trite law that common words which are descriptive or suggestive of a characteristic of a product have little inherent distinctiveness.
[39]
In the present matter, the appellant submits that the Registrar erred in deciding that the use of the trademark was not suitably distinct from that of the respondent so as to avoid confusion amongst the general population. Whereas the respondent contends that the Registrar accurately rejected the appellant's submissions on the basis of the respondent's ongoing use of the trademark. Specifically, the respondent alleges that it has been using the trademark FROOT LOOPS in relation to a business of breakfast cereal for the past 30 years (since 1964) and feels that there is a clear overlap in the appellant's use of the trademark and their own. The respondent relies heavily on the fame of its trademark to prove its distinctiveness.
[40]
The Registrar found the appellant's trademark FRUIT DOTS to be confusing with the trademark FROOT LOOPS despite a clear finding that the parties' marks are not inherently distinctive. This is difficult for the court to reconcile. At page 4 of the decision, (found at page 14 of the Applicant's Record Volume I of VII), the Registrar held:
"With regard to s. 6(5)(a), the inherent distinctiveness of the marks in question and the extent to which they have become known,
the marks are not inherently distinctive or coined
, as indicated by the opponent. The word FRUIT (or FROOT, which I have considered to be the phonetic equivalent of FRUIT) described the flavouring of the opponent's and applicant's wares. This word was disclaimed in both the applicant and opponent's trademark implying that the parties acknowledge that it is clearly descriptive of an aspect of the these wares. Furthermore, the word DOT and the word LOOPS merely describe the shape of the breakfast cereal. As a result, the marks merit a narrow ambit of protection. With respect to the extent to which the marks have become known, the applicant's mark is based on proposed use, and no evidence was filed showing use in Canada. The opponent on the other hand has evidenced more than 30 years of use and advertising in Canada. The opponent has alleged that it has a famous mark, and the applicant conceded this fact in its written argument." (My emphasis)
[41]
It is evident that when broken down to their basic elements, the trademarks FRUIT DOTS and FROOT LOOPS have very limited inherent distinctiveness. The word "FRUIT" (or its phonetic equivalent "FROOT") is merely descriptive of the flavouring of the product. The words "DOTS" and "LOOPS" allude to the shape of the product and again do not enhance any inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks as the words are merely descriptive.
[42]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  appellant claims that the words 'golden' and 'gold' have been extensively used and advertised in relation to Molson's products so as to acquire some distinctiveness which makes them worthy of a broad protection. In our view, although it is true that these words were widely used by the appellant over a considerable period of time,
one should not lose sight of the fact that the words are merely descriptive
.
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 43, Lord Simonds clearly established the inherent limits to the use of a descriptive word as the basis for a claim of distinctiveness of a trade mark and alleged confusion between it and other marks:
'The court will undoubtedly take into consideration long user [sic] of a descriptive name but will not forget that, since it is descriptive,
small differences may suffice
.
'... It comes in the end, I think, to no more than this, that where a trader adopts words in common use for his trade name, some risk of confusion is inevitable. But that risk must be run unless the first user is allowed unfairly to monopolise the words.
The court will accept comparatively small differences as sufficient to avert confusion
. A greater degree of discrimination may fairly be expected from the public where a trade name consists wholly or in part of words descriptive of the articles to be sold or the services to be rendered.'" (My emphasis)
[43]
The small differences which suffice to distinguish the trademarks FRUIT DOTS and FROOT LOOPS lie in the spelling of the word "FRUIT" and in the appearance, sound and meaning of the second word "DOTS" and "LOOPS."
[44]
However, it is the unique combination of the trademark FROOT LOOPS which in fact does make it distinctive. Yet, I do not believe confusion between the two trade-marks will arise.
Paragraph 6(5)(b) of the Act - The length of time the trademarks have been in use
Concurrent use in the United States
[45]
Likewise, I find that the co-existence of the parties' trademarks in the United States for many years is a good indication of the lack of possible confusion between the trade-marks here in Canada and is a determinative factor. At page 5 of the affidavit of John Stalker (Applicant's Record Volume II of VII), it is read:
"14. I am also aware that MY COMPANY'S American sister corporation, Weetabix Company Inc., has also been distributing FRUIT DOTS in the United States since at least the late 1980's. There has thus been coexistence in the marketplace between MY COMPANY'S FRUIT DOTS products and Kellogg's FROOT LOOPS product in both the United States and Canada for a number of years. Indeed the trademark FRUIT DOTS has been registered in the United States Trademarks Office in the name of MY COMPANY's sister corporation, Weetabix & Company Inc.,
since June of 1988.
" (My emphasis)
[46]
There is relevance where, as here, the trademarks in question are identical to the trademarks co-existing in the United  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).
[47]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 372 (T.D.), Joyal, J., held:
"It would seem that all the marks in issue are widely known in Canada. Used in association with similar products, they have coexisted for several years. To all appearances, the long-term use of similar marks, side by side, reduces the probability that confusion will 'likely' occur, to use the test in s. 6(2) of the
Act
.
. . . . .
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 497; 53 F.T.R. 228; 31 A.C.W.S.(3d) 459 (T.D.), I reiterated the fact that concurrent use for a long time was a determining factor:
'It might very well be true that there are similarities between the two competing marks. It might very well be true that there is some overlapping in the leasing functions of the appellant and the leasing operations of the respondent. Similarities and overlapping of the nature of the wares and the nature of the trade, must always be measured or balanced by the other criteria set out in s. 6(5).'
"
The two competing marks, as well as other similar marks, appear to have been surviving side by side and neither the Registrar nor this court have been provided with any evidence of actual confusion over the past 10 years.
" (My emphasis)
[48]
I am of the opinion that in the present case, concurrent use has had the effect of mitigating the issue of confusion.
Paragraphs 6(5)(c) and 6(5)(d) of the Act - The nature of the wares, services or business and the nature of the trade
[49]
Both parties produce breakfast cereals and operate within the same industry. This is not at issue in the present matter.
Paragraph 6(5)(e) of the Act - The degree of resemblance between the trademarks in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them
[50]
The visual similarity between the parties' trademarks reside in the two-word construction of the trademarks. Both use the word "FRUIT" or one of its phonetic variants and both include a second word which alludes to the shape of the product:
FRUIT DOTS
FROOT LOOPS
[51]
As mentioned previously, the use of the word "FRUIT" or a variant thereof, is descriptive of the flavour of the product and has thus, little inherent distinctiveness. It is however the second set of words that have a different sound and appear differently and this has the effect of differentiating the trademarks. As to the idea suggested by the marks, there is some similarity mostly due to the fact that both products are breakfast cereals. However, the evidence shows that there are similarly coined trademarks comprising the combination of the word "FRUIT" and another word alluding to the shape of the cereals which co-exist on the Register and have done so previous to the material date.
[52]
Therefore, I am of the view that the use of the trademark FRUIT DOTS is unlikely to be confused with the trademark FROOT LOOPS having regard to the similar third party trademarks co-existing on the Register and in the marketplace, such as FRUIT RINGS and FRUIT WHIRLS.
[53]
Based on all of the foregoing and the fact that for a number of years, the trade-marks FRUIT DOTS and FROOT LOOPS have been co-existing concurrently in the marketplace in the United States without any known instances of confusion, confirms for the court that there is a lack of confusion between the parties' trademarks.
[54]
In conclusion, I believe the Registrar's decision was incorrect. In my opinion, the appellant should succeed in this matter.
ORDER
[55]
Therefore I would allow the appeal with costs. The Registrar's decision is set aside and the matter is referred back for redetermination on the basis that Application No. 704, 156 for registration of the trademark FRUIT DOTS for breakfast cereals be granted.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/gs
Footnotes
1. Applicant's Record, Volume V of VII, p. 1008.
2. Applicant's Record, Volume V of VII, p. 1030.
3. Applicant's Record, Volume V of VII, p. 1046.
4. Applicant's Record, Volume V of VII, p. 1142.
5. Applicant's Record, Volume V of VII, p. 1176.
[End of document]