Background
[1]
Joyal, J.
: The two principal parties in this dispute, Navionics and Flota Maritima Mexicana, signed on May 13, 1988, a New York Produce Exchange standard-form charter party agreement regarding the ship "Feder Gulf". For reasons not directly related to this appeal, a dispute arose regarding certain obligations of the two parties and a statement of claim was filed in this court by Navionics on July 6, 1988.
[2]
On August 23, 1988, the defendant Flota Maritima brought a motion to stay the proceedings pursuant to the terms of the charter party agreement. In support of the motion was the affidavit of counsel for the defendants and a copy of the charter party agreement. Counsel pleaded s. 50 of the Federal Court Act as well as article 8 of the Commercial Arbitration Code. This motion was adjourned until September 12, 1988.
[3]
By the time the matter came for hearing on September 12, 1988, the plaintiff had filed its own motion for judgment against the defendant for default of pleadings. Mr. Justice Dubé adjourned the plaintiff's motion sine die and denied the motion of the defendant for a stay. However, Mr. Justice Dubé gave the defendant leave to reapply for the stay once a fresh affidavit was obtained from an affiant with knowledge of the particulars of the dispute between the parties. Leave, however, was for a limited period of seven days.
[4]
On September 19, 1988, the defendant came before the Senior Prothonotary seeking an extension of the time within which to file its fresh affidavit. This motion was granted and the time extended a further seven days.
[5]
On September 26, 1988, the defendant again asked for a further extension of time. However, the plaintiff again moved for default judgment. The Senior Prothonotary denied the extension and granted judgment against the defendant should it fail to file a defense by October 7, 1988.
[6]
On October 7, 1988, the defendant filed its statement of defence and on October 11, it filed a notice of motion appealing the decision of the Senior Prothonotary denying it a further extension of time and requesting once again a stay of the proceedings pending arbitration pursuant to the charter party. In support of this motion was the fresh affidavit requested by Mr. Justice Dubé. This appeal and motion came before me on October 17, 1988.
The Position of the Defendant-Appellant
[7]
The defendant Flota Maritima takes the position that the issue between the parties is one covered by the provisions of the Commercial Arbitration Act, 33-34-35 Eliz. II, c. 22, in force August 10, 1986. This statute incorporates into a federal law of Canada a Commercial Arbitration Code adopted by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on June 21, 1985. In particular, article 8(1) of the Code provides that:
"8(1) A court before which an action is brought in a matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement
shall
, if a party so requests not later than when submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute, refer the parties to arbitration unless it finds that the agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed." (The underlining is mine)
[8]
The defendant says that the statute should be made to apply to its case. The contract with plaintiff clearly provides for arbitration. As a matter of fact, both parties have already appointed their individual nominees to the arbitration panel and there should not be any reason for the court to refuse the application to stay. The defendant concedes that the affidavit filed in support of its first motion was deficient but at that time, it had been extremely difficult for counsel to seek out, find and obtain relevant facts on the dispute with which to submit to the court a more articulate and detailed support evidence. It is also true, says the defendant, that in complying with the order of the Senior Prothonotary to file its defence as otherwise a judgment would be signed against it, it might be judged to have failed to meet the conditions of article 8 of the Commercial Arbitration Code, as incorporated in the statute, which says that a request for arbitration must be made no later than when submitting a party's first statement on the substance of the dispute. The defendant urges the court, however, to note that its request to the court was in fact its first step and in any event, the plaintiff should not be allowed to avoid the operation of the statute if it were by reason of its own procedures that a statement of defence was filed, under duress as it were.
The Position of the Plaintiff-Respondent
[9]
The plaintiff-respondent takes an opposite tack. The new statute, it says, imposes a condition where the court is bound to stay proceedings. That condition has not been respected and the statute cannot be made to apply.
[10]
Furthermore, there was every reason for Mr. Justice Dubé to refuse the initial application and every reason for him to impose strict delays within which to reapply on better affidavit evidence. His Lordship had grounds to conclude that, otherwise, the proper progress of the case would be unconscionably delayed and that by reason of other facts before him, the defendant did not appear to have a good defence on the merits.
[11]
I should therefore conclude, according to the plaintiff, that the Senior Prothonotary was fully justified to order judgment by default if the defence were not filed by October 7, 1988 and was also fully justified in dismissing the defendant's application for a further delay to file its application for a stay in proceedings. I should consequently dismiss the defendant's appeal, refuse to entertain a motion to stay and simply order that the action continue in the usual way.
The Issues
[12]
The court is faced with both substantive and procedural issues. Counsel for the parties have not been able to refer me to any case law on the interpretation of the Commercial Arbitration Act and its incorporated Code in general or on the meaning of article 8 in particular. The statute does provide in s. 4(2), however, that aids to interpretation may be found in the Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the Work of its Eighteenth Session, held from June 3 to 21, 1985 and on the Analytical Commentary contained in the Report of the Secretary General to the Eighteenth Session of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.
[13]
In this Analytical Commentary, which was reprinted in the Canada Gazette (Vol. 1, 1986, No. 40, Supplement pp. 118-120, October 4, 1986), the following is noted:
"3. As under the 1958 New York Convention, the court would refer the parties to arbitration, i.e., decline (the exercise of its) jurisdiction, only upon request by a party and, thus, not on its own motion. A time element has been added that the request be made at the latest with or in the first statement on the substance of the dispute. It is submitted that this point of time should be taken literally and applied uniformly in all legal systems, including those which normally regard such a request as a procedural plea to be raised at an earlier stage than any pleadings on substance.
"4. As regards the effect of a party's failure to invoke the arbitration agreement by way of such a timely request, it seems clear that article 8(1) prevents that party from invoking the agreement during the subsequent phases of the court proceedings. It may be noted that the Working Group, despite the wide support for the view that the failure of the party should preclude reliance on the agreement also in other proceedings or contexts, decided not to incorporate a provision on such general effect because it would be impossible to devise a simple rule which would satisfactorily deal with all the aspects of this complex issue."
[14]
The only logical conclusion from the foregoing text is that article 8 should be given a fairly strict interpretation. Furthermore, I should also apply a strict construction approach on the grounds that its imperative provision is an exceptional departure from the court's inherent jurisdiction and from its traditional discretion in dealing with any application to stay proceedings.
[15]
If it should be found, therefore, that a substantive pleading has in fact been filed, notwithstanding the Catch-22 situation facing the defendant, article 8 of the statute would be of no avail to the defendant or, expressed in alternate terms, the court would not be statute-bound to grant the stay of proceedings.
[16]
There are, however, procedural aspects to the case. As was argued by the defendant, its application to stay was made on August 23, 1988, and its defence was only filed on October 7, 1988. Mr. Justice Dubé did not dismiss the original application completely but merely rejected the evidence in support and gave leave for new evidence to be filed. In this way, so the argument goes, the extension of time could be seen as making the original application a continuing application, i.e., one which began prior to any pleading on the merits.
[17]
The plaintiff counters this by urging a strict reading of Mr. Justice Dubé's order which says "Motion denied" and "leave granted to reapply" and which may be interpreted to mean "original application dismissed" but "leave granted to bring new application".
The Issue of Mr. Justice Dubé's Order
[18]
Whether in the circumstances the parties are faced with one continuing application or a series of new ones is not easy to determine, English practice suggests that there are different types of dismissal (see Supreme Court Practice 1988, Vol. 2, pp. 1274-1275). There may be dismissal on the merits or there may be dismissal for failure to comply with rules or orders. One can also be faced with a conditional dismissal which becomes final when the condition is not met within a prescribed delay. Mr. Justice Dubé's order was not conditional but neither was a decision on the merits. Nevertheless, I should prefer to interpret it as a dismissal pure and simple. The fact that the dismissal was made without prejudice to the defendant's right to reapply, and for that matter, to reapply within a specified time, does not make of it any less a dismissal. On that reasoning, therefore, any reapplication by the defendant becomes a new application.
The Issue As To The Application Of Article 8 Of The Act
[19]
If there should appear to be no doubt that the defendant's last application for a stay is a new application, it is filed at a date subsequent to its filing of a statement of defence. The mandatory provision of article 8 of the Code would, therefore, not apply.
[20]
The issue is not, however, as simple as that. On the facts of the case, it is relevant to examine the question of intention or voluntariness on the part of the defendant in filing its defence. Can a proper reading of article 8 allow the addition of the qualificative term "voluntary" to what the article describes as "his first submission on the substance of the dispute"?
[21]
It is evident that the only reason for the defendant filing its defence was to avoid judgment for default in pleadings. Some of the jurisprudence, in interpreting similar arbitration statutes, suggests that the action by the defendant must be a positive one and not simply to parry a blow by the plaintiff.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  injunction, that party was judged not to have taken a step in the action. This fell under the Arbitration Act, 1975, in England where the term used is "a step in the action". It is a term different from that used in article 8 but at first blush, it connotes substantially the same meaning.
[22]
Of relevance in this particular matter, whether one is dealing with the Canadian or the U.K statute or any similar statute, are the comments of Heald, J., then of the Federal Court Trial Division, in Vallorbe Shipping v. "The Tropwave", T-4426-74, decision dated May 5, 1975, not reported. In that case, the court was dealing with s. 7 of the New Brunswick Arbitration Act which allowed arbitration on defendant's application "at any time after appearance and before the delivery of pleadings or taking any other step in the proceedings". His Lordship noted that the reason why referral to arbitration was not allowed after pleadings by both sides was that the parties no longer wished to be bound by the terms of the arbitration agreement. Such actions expressed an intention to revoke the arbitration clause and the defendant should be precluded from invoking it later. An analogy of this would be where a defendant is deemed to have attorned to the jurisdiction of a court by his filing an appearance.
[23]
In the case at bar, the defendant certainly gives no indication of his intention to revoke the arbitration clause. On the contrary, it has been doing everything possible to maintain its vigour. The filing of its defence is but to avoid being judged in default. Its pleading in that regard is carefully structured: as stated in the affidavit of Frederico Acosta and in the statement of defence, the defendant has grounds upon which to counterclaim against the plaintiff but fails to do so at this time. This appears to be the conduct of a party that is forced to counter a procedural yet effective step of its opponent yet at the same time does everything possible to enforce the substance of its own rights to have the arbitration clause enforced.
[24]
Having said this, there is still before me the problem imposed by the interpretative guidelines of the Commercial Arbitration Code incorporated in the Canadian statute. As mentioned earlier, the court is invited to adopt a literal interpretation of article 8. Assuming that the intent is to have that article receive uniform application before the courts of all member States including those where more formalistic as against more equitable norms apply, the judicious mind might be wary of opening the door to a wider or more liberal interpretation even if the particular facts of any given case, as in this one, might well justify it.
[25]
I must also repeat that there is another reason to be wary of equitable considerations or an interpretative approach which might equitably meet the exigencies of the case. Article 8, in imposing a statutory duty on a domestic court to refer the parties to arbitration, is effectively removing all judicial discretion in the matter. The inherent jurisdiction of a domestic court to deal with such issues as it sees fit is circumscribed. It is an imperative provision which in and by itself demands or imposes a strict and narrow interpretation.
Conclusion
[26]
The situation facing the court is whether or not article 8 of the Code applies. For the reasons I have stated. I would be inclined, given the particular circumstances of the case, to discount the somewhat compulsory filing of the defendant's pleading, a filing made necessary by the application of our own domestic rules of procedure. For reasons which I have also stated, however, I hesitate to venture into an interpretative wasteland without the guiding light or support which the experience of other domestic courts might provide.
[27]
In the face of this, I should adhere to the wise and well-respected principle that a court should not decide an issue unless it is essential to the case. A court should not plunge through a line of massive proportions when a simple end run will do the trick. At the risk, therefore, of appearing to shirk the issue, as it were, I should establish the case for the defendant on the basis of s. 50(1)(b) of the Federal Court Act. This is the section also pleaded by the defendant which grants discretion to the court to stay proceedings where it is in the interest of justice to do so.
[28]
I should find first of all that article 8 of the Code, which makes the stay mandatory, in no way affects or impinges upon the permissive jurisdiction of the court under s. 50. I should find on the facts of the case before me that the conflict between the parties arises out of a charter party, that this charter party provides for arbitration and that the parties' nominees have been appointed. Furthermore, I see no unconscionable burden on one party being in Canada and on the other being in Mexico from having the situs of the arbitration in New York.
[29]
I should also view this approach as being more consistent with the general purpose and intent of the Commercial Arbitration Code and to which Parliament has fully subscribed by incorporating it into the Commercial Arbitration Act. In so doing, Parliament has recognized the need to enforce arbitration clauses in the settlement of international trade disputes affecting citizens of member States and has adopted as policy a requirement upon our courts to a like effect.
[30]
No doubt, the delays by the defendant in filing a properly detailed and outstanding affidavit in support of its motion to stay proceedings prompted the Senior Prothonotary, as he so found in his order of September 26, 1988, to question whether the defendant had any defence on the merits. Having now been appraised of the evidence in Frederico Acosta's affidavit of September 27, 1988, filed on October 7, 1988, I find that there is a prima facie triable issue which should go to arbitration.
[31]
I, therefore, conclude that I should allow the defendant's appeal in part and grant the motion for a stay of proceedings. Pending arbitration, the plaintiff pursuant to article 9 of the Commercial Arbitration Code may continue to seek the protection of the court for in rem proceedings or otherwise.
[32]
The several proceedings with respect to the issue before me have substantially been caused by the defendant's delays in providing supporting material. I, therefore, make no order as to costs of the appeal and I confirm the disposition of costs below.
Appeal allowed in part.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]