[1]
Dubé, J.
[Translation]: The appellant appealed from the decision rendered on February 28, 1990 by the Registrar of Trademarks, rejecting its application to register the trademark "Sécurité & Design".
[2]
The appellant claimed the Registrar (in this instance, the Chairman of the Trademarks Opposition Board) erred in ruling that the appellant's trademark was not registrable under the provisions of s. 12(1)(d) of the
Trade Marks Act
[see footnote 1]. This paragraph states that a trademark is not registrable if it creates confusion with a registered trademark. In the instant case, the trademarks registered by the respondent are "Security" and "Security Muffler".
[3]
The appellant's trademark is claimed in respect of management services for contract warranties for automobile owners to spare them vehicle repair and maintenance expenses. The respondent's trademarks were registered in respect of mufflers and other automobile parts and of installation and repair services for these parts.
[4]
In his reasons for judgment the Registrar first noted that "the material dates in this opposition are the date of the opponent's opposition (March 8, 1988) in respect of s. 12(1)(d) ... and nondistinctiveness grounds of opposition, and February, 1986, in relation to the entitlement ground". On the question of confusion, he also noted that the legal burden of establishing a reasonable risk of confusion between the trademarks in question rests on the applicant. These preliminary remarks are quite proper and consistent with the legislation and case law in this matter.
[5]
To determine whether there was a reasonable risk of confusion between the trademarks, the Registrar noted that all circumstances in the case had to be taken into account, especially those listed in s. 6(5) of the
Act
. He then proceeded to study the marks in question in light of these criteria, listed in the subsection cited above. He concluded:
"In view of the above, and bearing in mind the degree of similarity in the trademarks at issue and the fact that there is at least some similarity in the wares and services of the opponent and the services of the applicant, I have concluded that the applicant has failed to discharge the burden upon it of establishing that there would be no reasonable likelihood of confusion between its trademark 'Sécurité & Design' as applied to the services covered in its application and the opponent's registered trademark 'Security'. Accordingly, the applicant's trademark is not registrable in view of the provisions of s. 12(1)(d) of the
Trade Marks Act
."
[6]
The appellant first challenged the Registrar's decision on the ground that evidence of use of a trademark consisting of two components is not evidence of use of each component individually as a trademark. It noted that in his judgment the Registrar compared the trademark "Sécurité & Design" with the opponent's two trademarks "Security" and "Security Muffler", whereas the evidence produced by the opponent establishes use of the trademark "Security Muffler", not the trademark "Security".
[7]
This argument cannot be allowed, since s. 12(1)(d) on which the Registrar's decision is based requires no evidence of use, but simply provides that a trademark is not registrable "if it creates confusion with a registered trademark".
[8]
The legislation also does not require the opponent to establish the confusion but, as noted above, provides that the applicant has the burden of establishing that there is no reasonable risk of confusion between the trademarks [see footnote 2]. This risk is not limited to the two parties' current operations, but also covers their future operations as permitted in respect of the trademarks at issue. [See footnote 3].
[9]
The opponent further alleged that when a commonly used word is registered as a trademark (such as the word "security"), a second mark incorporating the same word ("Security Muffler") will not lead to confusion with the first if the second has a component distinguishing it from the first [see footnote 4]. It is possible that a second word may achieve this result in some cases, but the Registrar saw no need to rule on this point since, in his view, the trademark "Sécurité & Design" creates confusion with the registered trademark "Security".
[10]
The Registrar found a similarity between the opponent's wares and services and those of the applicant. It must be noted that both parties' trademarks apply to wares and services in the automotive sector. The possibility of confusion in customers' minds is thus quite conceivable: a person who had already done business with the opponent under the "Security" or "Security Muffler" trademark might be led to believe the services offered under the "Sécurité & Design" trademark were provided by the opponent.
[11]
It should be noted that the decision of a registrar, who is considered an experienced person in the field, is not to be casually reversed. In cases of error, of course, it may and must be overturned, but it is incumbent on the appellant to demonstrate such an error. In my opinion, it has failed to do so.
[12]
Accordingly, this appeal cannot be allowed.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon
slm
Footnotes
1. R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13.
2.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 29, at p. 36 C.P.R. (F.C.A.), Heald, J., and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 39 (F.C.T.D.), Marceau, J., affd. (1979), 29 N.R. 361; 43 C.P.R.(2d) 271, at p. 274 C.P.R. (F.C.A.), cf Urie, J.
3.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 3, at p. 12 (F.C.A.), Thurlow, C.J., and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 112-113 (F.C.A.), Pratte, J.
4.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 551 (F.C.T.D.), Jerome, A.C.J., and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Registrar of Trademarks).