 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
Chief Jean Maurice Matchewan, and Councillors Benjamin Nottaway, Eugene Nottaway, Joey Decoursay and David Wawatie and Eddy Nottaway, Michel Thusky, Jeannine Matchewan and Louisa Papatie, in their capacity as Members of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Casey Ratt, Ricky Decoursay, Roger Jerome, Wayne Papatie and Donat Thusky (claiming to be "council of the band" selected pursuant to a process conducted on January 30, 2008) (respondents)
(T-2000-09; 2010 FC 910)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Parent, Assessment Officer
September 14, 2010.
Counsel:
Nicole Richmond, for the applicants;
Virginie Cantave and Julia Rys, for the respondent, Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development.
Solicitors of Record:
Nahwegahbow Corbière, for the applicants;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent,. Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Parent, Asessment Officer
: The Application for Judicial Review was discontinued on March 5, 2010. On May 10, 2010, the respondent Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development (the respondent) filed its Bill of Costs. A timetable for written disposition of the assessment of the respondent's Bill of Costs was issued on May 20, 2010 and sent to both parties.
[2]
Pursuant to Rules 402, 403 and 407 of the
Federal Courts Rules
, the respondent submits that, in the event of a discontinuance and in the absence of any directions by the Court, costs should be assessed in accordance with Column III of Tariff B.
[3]
The applicants, in their representations, summarize the issues raised by this litigation and other related files, submitting that this is not an appropriate case for costs. They also submit that, further to the award of costs, consideration should be given to the fact that they had acted prudently in withdrawing their application at an early stage. Furthermore, the applicants needed the Court as a neutral party to resolve matters and they assert it in their representations at paragraph 5: "the importance of resolving this democracy and public interest should be a consideration in this Court's costs award".
[4]
I find, in the absence of a Court Order or agreement between parties on the costs of this discontinuance, the respondent shall have its costs assessed.
[5]
On the issue of public interest, the respondent indicates at paragraphs 6 and 7 of their representations that:
6. On the contrary, this discontinued Application concerns the specific interests of a particular group purporting to be the Council of the Band.
7. In their Notice of Application, the Applicants indicate that the "decision" at issue pertains to the Minister's relations with their particular group, known as the "Matchewan Customary Council":
"This is an Application for Judicial Review of the decision of the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development (the "Minister"), communicated to the Applicants by letter dated October 30, 2009, to NOT register the
results of the leadership selection of June 24, 2009, and to NOT conduct its relations with Chief Jean Maurice Matchewan and Councillors Benjamin Nottaway, Eugene Nottaway, Joey Decoursay and David Wawatie, the "Matchewan Customary Council"
, for the Mitchikanibikok Inik, also known as the Algonquins of Barriere Lake (the "First Nation" or "ABL"), who were selected on June 24, 2009." (Respondent's emphasis).
[6]
I note that Rule 409 states that "in assessing costs, an assessment officer may consider the factors referred to in subsection 400(3). Rule 400(3)(h) reads: "In exercising its discretion under subsection (1), the Court may consider: whether the public interest in having the proceeding litigated justifies a particular award of costs." It is important to note that neither party provided significant submissions on the issue of public interest making it difficult for me to fully consider the matter. From my review of the jurisprudence on the subject, the decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.) provides a summary of the criteria to determine whether a matter is of public interest. At paragraph 222, it was held:
In its Report on the Law of Standing (Toronto: Minister of the Attorney General, 1989) the Ontario Law Reform Commission proposed criteria to determine the circumstances where costs should not be awarded against a person who commences public interest litigation. Those criteria were:
(a) The proceeding involves issues the importance of which extends beyond the immediate interests of the parties involved.
(b) The person has no personal, proprietary or pecuniary interest in the outcome of the proceeding, or, if he or she has an interest, it clearly does not justify the proceeding economically.
(c) The issues have not been previously determined by a court in a proceeding against the same defendant.
(d) The defendant has a clearly superior capacity to bear the costs of the proceeding.
(e) The plaintiff has not engaged in vexatious, frivolous or abusive conduct.
[7]
After taking full cognizance of the file and the arguments of both parties on the subject, I cannot come to the conclusion that public interest was at issue. I consider that this matter did not involve issues the importance of which extends beyond the immediate interests of the parties involved (first criterion). Regarding the superior capacity of the respondent to bear costs in this matter, the Courts have held in numerous occasions that the financial capacity of the Crown should not prejudice its entitlement to costs ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 1076-1077 (C.A.), cited in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 29 (F.C.A.).
[8]
Continuing the exercise under Rule 400(3), other factors can also be considered while assessing costs namely at subparagraph (i) the conduct of the party that tended to shorten or unnecessarily lengthen the proceedings. For that factor, the applicants in their submissions argue that "they acted prudently in withdrawing their Application at this early stage" and ask that it be taken into consideration in the costs assessment.
[9]
In consideration for the work required in the preparation and filing of a Notice of Appearance, it has been held several times that one unit is reasonable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (A.O.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (A.O.). In keeping with these decisions, the three units claimed under Item 27 for the filing of such Notice are reduced to one unit.
[10]
Five units are claimed under Item 7 (Discovery of documents, including listing, affidavit or inspection) for the filing of the Affidavit of Camil Simard, on February 17, 2010. From the Court file, I note that this affidavit was filed in response to the Application. I suspect that the respondent meant to claim its preparation under Item 2 (Preparation and filing of all defences, replies, counterclaims or respondent's records and materials) and I will, therefore, correct the Bill of Costs to reflect the correct Item number. In response to the applicants' argument of timeliness, I have no doubt that the discontinuance was filed in a very timely manner. Nevertheless, the respondent, in order to conform with the
Federal Courts Rules
filed the affidavit of Camil Simard in response to the applicants' affidavits filed in support of the Application within the thirty days time limit as required by Rule 307. Therefore, Item 2 is allowed at four units for the affidavit of Camil Simard.
[11]
Three units are claimed under Item 27 (such other services as may be allowed by the assessment officer or ordered by the Court) for the work performed in responding to the applicants' request for materials under Rule 317 of the
Federal Courts Rules
. Said document was filed with the Court on January 8, 2010. Rule 317 provides a means for parties to request material in the possession of the tribunal. The respondent states in its letter of January 8, 2009:
"... Rule 317 can only be invoked where a decision or order of a tribunal is under review. At this preliminary stage in the proceedings, our position is that the Minister did not make a decision as described in your Notice of Application.
That being said and without prejudice to our position that no decision was made as described in your Notice of Application, a list of documents in our clients' possession pertaining to the purported June 24, 2009 selection process is provided in annex to the present letter."
Tariff B of the
Federal Courts Rules
does not have a counsel fee Item specifically for Rule 317 tribunal material. In this matter, in the interest of time, respondent's counsel did prepare the materials comparable to Rule 317, as requested by the applicants. In consideration for the work performed, I allow two units under Item 27 for the preparation of the materials.
[12]
Fees are claimed under Item 25 for services after judgment. Item 25 contemplates the review and the reporting of the final Court decision to the client. There was no final decision made in this Court file and I cannot find in the respondent's submissions any justifiable services rendered in that regard. I therefore disallow the one unit claimed.
[13]
The maximum number of units is claimed under Item 26 for the Assessment of Costs. Given my experience in dealing with costs and considering the affidavit and submissions filed by the respondent, I allow four units.
[14]
The fees for assessable services are allowed in the amount of $ 1,430 plus GST.
The respondent claimed the Provincial Sales Tax (PST) on all assessable services. The events of this litigation happened before July 1, 2010 when "legal services" were not considered a taxable service under subsection 1(1) of the
Retail Sales Tax Act
, R.S.O. 1990, c. R.31. Since costs are an indemnity for actual expenditures, I find that I do not have the authority to allow the PST as claimed.
[15]
I examined the remaining disbursements claimed along with the supporting material and find all claimed charges were necessary for the conduct of this matter. The amounts are not contested, are reasonable and they are, therefore, allowed.
[16]
The bill of costs is allowed for a total amount of $1,910.50.
[End of document]