[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The plaintiff sues the defendant for ordinary general damages, and punitive and exemplary damages, as compensation for an assault inflicted upon him by personnel of the Correctional Services of Canada (hereinafter, CSC). On November 28, 1985 (not 1986 as pleaded in the statement of claim) the incident under consideration occurred, while the plaintiff was an inmate at the Kingston Penitentiary. The assault of which the plaintiff complains occurred in an ambulance driving between the penitentiary and the Hôtel Dieu Hospital in Kingston, Ontario.
[2]
The whole story of the incident is not set out in the plaintiff's statement of claim which does not relate, as did the plaintiff, in viva voce testimony, that the incident arose from the plaintiff's having taken hostage a civilian employee of CSC, one, Peter Bennett, his shop instructor, while the plaintiff was armed with scissors, as he testified in cross-examination. (Transcript [hereinafter Tr]: 57.) During the three hour and 45 minutes duration of Mr. Bennett's being held hostage, the plaintiff cut Mr. Bennett's left ear by means of that pair of scissors (Tr: 57) and uttered threats to kill Mr. Bennett (Tr: 58 & 59).
[3]
In order to grasp the whole incident leading up to the assault of which the plaintiff complains, one should consider his testimony upon the matter of the hostage-taking which he initiated. The plaintiff testified on cross-examination, thus:
"By Mr. Villeneuve:
Q.	Now, Mr. Peeters, is it correct that one of the reasons why you took Mr. Bennett as hostage was because Kingston Penitentiary was constantly locked in?
A.	No, sir. That was the result of many hostage-takings that went on. Well, it was a partial reason, let's put it that way. It was a partial reason because it kept me secluded from any kind of social contact with my friends, or who were my friends at that time.
Q.	Okay, so you're saying that ---
A.	I shared my time with at that time.
Q.	Okay, so you're saying that was the partial reason for you taking ---
A.	Yes.
Q.	---Mr. Bennett ---the fact that the Kingston Penitentiary was constantly locked down and you can [sic -couldn't?] socialize with your fellow inmates?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Would another reason ---
. . . . .
A.	Do you want me to ---the more important reason was that a dominate characteristic of the guards being more or less arrogant, oppressive ---there was one guard ---one guard ---there had to have been more guards involved, but one guard was said to have been taking inmates out of their cells to beat them. This does not create an atmosphere where any individual would feel very secure in. I was a human being. I felt truly treated like dirt.
Q.	Okay, and what was your main demand during this?
A.	Just to speak to the press. I felt ---I guess I'm naive by nature, but I felt that surely if the public knew ---if the public only knew, that things would change.
Q.	Okay, Mr. Peeters, is it fair to say that you took Peter Bennett as a hostage to show the press ---or show the outside world ---what was going on and the oppressiveness ---
A.	No, what ---
Q.	---of guards within Kingston Penitentiary?
A.	That would not be the right word to use at all, 'show'. I was going to say what I had to say. Nobody is going to say, okay, we believe you, Joey Peeters. I'm sorry for reacting this way, but 'show' is a very ---it's the wrong word. I would hope that things that I say would spurn [sic spur] or create some kind of investigation in to see whether or not anything that I had to say had some truth to it.
Q.	And you felt that by taking a hostage, you could satisfy your wishes ---your wish to have an investigation?
A.	I didn't know. I didn't know. I just wanted ---all I knew is, I just didn't believe that if the public knew about just all the things ---I just couldn't believe that.
. . . . .
By Mr. Villeneuve:
Q.	Okay, I'd like to draw your attention to Page 9 of the Transcript for discovery, the first question on that page. Now, the question there is:
'Mr. Peeters, at the time of the hostage-taking, I understand you were within three or four months of your mandatory supervision date?'
And your answer, was 'Yes'.
A.	Okay. I was obviously thinking more of four, three or four. It's not a tight question, so I answer that with the same kind of ---
Q.	Okay, but your reflection today would be four to six?
A.	Three to four is acceptable to me." (Tr: 59 to 63)
[4]
The flavour of the plaintiff's testimony is partially captured in the above recited passages. After acknowledging that his own taking of Mr. Bennett hostage and his wounding of Mr. Bennett "was a scary experience", the plaintiff was asked about his confinement around the age of twelve, to an adolescent unit of a psychiatric hospital. The plaintiff although about to turn only 28 years of age at the time of the trial, could not remember how long, whether one or two years, he had spent in that unit. The plaintiff and his twin brother had been diagnosed as hyperactive in their childhood. The twin brother, Michael, had drowned (a suspected suicide), in late 1983, while the plaintiff was in prison; and the plaintiff, in July 1984, had attempted suicide by exsanguination as a reaction of depression and despair.
[5]
The plaintiff was cross-examined about how his hostage-taking of Mr. Bennett ended. He testified:
"Q.	[sic A.] I understand exactly what you're [sic] question is. I heard a bang and I, instinctively, dove off the chair that I had been sitting on. Peter Bennett was in front of me. He dove to the left. I dove to the right. The door was at the left and he escaped out of the left-hand side, at which point I knew it was over. I mean, there was simply no reason at all, I mean, to stay there. I wanted to give up. I mean, it was a conclusion that was obvious. So, I walked to the door and, whether or not it was ---they chose to or not, they didn't recognize that my hands were up and, you know, down I was. Because of a first blow, it sort of almost ripped my eye out.
Q.	What caused that blow?
A.	The front member of the Emergency Response Team. I couldn't see his face because they have ---they're protected.
Q.	Struck you with an object?
A.	Yes.
Q.	And your evidence was that there was a lot of bleeding that followed thereafter?
A.	Yes.
Q.	Okay. Did you suffer any other blows during that incident?
A.	Well, they continued. They were releasing their adrenalin on me.
Q.	Now, Mr. Peeters, again I'd like to draw your attention to the evidence that you gave on discovery on March 1st, 1990.
A.	Right.
Q.	At Page 10 of the Transcript ---this would be the second-last question. I guess number 26. The question to you was, 'I understand that as the hostage-taking was ended, that you received certain head or facial injuries?' And your answer was, 'Yes'.
A.	Yes.
Q.	You were asked to describe these. At Page 11, you say, 'Above my right eye, I had a laceration caused by, I don't know, a door flinging open when they came in, or something.' Now, what is your evidence, Mr. Peeters? Were you struck with a door or were you struck with a ---
A.	Okay, the door was like this, okay? It was partially still open because Mr. Bennett had just proceeded. Now, with everything happening, like this, it was either the door or a bat. I mean, there's nothing there.
Q.	Okay but, Mr. Peeters, on March 1st, 1990, you think it's a door ---
A.	I recognize what you say ---
Q.	At four and a half years after the incident, you recall it's a door. Now today, approximately a year and a half ---
A.	Okay, there was no intention ---I'm sorry." (Tr: 68 to 70)
[6]
The transcript reveals further matters of interest in assessing the plaintiff's credibility further on pages 71 and 72. The court assesses the plaintiff's credibility on the basis of his demeanour in testifying and on the testimony itself. He appeared to be a quite self-centered person with little regard for the effect which his actions inflicted on others. That observation leads to the assessment that the plaintiff's testimony exaggerated the alleged wrongs done to himself and left the impression that he regarded himself as a poor, innocent lamb who was always unjustly importuned by persons in authority. When confronted with facts or his own previous testimony which does not suit his purposes, the plaintiff purported to forget or to argue in justification that there was no conflict even when none was asserted. (Tr: p. 49, line 17 to p. 50, line 23; p. 56, lines 17 to 25; p. 57, line 14 to p. 59, line 16; p. 71, line 8 to p. 72, line 18.)
[7]
The plaintiff's face was injured upon the entry of the Emergency Response Team (hereinafter: ERT) and he had therefore to be taken to the hospital for medical attention and care. He does not sue here, if at all, for compensation for his facial injury. He sues for pain and consequent psychological trauma which he alleges were inflicted upon him during a three to five minute ambulance ride to the Hôtel Dieu. The physical force applied to the plaintiff left no marks.
Liability
[8]
On November 26, 1991, the defendant made and filed a formal admission of facts which runs:
"Take Notice that the defendant, through its [sic] solicitors of record, hereby admits, for the purposes of this cause only, the several facts respectively hereunder specified, saving all just exceptions to the admissibility of such facts as evidence in this cause.
"The facts for which the defendant admits the truth are:
1. The plaintiff, while in an ambulance and en route to the Hôtel Dieu Hospital in Kingston, Ontario, bound to a stretcher and naked, although covered with blankets, was assaulted by one of the defendant's servants in the abdomen, groin and on the legs with a billy club.
2. The plaintiff suffered no marks or permanent physical injury as a result of this assault."
Further on November 26, 1991, the defendant made and filed a formal
Confession of Judgment
, which states:
"The defendant, through its [sic] solicitors of record, hereby makes a confession of judgment for that part of the plaintiff's claim relating to the issue of liability."
This document evinces the defendant's admission of liability for whatever damages, if any, sustained by the plaintiff, which may be lawfully assessed and awarded by this court.
[9]
Physical pain was briefly inflicted on the plaintiff in the ambulance, but no enduring harm. The plaintiff testified that he suffered enduring psychological or mental harm from that infliction of brief pain and the intimidating tactics of the defendant's employees. For example, the plaintiff testified that immediately after his surrender to the ERT, he was taken to the penitentiary hospital and he testified:
"Q.	You say that two men were pulling you backwards?
A.	That's right.
Q.	And Mr. Aitchison was following you?
A.	Yes, and as I was being led back, the guard that I was facing, who was walking forward, Mr. Aitchison, who held a bat, was sort of like poking it into my stomach, saying, 'Thought you were tough, eh? Thought you were tough?' Then we got to the outside entrance to the institutional hospital ---and there's three steps. I was basically ---I tripped over the first one and dragged the rest of the way in into, I guess what would be called as a nurse's station ---a room ---a private room, where there's medicines and stuff like that. I was laid down on my back, okay, inside this room. On any side of me, I guess there was ---except there was a length here - there was about a yard and a half, I guess, maybe ---well, actually about at least three feet all around me of flooring still ---still open. It wasn't a big room but it was a decent size. In that room, there was two nurses ---well, hang on. There was definitely one nurse. I recall two. I was laying down on the ground. The nurse immediately was looking at my face.
. . . . .
... as I was laying there, guards were ---Mr. Aitchison and the guards who eventually escorted me ---Aitchison walked around me as I was laying on the ground. My clothes had been cut off me. The handcuffs that were originally at my back were removed to my front and, just before being placed on the stretcher, one guard was walking around me ---Aitchison ---okay, dropping his bat on the floor like this, like it was, you know, sort of in this motion, like where the head of it or the end of it would sort of ---and bounce back up into his palm, and sort of walked around saying things to me, basically to intimidate me to scare the heck out of me.
I was placed inside the ambulance ---
. . . . .
A.	My hands were cuffed here and I had shackles on.
Q.	All right.
The Court:	Where were the shackles, on your ankles?
The Witness: Yes." (Tr: 8, 9 & 10)
[10]
The plaintiff testified that three CSC guards and one of the two ambulance attendants boarded the rear compartment of the vehicle where he lay naked, save for a covering blanket, strapped to a stretcher or gurney. He testified that, with the ambulance attendant "being so scared and unable to react in any kind of normal fashion" (Tr: 24) despite the plaintiff's silent pleas for help, the three CSC officers assaulted the plaintiff most painfully by twisting and cramping his left leg, by striking a blow with a hard, blunt object to his kidney area, by striking him full force upon his testicles, (Tr: 23) and by pressing a baton, bat or club against the plaintiff's larynx (Tr: 17).
[11]
The plaintiff was returned to the penitentiary hospital the very day on which he was taken by ambulance to the Hôtel Dieu. The next day, November 29, 1985, he was placed in the institution's segregation unit where he was lodged until December 31, 1985. From there he was taken to, and lodged in, the special handling unit (SHU) at Ste. Anne des Plaines penitentiary until November, 1989. He testified that he spent that time "being very scared" (Tr: 29 & 30). His stated fear, in that place among the country's most dangerous prisoners, was that in any case of dispute with a fellow inmate, the custodial officers would not offer him any protection. The plaintiff testified thus:
"A.	Well, I just felt they wouldn't offer it and I questioned that, because I was just being beat by this guys, okay? This was a criminal response. This was something that went against the sacred trust. I mean, you don't expect police officers or guards to react criminally and once that's done, you can't ---I didn't know whether or not they would help me. I was in the S.H.U. and the most dangerous people are here [sic].
. . . . .
A.	At the beginning, I stayed a lot in my cell, to the point where I actually spent months on end ---months on end just in there and only coming out ---the only time I'd come out ---like, actual months ---where I wouldn't go out into the yard, would only maybe go see the psychologist, and shower maybe once every two weeks or once every week. I was just too scared to go out, too scared to put myself in a position where inmates could be around.
Too scared ---because I didn't know if I needed help, would they be there, and I wasn't prepared to play with my life.
Q.	All right. You say that condition continued for months?
A.	For months. Nightmares, even came, crying out loud.
Q.	Okay. How frequent were the nightmares?
A.	The nightmares ---I mean, once they started, they became a nightly ---they owned my sleep. They owned my sleep.
Q.	And you've indicated you were in the S.H.U. for a period of almost four years? First of all, this staying in your cell, did that continue ---you say, months? At what point in time did that subside? Did you decide to relax a little more at some point in time?
A.	I can't tell you exactly how many months, but I would hazard a guess it would be around three.
Q.	Okay. What happened after that? How did you spend the rest of that four year period?
A.	Skating on ice. Like, going out in the common room not hardly, not half as much as everybody else would. But going out in the common room and just being scared. Just spending that time being scared.
. . . . .
Q.	Again, within that four year ---and before you were released in November of 1989, how long did those nightmares continue?
A.	Oh, they started approximately four months upon my arrival at ---I can't really say exactly what time they started, but I know it was ---gee, I don't even know if I could say it was a month. All I know is that once I had the first one, they came every ---I was just scared to sleep. They told me basically ---every dream told me just how insecure I was ---just about what kind of predicament I was, that if something happened to me ---like, I mean Mr. Aitchison's got me in his hands ---
Q.	Okay, now just to be sure, I'm not clear on ---you arrived there on December 31st of 1985?
A.	That's right.
Q.	When did these nightmares commence? When did they begin?
A.	About a month after I arrived there. I don't know.
Q.	Okay. You've mentioned Mr. Aitchison now. Was he in your ---perhaps you could describe the nature of the nightmares or was it a recurring dream?
A.	Well, the first one was a whole dream, okay? And the recurring dream ---well, basically, I saw Mr. Hutchison beating me with bats ---or Mr. Aitchison, sorry - beating or having me beatened [sic] with bats, pounding and say, 'You thought this was the end of it, didn't you?'" (Tr: 31 to 33; 34 and 35)
[12]
The plaintiff was released from the S.H.U. in November, 1989, and he was accorded day-parole from a halfway house in Oshawa, Ontario. His nightmares, he testified, continued. After a month or less, toward the end of 1989, he was moved upstairs, in the same halfway house into a new apartment, having been accorded full parole.
[13]
Then, there occurred an incident which had nothing to do with the plaintiff, but which he relates to psychological trauma suffered while he was an inmate of Kingston Penitentiary, some four years, or longer, earlier. The plaintiff said he was enjoying "some sort of peace again", after a month and a half on full parole:
"And then one night, two of the tenants had a very violent ---and it was quite apparent that it was a very violent fight. The police were called and they responded in a way that was almost reminiscent to the attitude ---that was reminiscent to the attitude and the conduct of many guards ---of arrogance, I don't know, oppressiveness. It's almost as if the greatest feeling you get from them is the fact that I'm above you and I'll squish you under my heels, you know? And that night, I had a dream. That night, I had a nightmare. I went to bed at about eleven-thirty, very quickly fell into a fitful sleep, half an hour later, twelve o'clock, I was woke up from an incredible, this incredible dream again. I mean, Mr. Aitchison's, this time, in a cop uniform, you know, running through my door.
Q.	What, if anything, occurred after that?
A.	I got drunk for three days. Just left the apartment. I was too scared to sleep and I went out and actually didn't sleep for three days and, instead, just went to a local booze house ---something I don't even do. I don't even really drink. I mean, I drink so casually that it was just ---so, as soon as I started drinking and the drunker I got, the farther away I got from something that haunted me." (Tr: 39 & 40)
[14]
The plaintiff was thereafter permitted to move to the home of a very good friend,
"... and two weeks later, I got drunk, met somebody from the hostel ---well, not from the hostel, but from the apartments who I had been previously been a Chairman of the Tenants Committee of, and got drunk, and we did a 'B&E'. It was the first one I've ever done in my life. I'd never done a 'B&E' before ... I was in a very destructive mood." (Tr: 41)
"B&E" means the criminal offence of "Breaking and entering premises with the intent of committing an indictable offence therein." Here is the plaintiff's explanation for his criminal misconduct at that time while he was enjoying his good friend's hospitality:
"A.	I just was incredibly kind of ---like, really disappointed that I ---I was so sure that when I left the prison, it would be over ---that the dreams ---like, why would ---but, they didn't. It just kind of ruined me. I gave up. I just didn't have the strength to stay on the street to give the respect and determination freedom will take of you to do what you've got to do." (Tr: 42)
[15]
Needless to emphasize, the plaintiff's parole was revoked. That occurred on February 28, 1990, and he was reincarcerated. He said: "When they sent me back, I got mad", that is angry (Tr: 44). He explained: "... how could I let guards make me like this [?]" (Tr: 45). Outwardly, the plaintiff is extremely self-centered, for he seems to have given no thought to anyone victimized by his "B&E". Luckily for the plaintiff, he was released in November, 1990. The dreams subsided practically entirely after about a week.
[16]
The plaintiff testified as to his present state of mind:
"A.	I still have anger. I still don't like it. I get made when all I do is watch the start of General Hospital where the ambulance curves up and I'm reminded and I'm there again inside the scene of the ambulance, experiencing what I had experienced there. (Tr: 46)
Q.	Does that have any effect on you, when you would see an ambulance?
A.	Sure. Automatically, okay? Even if I was looking ---if I'm looking at that, in my mind I see ---what I see, is the inside of that ambulance. The fear again, and I would have to jump on top of it.
Q.	... has that subsided over the period of time since your first release?
A.	Yes, considerably, but I still ---I mean, you can't help but ---at least I can't help but to look at ---when I look at an ambulance ---I mean, an ambulance ---I mean, you think you're going to be safe, you know? With guards, you think you're going to be safe. I can't help but to look at that and say, could I ever be comfortable in that. And I see myself going through this whole thing again. Very quickly, then I jump on top of it and I push it away. ... I consciously say, not anymore. This is it. I get mad at it. I force myself just to kick it away." (Tr: 47 & 48)
[17]
The plaintiff's father, Johannes Wilhelmus Peeters, also testified. He said that he noticed that the plaintiff's letters after "the attack in the ambulance" evinced "a trend of ... fear of the environment he was in, which he didn't do before. He was expressing the fear of going to sleep at night. He was ... getting nightmares and ... they made him wonder that his mind wasn't working the right way. There as a distinct difference between before and after the events." (Tr: 77 & 78) The latter statement evinces more logic and objectivity than the earlier one pinpointing the attack in the ambulance. There is, quite obviously no evidence to the effect that the plaintiff wrote and posted letters to his father between the time of his taking Mr. Bennett hostage whose ear he cut with the scissors, and the time the plaintiff was attacked in the ambulance. However, Peeters
père
has adopted the thinking of the plaintiff and his counsel by linking the plaintiff's psychological troubles only to the brief, but painful, assault in the ambulance, and not at all to the plaintiff's own bloody assault on, and confinement of, his shop instructor, Mr. Bennett. The res gestae of this matter is more extensive than the plaintiff's counsel would have the court find. It includes the plaintiff's own savage depravity toward Mr. Bennett.
[18]
The plaintiff's father also testified about the plaintiff's request to be able to sleep "so I feel the walls of the room around me, because I feel unsafe". (Tr: 78) The plaintiff's father also testified to the effect of the plaintiff's "fairly frequently ... having severe nightmares" which the witness could hear during the time after release from prison when the plaintiff was residing with his parents (Tr: 79).
[19]
The plaintiff described one of the three guards, Aitchison, "being in a very riled-up, angry state and yelling and saying, twice, 'You thought you were tough, eh?'". The plaintiff believes that Aitchison, at least, had been a member of the ERT, but his testimony on that point (Tr: 13) is not entirely satisfactory. The three CSC personnel who rode in the ambulance were Messrs. Aitchison, Donahue and Hammond. Aitchison apparently never threatened to murder the plaintiff, as the latter so threatened Mr. Bennett. Mary Cassidy, who was the warden of Kingston Penitentiary at the material times, testified that she was unaware then or now of any rule, regulation, standing order or policy about whether a guard who has been in an altercation with a prisoner may, within a short time, be that prisoner's escort or a member of an escort team off the penitentiary premises (Tr: 98 & 99). Subject to exigencies of circumstances, of personnel availability and training, it would make good sense to prevent any CSC employee who was still "in a very riled-up, angry state" from performing escort duties in regard to an inmate offender, on or especially off, the penitentiary premises.
[20]
Indeed, whether CSC personnel do or do not believe that due processes of law are too inefficient, too slow or too lenient to punish inmate offenders, it is for the employer, the Crown, to insure that custodial staff are not turned loose upon inmates while such staff members are "in a very riled-up, angry state". That, or pay the price. Professionalism is realistically expected of such custodial staff and, while professional behaviour can always evince a dispassionate strictness, it must also evince self-control. Just as inmates who offend, (especially in such a bloody, ear-cutting savagery as did the hostage-taking, hostage-wounding plaintiff herein), must expect lawful restraint and lawful punishment, so also CSC personnel who offend, (especially in a maliciously assaultive manner), must expect to attract punishment to themselves and/or an extraordinary award of damages against the Crown, which alas, always means the taxpayers.
[21]
By his admission of liability without trial, the Deputy Attorney General can hardly be heard to assert that the Crown's servant's misdeeds, in these circumstances, do not transcend compensatory damages for mere negligence. The guards' misdeeds here were not only arbitrary, outrageous, unlawful and legally unwarranted, but also obviously malicious. While the miscreants in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , were more closely placed to the portals of the Government than are the custodial personnel here, the same principles apply. Mr. Justice MacGuigan, for a unanimous division of the Appeal Division in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is reported to have written this at page 616 F.C.:
"But, in my view, this argument [on the Crown's behalf] could succeed only if malice were required to found exemplary damages. If, as seems clear to me, malice is not necessary for the existence of 'oppressive, arbitrary or unconstitutional action by the servants of the government', the appellant's argument serves only to strengthen the trial judge's finding that the conduct of the government was wilful and deliberate. As I have already said in dealing with an earlier argument, apparently persistent failure by the government to obey a clear judicial decision is not consonant with the principle of the rule of law."
Although the Crown's servants' misconduct can be "amply abusive" without malice (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 8 F.T.R. 250, at 609 F.C.), the presence of malice obviously does nothing to mitigate or diminish any award of exemplary or punitive damages. It is quite the reverse. Here the court finds direct, advertent malice on the part of the Crown's employees. They wilfully applied painful and abusive force - utterly unnecessarily to the plaintiff's person. The subject of exemplary or punitive damages will be raised later in these reasons.
The Assessment Of General Damages
[22]
In his statement of claim, the plaintiff prays to be awarded, for general damages including pain and suffering, and continuing psychological trauma, $125,000, and as exemplary and punitive damages, another $125,000; for a grand total of $250,000. Neither such sums will be awarded to the plaintiff on the evidence adduced in this case.
[23]
The defendant in paragraph 6 of her statement of defence prays that "the expenses and damages incurred by Her Majesty as a result of the taking of a hostage by the plaintiff should be set-off or deducted by way of compensation from the plaintiff's award". That appears to be a good and sufficient plea "notwithstanding anything in" the
Constitution Act
, 1867
to the present and "for the better administration of the laws of Canada", despite the crippling damage to both concepts above stated which was inflicted by the Supreme Court of Canada in two unanimous decisions and one split decision, which are well known (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 273;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 193 (Martland, J., dissenting)). The Crown's set-off would be available pursuant to rule 418, but not pursuant to s. 155 of the
Financial Administration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-11. However, the defendant adduced no evidence to support the set-off which was pleaded, and so, it falls for want of evidence.
[24]
Damages for personal injuries are assessed frequently and continually by courts in Canada but it is rare that any two cases are the same.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a judgment of Stevenson, D.C.J., as he then was, the plaintiffs sued for damages for false imprisonment coupled with defamation and battery. The battery was minor involving only the seizing of the arm in order to steer a plaintiff to an interview room. The plaintiff's pain was psychological. They were berated and treated rudely both in public and in private and denied the use of a telephone. The learned judge was satisfied from observing them that the young plaintiffs were greatly distressed by the events which occurred and "they still feel uneasy when shopping in department stores". The judgment for each plaintiffs included general damages and exemplary damages in one global award of $2,000 each, plus costs. In the whole episode the plaintiffs were entirely innocent, which is not the case of the plaintiff here. The lump sum nature of the award makes it impossible to sort out the elements of distress when subsequently shopping in department stores in terms of apportioning the award, which is small in relation to all of the elements included, and which would be numerically larger today because of inflation's steady march.
[25]
One might contrast the above award with that which was intended to compensate a husband for the recurring nightmares generated by witnessing his wife being shot by a gunman. That award of general damages was $2,500 in the case of
McNichol Estate and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Alta. Q.B.). Again, for the traumatic neurosis of sexual assault, unique or repeated, the total general damages award was $40,000 in both of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. H.C.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.).
[26]
When one considers the shock of abused trust, one must consider the $30,000 award of general damages in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 27 D.L.R.(4th) 388; 36 C.C.L.T. 181 (Ont. H.C.), affirmed (1988), 66 O.R.(2d) 350; 54 D.L.R.(4th) 383 (Ont. C.A.). There, the plaintiff discovered his wife was engaging in an illicit affair with his lawyer who was found to have been exploiting solicitor-client confidences. The plaintiff suffered post-traumatic neurosis, nervous shock, mental anguish, memory loss and depression, but there is a vast difference between a solicitor and client relationship, and that which exists between a prison guard and a hostage-harming inmate.
[27]
Traumatic neurosis, that which in effect the plaintiff has described as a psychological sequel of the events of November 28, 1985, is the apparently unique element in cases of widely differing fact situations, and disparate awards of general damages. Here, the plaintiff's entire evidence consisted only of his own not wholly credible testimony, and the testimony of his father, J.W. Peeters.
[28]
The defendant's counsel argued that the plaintiff was already unstable and that his evidence failed to establish just how much additional neurosis was inflicted upon him by the trauma for which the defendant accepts liability. One can never be sure that an expert witness would have been of much help to the court, although the defendant's counsel seems to think so.
[29]
The court's view, upon the evidence, is that the plaintiff was, following the events of November 28, 1985, scalded by remorse at his own stupidity in attempting the hostage-taking, beset by some guilt but mostly fear of the repercussions of having cut Mr. Bennett's ear, while holding him hostage and threatening him with murder, and filled after all with supercharged loathing of prison guards whose "arrogant" demeanour and attitudes were his stated reason for embarking on his escapade of guaranteed failure. The plaintiff's testimony and demeanour both lead to the foregoing opinions and conclusions. The court's conclusion that the plaintiff's guilt and self-depreciation over his own misdeeds run true and deep is based not only on his demeanour but also his incredible posturing as such a nice, naive, but highly noble and innocent lamb. It is hard to believe that he "lost faith" in CSC personnel when one considers his stated reasons for terrorizing Mr. Bennett. It is likely that most folk outside of prison have more faith in the CSC personnel than did the plaintiff.
[30]
It is the court's conclusion that if the plaintiff suffered much or any traumatic neurosis, paranoia, nightmares and the like it was mostly a self-inflicted trauma with very little attributable to the painful mistreatment which he endured in the ambulance. Since the plaintiff was immature and self-centred, he could not easily, if at all, consciously censure himself and he fixed on the guard Aitchison to do that, to be the avenging angel for all his guilt, stupidity and loathing. Aitchison, but his disgraceful malice, became the plaintiff's own personal devil, but the plaintiff needed such a one so acutely that absent Aitchison someone else would have soon filled that rôle. The court, in these circumstances, will not award the plaintiff very much for his nightmares and alleged fears of ambulances. After hearing and observing the plaintiff, the court would have been hard pressed to accept a different view from even the most notable expert.
[31]
How much is that temporary but genuinely intensive physical pain inflicted in the ambulance worth? After a canvass of many awards, the court concludes that the award of general damages for the physical assault which was painful but left no marks or other physical
sequelae
, ought to be $1,200.
[32]
The psychological trauma, if true shock and paranoia had been inflicted
only
by the defendant's servants, could have borne an award of general damages of up to $20,000 or even $50,000, according to a recent decision of Mr. Justice Wells of the Newfoundland Supreme Court Trial Division in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . But, there, as with virtually every other such case, the plaintiff's psychological problems were not generated by the plaintiff's guilt and seething over his or her own faults and guilts but were, rather, inflicted by the defendant in their entirety. Why should the taxpayers pay for what the plaintiff did unto himself in nightmares? True, the defendant's servant Aitchison was so unprofessionally riled-up at the plaintiff that he, with his two colleagues, became the witless instrumentality of the plaintiff's complaints. He and they caused some at least minor psychological trauma to the plaintiff. This head of the plaintiff's claim is worth no more than $2,400, in the particular circumstances. This does not represent an apportionment of liability, for the Crown has confessed it. This award is compensation for the psychological injuries which the court finds were inflicted on the plaintiff - no more, no less. They consisted of temporary terror, and that is mental torture. The plaintiff is therefore awarded $3,600 for all general damages.
The Assessment Of Punitive Or
Exemplary Damages
[33]
It is beyond doubt that punitive or exemplary damages are called for. The defendant's servants' unprofessional lack of self-discipline, their brutality and thuggery, and their wilful malice cry out for punitive or exemplary damages. Some officials of a civilized state they were! Barbarity always harms the State and especially if the State's officials be the perpetrators. It is a pity that the taxpayers have to pay for the thuggish misbehaviour of Aitchison, Donahue and Hammond, when they themselves should be made to pay.
[34]
Now, it is true that each of the Crown's tortfeasant servants was punished by Warden Mary Cassidy, as she informed the court in her testimony. After receiving an investigator's report from the regional preventive security officer, and after interviewing personally the three officers, Aitchison, Donahue and Hammond, Warden Cassidy concluded that while there was no evidence of the plaintiff's injuries sustained in the ambulance, unnecessary force had been applied, given that the plaintiff was already in restraint strapped to the gurney, and she "took disciplinary action against the three gentlemen" (Tr: 86). Warden Cassidy "discharged Mr. Aitchison from the Correctional Service, and ... awarded a financial penalty against the other two. For Mr. Hammond who is the supervisor of the escort ... a penalty of $3,500 and to Mr. Donahue [she believed] it was $2,500" (Tr: 86).
[35]
Warden Cassidy was absolutely correct in concluding that unnecessary force was applied. Indeed, she stated:
"A.	Well, use of force is sometimes a very intrical [sic - 'integral', (misspelled)] part of corrections management and the role of a Correctional Officer. Only that amount of force which is deemed necessary to ensure the safety or security of persons is acceptable in the performance of a Correctional Officer's duties.
In my view, when Mr. Peeters was already restrained, there was
no amount of force that was acceptable
during the escort trip to the hospital. And so, it was on the basis of the inappropriate conduct and the exercise of power, that I took the discipline rather than because injuries had been sustained." (Emphasis not in original text) (Tr: 87)
Thereafter, "the three gentlemen" grieved these sanctions before the Public Service Staff Relations Board.
[36]
In the result, the adjudicator, for his own particular reasons, reinstated Aitchison to duty, but did not restore his full day, for a loss which Warden Cassidy thought probably amounted to about $14,000. Hammond's penalty was reduced to the equivalent of 15 days' pay and, Warden Cassidy believed, Donahue's penalty was reduced to the equivalent of five days pay; the penalties were roughly cut in half by the P.S.S.B. adjudicator. The P.S.S.B. is an independent tribunal which adjudicates on the evidence before it as it sees fit without let or hinderance, just as this court does.
[37]
It is on the basis of those reduced penalties that the defendant's counsel urges that punitive damages would not be appropriate in this case. He relies on an excerpt from a work called
Remedies in Tort
, Rainaldi, editor, 1989 Carswell, vol. 4, pages 27-47, as follows:
"
4. Punitive Or Exemplary Damages
(a)
Definition
"10. An award of punitive damages is based on the defendant's conduct rather than the plaintiff's loss. These damages are awarded to: i) punish the wrongdoer; ii) deter the tortfeasor or others from committing a similar act; or iii) prevent the wrongdoer from acquiring an undue profit from his unlawful act."
Under the heading about jurisdiction to make the award the author and editor state that there are certain limited circumstances in Britain in which an award can be made in regard to misdeeds of servants of the government. Those elements were discussed by Mr. Justice MacGuigan in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case above mentioned. The elements usually found in a case where such an award is made are in conduct (or, rather, misconduct) which is outrageous, oppressive, arbitrary, unconstitutional, wilful or wanton, or deliberate. These elements he took from Lord Devlin in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1964] 1 All E.R. 367 (H.L.), and from the trial judge's reasons in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and wove them into a new Canadian banner of exemplary damages. He did not exclude the government from the scope of his commentary.
[38]
The defendant's counsel relied further on these passages too in
Remedies in Tort
:
"(c) Criteria For Making Award
"13. The justification for awarding punitive damages is closely linked to the object of such damages. Consequently, the following factors will be considered in determining if an award of punitive damages should be made: i) the presence of punishable conduct; ii) the need for deterrence; or iii) the existence of undue profit.
"14. A tortfeasor's conduct is usually found to be deserving of additional sanctions when he has offended the ordinary standards of morality or decent conduct in the community. The punitive element is the most significant factor in determining whether punitive damages should be granted. Thus such damages will not often be awarded unless the defendant is guilty of moral turpitude. Punitive damages are not generally awarded in negligence actions unless the tortfeasor shows a reckless disregard for the consequences of his actions. Moreover, in some cases, the court requires that the defendant's conduct amount to more than recklessness; it must constitute arrogance and callousness or be intentionally directed at the person or property injured. However, in other cases, mere negligence has formed a sufficient foundation for an award of punitive damages." (pp. 27-48, 49)
[39]
Now the defendant's counsel principally submitted that "when the raison d'être of punitive damages is kept in mind, it then becomes clear that they generally should not be assessed in cases involving vicarious liability, such as this case". He submitted that the reason is that the person who is being punished is the employer; and the employer is not the one who committed the assault in this case, so the wrong person is being punished. Counsel referred in argument to the opus
Personal Injuries Damages in Canada
by Cooper-Stephenson and Saunders, 1981, Carswell, Toronto. The authors use the pages of their work, as is their right, to argue their personal point of view in regard to vicarious liability and exemplary damages. They do acknowledge that such awards are most often effected by Canadian Courts, and add "without discussion". The text is too long to recite here, but the authors even concede that the best rationale "for inflicting punitive damages on an innocent employer" is that the employer will, in turn, "be encouraged to chastise his employee himself".
"But this rationale once again cannot warrant punitive awards in all instances. The facts of each case should receive careful attention, for under certain circumstance exemplary damages against the employer could be unfair. For example, if an employee has already been dismissed prior to judgment, then judicial incentives become unnecessary." (p. 707)
[40]
Stephenson and Saunders give this as their summation on this topic:
"In summary, arguably an employer ought never to be vicariously liable for exemplary damages assessed on account of his employee's misconduct. Vicarious liability would be unjust in principle (because the employer is blameless) and pointless in practice (because the employee will get off scot-free). The one plausible justification in some cases is to encourage employers to sanction their employees themselves, where they are more favourably placed than the legal system to do so effectively. On the other hand, where evidence establishes that the employer himself merits punishment (for complicity in the employee's wrongdoing) or deterrence (against inferior management techniques), punitive damages may justifiably be assessed against him personally, provided that the plaintiff was a victim of the punishable behaviour and that the proposed quantum is adequate to achieve the intended purpose." (p. 707)
The authors do not reveal so much what the law is, as what they wish it to be. It may be noted that the publication date of their opus is 1981, some seven years before the publication of the Appeal Division's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  accomplished in Warden Cassidy's dismissal from the service of one of the perpetrators and her inflicting of monetary penalties on the other two. In any event, it is argued, their conduct could not have been too serious, because the P.S.S.B. restored the one perpetrator to his job and halved the penalties imposed on the other two. In any event, also, the employer, the government by means of the warden's action punished them. Independent as the P.S.S.B.'s adjudicators may be, the P.S.S.B. is not a court, and it is part of the machinery of government. Its adjudicator's decision seems to have signalled a downgrading of the seriousness of three C.S.C. officers brutally inflicting pain and terror upon an inmate bound and strapped to a gurney, out of sight in an ambulance. What kind of public servants are those three?
[42]
Although the warden's attitude to that affair was wholly correct, she is not the government, the Crown, the Commissioner of Penitentiaries, or the Clerk of the Privy Council. It is apparent that the degree of self-restraint and professionalism needed to avoid, or never even to contemplate such brutal misbehaviour were not sufficiently inculcated upon the three perpetrators of the assault and battery inflicted on the plaintiff. Why do such persons - almost inevitably male persons - pervert their rôle by evincing such goonsquad machismo, which is always nothing more than cowardly brutality? That is not their duty. Why do they not just do it right? Because they are not well selected, trained and admonished by their employer, they engage in brutal criminal behaviour and, by their example, make mockery of and push into disrepute the notion of a professional, proficient correctional service.
[43]
If punitive or exemplary damages be not properly awarded against vicariously liable employers, including the government, then the Appeal Division's unanimous decision in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case must be aberrant. Not so. There are at least two good reasons for overriding the defendant's objections in this regard. The first is the statute, and the second is the jurisprudence, among others, resonating in the imperatives of justice.
[44]
Basic to the jurisprudence is the statute, the
Crown Liability Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. C-38, in force during most of the material times, and latterly since December, 1988, the version found  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> C. 1985, c. C-50. The pertinent statutory texts of both present and previous Acts are virtually the same, differing principally in numbering arrangements and in the later French language version which refers to the Crown no longer as "la Couronne", but as "L'Etat".
Part I
Liability
Tort and Civil Salvage
"3. The Crown is liable in tort for the damages for which, if it were a private person of full age and capacity, it would be liable
(a) in respect of a tort committed by a servant of the Crown; or
(b) in respect of a breach of duty attaching to the ownership, occupation, possession or control of property.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of any act or omission of a servant of the Crown unless the act or omission would apart from the provisions of this Act have given rise to a cause of action in tort against that servant or the servant's personal representative.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  contemplation of the notion of respondeat superior, nor yet again in relation to the departmental nature of emanations of the government in which the three miscreants of the C.S.C. operate at a different level from the warden or the commissioner of penitentiaries and at a far remove from the Solicitor General, Treasury Board or the Privy Council Office. Section 10 does nothing to dilute the normalcy of the notion of awarding such damages against the Crown.
[46]
This general normalcy was confirmed by the Federal Court of Appeal in the earlier mentioned case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  custody for 43 days longer than they ought to have kept him. They did not inflict painful battery upon a helpless inmate bound by straps. The principle is a strong one, as articulated by Mr. Justice MacGuigan, thus:
"... the necessity for the Government and its officials to obey the law is the fundamental aspect of the principle of the rule of law, which is now enshrined in our
Constitution
by the preamble to the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
[being Part I of the
Constitution Act
, 1982
, Schedule B,
Canada Act, 1982
, 1982, c. 11 (U.K.)]. This aspect was noted by A.V. Dicey,
Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution
, 10th Ed., E.C.S. Wade, 1959, pages 193, 202-203, and was authoritatively established by the Supreme Court in its per curiam decision in
Reference Re Manitoba Language Rights
, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 721, at page 748:
'The rule of law, a fundamental principle of our
Constitution
, must mean at least two things. First, that the law is supreme over officials of the government as well as private individuals, and thereby preclusive of the influence of arbitrary power.'
"Elusive as it is as a concept, the rule of law must in all events mean 'the law is supreme' and that officials of the government have no option to disobey it. It would be unthinkable, under the rule of law, to assume that a process of enforcement is required to ensure that the government and its officials will faithfully discharge their obligations under the law. That the government must and will obey the law is a first principle of our
Constitution
." (F.C. p. 611)
Referring to the speech of Lord Devlin to the House of Lords in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  recognized that 'outrageous' or 'oppressive' conduct on the part of the government is quite different from similar conduct by powerful corporations or individuals, and that it is much more serious, 'for the servants of the government are also the servants of the people and the use of their power must always be subordinate to their duty of service'." (F.C. p. 615)
[47]
Of especial interest here is Mr. Justice MacGuigan's peroration in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in which he wrote about the sum of punitive damages assessed therein:
"The sum of $10,000 is far from negligible and I believe large enough to qualify as a deterrent against future conduct of this kind, especially since the financial consequences will in all likelihood be visited upon the budget of the particular government agency at fault." (F.C. p. 618)
Will they never learn just to carry out their duties in a lawful manner? Members of the same government agency as was involved  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's case have once more attracted not merely general damages but punitive damages for their tort of malicious assault and battery against the plaintiff. Penitentiaries can be lawfully operated with sufficient strictness to teach the criminals lodged therein that they are being punished and denounced by society for their offences, without teaching the wrong lessons of brutality, sneakiness and "might is right" which so corrode the fabric of civilized society. Because the lesson promulgated by Mr. Justice MacGuigan in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case seems not to have permeated the C.S.C., the court is justified, if not virtually obligated to escalate the quantum. The defendant shall pay punitive or exemplary damages to the plaintiff in the amount of $16,000.
General Summation
[48]
General damages are awarded to the plaintiff against the defendant in the amount of $3,600. Punitive or exemplary damages are likewise awarded in the amount of $16,000. The judgment of this court is that the defendant do pay to the plaintiff damages in the sum of $19,600. This is not a case for prejudgment interest, because of the delay in coming to trial. The defendant must also pay the plaintiff's party-and-party costs of and incidental to this litigation, either after taxation of those costs or as the parties' respective solicitors may agree to be the appropriate amount.
Judgment for plaintiff.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]