[1]
McKeown, J.
: The applicant, the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, seeks judicial review of the November 14, 1995 decision, signed on November 21, 1995, of the Immigration Appeal Division (IAD) of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada wherein it was ordered that the appeal of the respondent, the sponsor of his father (the principal claimant), mother, brother and sister from Fiji, be allowed on the ground that the refusal to approve the application for landing made by the four family members is not in accordance with the law. The application for landing was refused because the principal claimant was found to be medically inadmissible under s. 19 of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended (the
Act
).
[2]
The issue is whether the IAD erred in finding that the medical opinion that the principal claimant will place excessive demands on health care services was formed on insufficient and vague data; secondly, whether the IAD erred by making a perverse or capricious finding of fact; and finally, whether the IAD erred in requiring certain data for prognosis.
[3]
The first issue relates to the IAD's finding at page 7:
"Dr. Sorokin did not have 'echocardiography or catheter data' to be more specific about the principal applicant's left ventricular function. At the time of hearing no further medical evidence was adduced to satisfy Dr. Sorokin's concern one way or another. The Appeal Division, therefore, finds that the opinion that the principal applicant will place excessive demands on health care services was formed on insufficient and vague data."
[4]
The test in the case before me is not whether this court would have reached a different decision but rather whether the decision of the IAD was reasonably open to it based on all the evidence before it. As Joyal, J., stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at pp. 81-82:
"For purposes of judicial review, however, it is my view that a Refugee Board's decision must be interpreted as a whole. One might approach it with a pathologist's scalpel, subject it to a microscopic examination or perform a kind of semantic autopsy on particular statements found in the decision. But mostly, in my view, the decision must be analyzed in the context of the evidence itself. I believe it is an effective way to decide if the conclusions reached were reasonable or patently unreasonable."
[5]
In this case we are dealing with a medical opinion; there is a considerable amount of case law in that respect. In order to review the case law it is necessary to set out the relevant portions of the medical opinion which is under question. In a letter dated December 11, 1991, Doctor Sorokin, a consultant physician who examined the principal claimant, stated:
"This man has aortic valvular disease first diagnosed in the mid-sixties and he has been regularly followed in the Medical clinic here since then. He says he is still working regularly as a carpenter and has no restriction in effort ...
. . . . .
"
Diagnosis
He has double aortic lesion predominantly aortic regurgitation with evidence of cardiomegaly and left ventricular failure.
"Prognosis
In the long term he will lapse further into left ventricular failure. In the short term he can be adequately controlled by medical therapy but indications are present for valve replacement therapy.
"In the absence of echocardiography or catheter data I cannot be more specific about left ventricular function."
[6]
Dr. Sorokin's opinion was the basis for the medical notification provided by Dr. Tseng and Dr. Giovinazzo, the medical officers. The relevant portion of the report from Health and Welfare Canada, Medical Services Branch, reads as follows:
"His/Her admission would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services.
"AORTIC REGURGITATION
This applicant has aortic valvular disease. He has already developed complications of this condition (cardiomegaly and left ventricular failure) and indications are present for valve replacement therapy. He requires further specialist evaluation and care which will include the use of hospital facilities. This will place an excessive demand[s] on health care services. Inadmissible at this time under section 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Act
."
[7]
Martin, J., stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Webster and Ferrari are administrative decisions and, while they may be subject to review by this court, the review is somewhat constrained. As I appreciate the jurisprudence, I may not quash their decision and substitute my own, nor may I direct them to reach any particular decision, for under the provisions of s. 19 of the
Act
it is the medical officers who are charged with that responsibility. (Mr. Justice Strayer in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  limitations on medical officers in reaching the opinions which they express for the purpose of s. 19. If, for example, medical officers base their decision on matters which under the relevant statutory provisions they have no right to take into account their decision can be quashed on certiorari. (Mr. Justice Stone in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 693-694)."
[8]
There is no allegation in the case at bar that the officers relied for their opinion, on factors that are not contemplated under the relevant statutory provisions. Unlike the situation in the
Lee
case, supra, there is no second medical opinion which the IAD ignored in coming to its decision.
[9]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 85 (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal took exception to a dissenting member who stated that the absence of contrary evidence was irrelevant because the refusal was defective on its face. MacGuigan, J.A., for the court at p. 88 [Imm. L.R.] stated:
"In our opinion this dissenting viewpoint cannot be accepted. As Pratte, J.A., wrote in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Fed. C.A.)]:
'A layman, in the absence of medical evidence, cannot draw any inference as to the probable consequences of a physical disorder the cause of which is unknown. A medical doctor is not, however, in the same situation; because of his specialized knowledge and experience he may, in many cases, assess the likelihood that a physical disorder of unknown origin be very serious and dangerous and require long hospitalization.'
"A medical opinion as such cannot be second-guessed by the Board."
[10]
The Federal Court of Appeal expressly precludes drawing inferences on probable consequences unless there is other medical evidence. The prognosis set out by Dr. Sorokin is clearly in accord with the Health and Welfare Canada Medical Notification. In order to conclude that the prognosis was based on vague and insufficient data, the IAD would have to have medical experience. In his opinion, Dr. Sorokin makes a prognosis and indicates that in the absence of further data he "cannot be more specific about left ventricular function". However, he has made a prognosis.
[11]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 306 (T.D.), at p. 318 Dubé, J., reviewed the governing principle relating to the review of medical officers' opinion. He stated:
"The governing principle arising from this body of jurisprudence is that reviewing or appellate courts are not competent to make findings of fact relating to the medical diagnosis, but are competent to review the evidence to determine whether the medical officers' opinion is reasonable in the circumstances of the case. The reasonableness of a medical opinion is to be assessed not only as of the time it was given, but also as of the time it was relied upon by the Immigration Officer, since it is that decision which is being reviewed or appealed. The grounds of unreasonableness include incoherence or inconsistency, absence of supporting evidence, failure to consider cogent evidence, or failure to consider the factors stipulated in s. 22 of the
Regulations.
" (footnotes omitte)
[12]
In my view, there is nothing unreasonable about the medical officers' opinion in this case. This opinion was properly based on Dr. Sorokin's report. Dr. Sorokin was certainly well aware that the applicant had been diagnosed 25 years earlier as having aortic valvular disease and that he had been working as a carpenter since that time. Apart from Dr. Sorokin's opinion, there was no other medical evidence before the IAD. It should also be noted that the IAD found at page 4 of its reasons that:
"... the appellant and his wife were not candid and were less than credible in describing the principal applicant's medical condition."
[13]
Simpson, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 78 stated the reviewing principle in a slightly different way when she stated:
"I have concluded that s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Immigration Act
does not give the visa officer the discretion to review the opinion formed by the Medical Officers. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).) Once the opinion is formed, the person at issue is in an inadmissible class and cannot be granted admission by a visa officer. However, the visa officer has a duty to act fairly and pursuant to that duty would be compelled to reject the notice if it was manifestly in error. For example, if it related to the wrong party or an irrelevant disease, or if all relevant medical reports had not been considered."
[14]
In my view, the IAD questioned the medical opinion on medical grounds when it ignored Dr. Sorokin's prognosis and found that there was insufficient evidence to ground a prognosis. There was no medical evidence to contradict Dr. Sorokin's prognosis. The IAD went beyond its jurisdiction when it analyzed the prognosis without any medical evidence to back up the prognosis.
[15]
The IAD also erred in that it stated at page 7 of its reasons that:
"... in the event valve replacement therapy is needed, the principal applicant will place excessive demands on health care services, though no such evidence was produced at the hearing ..."
[16]
However, Dr. Sorokin stated:
"... In the short term he can be adequately controlled by medical therapy but indications are present for valve replacement therapy."
[17]
Furthermore, the IAD erred when it stated at page 7 of its reasons:
"... it is not certain when the principal applicant will need this therapy."
[18]
The medical officers properly assessed the probabilities associated with the principal claimant's condition and concluded that:
"... indications are present for valve replacement therapy."
[19]
Furthermore, the IAD erred by finding that the terms "long term and short term", used by Dr. Sorokin to describe the principal claimant's prognosis, were "rather vague". There is no requirement in s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Act
that within a fixed period of time following a person's admission into Canada his medical condition would require care and treatment which would place excessive demands on health care services. The test under subparagraph 19(1)(a)(ii) is that the person's "admission would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services". A medical officer need only assess the probability of a person's prognosis in determining whether that person is a person described in s. 19(1) of the
Act
. Certainty in prognosis is not required (see:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra).
[20]
The applicant had opportunity to place before the IAD new medical evidence with respect to the proper prognosis of the principal claimant's condition. The applicant did not do so. In my view, for the IAD to find that the medical prognosis was based on insufficient and vague data is a perverse and capricious finding of fact.
[21]
The judicial review is allowed and the decision of the IAD dated November 21, 1995 is set aside. The matter is returned to the IAD for rehearing and redetermination in a manner not inconsistent with these reasons.
Application allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/slm
[End of document]