[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is a motion on behalf of the defendant for an order striking out the statement of claim without leave to amend on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of action pursuant to rule 419(1)(a) which reads as follows:
"Rule 419
"419(1) The court may at any stage of an action order any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that
(a) it discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, as the case may be, ...
and may order the action to be stayed or dismissed or judgment to be entered accordingly."
[2]
The plaintiff is an inmate within the meaning of s. 2 of the
Corrections and Conditional Release Act
, S.C. 1992, c. 20, and is presently incarcerated at Joyceville Institution, a "medium" security facility.
[3]
On or about March 10, 1993, the plaintiff was moved from the "minimum" security Frontenac Institution to the segregation area at Collins Bay Institution, a medium security institution. On or about March 15, 1993, the plaintiff was then transferred to the Joyceville Institution. All three of these institutions are "penitentiaries" within the meaning of s. 2 of the
Corrections Act
, supra. The reason provided for the transfers was that the plaintiff had been involved in the assault of another inmate on March 10, 1993.
[4]
The plaintiff claims he was never involved in the assault of another inmate at Frontenac and that there are no grounds upon which the Correctional Service of Canada could classify him as a "medium" security inmate and thus no grounds for the transfers. The plaintiff claims that these transfers from a minimum security facility to a medium security facility will reflect negatively on his parole application, scheduled for February 23, 1994.
[5]
The defendant seeks to strike out the statement of claim on the basis that it discloses no reasonable cause of action. The defendant states that the statement of claim impugns two decisions of a federal board or tribunal, namely the Commissioner of Corrections or an official of the Correctional Services of Canada. The defendant submits that the
Federal Court Act
(the
Act
), R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 (am. S.C. 1990, c. 8) specifies a procedure for judicial review of decisions of a federal tribunal and that it is not open for the plaintiff to seek a civil remedy in private law against the Crown respecting such a decision.
[6]
The Commissioner of Corrections and the Correctional Services of Canada fall within the definition of "federal board, commission or other tribunal" in s. 2(1) of the
Act
. Section 18 and the new s. 18.1 establish a clear procedure for seeking remedies under judicial review. Section 18 reads in part:
"18(1) Subject to s. 28, the Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction
(a) to issue an injunction, writ of certiorari, writ of prohibition, writ of mandamus or writ of quo warranto, or grant declaratory relief, against any federal board, commission or other tribunal; and
(b) to hear and determine any application or other proceeding for relief in the nature of relief contemplated by para. (a), including any proceeding brought against the Attorney General of Canada, to obtain relief against a federal board, commission or other tribunal.
. . . . .
"18(3) The remedies provided for in subsections (1) and (2) may be obtained only on an application for judicial review made under s. 18.1." (S.C. 1990, c. 8, s. 4)
[7]
Section 18.1 is a new section added by S.C. 1990, c. 8, s. 4 and came into effect February 1, 1992. It reads in part:
"18.1(1) An application for judicial review may be made by the Attorney General of Canada or by anyone directly affected by the matter in respect of which relief is sought.
"18.1(2) An application for judicial review in respect of a decision or order of a federal board, commission or other tribunal shall be made within 30 days after the time the decision or order was first communicated by the federal board, commission or other tribunal to the office of the Deputy Attorney General of Canada or to the party directly affected thereby, or within such further time as a judge of the Trial Division may, either before or after the expiration of those 30 days, fix or allow.
"18.1(3) On an application for judicial review, the Trial Division may
(a) order a federal board, commission or other tribunal to do any act or thing it has unlawfully failed or refused to do or has unreasonably delayed in doing; or
(b) declare invalid or unlawful, or quash, set aside and refer back for determination in accordance with such directions as it considers to be appropriate, prohibit or restrain, a decision, order, act or proceeding of a federal board, commission or other tribunal."
[8]
It is clear from these sections that the 1992 amendments were intended to establish a clear procedure for seeking, inter alia, declaratory relief in this court. The amendments establish time limits for bringing an application and, in s. 18.4(1), the manner in which this court is to deal with these matters, subject to subs. (2). Section 18.4 is as follows:
"18.4(1) Subject to subsection (2), an application or reference to the Trial Division under any of ss. 18.1 to 18.3 shall be heard and determined without delay in a summary way,
"18.4(2) The Trial Division may, if it considers it appropriate, direct that an application for judicial review be treated and proceeded with as an action." (S.C. 1990, c. 8, s. 5)
[9]
The plaintiff's statement of claim seeks declaratory relief against the decision to transfer the plaintiff to a medium security facility, to declare him to be a minimum security inmate, as well as damages in the amount of $5,000. It is clear from the statement of claim that the relief sought is of the type contemplated by s. 18 and not simply damages against the Crown as counsel alleges. Thus, the proper course of action for the plaintiff would be to bring an application for judicial review pursuant to ss. 18 and 18.1, and then, if successful, bring an action for damages. In its notice of motion, the defendant states that it has no objection to allowing such time as required for the plaintiff to file such an application.
[10]
Prior to the amendments, a party had the choice to proceed by way of an application for judicial review or by way of an action commenced by a notice of motion except where declaration was being sought or where the Attorney General was the respondent in which cases a statement of claim was required. The amended section now requires the party to proceed by way of an application for judicial review. This is only subject to s. 18.4(2) which grants the Trial Division jurisdiction to direct that an application for judicial review be treated and proceeded with as an action, where it is considered appropriate to do so, as set out above.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mr. Justice Muldoon held that the new s. 18.4 dictated that:
"The new and preferred course of procedure, however, is by way of motion and that course should not be departed from except in the clearest of circumstances." (at p. 152)
[11]
He further stated (at p. 152):
"The new provisions of the
Federal Court Act
should be given a chance to work in the manner intended and not pre-emptively circumvented on the basis of speculation, and for this reason, too, the respondent's motion that the matter be proceeded with as an action, is denied."
[12]
I agree with Muldoon, J., and feel that the proper course of action is to follow the procedure laid out by Parliament in the amendments. This case does not fall within the "clearest of circumstances" as discussed above, and therefore I can see no reason to deviate from the norm established in ss. 18 and 18.1.
[13]
Accordingly, the application to strike out the statement of claim is allowed, without leave to amend. The plaintiff, with the consent of the defendant, may move forthwith for a judicial review of the decision impugned in the statement of claim. If the plaintiff opts not to proceed this court and the defendant must be notified.
Motion allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sms
[End of document]