[1]
Cullen, J.
: On October 18, 1991, Mahmoud Abu Shandi (Shandi) a Palestinian, arrived in Canada from Norway at Mirabel airport with his wife and they applied for refugee status. Shandi immediately identified himself to the immigration authorities as a colonel in the Palestinian Liberation Organization (P.L.O.), and voluntarily provided them with a series of documents. Shandi was using an Italian passport in the name of Gianlorenzo Piccioli and his wife Zamet was also using an Italian passport in the name of Cristina Zigomacas. They were detained and questioned at Mirabel airport and then transferred to a Canadian immigration detention centre. On October 29, 1991 the adjudicator rendered a decision that a certificate signed by the Minister of Employment and Immigration (the Minister) dated October 24, 1991 was in conformity with s. 103.1(2) of the
Immigration Act
(the
Act
). The adjudicator then ordered that the detention of the applicant be continued. The Review took place on November 1, 1991 and was adjourned at about 11:30 a.m., and recommenced at about 1:15 p.m. at which time the Minister's representative requested the application of s. 103.1(7) which was granted. The section reads:
"103.1(7) Where
(a) the Minister is of the opinion that any evidence or information to be presented by or on behalf of the Minister at any review under subsection (2) or (3) of the detention of a person referred to in subsection (6) should not be disclosed on the grounds that its disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons, and (b) a request therefor is made by the Minister,
the adjudicator shall order that the review or any part thereof be conducted in the absence of the person and any counsel representing the person."
[2]
The adjudicator stated she was satisfied that the Minister was making reasonable efforts to investigate the matter referred to in s. 103.1(2)(a)(ii) of the
Act
, based, apparently, on information revealed to her by the Minister's representative during that part of the Review that occurred in the absence of the applicant and his counsel, and ordered the continuation of the detention of the applicant under s. 103.1(5) of the
Act
.
[3]
Subsequently, a notice of motion was made by Shandi pursuant to s. 103.1(8) of the
Act
for the following relief:
"Take notice that the applicant applies to the Chief Justice of the Federal Court to quash an order made by Adjudicator Johanne Dupuis under s. 103.1(7) of the
Immigration Act
on November 1, 1991 excluding the presence of the applicant and his counsel from a part of a Review Hearing which took place on the above-mentioned date under s. 103.1(2) of the
Immigration Act
.
"Take notice that the applicant further applies to the Chief Justice of the Federal Court to immediately grant access to him and his counsel, to all evidence and/or information presented by the respondent to the Adjudicator, Johanne Dupuis during that part of the above-mentioned Review from which the applicant and his counsel were excluded.
"Take notice that the applicant further applies to the Chief Justice of the Federal Court to exempt the applicant from the provisions of subsection 103.1(7) in conformity with s. 52(1) of the
Constitution Act
.
"Take notice that the applicant further applies to the Chief Justice of the Federal Court to order that the applicant's detention be discontinued and that an Adjudicator make the appropriate order under s. 103(3) of the
Immigration Act
in conformity with s. 24(1) of the
Constitution Act
.
"Take notice that the applicant further applies to the Chief Justice of the Federal Court to lessen the time period referred to in s. 38(2) of the
Canada Evidence Act
and to make such other modifications to any other parts of ss. 37 and 38 of that
Act
which the immediacy of the circumstances of this application may require."
[4]
However, on November 22, 1991, the Minister and the Solicitor General filed a Certificate with a senior immigration officer acting under the authority of s. 40.1 of the
Act
which reads:
"40.1(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, where the Minister and the Solicitor General are of the opinion, based on security or criminal intelligence reports received and considered by them, that a person, other than a Canadian citizen or permanent resident, is a person described in paragraphs 19(1)(d), (e), (f), (g) or (j) or 27(2)(c), they may sign and file a certificate to that effect with an immigration officer, a senior immigration officer or an adjudicator.
"(2) Where a certificate is signed and filed in accordance with subsection (1), an inquiry under this Act concerning the person in respect of which the certificate is filed shall not be commenced, or if commenced shall be adjourned, until the determination referred to in paragraph (4)(d) has been made and a senior immigration officer or an adjudicator shall, notwithstanding s. 23 or 103, detain or make an order to detain the person named in the certificate until the making of the determination.
"(3) Where a certificate referred to in subsection (1) is filed in accordance with that subsection, the Minister shall
(a) forthwith cause a copy of the certificate to be referred to the Federal Court of Canada for a determination as to whether the certificate should be quashed; and
(b) within three days after the certificate has been filed, cause a notice to be sent to the person named in the certificate informing the person that a certificate under this section has been filed and that following a reference to the Federal Court of Canada a deportation order may be made against the person.
"(4) Where a certificate is referred to the Federal Court of Canada pursuant to subsection (3), the Chief Justice of that court or a judge of that court designated by the Chief Justice for the purposes of this section shall
(a) examine within seven days, in camera, the security or criminal intelligence reports considered by the Minister and the Solicitor General and hear any other evidence or information that may be presented by or on behalf of those Ministers and may, on the request of the Minister or the Solicitor General, hear all or part of such evidence or information in the absence of the person named in the certificate and any counsel representing the person where, in the opinion of the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, the evidence or information should not be disclosed on the grounds that such disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons;
(b) provide the person named in the certificate with a statement summarizing such information available to the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, as will enable the person to be reasonably informed of the circumstances giving rise to the issue of the certificate, having regard to whether, in the opinion of the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, the information should not be disclosed on the grounds that the disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons;
(c) provide the person named in the certificate with a reasonable opportunity to be heard;
(d) determine whether the certificate filed by the Minister and the Solicitor General is reasonable on the basis of the evidence and information available to the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, and, if found not to be reasonable, quash the certificate; and
(e) notify the Minister, the Solicitor General and the person named in the certificate of the determination made pursuant to paragraph (d).
"(5) For the purposes of subsection (4), the Chief Justice or the designated judge may receive and accept such evidence or information as the Chief Justice or the designated judge sees fit, whether or not such evidence or information is or would be admissible in a court of law.
"(6) A determination made under paragraph (4)(d) is not subject to appeal or review by any court
"(7) Where a certificate has been reviewed by the Federal Court pursuant to subsection (4) and has not been quashed under paragraph (4)(d),
(a) the certificate is conclusive proof that the person named in the certificate is a person described in paragraphs 19(1)(d), (e), (f), (g) or (j) or 27(2)(c); and
(b) the person named in the certificate shall, notwithstanding s. 23 or 103, continue to be detained until the person is removed from Canada ..."
A detention order was then issued by a senior immigration officer pursuant to s. 40.1(2) of the
Act
and Shandi became a detainee.
[5]
I indicated in Federal Court Action No. IMM-1-91 that s. 40.1 was enacted by
An Act to Amend the Immigration Act, 1976 and the Criminal Code in consequence thereof
, S.C. 1988, c. 36, now c. 29 (4th Supp.), and proclaimed in force October 3, 1988. Section 40.1 provides for a form of judicial review in the case of an applicant for refugee status who is not a permanent resident of Canada and who for security or other specified reasons may not be admitted to Canada. The concerned Ministers file with this Court a certificate of their conclusion that a person does not qualify for admission, for review by the court to determine whether the certificate is reasonable on the evidence and information provided to the judge. Until this determination is made, and the certificate either quashed or approved, any inquiry into the refugee status for the applicant may not be commenced, or if already commenced it must be adjourned.
[6]
On November 28, 1991, I conducted a hearing pursuant to s. 40.1(4) in the course of which I examined the security intelligence reports considered by the Minister and the Solicitor General, heard evidence presented by a C.S.I.S. officer and listened to arguments advanced by counsel for the Minister and the Solicitor General. I examined a summary of the information provided to me which had been prepared by C.S.I.S., vetted it and ordered this be served on the applicant pursuant to the requirements of s. 40.1(4)(b) of the
Act
.
[7]
On Thursday, December 5, 1991 the hearing, pursuant to s. 40.1(4)(c) began and was continued in Montreal on December 6 and 7, 1991. At the commencement of the December 5 hearing I ruled against a motion for particulars filed by counsel for Shandi in that I had already determined on the 28th of November that the Report to be served on the applicant enabled him to be reasonably informed of the circumstances giving rise to the issue of the Certificate. Also, I ruled that the constitutionality of sections of the
Immigration Act
could not be challenged at the hearing but that I would accept arguments based on the possibility that the
Charter
rights of the applicant had not been met. This latter pronouncement by me was in error and conformed with the dissenting judgment of Lamer, J., of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , but not with the majority decision of McIntyre, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 81; 52 C.R.(3d) 1; 26 C.C.C.(3d) 481; 29 D.L.R.(4th) 161.
[8]
Evidence was then advanced on behalf of Shandi on December 5th and continued December 6th. We heard from Dr. J.R. Brynen who was qualified as an expert on the P.L.O. and the Middle East. This matter was adjourned on Friday, December 6th and continued again on December 11th and 12th in order to hear evidence when the matter was further adjourned to December 18th for argument. The hearing was held in open court but at the request of counsel for Shandi the media were excluded. If I should quash the Certificate Shandi would be free to continue his application for refugee status and it was a concern of counsel for the applicant that certain spill-over evidence might prejudice that application. Counsel for the Minister had agreed to an open hearing but took no position vis-à-vis excluding the media.
P.L.O.
[9]
There is no secret about the administrative structure of the P.L.O. in that this information is available from several open sources. Professor Brynen at 50 of the transcript for December 5th states:
"Q.	What knowledge do you have concerning the internal administrative functioning or workings of the P.L.O.?
A.	I cannot claim to have detailed information on the innermost administrative details of the P.L.O. in the finest sense. Having said that, much of the thrust of my work has been to demonstrate that the P.L.O.'s administrative body is, for want of a better word, incredibly fuzzy."
Also, for those interested and who study this organization, there is constant work entailed determining who actually make up the groups and which group or groups carry the most influence. Fatah was formed by Yasir Arafat and Abu Iyad in Cairo, Egypt in 1956. "It advocates the liberation of Palestine by Palestinians through armed struggle. This included commando raids": Yonah Alexander and Joshua Sinai,
Terrorism: The P.L.O. Connection
, Crane Russak, (Taylor & Frances Inc. New York, NY 1989). Recent declarations by Arafat recognizing the right of Israel to exist as a country still indicate some reticence, i.e., that borders would have to revert to the original borders of the State of Israel recognized initially by the United Nations.
[10]
Clearly, Fatah, headed by Arafat is the largest group and is the real strength of the P.L.O. Interestingly enough, if a Palestinian state were recognized the P.L.O. already has in place the administrative structure to run a government and it would simply move into this new political role. However, unless and until that occurs, the P.L.O. has a series of groups under a heading Organization of Resistance with, as I stated earlier, Fatah headed by Arafat playing the leading role. Some of the groups in this category are Popular Front for Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) and several others with different ideas and approaches about how the ultimate objective might be reached. As might be expected, some are more militant than others.
SHANDI
[11]
Shandi is a colonel in the P.L.O. military but after listening to the evidence, reading the transcript and hearing the arguments I am convinced that he is more than that, which confirms the reasonableness of the certificate filed by the Minister and the Solicitor General on the basis that Shandi is a member of an inadmissible class under s. 19(1)(e) of the
Immigration Act
. Shandi's evidence is that he was for some time a bodyguard to Arafat. One does not reach that position without the benefit of an intelligence network so that the guard can appreciate where there is danger and from whom. He was succeeded in the role by Force 17 - a group that is criticized by Shandi in his evidence as not to be trusted but Arafat trusted Force 17 with his life, indicating a better qualified and informed group than that described by Shandi.
[12]
Despite his declaration that he never had trouble with police or immigration authorities there are several instances where that did in fact occur. Although his evidence was to the effect that he always travelled under his own name, that declaration too is false. Also, he has almost made a career of travelling with forged documents and just managed to leave Germany, for example, before he was deported. Fake passports, even if he used his own name, are an indication of an intention to be subversive in the host country. It is not given to everyone to obtain, as he did, passports (Italian) in a country where one is a virtual stranger unless some organization exists to assist in securing them and one is a member of that illegal organization.
[13]
I have no doubt that Shandi is a competent soldier, probably a good leader in a military context (e.g. Tiebe) where he commanded a large force of troops but I have very little doubt that the Ministers were correct to act under the authority of s. 40.1 of the
Act
with all the information provided to them by sources, which information was corroborated by other agencies.
[14]
It is inconceivable that a man who is as committed to the Palestinian cause as Shandi - even to risking the wrath of Arafat, the possibility of death in action as a soldier - would suddenly cease to be involved in a subversive way with this cause of Palestinians if he were given a green light under the
Immigration Act
to reside in Canada. "I am a cadre of the revolution" (transcript, p. 34).
[15]
Because his evidence was given in Arabic and translated I had to listen very carefully to the interpreter and read with considerable care the transcript provided. The evidence of Professor Brynen was most informative in highlighting the background in the area where Shandi lived and worked, and the political forces at play which help shape the history of the region. He could suggest only that it was unlikely that a military man holding the rank of Colonel would be a member of Force 17 but could not rule it out. Shandi's own evidence points to considerable knowledge of the makeup of the personnel, their fields of activity, i.e. terrorism and drug sales and their modus operandi.
[16]
I am satisfied that Shandi worked on a larger playing field and was not solely consigned military duties protecting Palestinians in camps (which incidentally he did very well and was and is committed to freeing those in the camps).
[17]
Espionage and subversion are not limited to the actual act but to be engaged in these activities the words envisage participation by one who assists or facilitates the objective as one who commits the actus reus. Any act that is intended to contribute to the process of overthrowing a government is a subversive act. It perplexes me that so much has been written about subversion, or that the word should not be used because it runs contrary to a person's rights under the
Charter
to be a dissident. Certainly CSIS investigators must be aware of the difference (which may not always have been the case), but subversive acts are not difficult to distinguish from acts of protest that should not be subject to investigations. For example, if funds are raised or guns sent to the I.R.A. from Canada, is that not clearly subversion? However, vocal comment or written treaties on the "Struggle" are clearly protected under the
Charter
. Examples of subversive acts are not difficult to find.
[18]
Initially, I had intended to list and categorize the particular activities which I'm sure led the Ministers to move as they did and which convinced me that their action was correct. On reflection I decided it would not be particularly productive given that some of the data is top secret and could not be revealed in these reasons in any event. Also, I was guided by the words of s. 19(1)(e) of the
Act
as provided by Mr. Joyal in argument (p. 133 of Dec. 18 transcript):
BY MR. JOYAL
"The question of standard of evidence that you have discussed in your judgment in the
Smith
decision. And it's at tab 7 of the blue book. I want to ... I have remarked at page 84, sub 4, page 84 that the basis of the certificate in the
Smith
decision is different from the present case. In that case, the basis of the certificate was 19(1)(f) and (g) which says:
'(f) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe will, while in Canada engage in or instigate the subversion by force of any government;
'(g) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe will engage in acts of violence that would or might endanger the lives or safety of persons in Canada or are members of or are likely to participate in the unlawful activities of an organization that is likely to engage in such acts of violence;'
"Here, the basis of the certificate is 19(1)(e). And I think it's important to note that that paragraph is drafted differently from the two (2) paragraphs (f) and (g). It says:
'(e) persons who have engaged in or there are reasonable grounds to believe will engage in acts of espionage or subversion against democratic government, institutions or processes as they are understood in Canada except ...'
"There is an exception and I want to point this.
'... persons who have been engaged in such acts have satisfied the Minister that their admission will not be detrimental to the national interest.'
"We don't find the word national interest in paragraphs (f) and (g). And that's the reason why we pretend [sic] [maintain] that the interests at stake in this case is on one side the national interest and on the other side the interest of Mr. Shandi to be permitted to stay in Canada.
"In the
Smith
decision at pages 96 and 97, you refer to
Khawaja
decision and it is at page 97 that we find the extract of the
Khawaja
decision. And at the top of the page, right column, you cite the decision which begins at the end of the left column:
'The flexibility of the civil standard of proof suffices to ensure that the court will require the high degree of probability which is appropriate to what is at stake.'
"... The interest at stake is on the one side national interest and on the other side the interest of Mr. Shandi. And that is the interest that the court should evaluate and review the evidence.
"I just want to make a remark. In the
Khawaja
decision, it was not ... the facts did not concern national security or national interest. But you will find at tab 4 a case of the Court of Appeal of the Secretary of State for the Home Department. And at that time of that judgment, Lord Denning was at the Court of Appeal. The reasons of Lord Denning begin at page 455. And I refer you at page 457, at the top of the page near the letter a.
'But this is no ordinary case. It is a case in which national security ...'
"And I will add national interest in our case because that is the basis of the decision of the Minister.
'... is involved, and our history shows that, when the state itself is endangered, our cherished freedoms may have to take second place. Even natural justice itself may suffer a set-back. Time after time parliament has so enacted and the courts have loyally followed.'
"And then, he refers to a decision. My pretension [position] is that the interest at stake, national interest in the balance is very high. And the court should look at the evidence supporting the national interest and the decision of the Minister with some reluctance.
"And I refer also to page 456 at the end of the page near the paragraph h and j. I won't read all the citation. We'll refer to it in the written arguments. But I just want to refer you to the decision of the Supreme Court which you will find at tab 3,
Kindler
[
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice La Forest:
'The government has the right and duty to keep out and to expel aliens from this country if it considers it advisable to do so. This right, of course, exists independently of extradition. If an alien known to have a serious criminal record attempted to enter into Canada, he could be refused admission. And by the same token, he could be deported once he entered Canada. This basic state power was described by Lord Atkinson in
Attorney General for  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  same decision. In the middle of the first paragraph, the phrase beginning by the words 'As this court':
'As this court has previously stated, while the decision of the executive are, of course, subject to judicial review, the jurisdiction of courts to interfere with the executive's exercise of discretion in this area "must be exercised with the utmost circumspection consistent with the executive's preeminent position in matters of external relations";'
"And I will add in matters of national interest.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ...'
"And I will add national interest.
'... and is in a better position to evaluate many of the considerations which have been set forth above.'
"And finally, I want to refer you to the other decisions which are reported under paragraph 7 of the written submission. You will find the proper pages where we want to refer you.
"Our position is explained at paragraph 8 where we put the primary interest at issue for the individual concerned in this case, his admission to Canada and secondarily, his detention pending a decision on this matter. Again his personal interest is that of the public interest raised by the question of national interest which includes national security. You will find the conclusion at paragraph 9.
"And finally, I refer you to paragraph 3 of the
Act
, subparagraph j. Paragraph 3 is entitled 'Objective'.
'It is abundantly clear that the Canadian Immigration Policy and the ruling regulations made under this
Act
shall be designated and administered in such a manner as to promote the domestic and international interests of Canada, recognizing the need ...'
"Subparagraph j:
'... to promote international order and justice by denying the use of Canadian territories to persons who are likely to engage in criminal activities.'
"And you will find at paragraph, art. 2.1, subparagraph d:
'Another object to respond to security concerns including the fulfilment of Canada's obligation in respect of international protected persons.'
"So there is to balance and in our case, we pretend [propose] that the balance in favour of national interest favours that you maintain the certificate and declare that the decision of the two (2) Ministers on the basis that the admission will be detrimental to national interest is reasonable."
[19]
For all of the reasons listed above, I have determined, pursuant to the authority of s. 40.1(4)(d) of the
Act
that the certificate filed by the Minister and the Solicitor General is reasonable on the basis of the evidence and information available to me.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]