[1]
Rothstein, J.
: In this application for judicial review from a decision of a panel of the Convention Refugee Determination Division, the applicant raises two issues.
1. That the panel erred in finding that the applicant's past experiences did not amount to persecution; and
2. That delay from April, 1989, when she arrived in Canada and had intended to make her convention refugee application to May, 1991, when the issue of delay was first raised before the panel, was unreasonable and violated her rights under s. 7 of the
Charter Rights and Freedoms
.
[2]
I will briefly dispose of the second issue. I am bound by the dicta of Robertson, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.):
"It is probably closer to legal reality for one to presuppose that rarely, if ever, will the argument (of delay) be successfully invoked."
I am not aware of any jurisprudence after <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that has found that delay justifies a remedy based on the
Charter
to an applicant in immigration proceedings. The only unusual element in this case upon which the applicant relies is her age and frailty. While such considerations may be grounds for a humanitarian and compassionate application, they do not assist an applicant in this court in a
Charter
argument based on delay in immigration proceedings.
[3]
I turn now to the first issue raised by the applicant. The applicant is a citizen of Czechoslovakia. She is approximately 78 years of age. Prior to the Communist take over of Czechoslovakia in 1948 the applicant's husband owned a liquor producing factory. The applicant owned and operated a home economics school. After 1948 they were reviled as capitalists. Between 1948 and the early 1950's, the applicant's husband was placed in detention and she and her children were evicted from their apartment. She was not allowed to operate her school. After the early 1950's the applicant became employed in the food services industry, eventually becoming the manager of a third (or perhaps a second) class dining room and catering facility. She retired from this position in 1977.
[4]
In addition to the experiences of the applicant and her husband between 1948 and the early 1950's, various actions by the police and the government were cited as evidence of persecution after that time, including visits by the police to their home and searches of their home and educational restriction on their children. The evidence as to when the police action took place was vague, but the panel appears to have concluded that the preponderance of these actions took place up to the early 1950's, with any actions in later years of less significance.
[5]
The panel found that experiences which the applicant said she suffered after 1951 were discriminatory but did not amount either individually or cumulatively to persecution. Perhaps by implication the panel had concluded that up to 1951, the actions against her did amount to persecution but that is not expressly stated.
[6]
There was a suggestion that the applicant received inferior health care in Czechoslovakia in the late 1970's and 1980's, but there is no reason to believe this was because of her political status.
[7]
The panel concluded the applicant failed to establish an objective basis for her stated fear of persecution in Czechoslovakia.
[8]
The applicant says the panel erred in finding that her experiences in Czechoslovakia did not amount to persecution. While evidence of past persecution does not necessarily prove that an applicant has an objective basis for fear of persecution in the future, it may point in that direction. Further, the applicant's material indicates that she wishes to have the opportunity to argue that she falls under s. 2(3) of the
Immigration Act
and such argument is not open to her unless she is found to have had a reason to fear persecution at some time in the past. (See ss. 2(2)e and 2(3) of the
Immigration Act
.) These are the reasons she seeks to have the decision of the panel quashed and the matter remitted for redetermination.
[9]
The test for determining whether this court should intervene when the issue is whether discriminatory conduct amounts to persecution has been set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). Mahoney, J.A., stated:
"It is true that the dividing line between persecution and discrimination or harassment is difficult to establish, the more so since, in the refugee law context, it has been found that discrimination may very well be seen as amounting to persecution. It is true also that the identification of persecution behind incident of discrimination or harassment is not purely a question of fact, but a mixed question of law and fact, legal concepts being involved. It remains, however, that, in all cases, it is for the board to draw the conclusion in a particular context by proceeding with a careful analysis of the evidence adduced and a proper balancing of the various elements contained therein, and the intervention for this court is not warranted unless the conclusion reached appears to be capricious or unreasonable."
[10]
Applicant's counsel submits that the panel ignored evidence of persecution up to 1951. She also says that evidence of police visits and interrogations after that time are more akin to persecution than discrimination.
[11]
The panel in this case did not express itself as clearly as it might. However, it is apparent that it considered that subsequent to early 1950's, conditions for the applicant in Czechoslovakia changed such that the incidents to which the applicant was subjected up to that time did not seriously adversely affect her subsequently. For example the panel states at p. 22:
"The female claimant's testimony shows that the discriminatory acts in her past had not seriously restricted her right to make a living."
Accordingly, the panel did not ignore the evidence of acts suffered by the applicant up to 1951. However, the panel considered these past events as part of the background.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 781. This was not unreasonable because the improvement of the applicant's conditions in Czechoslovakia subsisted for well over 30 years after that. In the circumstances, I do not think that the panel erred in treating the applicant's experiences up to 1951 as part of the background.
[12]
Whether police visits, interrogations and searches amount to persecution or discrimination is for the panel to determine. In this case the evidence of such actions after 1951 was vague. The applicant's personal information form makes no reference to specific dates. The applicant son's evidence was that he could not recall exactly but that they had police visits "let's say it was twice a year." It may be that this was up to the time he was 18 years of age in about 1964 but this also is not clear from the record.
[13]
The panel noted that the applicant was employed after 1951 and had been promoted through the years prior to her retirement in 1977. It found this was not reflective of persecution. On the basis of the evidence before it, I do not think it was unreasonable or capricious for the panel to conclude that the experiences of the applicant after 1951 did not amount to persecution.
[14]
One other issue arose during argument. In finding that the applicant did not establish an objective basis for her fear of persecution, the panel appears to have relied in part on the fact that she returned to Czechoslovakia in 1987 after travelling outside the country. On its face, this is a compelling point. However, there was evidence that the applicant returned to Czechoslovakia because if her family left piecemeal, there was a concern the remaining members would not be allowed to leave. The panel was alive to this issue (see p. 5 of its reasons). From the transcript of evidence it is apparent that the panel was interested in knowing why the applicant would return to Czechoslovakia if she had a well founded fear of persecution in that country. This was not an inappropriate line of inquiry or basis for considering her claim. It is for the panel to weigh the evidence and I cannot say that it erred in its conclusion by having regard to the fact that the applicant did indeed return to the country in which she claimed to have a well founded fear of persecution despite the reasons for her return.
[15]
I have not been persuaded that the panel's focus on circumstances after 1951 and its conclusion that the applicant did not suffer persecution after that time were capricious or unreasonable or that it otherwise erred in concluding that the applicant did not have an objective basis for a fear of persecution in Czechoslovakia. The judicial review must be dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/saf
[End of document]