[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
: On December 10, 1995 I heard a motion for a stay of the execution of removal orders which would send the applicants back to their country, Sri Lanka. In response to the applicants' argument that there was a serious issue to be tried, the respondent took the position that the statements of claim did not disclose any reasonable cause of action and that it intended to file notices of motion to strike the statements of claim in each of the applicants' files. I decided to hear those motions to strike on December 12, 1995. These reasons relate to both the stay applications and the motions to strike. I will first deal with the four files in which statements of claim have been filed: IMM-3343-95, IMM-3344-95, IMM-3284-95 and IMM-3349-95. I will then dispose of the matter in file IMM-2474-95 which was started by an application for judicial review.
[2]
The applicants all came to Canada from Sri Lanka. Upon their failure to demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution, their claims for refugee status were refused. Removal orders were therefore issued. The applicants then each filed a statement of claim in order to obtain declaratory relief that the removal orders violated ss. 7 and 12 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
and that they contravened the
Geneva Conventions Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. G-3 as am. by S.C. 1990, c. 14.
[3]
The main issue in the motions to strike is whether or not the applicants were correct in seeking declaratory relief by way of an action rather than proceeding with an application for judicial review. The respondent took the position that the relief sought should be obtained pursuant to s. 18(3) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, which provides that declaratory relief may only be obtained by way of a judicial review application rather than by way of an action pursuant to s. 17. Both parties agreed that the Minister's decision in determining the country of removal was in fact a decision made by a federal board, commission or other tribunal within the meaning of s. 18. The respondent submits that in similar circumstances to those before me, this court has struck statements of claim for disclosing no reasonable cause of action where the relief sought in the claims has been characterized as relief coming within s. 18(1) of the
Federal Court Act
[see footnote 1].
[4]
The applicants, however, argue that if a tribunal does not have the jurisdiction to entertain a constitutional issue, the court, on judicial review, also lacks the competent jurisdiction to examine a constitutional question. Such was the determination in the Supreme Court decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 358. Furthermore, the applicants argue in the same vein, that if the federal tribunal lacks the jurisdiction to examine the
Geneva Conventions Act
, the court could not, on judicial review, analyze that
Act
, either. Therefore, the applicants submit, if their cases were to proceed by way of judicial review, they could not obtain the relief they seek.
Striking The Statement Of Claim
The Declaratory Relief Under
The Charter
[5]
In their statements of claim, the applicants seek declaratory relief that the Minister's decision to remove the applicants to Sri Lanka violates the
Charter
. They argue that the only proper recourse for them is by way of action since under judicial review this court could not examine the
Charter
.
[6]
I must disagree with that assertion. Unlike the facts  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -Gadoury
, the Minister in this case was not asked to find a provision of the
Act
unconstitutional. If that were the situation, and if the enabling statute did not permit the federal board to determine the constitutionality of provisions of the
Act
, then it would be true that this court would not have the jurisdiction on judicial review to entertain such a request for relief but could only examine it under an action. Those are not the circumstances before me.
[7]
However, this does not mean that the Minister may act contrary to the
Charter
.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 416; 26 C.C.E.L. 85; 89 C.L.L.C. 14,031; 40 C.R.R. 100, the Supreme Court of Canada has expressly stated that a tribunal's powers are restricted by the
Charter
, at p. 1078:
"As the
Constitution
is the supreme law of Canada and any law that is inconsistent with its provisions is, to the extent of the inconsistency, of no force or effect, it is impossible to interpret legislation conferring discretion as conferring a power to infringe the
Charter
[...] Accordingly, an adjudicator exercising delegated powers does not have the power to make an order that would result in an infringement of the
Charter
, and he exceeds his jurisdiction if he does so."
[8]
The Minister has a constant obligation to act within the
Charter
, and the court, under the rules of judicial review, must ensure that the federal boards act within constitutional standards. Unconstitutional conduct is presumed to be prohibited and therefore, a federal tribunal engages the
Charter
as part of its general responsibility. This court has often, under the rules of judicial review, examined the constitutionality under the
Charter
of decisions made by federal boards.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the
Charter
, confirmed the court's jurisdiction to decide upon the constitutionality of a federal
action
by way of judicial review. I agree with the findings in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> where Nadon, J., stated at p. 33:
"Section 18(3) makes it clear that the remedies provided for in subs. 1 and 2 can only be obtained by way of a judicial review application made under s. 18.1. Consequently, any application to obtain a declaratory relief or a writ of mandamus against any federal board, commission or other tribunal must be made pursuant to s. 18.1."
[9]
I therefore find that the applicants should not have proceeded by way of action to obtain declaratory relief under the
Charter
. The proper procedure is by way of applications for judicial review.
The Declaratory Relief Under The
Geneva Conventions Act
[10]
Again, the applicants seek declaratory relief in the form of statements of claim that the removal orders contravene the
Geneva Conventions Act
. They argue that such relief can only be obtained through an action. Section 52 of the
Immigration Act
enables the Minister to decide upon the country of removal. It provides:
"52(1) Unless otherwise directed by the Minister, a person against whom an exclusion order or a deportation is made may be allowed to leave Canada voluntarily and to select the country for which that person wishes to depart.
"(2) Where a person is not allowed to leave Canada voluntarily and to select the country for which he wishes to depart pursuant to subsection (1), that person shall, subject to subsection (3), be removed from Canada to
(a) the country from which that person came to Canada;
(b) the country in which that person last permanently resided before he came to Canada;
(c) the country of which that person is a national or citizen; or
(d) the country of that person's birth.
"(3) Where a person is to be removed from Canada and no country referred to in subsection (2) is willing to receive him, the person, with the approval of the Minister, or the Minister, may select any other country that is willing to receive that person within a reasonable time as the country to which that person shall be removed.
"(4) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2), where a removal order is made against a person described in paragraph 19(1)(j), the person shall be removed from Canada to a country selected by the Minister that is willing to receive the person."
[11]
Upon reading the enabling provision, it will be up to this court to determine whether the Minister has an implicit obligation to examine or consider any other type of federal legislation, in making a decision under s. 52.
[12]
A basic principle of administrative law is that a tribunal has only those powers conferred on it by its enabling statute. [See footnote 2]. If there is a dispute as to the scope of the powers of a tribunal or the legal rights of a party, the purpose of seeking declaratory relief is that the court will clarify the law. [See footnote 3]. The court, on judicial review, has often determined the competent jurisdiction of a tribunal by interpreting the enabling provision.
[13]
The scope of the Minister's power and the legal rights of the applicants are what will be determined by a request for a declaration that the Minister has an implicit obligation to examine the
Geneva Conventions Act
, that he is bound by it, and that he has violated his obligations under that statute.
[14]
As noted previously, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, footnote 1, the court struck a statement of claim which not only sought a declaration under the
Charter
, but also under the
U.N. Convention
. In that decision, Nadon, J., felt that the court, on judicial review and pursuant to s. 18(3), had the jurisdiction to entertain a request for declaratory relief against a federal board by examining whether certain provisions of the
Passport Office's Internal Guidelines
infringed the
U.N. Convention
. On the same reasoning, I also believe that this court, on hearing a judicial review application, will be able to examine the scope of the Minister's power and its alleged obligations under the
Geneva Conventions Act
.
[15]
The motion to strike the statements of claim is therefore granted. However, I do not want this procedural error to preclude the applicants from having their day in court. Furthermore, since the court is allowing the stay of removal orders, it is important to avoid there being a vacuum where the applicants would have no proceedings before this court. Therefore, pursuant to the court's jurisdiction under rules 2(2) and 303 of the
Federal Court Rules
, the present actions will be presumed to have been commenced as applications for judicial review. The respondent did not object to this during the hearing. However, the applicants must, within 10 days from the date of this order, file the proper documentation, that is, their applications for leave to file applications for judicial review.
Stay Of The Removal Order
[16]
Upon consideration of the statements of claim and of the submissions of the parties, I am of the opinion that the applicants have met the tripartite test. [See footnote 4]. The applicants allege violations of their
Charter
and
Convention
rights and I am satisfied that there is an arguable case to be determined by the court. I am also satisfied that the applicants would suffer irreparable harm as a result of being deported to Sri Lanka at this time as there is enough evidence of risk of physical danger to the applicants. In light of this finding, it is obvious that because of the serious harm that the applicants would suffer if they were to be deported, that the balance of convenience favours granting the stay, pending the outcome of the applications.
Judicial Review File IMM-2474-95
[17]
The applicant Subramaniam Sivaraj, as well as filing a statement of claim in file IMM-3349-95, has also filed an application for judicial review in file IMM-2474-95. That application pertains to a Post Determination Refugee Claimants in Canada Class request that was rejected. He is also seeking a stay of the removal order against him pending the outcome of that judicial review proceeding.
[18]
However, since I have favourably disposed of his application for a stay of the execution of his removal order in file IMM-3349-95, I feel that his request for a stay of the same nature in his judicial review file is premature.
[19]
The application for a stay in file IMM-2474-95 is therefore not considered at this time. The applicant will have the opportunity to file another notice of motion for a stay of the execution of his removal order, if necessary at a later date, that is, if the judicial review proceeding is still pending after the determination of file IMM-3349-95.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/slm
Footnotes
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 320 (S.C.C.).
3.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 1, at 9 (S.C.C.).
4.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 123 (F.C.A.).
[End of document]