[1]
Heald, D.J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of Chairman John Mooney, dated August 11, 1994, of the Public Service Commission Appeal Board (the "Appeal Board"), wherein he granted the applicant's appeal of the Deputy Head's decision to release him from his position as a psychologist with the Department of Solicitor General. By this application, the applicant seeks an order setting aside only a portion of the decision of the Appeal Board, leaving the remainder intact.
I. Background
i. Relevant Legislation
[2]
Section 31 of the
Public Service Employment Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-33 (the "
PSEA
") is relevant to this application for judicial review. This provision reads as follows:
"31(1) Where an employee, in the opinion of the deputy head, is incompetent in performing the duties of the position the employee occupies or is incapable of performing those duties and should be appointed to a position at a lower maximum rate of pay, or released, the deputy head may recommend to the Commission that the employee be so appointed or released, in which case the deputy head shall give notice in writing to the employee of the recommendation.
"(2) Within such period after receiving a notice under subsection (1) as the Commission prescribes, the employee may appeal against the recommendation of the deputy head to a board established by the Commission to conduct an inquiry at which the employee and the deputy head, or their representatives, shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
"(3) The Commission, on being notified of the decision of the board on the inquiry into a recommendation conducted pursuant to subsection (2), shall, in accordance with the decision,
(a) notify the deputy head concerned that the recommendation will not be acted on; or
(b) appoint the employee to a position at a lower maximum rate of pay, or release the employee.
"(4) If no appeal is made against a recommendation of a deputy head under subsection (1), the Commission may take such action with regard to the recommendation as the Commission sees fit.
"(5) The Commission may release an employee pursuant to a recommendation under this section and the employee thereupon ceases to be an employee." (Section 31 of the
PSEA
was repealed by section 21 of the
Public Service Reform Act
, S.C. 1992, c. 54, which came into force on June 1, 1993. However, pursuant to the transitional provision found in section 93 of the
Public Service Reform Act
, the appeal shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with section 31 of the
PSEA
as if it had not been repealed.)
ii. Facts
[3]
The applicant commenced employment as a psychologist for the Correctional Service of Canada on January 2, 1986. He worked in this capacity at the Edmonton Institution, a federal penitentiary. On September 25, 1992, Jack Linklater, the Warden of the Edmonton Institution, on behalf of the Deputy Head of the Department of Solicitor General, recommended the applicant's release from his position on the basis of incompetence, pursuant to s. 31(1) of the
PSEA
.
[4]
The applicant appealed the recommendation of the Deputy Head, pursuant to s. 31(2) of the
PSEA
. Accordingly, the Public Service Commission appointed the Appeal Board to conduct an inquiry, at which the applicant and the Deputy Head were given an opportunity to be heard. The Appeal Board then rendered a decision allowing the appeal, in which it decided that the Public Service Commission should not act upon the Deputy Head's recommendation that the applicant be released from his position. The last paragraph of the decision is relevant to this application for judicial review. It reads as follows:
"In conclusion therefore I find that there was sufficient evidence to enable the Warden to conclude the appellant was incompetent in the performance of his duties. This appeal is allowed, however, on the ground that the Department failed to give the appellant prior notice that his work performance was unsatisfactory and that he would be recommended for release if his performance did not improve. I therefore conclude that the Public Service Commission should not act upon the Deputy Head's recommendation that the appellant be released from his position." (Applicant's Application Record, Decision of the Appeal Board, at p. 131.)
[5]
The applicant seeks review only of that part of the decision wherein the Appeal Board concluded that there was sufficient evidence to enable the Warden to conclude the applicant was incompetent in the performance of his duties.
II. Issues
[6]
1. Does the court have jurisdiction to hear this application for judicial review?
2. If the court does have jurisdiction, should part of the Appeal Board's decision be set aside?
III. Analysis
1. Does The Court Have Jurisdiction To Hear This Application For Judicial
Review?
[7]
This application for judicial review is brought pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, which gives the court jurisdiction to review a
decision or order
of a federal board. It is well established law that a portion of the reasons for a decision cannot be reviewed and set aside while leaving the decision itself intact. (See
Libby,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 342; 47 C.C.C.(3d) 104 (F.C.A.), at 350;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Man. C.A.), at 120; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.R.(3d) 212 (Div. Ct.), at 215.)
[8]
The applicant seeks to have set aside the Appeal Board's conclusion that there was sufficient evidence to enable the Warden to conclude the applicant was incompetent in the performance of his duties. The applicant characterizes this conclusion as a reviewable decision, which is severable from the remainder of the decision. The respondent's position is that this statement of the Appeal Board is simply part of the Appeal Board's reasons, which are not reviewable by the court except in the context of reviewing the decision itself. Therefore, the issue of the court's jurisdiction is reduced to determining whether the conclusion of the Appeal Board that is attacked by the applicant is a decision or simply part of the Appeal Board's reasons for its decision.
[9]
In my view, it is apparent that, pursuant to s. 31 of the
PSEA,
the Appeal Board must simply decide whether or not the recommendation of a Deputy Head to release an employee should be acted on. In the case at bar, the Appeal Board decided that the recommendation of the Deputy Head to release the applicant should not be acted on. This is the "decision" of the Appeal Board. The reasons given for this decision, or alternatively, the grounds upon which the applicant was successful, was that the Employer had "failed to give the appellant prior notice that his work performance was unsatisfactory and that he would be recommended for release if his performance did not improve." (Applicant's Application Record, Decision of the Appeal Board, at p. 131.)
[10]
The Appeal Board may have reached the same decision on a different ground. For example, had failure to give notice not been an issue the Appeal Board may have decided that there was insufficient evidence to enable the Deputy Head to conclude the applicant was incompetent, and thus the recommendation should not have been acted on. In that case, the finding that there was insufficient evidence to support the recommendation would have been a reason for the decision. However, the decision itself would have been the same: the recommendation should not be acted on.
[11]
In my view, the above hypothetical scenario illustrates that the applicant is actually seeking to have the reasons of the Appeal Board reviewed and set aside, rather than a portion of the "decision" itself. Accordingly, as the court is without jurisdiction to grant the order sought by the applicant, this application is dismissed.
2. If The Court Does Have Jurisdiction,
Should Part Of The Appeal Board's
Decision Be Set Aside?
[12]
Since I have concluded supra that the court does not have jurisdiction to grant the order sought, this issue need not be addressed.
IV. Conclusion
[13]
For the aforesaid reasons this application is dismissed. At the hearing, respondent's counsel conceded that no special reasons existed on this record that would entitle the respondents to an award of costs (Transcripts of April 30, 1996, at pp. 31-32). Accordingly, there will be no award of costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Giovanni A. Merlini/slm
[End of document]