[1]
Dubé, J.
: The applicant seeks an extension of the thirty-day requirement, pursuant to s. 18.1(2) of the
Federal Court Act
, to file his Originating Notice of Motion dated October 26, 1995. To obtain an extension under Rule 1614 the applicant must justify the delay and establish that the application has a reasonable chance of success (an arguable case):
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  as follows. On April 20, 1989, the applicant transferred his property in Duck Lake Indian Reserve No. 7, in the Province of British Columbia, to one of his four children, Maureen Ziprick, and himself as joint tenants. He claims that he cannot recall signing any land transfer documents and his last will and testament shows that all four of his daughters would share equally in his property. In 1993, he decided to have the property developed as a modular home park. On November 19, 1993, he obtained land transfer documents from the Okanagan Indian Band Office showing the joint tenancy. He alleges that this was the first time he became aware that his daughter was a joint locatee of the property. Presently she has taken steps to stop the land development on the property.
1. Reasons For Delay
[3]
In his affidavit, the applicant testifies that at that time in his life he was drinking heavily and could not look after his own affairs. After he discovered, in 1993, the Certificates of Possession issued in joint tenancy to himself and only one of his daughters, he obtained the assistance of a solicitor and pursued an action in the British Columbia courts. In 1994, he had correspondence with the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development with a view to resolve this matter. Now, he has no money and has launched this judicial review application before the Federal Court with the assistance of Larry Hrabchuk, a professional engineer and a director of Braunfel Engineering and Construction Limited, the developer of the applicant's property. Over the objections of counsel for the respondents, I allowed Mr. Hrabchuk, who is not a solicitor, to represent the applicant for the purposes of this extension hearing. The applicant cannot afford a lawyer.
[4]
Under s. 18.1(2) of the
Federal Court Act
, an application by originating notice of motion must be filed and served within 30 days of the decision or order in respect of which the judicial review is sought. In view of the fact that issuance of the certificates of possession in question occurred on May 2, 1989, the extension requested would be of some six years. Even if the applicant was not aware of the issuance of these certificates until December 1993, he still awaited two years before bringing on this application. During that period, the applicant had the assistance of a lawyer who guided him through the provincial courts.
[5]
Mr. Justice Millward of the Supreme Court of British Columbia, before whom the applicant appeared, stated that he had the opportunity to observe him for a considerable period of time during direct examination and cross-examination. He concluded that his evidence does not support the allegations that he was unsophisticated or of low intelligence. The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and ordered that the transfer was, in effect, a transfer to Ms. Ziprick of an undivided half-interest in joint tenancy of the property which she was to hold as trustee for herself and her three sisters. The judgment of the British Columbia Court of Appeal was released on May 1, 1995.
[6]
Clearly, the applicant has not justified such an inordinately long delay.
2. Arguable Case
[7]
Merely averring that an arguable case exists is not sufficient for an application under rule 1614. The applicant must adduce some evidence upon which an arguable case can be based. Again, in this instance, the "decisions" attacked are the issuance of certificates of possession by the two respondents. A bald allegation of fraud failing to identify any particulars of such fraud does not constitute evidence.
[8]
Moreover, the issue as to whether the transfer of lands from the applicant to himself and his daughter was unlawful and invalid, as alleged by the applicant, has already been determined against him in judicial proceedings before the British Columbia courts. Mr. Justice Millward, after an analysis of the evidence, determined that there was no undue influence exercised upon the applicant and that he, himself, instructed Band officials to prepare a document of transfer. The applicant is thus precluded from seeking a redetermination of these issues. The matter is now res judicata. It is in the interest of justice that litigations come to an end.
[9]
Not raised before the British Columbia courts but alleged in the applicant's Originating Notice of Motion is the further submission that an approval of the transfers pursuant to s. 20 of the
Indian Act
R.S.C. 1985, c. I-5, was never submitted to the Band Council for a resolution and therefore the transfers are void. That argument has no merit. The applicant at the time of transfer was the holder of a valid Certificate of Possession and was therefore vested with all the incidence of ownership with the exception of the legal title itself which remains with the Crown. Accordingly, he was entitled to transfer his interest in the property to himself and his daughter in joint tenancy pursuant to s. 24 of the
Indian Act
. Under that section there is no explicit or implicit requirement for a Band Council resolution in respect of any such transfer. The Band's interest in land which has already been allotted to an individual band member has disappeared or is at least suspended (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 284 at 291-292 (F.C.A.).
[10]
Consequently, this application for extension of time is denied. However, in view of the difficult and impecunious situation in which the applicant finds himself, there will be no costs taxed against him.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/ldl
[End of document]