[1] Gibson, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division (the "CRDD") of the Immigration and Refugee Board wherein the CRDD determined the applicants not to be Convention refugees within the meaning of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2. The decision of the CRDD is dated the 6th day of May, 1993.
[2]
Flor De Maria Herrera Flores (the "Principal Applicant") is the mother and the designated representative of her co-applicant Maria Felix Herrera. Mother and daughter are citizens of Nicaragua who arrived in Canada on the 8th day of September, 1992. The applicants based their claim to Convention refugee status on an alleged well-founded fear of persecution if they are required to return to Nicaragua by reason of their political opinion and membership in a particular social group.
[3]
The relief requested on behalf of the applicants is that the decision of the CRDD with respect to them be set aside and the issue of determination of their Convention refugee status be referred back for rehearing before a differently constituted panel.
[4]
The factual background to the applicants' claim may be summarized as follows. The principal applicant's father was a sergeant in the Presidential Guard under the Somoza regime in Nicaragua. When, in 1979, the Sandinistas assumed power, the principal applicant's father was arrested, detained and mistreated. When he was finally released, he was, in the words of the principal applicant's Personal Information Form, "... not a normal person". His whereabouts have been unknown for many years. The principal applicant's family was identified as espousing policies and a philosophy not in accord with those of the Sandinistas. Community representatives of the Sandinistas endeavoured to indoctrinate the principal applicant and members of her family. They were harassed in their home; stones were thrown through windows, their peace and privacy was disrupted and the exterior walls of their home were defaced.
[5]
In 1983, Sandinista forces involuntarily "recruited" the principal applicant's brother. After seven months of searching, the principal applicant and other members of her family determined his whereabouts. The following year, persons identified as Sandinistas burned the principal applicant's home. Shortly thereafter, the principal applicant's mother died, allegedly by reason of the constant harassment.
[6]
In 1985, the principal applicant and one of her sisters arranged through army officers for the defection of their brother from the army and for his escape from Nicaragua. The army officers to whom they had paid money were arrested, and by reason of the arrests, the principal applicant alleges that the Sandinista security forces became aware of the involvement of the principal applicant and her sister in their brother's defection. In the same year, Sandinista security officers searched the principal applicant's home on several occasions. The security forces arrested and detained the principal applicant and her sister. The principal applicant, who was five months pregnant, was beaten, her sister was raped. Upon their release, they were threatened with death should they tell of their experiences.
[7]
The principal applicant moved to a remote farm. Despite the remoteness, between 1986 and 1988, the principal applicant found threatening notes inside her home on a number of occasions. In 1989, while visiting with a man identified only as "David", apparently a member of the Contras and the father of Maria Felix Herrera, the principal applicant witnessed his apprehension by armed members of the Sandinista security forces. Following this event, the principal applicant and her family went into hiding for approximately one month. They then returned to their remote farm home.
[8]
In 1991, when the principal applicant was able to accumulate sufficient money, she arranged for the travel of her son to the United States to join other family members. Eventually, she and her daughter were able to leave Nicaragua.
[9]
In its decision, the CRDD found certain of the principal applicant's oral testimony surrounding her arrest, detention and beating in 1985 to be inconsistent with her PIF and determined her explanation of the inconsistency to be "... unacceptable". The CRDD therefore attached no credence to the principal applicant's allegation that she spent eight days in jail without food and that she gave birth to one of her children by caesarean section due to mistreatment in prison. The CRDD does not go so far as to determine that the principal applicant's testimony regarding her arrest, detention and beating, of itself, was not credible.
[10]
The CRDD identified the issues before it for determination in the following terms:
"1. Are the changes which have taken place in Nicaragua of a fundamental and lasting nature?
"3. Does the mother have a well-founded fear of persecution in her homeland because of the claimant's political opinion or due to her membership in a particular social group?
"3. Is the child's fear of persecution in Nicaragua by reason of her membership in a particular social group, namely, the family, well founded?"
The CRDD then goes on to examine the changes in country conditions in Nicaragua since just before the Presidential election of February 1990 and concludes as follows:
"Although the panel admits that there have been some instances of human rights abuses and a degree of violent confrontations in the country lately, the very essence of democratic life in Nicaragua remains unchanged.
"In sum, we are of the view that the changes that have taken place in Nicaragua over the last three years or so can be deemed to be of a fundamental and lasting nature."
[11]
On the second issue, the CRDD concludes that it is "... not satisfied that she (the principal applicant)
would
be persecuted by reason of her perceived political opinion or the overlapping ground of membership in a particular social group, namely, an anti-Sandinista family, were she to return to Nicaragua." (Underlining added by me for emphasis.)
[12]
On the third issue stated by the CRDD, it concludes that:
"Given that the child's claims is entirely based upon her mother's case, we are of the view that she does not have a well-founded fear of persecution in Nicaragua either."
[13]
In the applicant's Memorandum of Argument, six issues are identified. The first relates to the credibility finding with regard to the principal applicant which I have referred to above. Two others relate to the finding of changed country circumstances. The remaining issues relate to the application of the test for Convention refugee status and determination as to whether the principal applicant meets the objective element of that test.
[14]
In the respondent's further Memorandum of Argument, the respondent submits that the CRDD did not err in finding that the applicant was not credible with regard to certain of the events surrounding her arrest, detention and beating, did not err with respect to its determination regarding changed country conditions, did not err in its application of the Convention refugee test, and, finally, did not err with regard to its finding that the principal applicant suffered harassment not amounting to persecution.
[15]
I will restrict my analysis to the issues of changed country conditions and the application of the Convention refugee test as I am satisfied that these issues are determinative of the result of this application.
[16]
At p. 5 of its reasons, the CRDD states the test for Convention refugee status in the following terms:
"In order for these claims to succeed, the evidence must demonstrate that there is a reasonable chance or serious possibility that the claimants would be persecuted for any of the reasons set out in the Convention refugee definition ..."
In support of this statement, the CRDD cites
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 683 (F.C.A.). This is an accurate statement of the test for Convention refugee status and effectively reflects the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The CRDD then goes on to analyze changes in country conditions in Nicaragua leading up to and following the Presidential election of February, 1990. It notes that changes "... have
scaled down
the Sandinista-Contra conflict
significantly
and brought about
considerable improvement
in the democratic process in Nicaragua." (Underlining added by me for emphasis.) The CRDD acknowledges that there have been "...
some instances
of human rights abuses and a
degree of violent confrontations
in the country lately, ..." (Once again, I have added underlining for emphasis). Despite these qualified statements, the CRDD concludes with the view that the changes "... can be deemed to be of a fundamental and lasting nature."
[17]
Whatever one's view as to the appropriate test of changed country circumstances [See footnote 1] I have concluded that the CRDD erred in law in not conducting an adequate analysis of the conflicting documentary evidence and then in not turning, in any significant way, to an evaluation of the changes against the particular circumstances of the applicants." ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 204 (F.C.A.), at p. 206.)
[18]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Marceau, J.A., speaking for the Federal Court of Appeal, stated:
"Surely more detailed commentary was required. Could the Chamorro government put a curb on this 'overzealousness' given that Sandinista control of the military remained? Moreover, after affirming that the Sandinistas continued to play a role in the military and political scene in Nicaragua, the tribunal found that a change in the circumstances undermined the claim on the basis that 'the documentary evidence points to positive steps taken and progress made towards that objective (of diminishing the influence of the Sandinistas)'. Again, a more detailed analysis of the conflicting evidence in respect of a change in circumstances was necessary to meet the requirement that the change be meaningful and effective enough to render the genuine fear of the appellant unreasonable and hence without foundation."
[19]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Noel, J., stated:
"In my view, when one says that 'change' in circumstances is an important consideration, one is not speaking of any change. The board must not be content in simply noting that changes have taken place, but must assess the impact of these changes on the person of the applicant."
More recently, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  J., stated:
"The board has a duty to assess the effect of the changes in the country as they relate to these particular applicants in order to determine if the fear of persecution has been alleviated as a result of the changes. In its reasons the Board did not expressly or implicitly deal with the applicant's arrest and beating. This event was critical to understanding the applicant's fear and the basis for it."
This last quote applies with particular force in the circumstances of this application. Although certain circumstances surrounding the principal applicant's arrest, detention and beating in the spring of 1985 were, I conclude, reasonably found by the CRDD not to be credible, the fact of that arrest, detention and beating which forms one of the bases for the principal applicant's fear was not questioned.
[20]
Having reached a conclusion on the issue of changed country conditions, the CRDD went on to state that it was "... not satisfied that she (the principal applicant)
would
be persecuted by reason of her perceived political opinion or the overlapping ground of membership in a particular social group, ...". (Underlining added by me for emphasis). The CRDD went on, later in its reasons to state
"Furthermore, the panel is not persuaded that a person like the claimant, - who did not participate in any political or military activities against the FSLN -
would
be at risk of persecution by the Sandinistas now." (Once again, underlining added by me for emphasis).
[21]
Neither of the restatements of the test for Convention refugee status that are quoted immediately above, conform to the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> test.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.J., speaking for the Federal Court of Appeal stated:
"The error alleged appears in the reasons of the Board ... where ... the board concluded that it had serious reservations about the appellant's credibility and stated as follows:
'We are unable, therefore,
to give him the benefit of the doubt
. There is room for expression of his anti-communist opinions in contemporary Sofia and while the changes are not fundamental, we are not
convinced
that the claimant faces a reasonable chance that he
would be
persecuted for his political opinions should he return to Bulgaria.' (Emphasis added)
"We are all of the view that by using the words that I have underlined, the board appears to have placed upon the appellant a burden of proof that was too high, having regard to the jurisprudence of the court. In doing so, the board committed an error which, in our view was fatal to the validity of its decision."
[22]
I conclude that the same must be said of the decision of the CRDD on the facts of this case, taking into account the words that I have underlined in the last two quotations from the CRDD's decision appearing above.
[23]
For the foregoing reasons, I have allowed this application.
[24]
At the close of the hearing before me, I consulted counsel regarding whether or not a question should be certified in this matter. Both counsel agreed that this matter turned on its particular facts. No question was recommended for certification. No question is certified.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/saf
Footnotes
1.	 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) where statements of the test as being "fundamental and significant changes of proven durability" or "significant effective and durable changes" are discussed against the concept of "meaningful and effective change".
[End of document]