[1]
Dubé, J.
: The appellant ("the Royal Bank") appeals the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks ("the Registrar") dated August 30, 1994, expunging registration no. 218,244 for the trademark "Informaction" pursuant to the provisions of s. 45 of the
Trade-marks Act
("the
Act
"). The respondent Gowling, Strathy & Henderson is acting on behalf of the Bank of Montreal, a competitor of the Royal Bank which intends to use the trademark "Ligne Informaction"
[2]
In response to a s. 45 notice, the Royal Bank filed the affidavit of Ms. Anita Cadieux declaring that the trademark "Informaction" was used by the Royal Bank in association with printed publications published from time to time and distributed in the normal course of the banking business through the late '70s and early '80s. The Royal Bank did not publish between 1986 until the spring of 1992 but claims that it decided to recommence the use of the trademark in the fall of 1991 and took steps to prepare for the continued marketing of the trademark.
[3]
For the purposes of the instant hearing before the Federal Court, the Royal Bank filed the affidavit of Mr. Steven Higgins, who was promoted to the position of National Sales Manager, Card Services and Point of Sale in the fall of 1991. His function was to complete the development of a newsletter to communicate information relating to the VISA credit cards issued by the Royal Bank. He testified that in the summer of 1991 a mandate was given to the advertising agency Napier-Andrews Communications Limited to provide the Royal Bank with a new design for the trademark "Informaction". Approximately three thousand (3,000) samples of the new format for the newsletter were sent to Mr. Higgins. Well prior to the issuance of the s. 45 notice on November 12, 1991, the Royal Bank was actively engaged in the preparation of material for the use of the trademark. In the spring of 1992, more quantities of this letter format were printed and sent to the Eastern and Central card centres of the Royal Bank.
[4]
Mr. Higgins filed as exhibits to his affidavit various sample copies of newsletters bearing the trademark "Informaction" issued by the Royal Bank from time to time, between September 1992 through August 1994.
[5]
The Registrar expunged the Royal Bank registration of the trademark "Informaction" on the ground that the Royal Bank had not published the bulletin since late 1986. The Registrar noted that the Royal Bank indicated that the bulletins were published from time to time and were distributed in the normal course of trade in the banking business. He stated that the word "trade" in the expression "normal course of trade" contemplates some payment or exchange for the wares supplied or, at least, that the transfer of the wares be a part of a dealing in the wares for the purpose of acquiring profits from the marked goods. No special circumstances exist to excuse the absence of use of the mark. Given the long absence of use and the fact that the nonuse appears to have been the result of a voluntary decision of the Royal Bank not to publish, the trademark was expunged.
[6]
It is trite law that proceedings under s. 56 of the
Act
are somewhat similar to a trial de novo in the sense that new evidence of a substantial nature may be placed before this court to show that the Registrar came to a wrong conclusion [see footnote 1]. It is well established that the purpose and scope of s. 45 proceedings are to provide a simple, summary and expeditious procedure for clearing the dead wood from the register [see footnote 2]. It is also common ground that s. 45 proceedings are not a means for resolving competing commercial interests between parties [see footnote 3] and are not meant to confer rights on its initiator [see footnote 4]. Where the trademark has not been in use or there has been interrupted use, the Registrar may nonetheless maintain the registration provided the registrant shows that there are "special circumstances" for the nonuse [see footnote 5].
[7]
However, it has been often said that the court must be circumspect about interfering with a Registrar's decision unless it is reasonably apparent that the Registrar has gone wrong on the facts before him, or as now appears clearly from new and significant evidence subsequently submitted to the court [see footnote 6]. In other words, it is only with reference to the new evidence that the proceedings may be likened to a trial de novo.
[8]
In my view, the evidence before the Registrar allowed him to decide as he did. He found that: 1) the Royal Bank's mark was not in use during the relevant period of time; 2) there was no "use" "in the normal course of trade" and 3) there were no special circumstances justifying such nonuse. The affidavit of Mr. Higgins is not significant enough as additional evidence to reverse the Registrar's decision.
[9]
The evidence of "use" of a "trademark" adduced by the registered owner must meet the requirements of ss. 2 and 4 of the
Act
. A "trademark" means a mark issued by a person for the purpose of distinguishing wares or services manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by him from those of others. "Use" is deemed to be a use in association with wares or services. A trademark is deemed to be used in association with wares if, in the normal course of trade, at the time of the transfer of the wares, it is marked on the wares or is otherwise associated with the wares.
[10]
The evidence adduced by the Royal Bank does not support a finding that its trademark "Informaction" has been used in association with its newsletters so as to distinguish them from the wares of others. It is described as "printed publications, namely a consumer services bulletin relating to banking published from time to time". The use described is more in the nature of an internal document. Neither of the two aforementioned affidavits establish use of the trademark in the normal course of trade during the relevant period.
[11]
It is clear that there has been a gap in publication for several years. It is not sufficient to declare that a trademark has been used, the affidavit must "show" use, that is to say it must describe the use being made of the trademark within the meaning of the definition of a trademark in s. 2 and of the use in s. 4 of the
Act
[see footnote 7].
[12]
The only evidence of use of the "Informaction" trademark before November 12, 1991, was a bulletin circulated within the Royal Bank's organization and an application of the mark as a letterhead on blank stationary. It is not good enough to declare that the trademark has been used "in the normal course of trade". The affiant must explain what is the normal course of trade and show how the trademark was used therein.
[13]
On that score, the evidence is thin and vague as there is no indication as to how the trademark was linked to wares being sold or transferred [see footnote 8]. The word "trade" contemplates some payment or exchange for the wares supplied or at least that the transfer of the wares was part of a deal. The only evidence is of the trademark being associated with internal communications or, at best, free leaflets at one time available to some customers [see footnote 9]. In short, there is no evidence that the wares covered by the trademark "Informaction" were ever manufactured, sold or leased for the purpose of distinguishing the Royal Bank's wares from others on the market place.
[14]
The onus is on the owner of the trademark to establish that special circumstances exist excusing its absence of use pursuant to s. 45 of the
Act
[see footnote 10]. The terms "special circumstances" have been defined by Cattanach, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), at p. 123, as being "of such a kind as to exceed in some way that is not usual or common; exceptional in character, quality or degree".
[15]
Factors to be considered in assessing the existence of special circumstances justifying nonuse of a trademark include: (1) the duration of nonuse, (2) the degree to which nonuse is attributable to the will of the registrant, and (3) whether there was a serious intention to shortly resume use.
[16]
In the instant case, the trademark "Informaction" has never been used in the normal course of trade; the mark was not used in any matter whatsoever from 1986 to 1991. Secondly, the nonuse is totally attributable to the will of Royal Bank. Thirdly, there is some ambiguous evidence that the Royal Bank intended to resume use in the fall of 1991, the period when the notice was issued, but that intention appears to have been directed more to the promotion of its services than the use of its wares.
[17]
Consequently, this appeal is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/slm
Footnotes
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 74 (T.D.), at p. 76 C.P.R. (Reed, J.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 135 C.P.R. (Strayer, J.).
2.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at pp. 293-294 C.P.R. (McNair, J.).
3.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 473 (T.D.), at p. 480 C.P.R. (Cullen, J.).
4.
International Board of Standards and Practices for  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 134 (T.D.), at p. 148 C.P.R. (Joyal, J.).
5.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 70 (T.D.), at p. 75 C.P.R. (Pinard, J.).
6.	Supra, footnote 2, at pp. 297-298 C.P.R.
7.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 62 (F.C.A.), at p. 66 C.P.R. (Thurlow, J.).
8.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.M. Bd.) at p. 287.
10.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 417 (T.D.), at p. 420 C.P.R. (Rouleau, J.).
[End of document]