[1]
Rouleau, J.
[Translation]: This is an appeal pursuant to s. 56 of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, (hereinafter "the
Act
") from the decision of the Trademarks Opposition Board (hereinafter "the Registrar") rejecting the appellant's opposition to an application for registration of the nominal trademark "Confortel" filed by the predecessor in title of the respondent, Espalau Inc., on a basis of proposed use in association with the operation of hotels, motels, restaurants and catering services.
[2]
The appellant Choice Hotels International Inc. is a corporation having its head office in Silver Spring, Maryland, in the United States. It describes itself as the successor in title or successor in interest to Quality Inns International Inc.
[3]
The respondent Hotels Confortel Inc. is a duly incorporated society having its head office in Val d'Or, province of Quebec, Canada. It might be noted that on September 26, 1994 there was an assignment of the "Confortel" mark by Espalau Inc. to the respondent herein, Hotels Confortel Inc., and that this change was recognized by this court on May 29, 1995.
[4]
On January 13, 1989, the respondent applied to the Registrar to register, as No. TMO 623,214, a trademark "Confortel" in association with "the operation of hotels, motels and restaurants, restaurant catering services", on the basis of an intention to use the mark in Canada. This application for registration was published in the July 5, 1989 edition of the
Trade Marks Journal
(Vol. 36, No. 1810, pp. 62-63).
[5]
On November 3, 1989, having obtained an extension of time to do so, the predecessor in title of the appellant, Quality Inns International Inc., filed with the Registrar a statement of opposition to such registration. On December 15 of that year, the respondent filed a counter statement in which it denied each and every allegation contained in the statement of opposition.
[6]
The appellant filed no evidence with the Registrar of Trademarks under rule 43 of the
Regulations
within the prescribed time limits. On November 26, 1990 the respondent filed, as partial evidence under rule 44, a certificate of authenticity in relation to the TMA 366,303 registration on March 2, 1990 of a "trademark C & Design". On May 30, 1991 the respondent filed under rule 44 the second part of its evidence, the affidavit of May 15, 1991 of Mr. Normand Cliche and exhibits NC-1 and NC-2 in support.
[7]
On February 27, 1992, the appellant requested leave to cross-examine the affiant Cliche but this request was denied it by the Registrar, since it was made out of time and the appellant had not filed any evidence under rule 43 on the record. The Registrar subsequently refused to reconsider his decision.
[8]
On October 29, 1993 the two parties appeared before the Trademarks Opposition Board to make their submissions. On January 31, 1994, Mr. Myer Herzig, acting on behalf of the Registrar of trademarks pursuant to the delegation of authority provided for in s. 63(4) of the
Act
, rejected the appellant's opposition and allowed the respondent's application for registration TMO 623,214 on the ground that the respondent had discharged its legal burden of establishing that there is no reasonable possibility of confusion between the trademarks in question, having regard to the first impression and imperfect recollection test.
[9]
On March 30, 1994 the appellant filed its notice of appeal of the decision of the Registrar under s. 56 of the
Act
. This section states:
"
Appeal
"56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of the decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months.
"
Procedure
"(2) An appeal under subs. (1) shall be made by way of notice of appeal filed with the Registrar and in the Federal Court.
"
Notice to owner
"(3) The appellant shall, within the time limited or allowed by subs. (1), send a copy of the notice by registered mail to the registered owner of any trademark that has been referred to by the Registrar in the decision complained of and to every other person who was entitled to notice of the decision.
"
Public notice
"(4) The Federal Court may direct that public notice of the hearing of an appeal under subs. (1) and of the matters at issue therein be given in such manner as it deems proper.
"
Additional evidence
"(5) On an appeal under subs. (1), evidence in addition to that adduced before the Registrar may be adduced and the Federal Court may exercise any discretion vested in the Registrar."
[10]
When faced with an appeal from a Registrar's decision, this court is justified in intervening only if the appellant demonstrates that the Registrar erred in law or in the assessment of the facts in the case. Since the Registrar is a specialized tribunal with expert knowledge in the area of trademarks, this court must act with restraint. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 205 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 67 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 387 (T.D.).) When, however, additional evidence is adduced in accordance with s. 56(5) of the
Act
, this court enjoys greater latitude in relation to the Registrar's decision. In this case, both of the parties to the appeal introduced additional evidence in this court.
[11]
The decisive issue in this case is whether the respondent's "Confortel" mark creates confusion with the appellant's "Comfort Inn" mark.
[12]
The onus is on the respondent to demonstrate, by a preponderance of evidence, that there is no reasonable possibility of confusion between the said marks. Hotels Confortel Inc. must show that "[Translation] the trademark it wishes to register creates no reasonable risk of confusion with the mark that is already registered." (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 82, at p. 93 (F.C.A.).)
[13]
Under s. 12(1)(d) of the
Act
, the risk of confusion is a valid ground of opposition to the registrability of a trademark. This paragraph states:
"
When trademark registrable
"12(1) Subject to s. 13, a trademark is registrable if it is not
. . . . .
"(d) confusing with a registered trademark; ..."
[14]
At the hearing, the parties did not dispute that the date on which the existence of possible confusion between the appellant's and respondent's trademarks is to be assessed is the date of the decision that allows or refuses the registration, that is, January 31, 1994 in this case. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 413 (F.C.A.).)
[15]
However, what is meant by the term "confusing"? Section 6(2) of the
Act
indicates when a trademark might be confusing. It states:
"
When mark or name confusing
"6(1) ...
"
Idem
"(2) The use of a trademark causes confusion with another trademark if the use of both trademarks in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with those trademarks are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class."
[16]
The courts, for their part, have construed this statutory provision through the test of the first impression and imperfect recollection of the average consumer. Here, for example, is what Cattanach, J., stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.):
"It is the probability of the average person endowed with average intelligence acting with ordinary caution being deceived that is the criterion and to measure that probability of confusion the Registrar of Trademarks or the judge must assess the normal attitudes and reactions of such persons."
[17]
Similarly, Hughes, in his treatise on trademarks, describes the test in these words:
"In considering whether confusion between the wares, services or business of one party and those of another party is likely to exist, the court is to put itself in the position of an ordinary person who has at best a general recollection of the wares, services or business of one party, who is presented in a commercial background with wares, services or business of a second party. The court is then to ask whether such a person would be in a state of confusion as to whether the wares, services or business of the second were those of the first. The standard is not that of a person fully familiar with the detailed operations of one party and therefore capable of distinguishing at once, but rather it is that of a person who has a vague recollection or understanding of the former and who is being faced with those of another and whether such person may well be confused or deceived as to the ownership or nature thereof." (Roger T. Hughes et al.,
Hughes on Trademarks
(Toronto, 1984, Butterworths), at ยง 77)
[18]
Moreover, the assessment of confusion must reflect all of the circumstances surrounding the disputed trademarks, including those circumstances listed in s. 6(5) of the
Act
. These are the following:
"
What to be considered
"(5) In determining whether trademarks or tradenames are confusing, the court or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks or tradenames and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trademarks or tradenames have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade; and
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trademarks or tradenames in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
[19]
These circumstances were cited in order to guide the judge or the Registrar in making his or her decision. Furthermore, the cases (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 483 (T.D.), affd. (1993), 155 N.R. 159; 49 C.P.R.(3d) 217 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 439 (T.D.). have clearly held that s. 6(5) of the
Act
indicates in a nonexhaustive way the circumstances that must be considered in determining whether there is a reasonable possibility of confusion between disputed trademarks.
[20]
In the case at bar, the evidence on the record is clear concerning the circumstances listed in paragraphs (b), (c) and (d). The parties to this appeal operate the same kind of business and provide similar services. Similarly, the trademarks in question enjoy some recognition in this country. Furthermore, the appellant registered and began using its trademark in Canada even prior to the respondent's registration application. The appellant has also advertised its trademark "Comfort Inn".
[21]
Now let us examine paragraph 6(5)(a) of the
Act
, which refers to the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks. The Registrar found, in relation to this paragraph, that neither of the disputed trademarks has a strong inherent distinctiveness. Hughes has articulated the following principle concerning the inherent distinctiveness of a trademark, in his treatise on trademarks:
"A strong, inherently distinctive trademark is one consisting of a striking inventive name or an original design, and as such, will be entitled to a wide scope of protection; on the other hand a trademark lacking these qualities is inherently less distinctive and is considered to be a weaker mark; the ambit of protection afforded to a weak mark is much less than for a strong mark, and registration of other marks containing comparatively small differences may be permitted." (Supra, para. 17, at ยง 63.)
[22]
In the case at bar, the Registrar did not err in arriving at such a decision. On the one hand, the "Comfort Inn" trademark is composed of two words that are common in the English language. Its intrinsic originality is therefore minimal. On the other hand, the "Confortel" trademark is of course an invented word, although it is true that the suffix "TEL" is one that is frequently used in the hotel industry and the term confort ("comfort") is not in itself original. Accordingly, the trademark "Comfort Inn" should be given less extended protection, since it has little inherent distinctiveness.
[23]
I must now look at s. 6(5)(e) of the
Act
, the degree of resemblance between the trademarks involved in this litigation.
[24]
In this case, I am of the opinion that the Registrar erred in concluding that "the differences between the marks 'Comfort Inn' and 'Confortel' outweigh their similarities when the marks are considered in their totality".
[25]
There is substantial similarity in sound between the two trademarks in question. Both use a term with a similar phonetic rendering: "Comfort" for the appellant, and "Confor" for the respondent, notwithstanding that one term is English and the other is French. Joyal, J., wrote the following on the matter in
101482  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 505 (T.D.).
"Etymological or phonetic equivalence in either of our two official languages creates a new dimension in implementing the provisions of s. 12(1) of the
Trade-marks Act
. A mark under paragraph 12(1)(b) may be descriptive in one language and not in another. It may be descriptive because of the way it is written or the way it is pronounced."
[26]
The impression that the average consumer gets when confronted with these two trademarks is therefore largely influenced by this similarity, since the first word in a trademark is of primary importance. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).)
[27]
Similarly, there is a strong resemblance in terms of the ideas suggested by the disputed trademarks. Although I am not prepared to accept the appellant's argument that the mark "Confortel" is a translated version of the mark "Comfort Inn", both evoke feelings of comfort and ease.
[28]
Furthermore, the appellant introduced as evidence the findings of Ms. Ruth M. Corbin, president of Decision Resources Inc., a company that specializes in researching consumer behaviour. This company conducted an Omnibus survey to determine whether there is a risk of confusion between the two marks. More than 1,100 English-speaking persons, selected at random across Canada, were polled. I agree that the average consumer of hotel services should be considered a member of the general public, since such services are addressed to all layers of the population. And despite the fact that this survey was aimed primarily at the English-speaking market in Canada, s. 6(5)(e) will nevertheless apply if there is a reasonable risk of confusion in either of the official languages of Canada. This principle has been expressed by this court in these words:
"Under paragraph 12(1)(d), a mark may create confusion in one language but not in the other. The legal rule and the 'first impression' principle in one language do not necessarily affect a mark pronounced in the other. The result is that the considerations which must be applied to a particular situation are more numerous and in fact impose a double and reciprocal test." (Supra, para. 25.)
[29]
In this case, the survey indicates that the majority of the average consumers of the services of the parties hereto who vaguely recall the mark "Comfort Inn" and who later see the mark "Confortel" may think the latter is held by the same company as the former.
[30]
The report by Ms. Ruth M. Corbin obviously is not binding on this court, which yields to no one in its assessment of the facts. However, this survey is a tool that we cannot dismiss, since it provides additional evidence that there is a reasonable risk of confusion between the appellant's "Comfort Inn" trademark and the respondent's "Confortel" trademark evidence that the respondent was unable to contradict or even challenge.
[31]
Accordingly, I am persuaded that the appellant has discharged its burden by demonstrating that the Registrar erred, since the respondent was unable to establish that there is not a reasonable possibility of confusion between the appellant's "Comfort Inn" trademark and the respondent's "Confortel" trademark, bearing in mind all the circumstances of this case.
[32]
For these reasons, I am of the opinion that the Registrar erred in rejecting the appellant's opposition and allowing the respondent's application for registration TMO 623,214.
[33]
This appeal is allowed. There is no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/kaw