[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review from a decision by the Refugee Division that she [sic] is not a Convention Refugee.
Facts:
[2]
The Refugee Division found the following testimony by the applicant to be credible.
[3]
The applicant is an Israeli citizen. She left her country of origin, the Ukraine, to settle in Israel on November 3, 1990 and lived there until November 2, 1992. On that date she arrived in Canada and claimed refugee status on account of her membership in a particular social group, her religion and nationality.
[4]
On February 22, 1990 the applicant and her husband obtained an invitation for Israel and arrived in the town of Ashod on or about November 3, 1990. From the very first day the applicant suffered incidents of harassment, threats, dismissals and difficulty in finding accommodation.
[5]
At school her daughter was shunned by other students and was even on one occasion beaten by students as she was returning home.
[6]
On February 22, 1991 the applicant was attacked by two neighbours.
[7]
In March 1991, before the feast of "Purim", when the children were in costume, her daughter was hit with sticks by other children. Her notebooks were torn up and she was warned that if she came to the evening celebration at the school she would never be able to return home.
[8]
On her arrival the applicant took courses in Hebrew and looked for work. She was denied all work because she was not Jewish. She even tried to get work as a domestic, but without success.
[9]
In April 1991 the applicant was attacked by the owner's brother in a confrontation over her non-Kosher kitchen. Neighbours came in but they took the side of the attackers. Her husband telephoned the police when he arrived but they refused to do anything.
[10]
Finally, in June 1991 the family moved to another town in Israel, Ashkalon, because the husband had found work. They bought an apartment and the applicant again tried to find work, but unfortunately without success.
[11]
In August 1991, after much difficulty, she succeeded in finding work as a waitress in a restaurant. However, she was not allowed to serve people and was constantly insulted. She was also attacked and threatened by other waitresses and on one occasion her employment card was stolen (as a result, she was not paid for one week).
[12]
The situation also got worse for her daughter. The same harassment occurred again at her new school. She became increasingly upset and even said she wanted to commit suicide. The applicant began to fear for her emotional stability.
[13]
In mid-October 1991, after completing her work, the applicant was attacked by two waiters from the restaurant. They dragged her into the bushes and tore at her hair and blouse. A car came by and the waiters left, threatening her that this would not be the last time.
[14]
In early November she was dismissed. She began working in a fruit packing plant.
[15]
In addition, the neighbors began open welfare. Each time the applicant and her family left the house, they threw bottles and garbage at them. They called the police when the husband was working at the house and they assembled and knocked on the door of the house, threatening the family with physical reprisals.
[16]
The attacks and harassment continued without interruption. Finally, in late September the applicant's daughter threatened to kill herself if she was not taken away from Israel. The husband had to stay in Israel to earn money to reimburse the government, but the applicant decided to leave with her daughter. The Ministry of Internal Affairs refused to issue the daughter a passport because she was not a Jewess and so not a citizen of Israel. At that point, they took the applicant's passport and indicated in it that she was Russian.
[17]
On October 6, 1992 the husband applied to the Zionist Forum to obtain an exit document for his daughter and the family received the document on October 21, 1992. On November 1, 1992 the applicant and her daughter left for the airport but the daughter was not allowed to leave.
Issues:
(1) Did the panel err in finding that the applicant's experiences were problems associated with settling into a new country and that no credible basis had been established for her fear?
(2) Did the panel err in finding that the applicant could obtain protection from the Israeli authorities?
Analysis
[18]
There is clearly a qualitative difference between treatment which is discriminatory and treatment which amounts to persecution. In the
Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status
, published by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, it states under the heading "Discrimination":
"54 ... Persons who receive less favourable treatment as a result of such differences are not necessarily victims of persecution. It is only in certain circumstances that discrimination will amount to persecution. This would be so
if measures of discrimination lead to consequences of a substantially prejudicial nature for the person concerned, e.g. serious restrictions on his right to earn his livelihood, his right to practise his religion or his access to normally available educational facilities
.
"55 Where measures of discrimination are, in themselves, not of a serious character, they may nevertheless give rise to a reasonable fear of persecution if they produce, in the mind of the person concerned, a feeling of apprehension and insecurity as regards his future existence. Whether or not such measures of discrimination in themselves amount to persecution must be determined in light of all the circumstances. A claim to fear of persecution will of course be stronger where a person has been the victim of a number of discriminatory measures of this type and where there is thus a cumulative element involved."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  dividing line between persecution and discrimination or harassment is difficult to establish, the more so since, in the refugee law context, it has been found that discrimination may very well be seen as amounting to persecution. It is true also that the identification of persecution behind incidents of discrimination or harassment is not purely a question of fact but a mixed question of law and fact, legal concepts being involved. It remains, however, that, in all cases, it is for the Board to draw the conclusion in a particular context by proceeding with a careful analysis of the evidence adduced and a proper balancing of the various elements contained therein, and the intervention for this court is not warranted unless the conclusion reached appears to be capricious or unreasonable."
[19]
In the circumstances I feel that the panel erred in characterizing the problems encountered by the applicant as discrimination. The cumulative effect of what happened to her leads me to conclude that the discriminatory treatment she received amounted to persecution:
- sexual assault;
- repeated assault;
- a host of incidents of harassment directed against her and the members of her family;
- repeated dismissals;
- insults and threats from her neighbors;
- problems finding accommodation;
- problems encountered by her daughter at school and the attacks suffered (she was even beaten by other students).
[20]
In light of the documentary evidence in the record corroborating what the applicant related (namely that non-Jews are harassed and mistreated), all these events cannot be looked at in isolation. These discriminatory actions had serious consequences for the right to earn a livelihood and the right of access to educational institutions and, there can be no doubt, engendered a strong feeling of insecurity as to what her fate would be. In such a situation, could she avail herself of protection from the state? The question now must be whether the applicant could obtain state protection.
State Protection
[21]
The definitive comment on this point is contained in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada. La Forest, J., concluded at 689 (Quoted portion is at p. 717 - Tr.) that:
"... persecution under the Convention includes situations where the state is not in strictness an accomplice to the persecution, but is simply unable to protect its citizens."
[22]
The claimant has the burden of establishing that the state is unable to protect its nationals and that his or her refusal to seek such protection is reasonable. At 724, La Forest, J., states:
"... clear and convincing confirmation of a state's inability to protect must be provided. For example, a claimant might advance testimony of similarly situated individuals let down by the state protection arrangement
or the claimant's testimony of past personal incidents in which state protection did not materialize
. Absent some evidence, the claim should fail, as nations should be presumed capable of protecting their citizens ... Absent a situation of complete breakdown of state apparatus, such as that recognized in Lebanon in
Zalzali
, it should be assumed that the state is capable of protecting a claimant." (my emphasis)
[23]
The applicant related two incidents in which she filed complaints with the police and in which state protection did not materialize. In my opinion, this evidence suffices to justify the applicant's reluctance to seek protection from the state.
[24]
The application for judicial review is allowed and the matter is referred back for a re-hearing before a panel of different members.
[25]
After examining the questions submitted by counsel for the parties, I consider that there is nothing here for certification.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/clh