[1]
McNair, J.
: This is an appeal by the plaintiffs from an order of the Senior Prothonotary made on October 19, 1988, wherein he allowed all the amendments contained in the plaintiffs' amended statement of claim, with the one exception of a claim for interest. In fact, it is the exception which forms the subject matter of the appeal. The only stated ground of appeal is that the learned Senior Prothonotary erred in refusing an order permitting the plaintiffs to amend the statement of claim to claim interest. The plaintiffs' application also seeks an order permitting them to amend their statement of claim in that behalf, pursuant to Federal Court Rules 336(5), 303, 420, 425 and 427.
[2]
The action is one for the alleged infringement of two patents, where the infringing acts complained of were committed in the Province of Quebec. Paragraph 25(a) of the amended statement of claim sets out a claim for a declaration as to the alleged patent infringements, with particulars thereof. Paragraph 25(b) of the prayer for relief is the one germane to this appeal, and reads:
"25(b) Damages in the amount of two million dollars ($ 2,000,000), or an accounting of profits from each of the defendants, as the plaintiffs may elect, for all of the defendants' infringing acts,
together with such interest as the law allows, including in particular interest pursuant to Article 1056(c) of the
Civil Code of the Province of Quebec
.
" (My emphasis)
[3]
In response to the plaintiffs' motion for an order permitting the amendments sought by the amended statement of claim, the learned prothonotary made the following order:
"After hearing arguments of counsel, this motion is granted for amendments to the statement of claim on the ground of rules 303, 420, 426, 427, section 38 of the
Federal Court Act
, the chapter on the prescription of the
Civil Code
, as follows: page 1, 2A, 7 and 8 except from the word:
'together with such interest ... to Province of Quebec'
." (My emphasis)
[4]
Obviously, the full text of the exception which the prothonotary disallowed by his order is that which is contained in the underlined portion of paragraph 25(b) aforesaid.
[5]
Article 1056c of the Civil Code of Quebec provides as follows:
"Art. 1056c. The amount awarded by judgment for damages resulting from an offence or a quasi-offence shall bear interest at the legal rate as from the date when the action at law was instituted.
"There may be added to the amount so awarded an indemnity computed by applying to the amount, from such date, a percentage equal to the excess of the interest rate fixed according to section 28 of the Act respecting the Ministère du Revenu (R.S.Q., chapter M-31) over the legal interest rate."
[6]
It should be noted that no specific grounds of objection were set forth in the notice of appeal as contemplated by rule 336(5), which has been held sufficient in some cases to warrant dismissing the appeal out of hand. Perhaps these can be taken to be implicit from the specific references to the Federal Court Rules relating to amendments generally, coupled with the relatively clear delineation of the particular amendments sought in this instance. In any event, the point was not raised in argument.
[7]
It is now authoritatively settled that an appeal from an order or decision of a prothonotary is to be treated as an appeal and not a trial de novo and should not be overturned by the judge sitting on appeal therefrom unless it has been demonstrated that the prothonotary was clearly wrong in law or on the facts, or that there was some other compelling reason requiring appellate interference: see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 261-262; and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  appeal, being discretionary, should be overruled only if the motions judge were clearly wrong on the facts, or proceeded on an erroneous principle of law, or his decision resulted in some injustice to the appellant."
[8]
Counsel for the plaintiffs points out that the infringing acts were committed in the Province of Quebec, but that there may be grounds for believing that the defendants may be selling the infringing articles in other provinces of Canada. He points out that the statement of defence pleads the limitations statutes not only of Quebec, but also of Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia. He says that the reference to art. 1056c in the proposed amendment has the purposive intent of extending the claim for damages to include allowable prejudgment interest as contemplated by the said article. Counsel for the plaintiffs relies particularly on Federal Court Rules 424 and 427, which read as follows:
"424. Where an application to the court for leave to make an amendment mentioned in rule 425, 426 or 427 is made after any relevant period of limitation current at the date of commencement of the action has expired, the court may, nevertheless, grant such leave in the circumstances mentioned in that rule if it seems just to do so.
"427. An amendment may be allowed under rule 424 notwithstanding that the effect of the amendment will be to add or substitute a new cause of action if the new cause of action arises out of the same facts or substantially the same facts as a cause of action in respect of which relief has already been claimed in the action by the party applying for leave to make the amendment."
[9]
Plaintiffs' counsel stresses the point that the amendment to include prejudgment interest does not add a new cause of action; rather, it is simply an amendment to the quantum of damages claimed. Alternatively, he contends that even if the effect of the amendment is to add or substitute a new cause of action, then it is one arising out of the same facts giving rise to the original cause of action within the meaning of rule 427. Such being the case, he argues that the combined effect of rules 427 and 424 is sufficient in the circumstances to permit the court to override the two year period of limitation prescribed by art. 2261. The final submission is that the amendment should have been allowed and not dismissed on summary motion so that the merits of the prescription question could be fully adjudicated at trial.
[10]
Although plaintiffs' counsel made passing reference to the possible application of rule 5, the so-called "gap rule", it is common ground that the applicable statutory provision is s. 38(1) of the Federal Court Act, which reads:
"38(1) Except as expressly provided by any other Act, the laws relating to prescription and the limitation of actions in force in any province between subject and subject apply to any proceedings in the court in respect of any cause of action arising in such province, and a proceeding in the court in respect of a cause of action arising otherwise than in a province shall be taken within and not after six years after the cause of action arose."
[11]
Counsel for the defendants submits that the plaintiffs have failed to demonstrate on balance of probability that the prothonotary was clearly wrong in disallowing the amendment to claim prejudgment interest. That being so, she maintains his decision must be upheld. She further submits that s. 38 of the Federal Court Act automatically brings into play article 2261 of the Quebec Civil Code, which provides, inter alia, as follows:
"Art. 2261. The following actions are prescribed by two years;
. . . . .
"2. For damages resulting from offences or quasi-offences, whenever other provisions do not apply;"
[12]
The result, in her submission, is that the claim for prejudgment interest is not only statute-barred as being outside the limitation period, but is absolutely extinguished as a legitimate claim because the delay for prescription period under the Quebec Civil Code had long since expired. Defendants' counsel makes the forcible argument that the amendment to allow interest raises in actual fact a new and separate claim from the claim for damages. This, she asserts, is the real reason why the learned Senior Prothonotary disallowed the final amendment with respect to interest. In support of her submissions, defendants' counsel relies strongly on  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the headnote of which reads as follows:
"Following the trial of a petition of right for damages against the Crown on the ground of negligence by employees of CRTC, the trial judge held that the negligence pleaded was not established, but instead of dismissing the petition gave the suppliant thirty days in which to apply for leave to amend his petition by alleging negligence other than that pleaded.
"Held, rejecting an objection to the suppliant's application:
1. The order granting suppliant leave to amend his pleading was authorized by Federal Court Rule 496(2).
2. While Federal Court Rule 424 does not permit an amendment which sets up a new cause of action after expiration of the delay for prescription under Quebec law, prescription in this case was interrupted by the institution of the action."
[13]
If I apprehend correctly the argument of defendants' counsel, she relies particularly on the observation made by Mr. Justice Pratte on the scope of rule 424 as a rule of procedure with respect to the limitation of actions, where he said at p. 1139:
"... the rules of Quebec law relating to short prescriptions are not rules of procedure, and because of this, when they are applicable under section 38 of the Act, their effect cannot be altered by rule 424."
[14]
With respect, I consider that the true ratio of the case is that which is set out in item 2 of the headnote, as more fully expounded by Pratte, J., at p. 1140:
"By bringing an action suppliant interrupted the prescription; in other words, he took the necessary step to protect the claim which by his petition of right he is seeking to have enforced. Suppliant is not seeking to amend his petition of right so as to assert a right other than that on which prescription was interrupted; he only wants to allege new facts establishing the existence of the same right."
[15]
The case was affirmed on appeal, sub nom.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the plaintiff instituted an action within the one year prescribed by art. 2262 of the Civil Code for damages for bodily injuries resulting from a motor vehicle accident, and some twenty-five months later claimed an additional amount of damages by way of incidental demand. The trial judge maintained the action and awarded damages on both the principal and the incidental demands. The Court of Appeal maintained the action, but rejected the incidental demand as being prescribed. On appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada, the court held that the judgment at trial should be restored since the incidental demand was not prescribed.
[17]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , held that Federal Court Rules 424 and 425 did not conflict with the prescription provisions of the Civil Code so as to prevent an amendment correcting the misnomer of a party defendant after the expiry of the prescription period, where it could be seen from the substance of the proceedings that the true defendant had been a party thereto from the beginning, even though incorrectly described. Mr. Justice Pigeon, delivering the judgment of the court, made the following statement regarding  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  to increase a claim beyond the amount of the original action. ... the decision was later reversed unanimously in this court. After citing arts. 2262, 2264, 2265 as well as 2242, Taschereau, J., as he then was, said for the court (at p. 451):
[Translation] 'With all possible respect for those holding contrary views, I am of the opinion that when an action for damages is instituted within the proper time, it interrupts the prescription, which begins to run again only after the final judgment. It follows that during the proceedings the plaintiff may, depending on the circumstances, claim, by means of an incidental demand or an amendment, additional damages resulting from the same cause of action....'"
[18]
Applying the interruption principle enunciated in the Lussier and Couture cases, it is my opinion that the claim for prejudgment interest is but an additional item to the amount of damages claimed in the patent infringement action for which the prescription period had been interrupted. Consequently, I am impelled to the conclusion that the learned prothonotary erred in law in disallowing the amendment to claim prejudgment interest on the ground that the expiry of the short prescription period imposed by art. 2261 of the Civil Code prevented such an amendment in the circumstances of the case.
[19]
For these reasons, the plaintiffs' appeal is allowed with the result that the amendment contained in paragraph 25(b) of the amended statement of claim with respect to prejudgment interest is permitted to stand. This leaves only the matter of costs. In my view, a proper disposition of costs would be to make no order as to the costs of this appeal, since the whole of the proceedings were occasioned by the plaintiffs' failure to plead properly in the first instance, but to allow the defendants their costs of the motion to amend in any event of the cause. An order will go accordingly.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]