[1]
Joyal, J.
: The court is seized with an application for judicial review pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
to quash a decision of the Veterans Appeal Board rendered on August 23, 1993, denying the applicant a pension entitlement under s. 21(1) of the
Pension Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-6, for injuries sustained in an automobile accident in Cyprus in 1990.
Background
[2]
The applicant is 28 years old. He joined the Regular Force of the Canadian Armed Forces in 1987. From June 5, 1990, he was on duty with the Canadian Contingent of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force in Syria, which has been designated by the Governor-in-Council as a Special Duty Area for the purpose of the
Pension Act
.
[3]
The applicant requested a pass to leave Syria in order to meet his fiancee in Israel, from where they would travel to Cyprus to be married. It would seem that the military authorities were quite supportive and interested in the issue of an interracial marriage taking place in Cyprus. They helped organize the journey and even arranged for the applicant to report to the U.N. peacekeeping camp in Cyprus. A Canadian Forces Personal Assistance Fund loan of $1,000 was also given to him to finance his trip.
[4]
The evidence shows that he was granted a 60 hour pass from his Syria posting which commenced on November 10, 1990, and a three day United Nations Leave which commenced on November 14, 1990. After work on November 9, 1990, the applicant left his camp and arrived at his fiancee's home in Tiberias, Israel, in the late evening. The next day the couple went to Haifa, Israel, and took the ferry to Cyprus, arriving the next morning at the U.N. Leave Centre in Limmassol, Cyprus.
[5]
On November 13, 1990, while they were sightseeing, the applicant and his fiancee were involved in a motor vehicle accident. The applicant sustained multiple injuries:
- Fractured dislocation right knee;
- Comminuted fracture of the medial femoral condyle left knee;
- Fractured right wrist;
- Colles fractured left wrist;
- Undisplaced fractured right ankle with comminution all tarsal bone;
- Fractured dislocation left ankle;
- Compound nasal fracture with laceration right cheek;
- Compound fractured first metacarpal left thumb.
[6]
On December 17, 1990, the applicant filed an application with the Canadian Pension Commission pursuant to the
Pension Act
. The Commission rendered its decision on April 25, 1991, declaring the accident "attributable to service in a Special Duty Area (Cyprus) with entitlement effective the 17th of December, 1990". As a result of this decision, he was awarded a monthly pension of $1,427.68, pursuant to s. 21(1) of the
Pension Act
. Subsequently, on February 5, 1991, the applicant was found to be 65% disabled as a result of the accident.
[7]
On September 25, 1991, Col. S.H. Forster, Director of Personnel Legal Services for the Chief of the Defence Staff at the Department of National Defence, wrote to the Chairman of the Commission giving his understanding of how the
Pension Act
and related legislation would apply to a case such as the applicant's. By letter dated January 23, 1992, the Commission wrote to Col. Forster and informed him that the "Insurance Principle" under the
Pension Act
does not exclude serving members from being protected if they are on Leave from a Special Duty Area.
[8]
However, as a result of the letter dated September 25, 1991, from the Department of National Defence, the Commission decided, on January 27, 1992, to amend its first decision to reflect that the pension was awarded in relation to the applicant's posting in Syria as a Special Duty area rather than Cyprus.
[9]
In a further letter to the Commission, dated February 26, 1992, Col. Forster stated that he disagreed with the Commission's finding that a person in the applicant's position was entitled to a pension. On April 3, 1992, the Commission rendered a further amended decision. It stated that the injuries sustained by the applicant were "not attributable to service in a Special Duty Area (Syria)" and therefore not pensionable under s. 21(1) of the
Act
.
[10]
By letter dated April 14, 1992, the Commission informed Col. Forster that it had decided to reject the applicant's request for a pension. This rejection was based upon Col. Forster's reasoning that a member is not entitled to a pension when he is on leave outside the Special Duty Area to which he is assigned.
[11]
The applicant appealed the Commission's decision to the Entitlement Board. It denied the applicant's eligibility on June 3, 1992.
[12]
That decision was appealed to the Veterans Appeal Board and was heard on March 11, 1993. On August 26, 1993, the applicant received the Board's decision dated August 23, 1993, in which it confirmed the Entitlement Board's decision.
[13]
The applicant seeks judicial review of this decision.
The Veterans Appeal Board Decision
[14]
The Board interpreted the Vote 58A of the
Appropriation Act, No. 10, 1964
and the
Pension Act
to mean that
"Injuries incurred on any other type of leave will be covered under s. 21(1) when the leave was taken within the Special Duty Area where the member was serving. Once the member leaves the Special Duty Area, the Board must conclude that he reverts to his s. 21(2) coverage as the special coverage appears to only be extended while the member is serving in the Special Duty Area in the circumstances of this case, Special Duty Area (Syria)."
[15]
The Board recognized that this case caused difficulties since the injuries were incurred within a Special Duty Area, but not within the one to which he was posted. In any event, it still concluded that because the applicant was not disabled in his Special Duty Area, he could not be covered under s. 21(1).
Issues
[16]
The issues to be examined are outlined as follows: (a) whether the Canadian Pension Commission had jurisdiction to reverse a decision which had a reasonable basis in law; (b) whether the applicant was denied procedural fairness and natural justice when the Commission reversed its original decision without permitting the applicant an opportunity to be heard; and (c) how should Vote 58A of the
Appropriation Act
and the
Pension Act
be interpreted in similar circumstances?
The Law
[17]
Section 21(1)(a) and (f) of the
Pension Act
reads:
"21(1) In respect of military service rendered during World War I or World War II and subject to the exception contained in subs. (2),
(a) where a member of the forces suffers disability resulting from an injury or disease or an aggravation thereof that was attributable to or was incurred during such military service, a pension shall, on application, be awarded to or in respect of the member in accordance with the rates for basic and additional pension set out in Schedule I;
(f) no pension shall be paid for disability or death incurred by a member of the forces,
(i) while on leave of absence without pay, or
(ii) during a period of absence without leave for which the pay of the member was stopped, or
(iii) when the member of the forces has, during leave of absence with pay, undertaken an occupation that is unconnected with military service,
unless the disability or death was attributable to that military service;"
[18]
Vote 58A of Schedule B of the
Appropriation Act, No. 10, 1964
reads:
"... To authorize the Governor-in-Council to designate by order as a special duty area any area outside Canada in which an officer or man or former officer or man of the Canadian Forces is or has been required to serve on or subsequent to the first day of January 1949; and thereupon the Pension Act shall apply to and in respect of every officer and man or former officer or man of the Canadian Forces in respect of his service in such area on or subsequent to that date while the order is in force in respect thereto or during such later period as the order may specify as though such service were military service (other than service rendered in the nonpermanent active militia or in the reserve army) rendered during World War II within the meaning of the Pension Act and as though the service described in paragraph (v) of s. 2 of that Act include service in such special duty area in any of the services during such period ..."
[19]
Section 108 of the
Pension Act
reads:
"108. The Commission and every Entitlement Board shall, in determining the entitlement of an applicant to an award and in assessing the extent of the disability of a member of the forces,
(a) draw from all the circumstances of the case and all the evidence presented to it every reasonable inference in favour of the applicant or member;
(b) accept any uncontradicted evidence presented to it by the applicant or member that it considers to be credible in the circumstances; and
(c) resolve in favour of the applicant or member any doubt, in the weighing of evidence, as to whether the applicant or member has established a case."
[20]
Section 10(5) of the
Veterans Appeal Board Act
, R.S.C. 1985 (3rd Supp.), c. 20, reads:
"10(5) In all appeals to the Board, the Board shall
(a) draw from all the circumstances of the case and all the evidence presented to it every reasonable inference in favour of the appellant;
(b) accept any uncontradicted evidence presented to it by the appellant that it considers to be credible in the circumstances; and
(c) resolve in favour of the appellant any doubt, in the weighing of evidence, as to whether the appellant has established a case."
[21]
Section 88(1.1) of the
Pension Act
reads:
"88(1.1) The Commission may not cancel or reduce a pension by reason of a change in the basis of entitlement until the pensioner has been given an opportunity to be heard by an Entitlement Board."
[22]
Section 84(1) of the
Pension Act
reads:
"84(1) An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision of the Commission under s. 83 may make a second application to the Commission."
The Parties' Position
[23]
This is an unusual matter as both parties agreed on the substantive issues but nevertheless wanted the court to adjudicate on the matter.
[24]
Both parties agree that the Veterans Appeal Board decision should be quashed on either of two grounds. First, the Commission breached a principle of natural justice when it accepted outside correspondence and did not allow the applicant to respond. This decision was not cured by the Veterans Appeal Board. Second, by virtue of the principle of "functus officio", the Commission had lost jurisdiction. The parties agreed that the Commission, once it had granted a pension to the applicant, could no longer reverse its decision. Section 88(1.1) of the
Pension Act
provides that the Entitlement Board should have been constituted if the Commission wanted to reverse the entitlement.
[25]
Counsel agreed that the principle of "functus officio" should be the main reason for granting certiorari, since this would mean that both the Entitlement Board and the Veterans Appeal Board had also lost jurisdiction and that the matter should be remitted back to the Commission. To quash due to the breach of natural justice would mean that the matter would be sent back to the Veterans Appeal Board since it can hold a full hearing and cure whatever breach has occurred.
[26]
What the parties request from this court is an interpretation of the application of Vote 58A of the
Appropriation Act
and of the
Pension Act
in similar factual circumstances to those of the applicant. This would help to direct the Commission in future cases.
[27]
The parties' opinion as to what the interpretation should be is as follows:
1. It is clear from Vote 58A of the
Appropriation Act
, that once an individual enters a Special Duty Area, the provisions in the
Pension Act
that apply to an individual who served in World War II also apply to the individual in the Special Duty Area until such time as his service ends in that Special Duty Area. For the applicant, that period was from June 5 to December 5, 1990, and his injuries were incurred during that posting. Vote 58A and the
Pension Act
should be read in harmony. Since the applicant was posted in a Special Duty Area, since s. 21(1)(f) explicitly excludes from pension entitlement certain types of leave, and since s. 10(5) of the
Veterans Appeal Board Act
and s. 108 of the
Pension Act
provide that in case of doubt the decision should favour the claimant, the applicant should be entitled to a pension.
2. The applicant was granted a 60 hour pass, which Canadian Forces policy deems to be duty time as opposed to leave time. Since the accident occurred during that 60 hour pass, the applicant's injuries which occurred while on duty are pensionable under s. 21(1).
Analysis
[28]
I will start by confirming that the Veterans Appeal Board decision should be quashed. The second decision of the Commission, which simply modified the location of the Special Duty Area, is not being challenged by the parties. This amendment made by the Commission would probably fall under one of the exceptions to the principle of "functus officio" stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 321; 70 Alta. L.R.(2d) 193; 62 D.L.R.(4th) 577, at p. 860, that is where there had been a slip in drawing it up, or where there was an error in expressing the manifest intention of the court.
[29]
However, when the Commission rendered its third decision and reversed the entitlement, it had lost jurisdiction. As stated by the Federal Court of Appeal in
Ministre de l'Emploi et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 426:
"[...] a tribunal exercising adjudicative powers may not retry a matter after it has disposed of that matter in accordance with the
Act
, unless it is expressly authorized to do so by its enabling legislation. This is the well-known principle of 'functus officio'."
[30]
Since the
Act
did not provide for the Commission to reverse its decision, it was "functus officio" when it decided to change the applicant's entitlement to pension. It follows that both the Entitlement Board and the Veterans Appeal Board were not properly seized of the matter. The case should then be sent back to the Commission.
[31]
There is no doubt that a breach of natural justice also occurred. The Commission should not let itself be influenced by outside concerns, unless it gives an opportunity to the applicant to be heard. If in such circumstances the Commission has become "functus officio", as it was the case in this situation, it should request the constitution of an Entitlement Board pursuant to s. 88(1.1).
[32]
Having said that, I will attempt to direct the Commission as to what interpretation should be given to Vote 58A and the
Pension Act
.
[33]
Vote 58A provides that the "Pension Act shall apply to and in respect of every officer and man or former officer or man of the Canadian Forces in respect of his services in such area" [that is, a Special Duty Area]. The relevant provision of the
Pension Act
, pertaining to disability resulting from an injury incurred in a Special Duty Area, is s. 21(1).
[34]
Vote 58A refers to "in respect of his service", while s. 21(1) refers to "incurred during such military service". Reading both of these provisions in harmony, I must conclude that the applicant must have been in service in order to be eligible for a pension. What does being in "military service" imply or include? The
Pension Act
provides no helpful guide, as s. 3(1) defines the term as such:
"3(1) 'military service' or 'service' means service in the Canadian Forces or in the naval, army or air forces of Canada since the commencement of World War I;"
[35]
The first clue may be what is not defined as "service" for the purposes of a pension in cases of injuries. This is found in s. 21(1)(f) of the
Pension Act
: a member of the Forces is not in "service" if he gets injured while he is on leave without pay, while his pay is stopped due to unauthorized absences, or if he undertakes an occupation unconnected with military service.
[36]
The term as such has never been defined but a couple of cases may be used as guidelines.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), affd. [1982] 2 F.C. 376 (F.C.A.), revd. [1983] 2 S.C.R. 362, the plaintiff was a member of the Canadian Armed Forces who suffered a severe cardiac infarction. He underwent two coronary by-pass operations and while he was in convalescence at the National Defence Medical Centre, the plaintiff received an incorrect blood transfusion with the wrong blood type. The transfusional shock aggravated his situation and the plaintiff was declared 80% disabled. The plaintiff sued the Crown in tort. On the facts, at the trial level, Marceau, J. (as he then was), had to contend with two statutes, namely the
Pension Act
and the
Crown Liability Act
.
[37]
Section 12(2) of the
Pension Act
, at that time, read as follows:
"12. [...]
"(2) In respect of military service rendered in the nonpermanent active militia or in the reserve army during World War II and in respect of military service in peace time, pension shall be awarded to or in respect of members of the forces who have suffered disability, in accordance with the rates set out in Schedule A, and in respect of members of the forces who have died, in accordance with the rates set out in Schedule B, when the injury or disease or aggravation thereof resulting in disability or death in respect of which the application for pension is made
arose out of or was directly connected with such military service
." (Underlining mine)
[38]
Under s. 4 of the
Crown Liability Act
, the plaintiff was precluded from suing the Crown in tort if the injury or disability was pensionable. Marceau, J., decided that the disability was pensionable. At p. 425, he states:
"Under the
National Defence Act
(R.S.C. 1970, c. N-4), military service is continuous and total and a soldier is at all times subject to the orders and instructions of his superiors. Plaintiff was moved to the National Defence Medical Centre and admitted on the instructions of his superiors, and the treatment he underwent was prescribed and administered at the request of his superiors. He was treated as a member of the military, by others in the military, in a military facility. I think it clear that the acts which he complains of were committed in connection with his military service and that the resulting disability on which his claim is based 'arose out of or was directly connected with such military service'."
[39]
In the end, however, anticipating that he might, on appeal, be found in error, His Lordship then proceeded to deal with tort liability and fixed the quantum of damages at $120,975.
[40]
Marceau, J.'s, decision was confirmed by a majority of the Federal Court of Appeal, but later reversed by the Supreme Court of Canada. In a very brief judgment, that court found that the link between the damage suffered by the appellant and his status as a servicemen was "too tenuous for one to say that the damage is connected to his military service". Nevertheless, the court confirmed the liability issue and awarded damages to the appellant at the sum fixed by the trial judge.
[41]
It will be recognized that the term "directly connected" with military service was taken out of s. 12(2) of the
Pension Act
, a provision which imposed a stricter burden upon a member of the armed forces serving in peacetime.
[42]
In dealing with s. 21(1) of the
Pension Act
, as extended to peacekeeping forces under Vote 58A of the
Appropriation Act
, the case for the applicant rests on entitlement under wartime conditions, namely World War II, when any liability incurred is covered if "attributable to or was
incurred during such military service
". (Underlining mine)
[43]
It should therefore be observed that the range of pensionable disability available to a person in the applicant's position is markedly wider than that applicable to peacetime service as was the case in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. I should nevertheless conclude that the case is of some assistance in directing the court's mind to the differences in peacetime and wartime conditions of military service whenever a disability pension is at issue.
[44]
In
Chénier, Re
(1991) 136 N.R. 377 (F.C.A.), the Federal Court of Appeal dealt with s. 21 of the
Pension Act
. In that case, the applicant's husband, a member of the Canadian Forces, was killed while bicycling to work. He biked to and from work, 20 km each way, in order to follow a physical exercise program prescribed by his superiors.
[45]
The court felt that when the applicant's husband was killed, he was engaged in an activity "performed in the interest of the service although not authorized or organized by a military authority" pursuant to s. 21(3)(a), which reads as follows:
"21(3) For the purposes of subs. (2), an injury or disease, or the aggravation of an injury or disease, shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have arisen out of or to have been directly connected with military service of the kind described in that subsection if the injury or disease or the aggravation thereof was incurred in the course of
(a) any physical training or any sports activity in which the member was participating that was authorized or organized by a military authority, or performed in the interests of the service although not authorized or organized by a military authority;"
[46]
The court also added, referring to s. 10(5) of the
Veterans Appeal Board Act
:
"In our opinion, having regard to the requirement of [s. 10(5)] that it draw from the evidence 'every reasonable inference in favour of [the] applicant', the Board failed in the exercise of its jurisdiction when it summarily arrived at the conclusion that the late member was not engaged in such an activity without expressly dealing with the evidence from which an inference favourable to the applicant might have been drawn."
[47]
The court accordingly quashed the decision below and ordered that the matter be reconsidered by the respondent on a basis not inconsistent with the court's reasons.
[48]
It is obvious that each case, as to whether the member was "in service" at the moment the injuries occurred, will fall on its particular facts. But there are certain common elements in s. 21(1)(f) and the cases noted above: the knowledge of or control over the activity of the soldier by the authorities. But again, as stated by the Supreme Court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> relating, as I have said, to peacetime service, that control cannot be too remote. If the member is on leave without pay, for example, the authorities have no control over his activities. But if the member is granted leave with pay from his posting or duties, and the authorities have full knowledge of, or consent to his activities, he is, though not on duty, still in service. Further, if the activities of the member, while on his leisure time, are influenced by his superiors' orders, as was the case in
Chénier
, the member is in service.
[49]
There is evidence before me that the military authorities helped organize the applicant's trip, arranged for him to report to the U.N. Peacekeeping Base in Cyprus, and throughout, indicated interest in the incidence of a contemplated interracial or interfaith marriage. This, in my view, might be said to constitute "service", since the authorities granted the pass with full knowledge that the applicant was on his way to Israel and then Cyprus, with a military loan, and with the intention to marry once he had reported to the U.N. Leave Centre in Cyprus.
[50]
The other element favouring the applicant is that at the moment of the accident, the applicant was on duty, therefore "in service". The applicant's Commandant confirmed that the 60 hour pass authorized leave from November 10 to November 13, 1990, while the three day UN Leave extended it from November 14 to November 16, 1990. Since the accident occurred on November 13, 1990, it happened specifically during the first 60 hour leave that he had been granted. A 60 hour pass is considered, according to Canadian Armed Forces policy, to be duty time. Therefore, the applicant was in service when the accident occurred and he would thereby be entitled to a pension.
[51]
This finding, however, is based on the particular facts of the case before me, namely the knowledge and approval by military authorities of the applicant's intended course of action and, perhaps more technically, the casualty having occurred during what the Armed Forces call duty time. From the representations made to me at the hearing by counsel for both parties, I gather that the court is invited to define in a more general sense, under the law, the field of disability coverage of Canadian peacekeepers in military service in a designated area.
[52]
In my respectful view, the key provisions leading to pension entitlement may be found in both Vote 58A and the
Pension Act
. These two enactments are tied together and it may be said that any ambiguity in one of them may be resolved by the clear language of the other.
[53]
Vote 58A states that the
Pension Act
shall apply "in respect of" service in a designated area. That expression is often a bone of contention when it is analyzed in the context of facts or circumstances in a particular case. The expression certainly lends itself to a wider interpretation than say "when service is in a designated area" or "in relation to service in a designated area" or any other similar expression which would indicate clearly that the coverage only applies within the strict confines of the designated area to which a peacekeeper is appointed.
[54]
I find that the wording of the enactment is ambiguous and in order to interpret it and to discover the intentions of Parliament, regard must be had to the normal rules of interpretation as found in E.A. Driedger's seminal work
Construction of Statutes
at p. 33 et seq. The learned author sets out the various criteria to be examined, namely the reasonableness of the interpretation, the internal harmony with the rest of the enactment, and the object and scheme of the
Act
. There are other rules as well, namely that acts related to an enactment may be referred to in order to shed light on its meaning. In this respect, the author cites at p. 149 the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[55]
I note that in a contextual sense, Vote 58A goes on to say that the
Pension Act
shall apply ... as though such service were military service ... rendered during World War II within the meaning of the
Pension Act
.
[56]
Section 21(1) of the
Pension Act
, in turn, makes it evident that a pension is payable when any disability is incurred during military service during World War I and World War II, or as the French text says, "service militaire accompli pendant la Première Guerre Mondiale ou pendant la Deuxième Guerre Mondiale ...". A reading of the whole section leads me to conclude that the entitlement applies in all cases except those outlined in s. 21(1)(f) where again, however, by an exception to the exception, a pension is payable if disability or death under any circumstances is
attributable
to military service.
[57]
By this reference to the provisions of the
Pension Act
, I should conclude that the expression "in respect to service in such area" does not have the restricted meaning which was advanced by National Defence to the effect that pension coverage does not apply should a peacekeeper step one foot out of a designated area. Admittedly, the enactment is ambiguous but, with respect to contrary views, the provisions of the
Pension Act
, liberal and generous as they are, attract an equally liberal and generous interpretation of Vote 58A. In my view, no geographical limit is imposed. The enactment is meant to confer on a peacekeeper the status of a World War II combatant while his military service is in a designated area. As in World War II, when universal coverage applied, it should not matter one whit where the casualty occurs, as any World War II veteran will testify.
[58]
Furthermore, it may be said that if under World War II conditions, a disability is covered if it is not only attributable to military service but
incurred during military service
, then Vote 58A would be bereft of any substance. The role exercised by Canadian peacekeepers, in many ways more hazardous and more vulnerable to violent action than many of us might have experienced in World War II, invites a wide interpretation of Vote 58A and one which is more consistent with Parliament's intention. Otherwise, it would be, in my respectful view, a situation where the good Parliament hath given and hath taken away.
[59]
In the circumstances, therefore, the expression "in respect of his service in such designated area" must be interpreted in the sense that the
Pension Act
interprets it, i.e. the coverage applies if disability is incurred while a peacekeeper enjoys a World War II status by reason of his being in military service in a designated area. This, in my view, is consonant with the general intent and purpose of the
Pension Act
as expressed in s. 2 of the
Act
.
[60]
I should conclude that whether by reason of the particular facts surrounding the applicant's disability or by reason of my interpretation of both Vote 58A and the
Pension Act
, the Veterans Appeal Board decision should be quashed and the matter remitted back to the Commission for reconsideration pursuant to these directives.
[61]
The applicant has asked for costs. Although costs are not usually awarded in judicial review proceedings, I believe this is a special case. It is evident that the applicant has been made an innocent party to many adjudications until the issue reached this court. Furthermore, the issue brought before me is not limited to the individual interests of the applicant, but as the respondents admitted, it involves matters upon which either through these proceedings or by way of further proceedings on appeal, the court is to make a judicial determination relating to a question which might be raised again in other cases.
[62]
I should think that the awarding of a lump sum for costs would be of a nature to bring matters to an expeditious conclusion. I would therefore ask counsel to seek agreement as to quantum. Otherwise, I may be spoken to, and in the meantime, I remain seized of the case.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/gas
[End of document]