 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
German Hernandez Rodriguez, Irma Gabriela Ortiz Blanca and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FC 1331)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Martineau, J.
November 16, 2012.
Counsel:
Stewart Istvanffy, for the applicant;
Geneviève Bourbonnais and Sonia Bédard, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Étude Légale Stewart Istvanffy, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant;
Myles J. Kirvan, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. This case was originally cited as [2012] F.T.R. TBEd. NO.047.
[1]
Martineau, J.
[Translation]: The applicants are challenging the legality of the decision dated February 17, 2012, by the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board [the panel], rejecting their claim for refugee protection essentially because of a lack of credibility and subjective fear.
[2]
It is the second application for judicial review of a decision of the panel involving the applicants. On May 25, 2011, their application for refugee protection was rejected for the first time by Member Bissonnette. On May 25, 2011, the Federal Court quashed the first decision of the panel and referred the matter back for redetermination:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 1]. On February 17, 2012, Mr. Aronoff [Member] heard the matter
de novo
and rendered the decision being challenged today by the applicants.
[3]
At the outset, the applicant submits that the panel erred in law or otherwise showed a lack of respect towards the Court by failing to consider in its analysis the findings of Member Bissonnette and the judgment of the Court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 1. It should be noted that my colleague Justice Pinard reversed the first decision of the panel because the panel erred in determining the existence of state protection and, to a lesser degree, in its assessment of the evidence ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at paragraphs 10-12). With respect, the Court cannot accept the applicants' argument.
[4]
First, because it is a
de novo
hearing, the panel was not obliged to address only the question of state protection (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). However, given that the first decision was quashed, there is no
stare decisis
or res judicata, whether it involves questions of credibility or other aspects such as state protection (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Furthermore, it turns out that the panel did not repeat the errors identified by this Court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 1, especially since the impugned decision is based on evidence and reasoning in whole or in part different.
[5]
I now turn to the main reason for quashing the impugned decision, namely, that the panel allegedly ignored relevant evidence or rendered an otherwise unreasonable decision. There is no reason to intervene in this case. On the one hand, the findings of credibility made by the panel are clear, well articulated and based on the evidence on file. On the other hand, the allegations of reasonable apprehension of bias against the Member are not justified, nor are the other grounds raised by the applicants.
Applicants' Allegations
[6]
I will begin by summarizing the applicants' main allegations. As will be discussed further on, the panel did not find the allegations to be credible or supported by the evidence on the record.
[7]
The applicants are citizens of Mexico and base their fear of persecution or risk to life on the account of Irma Gabriela Ortiz Blanca [female applicant], wife of German Hernandez Rodriguez and the mother of German Hernandez Ortiz, their son. The female applicant fears a man called Rafael Pellegrin Breton with whom she did business in Puebla, Mexico.
[8]
Mr. Pellegrin Breton is a representative of a Mexican company which had a business relationship with the company of the female applicant for the acquisition of calling cards. However, on May 2, 2007, three federal police officers allegedly attempted to arrest the female applicant at her home, on the ground that Mr. Pellegrin Breton had instituted a criminal action against her allegedly for fraud or breach of trust. According to the female applicant, Mr. Pellegrin Breton - who was in collusion with the federal police - sought to implicate her in a fraud for which he was solely responsible.
[9]
On May 4, 2007, the female applicant retained the services of a lawyer who immediately brought an action to stay the arrest warrant. Once the stay was granted, according to the applicants, they left Mexico for Phoenix, Arizona, where they resided for 25 days. Owing to financial reasons, they did not go back to Puebla, but rather moved to Tuxtla, in the state of Chiapas, for four months, that is, until their lawyer informed them that the Federal Mexico Court rendered a favourable decision.
[10]
Upon their return to Puebla, the female applicant stated that she received threatening telephone calls. She allegedly tried to file a complaint with the police, but they allegedly refused to take her complaint given the lack of evidence. In the meantime, on February 19, 2008, the applicants allegedly met with Mr. Pellegrin Breton in a shopping centre and he allegedly threatened them. Following that incident, on February 24, 2008, the female applicant filed a complaint with the public prosecutor, but on February 28, 2008, Mr. Hernandez Rodriguez was allegedly beat up by three men. Fearing for their lives, the applicants decided to leave Mexico and arrived in Montréal on June 9, 2008, to claim refugee status.
[11]
Since the applicants have been in Canada, a judgment has been rendered against the female applicant by default in Mexico on or about March 29, 2011. The female applicant alleges that the second action of Mr. Pellegrin Breton is fraudulent as it involves the same charges laid against her in 2007 and of which she has already been acquitted.
Reasonableness of the Impugned Decision
[12]
In my view, the panel rendered a reasoned decision in which the reasons for rejecting the refugee claim are set out in a clear and intelligible manner. In this case, the decision to reject the claim falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law. I will simply discuss some salient or determinative aspects of the panel's reasoning, and not necessarily in the order in which they were dealt with by the panel in the impugned decision or by counsel for the parties at the hearing before this Court.
[13]
As regards the lack of subjective fear, the panel considers that it is unlikely that the applicants hid for a period of four months in Tuxtla, in the state of Chiapas.This conclusion does not strike me as being unreasonable. With the exception of two medical prescriptions issued in Tuxtla on October 4 and 10, 2007, there is no credible evidence on the panel's file corroborating the applicants'assertions. Also, in its decision the panel wonders why exactly the applicants felt it was necessary to move to Chiapas. After all, their purported departure follows the stay of the arrest warrant and the evidence does not make it possible to conclude that the female applicant had received threats at the time.
[14]
Furthermore, the panel notes that a letter from counsel for the female applicant informing her that her life was in danger and that she had to consider leaving the country, was falsified by the addition of the date of October 19, 2007, written in different characters. The panel concludes that, in all likelihood, the letter was rather written during the first two weeks of September 2007 (versus October 19, 2007). That conclusion also appears reasonable to me as it is based on contradictory evidence on file, particularly the testimony of the female applicant that she was informed by her lawyer that she could return to Puebla following the favourable decision of the Mexican Court dated October 4, 2007.
[15]
The panel also notes that the female applicant does not at all mention the alleged death threats she said she had received since October 2007 in the complaint she filed on February 24, 2008, with the public prosecutor. The panel also notes that the applicants did not file a complaint against Mr. Pellegrin Breton after the assault on Hernandez Rodriguez on February 28, 2008, and that they continued to live and work at the same place every day. Again, these are determinative aspects of the applicants' claim.
[16]
This is a determinative aspect and it significantly affects the claim for refugee protection. The applicants submit today that it was unreasonable for the panel to conclude that the female applicant had not mentioned in her statement to the public prosecutor the death threats uttered by Mr. Pellegrin Breton. They submit that the complaint made mentioned serious threats. However, a simple reading of the complaint shows that there is no mention of the death threats by telephone.
[17]
According to the evidence, the female applicants husband continued to work after February 28, 2008, that is, after being threatened, which is not challenged in this case. The applicants nevertheless argue that the female applicant's husband explained to the panel that he needed to work to earn a living. In any event, in my opinion, the panel could have reasonably concluded that this fact, coupled with the fact that the applicants did not file a complaint against Mr. Pellegrin Breton after the assault and with the fact that they continued to live at the same place after the attack, supports the finding of lack of subjective fear or risk to life.
[18]
The applicants also reproach the panel for having disregarded or ignored in its analysis the medical evidence that the female applicant suffers from major depression and from post-traumatic stress, in addition to the medical evidence in relation to the assault of Hernan Rodriguez. The reproach also appears to be unfounded to me, considering the fact that the general account of the the female applicant was not found to be credible by the panel. It should be noted that the panel is presumed to have considered all of the evidence submitted to it. This presumption will only be rebutted where the evidence not discussed is significant and relevant to a crucial element. In the case at bar, the medical evidence of the female applicant's mental health does not corroborate the facts in support of her refugee protection claim. Although the medical evidence of the assault of Mr. Gernan Rodriguez demonstrates that he was injured, it has little probative value. In fact, there is no evidence that the injuries were caused by Mr. Pellegrin Breton's men.
[19]
The applicants take issue with the fact that in its analysis the panel attaches little importance to the corruption that many denounce in Mexico. The panel notes in passing that the applicants' claim that the legal system itself is corrupt appears to be unfounded in this case, as the female applicant was in fact actually able to obtain a withdrawal of the warrant for arrest that had been issued against her. However, the panel concluded that the applicants were not forthright about the content of the Mexican judgment on the dismissal of the criminal charges. According to the panel, contrary to the female applicant's submissions, the Mexican judge did not indicate that the female applicant or her company owed money to the company of Mr. Pellegrin Breton; the judge rather indicated that the failure to pay for merchandise upon receiving it did not constitute a breach of trust on the part of the female applicant.
[20]
While the execution of the arrest warrant was suspended, the fact remains, in the applicants'view, that corruption is ubiquitous in Mexico, which renders the panel's findings unreasonable. The applicants submit that the existence of the second judgment, in which the charges are identical to the first, shows that Mr. Pellegrin Breton managed to bribe or intimidate a judge to obtain judgment in his favour because the same case was tried twice. In any event, the female applicant was unable to obtain protection from the Mexican police and on that basis the applicants conclude that their claim for refugee protection should have been granted by the panel. The findings drawn by the panel from the Mexican judgments are being vehemently challenged today by the applicants who reproach the panel for having mischaracterized the nature and scope of the legal proceedings, thus wrongly treating the entire matter as though it resulted from a commercial dispute-Mr. Pellegrin Breton having brought an action against the female applicant because she owed his money, which she strongly denies.
[21]
For its part, the respondent submits that the panel did not err in determining that, because the two decisions address different issues, the existence of the second decision does not prove that the state of Puebla is corrupted. Relying on
R v Kienapple
, [1975] 1 SCR 729 at page 748, the respondent submits that there is no res judicata between the two decisions. The first examines whether there was a breach of trust in the criminal context, whereas the other considers whether the female applicant owed money to Mr. Pellegrin Breton after the contracted sale on credit was complete, for commercial purposes. Also, the respondent submits that the applicants cannot invoke that the same case was tried twice if they did not raise the issue before the Mexican court at the time of the second proceeding (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> confirmed by
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[22]
I need not determine today whether the reading of panel's and the respondent's reading of the Mexican judgments is correct. Suffice it to say here that it is not unreasonable to find that the two decisions address different issues. Essentially, the applicants are asking me to review all of the evidence and substitute my judgment for that of the panel. That is not the role of the judge in a judicial review. I am of the opinion here that all of the panel's findings are supported by the evidence on file and the panel's reasoning does not appear to be capricious or arbitrary to me.
No Reasonable Apprehension of Bias
[23]
Although it is an alternative argument, the applicants submit strongly argue before this Court that the Member's conduct during the refugee claim hearing raises a reasonable apprehension of bias. This is a serious allegation that the Court cannot take lightly. To that end, the Court must determine whether an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically-and having thought the matter through-would think that there is a reasonable apprehension of bias (
Committee for Justice and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp 394 and 395). I have carefully read the transcripts of the hearing and find no grounds for reproach against the Member in the circumstances.
[24]
Although the applicants submit that the Member was [translation] "biased" and that he was [translation] "cantankerous and negative throughout the hearing of the evidence," counsel for the applicants cannot point out any particular passage of the transcripts where the Member acted inappropriately, especially since counsel for the applicants continued to insist that the Member limit the scope of his investigation. The Member simply resisted the repeated and manifestly unfounded requests of counsel for the applicants to address only the question of state protection. The applicants also rely upon an affidavit of an observer at the hearing who stated that the Member [translation] "played with his papers and stared at the wall" when counsel for the applicants interviewed the female applicant, but the observer was not present throughout the hearing and it is necessary to consider the Member's conduct as a whole before rushing to the conclusion that he was biased.
[25]
Nor was there any breach of procedural fairness during the hearing as the learned counsel for the applicants now seems to suggest. There was indeed much confusion at the hearing before the panel on the interpretation or the effect of the Mexican judgments relied upon by the applicants. It is unfortunate, but the applicants must, in my opinion, assume full responsibility. All evidence of payment of invoices relied upon by the female applicant should have been submitted in a timely fashion, whereas the applicants had three years to obtain and have all relevant documents translated, including the most important judgment on which they rely now.
[26]
It should also be noted that foreign law is a question of fact, which must be proved to the satisfaction of the Court (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The panel cannot in this case be faulted for having asked the Spanish interpreter at the hearing to provide an unofficial translation of the judgment in Spanish, especially since the panel is not even legally obligated to consider the document at the hearing because it was not translated into French or English by the applicants.
[27]
The applicants also complain about the numerous interventions by the Member at the hearing. However, the fact remains that the female applicant did not always answer the Member's specific and legitimate questions. In my view, it is necessary to treat the multiple interventions for what they are, that is, a simple call to order. Finally, as noted by the respondent, this is a case where the energetic interventions alone by the Member do not in themselves give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias; I agree with the respondent.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Moreover, none of the interventions by the Member prevented the applicants, who were represented by the same counsel as today, from eventually providing explanations and arguing their point of view.
The rights under the Charter and the international instruments are not directly threatened
[28]
Finally, the applicants claim that their removal to Mexico would place their lives and their physical integrity at risk, thus violating sections 7 and 12 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, Part I of the
Constitution Act, 1982
, constituting Schedule B to the
Canada Act 1982
(UK), 1982, c 11, and Canada's international obligations under Article 3 of the United Nations' 1984
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
. Nevertheless, I agree with the respondent that this argument is premature, while the applicants are not in imminent danger of removal to their country.
[29]
For these reasons, the application for judicial review is dismissed.
[30]
The applicants propose that the Court certify the following questions:
a. What is the role of the Federal Court's first judgment in a
de novo
hearing?
b. Does the Member in the case have the right to depart from the Federal Court's findings of law or fact without providing a clear explanation?
The respondent opposes the certification of the above two questions.
[31]
A certified question must transcend the interests of the immediate parties to the litigation and contemplate issues of broad significance or general application and be determinative of the appeal (see
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[32]
In my view, it is clear that the proposed questions do not meet the criteria established by the case law. On the one hand, the proposed questions have already been sufficiently addressed by the case law. Such is the case of the nature of a
de novo
hearing and
stare decisis
issues. On the other hand, the proposed questions do not transcend the impugned decision, are not of general interest and would not bring the dispute to an end. Accordingly, no question will be certified by the Court.
JUDGMENT
[33]
THE COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES
that this application for judicial review is dismissed. No question will be certified.
.........................
German Hernandez Rodriguez, Irma Gabriela Ortiz  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  contestent la légalité d'une décision rendue le 17 février 2012 par la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié [tribunal], rejetant leur demande d'asile essentiellement en raison d'un manque de crédibilité et de l'absence de crainte subjective.
[2]
Il s'agit de la deuxième demande de contrôle judiciaire visant une décision du tribunal impliquant les demandeurs. Le 25 mai 2011, leur demande d'asile a été rejetée pour la première fois par le commissaire Bissonnette. Le 25 mai 2011, la Cour fédérale a cassé cette première décision du tribunal et a retourné l'affaire pour redétermination:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 1]. Le 17 février 2012, Me Aronoff [commissaire] a entendu l'affaire
de novo
et a rendu la décision que contestent aujourd'hui les demandeurs.
[3]
D'entrée de jeu, la demanderesse soumet que le tribunal a erré en droit ou a autrement manqué de respect envers la Cour en omettant de considérer dans son analyse les conclusions du commissaire Bissonnette et le jugement de cette Cour dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 1
.
Rappelons que mon collègue le juge Pinard a renversé la première décision du tribunal parce que le tribunal a erré au niveau de l'existence de la protection étatique et, à un moindre degré, quant à l'appréciation de la preuve ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> aux paras 10-12). Avec égards, la Cour ne peut accepter l'argument des demandeurs.
[4]
D'abord, puisqu'il s'agissait d'une audition
de novo
, le tribunal n'était pas obligé de s'en tenir uniquement à la question de la protection étatique (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). D'autre part, la première décision ayant été cassée, il n'y a pas de
stare decisis
ou de
res
judicata, qu'il s'agisse de questions de crédibilité ou d'autres aspects comme la protection étatique (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> )
.
D'ailleurs, il se trouve que le tribunal n'a pas répété les erreurs identifiées par cette Cour dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 1, d'autant plus que la décision contestée est fondée sur une preuve et un raisonnement au partie ou en totalité différents.
[5]
J'en arrive au principal motif d'annulation de la décision contestée, soit que le tribunal aurait ignoré des preuves pertinentes ou rendu une décision autrement déraisonnable. Il n'y a pas lieu d'intervenir en l'espèce. D'une part, les conclusions de crédibilité tirées par le tribunal sont claires, bien exposées et se fondent sur la preuve au dossier. D'autre part, les allégations de crainte raisonnable de partialité à l'endroit du commissaire ne sont pas justifiées, non plus que les autres moyens soulevés par les demandeurs.
Les allégations des demandeurs
[6]
Je commencerais par résumer les principales allégations des demandeurs. Comme nous le verrons plus loin, le tribunal n'a pas jugé que celles-ci étaient crédibles ou appuyées par la preuve au dossier.
[7]
Les demandeurs sont citoyens du Mexique et fondent leur crainte de persécution ou d'un risque à la vie sur le récit d'Irma Gabriela Ortiz Blanca [demanderesse], l'épouse de German Hernandez Rodriguez et la mère de German Hernandez Ortiz, leur fils. La demanderesse a peur d'un certain Rafael Pellegrin Breton avec qui elle a fait des affaires à Puebla au Mexique.
[8]
M. Pellegrin Breton est le représentant d'une compagnie mexicaine qui entretenait une relation commerciale avec la compagnie de la demanderesse pour l'acquisition de cartes d'appel. Or, le 2 mai 2007, trois agents de la police fédérale auraient tenté d'arrêter la demanderesse à son domicile, et ce, au motif que M. Pellegrin Breton avait intenté une action pénale soi-disant pour fraude ou abus de confiance. Selon la demanderesse, M. Pellegrin Breton - qui était en collusion avec la police fédérale - cherchait à l'impliquer dans une fraude dont il était le seul responsable.
[9]
Le 4 mai 2007, la demanderesse retient les services d'un avocat qui intente aussitôt un recours visant à surseoir à l'exécution du mandat d'arrestation. Une fois que le sursis est accordé, aux dires des demandeurs, ils quittent alors le Mexique pour Phoenix en Arizona où ils résident pendant 25 jours. Faute d'argent, ils ne reviennent pas à Puebla, mais s'installent plutôt à Tuxtla, dans l'État de Chiapas, et ce, pendant quatre mois, c'est-à-dire soit jusqu'à ce que leur avocat les informe que la Cour fédérale mexicaine a rendu une décision favorable.
[10]
De retour à Puebla, la demanderesse dit avoir reçu des menaces téléphoniques. Elle aurait bien tenté de porter plainte à la police, mais on aurait refusé de consigner sa plainte vu le manque de preuves. Dans l'intervalle, le 19 février 2008, les demandeurs auraient rencontré M. Pellegrin Breton dans un centre commercial et ce dernier les aurait menacés. Suite à cet incident, le 24 février 2008, la demanderesse portera plainte auprès du ministère public, mais voilà, le 28 février 2008, M. Hernandez Rodriguez aurait été battu par trois hommes. Craignant donc pour leur vie, les demandeurs décident de quitter le Mexique et arrivent à Montréal le 9 juin 2008 pour revendiquer le statut de réfugié.
[11]
Depuis que les demandeurs sont au Canada, un jugement contre la demanderesse a été rendu par défaut au Mexique le ou vers le 29 mars 2011. La demanderesse allègue que cette deuxième poursuite de M. Pellegrin Breton est frauduleuse, car elle porte sur les mêmes accusations portées contre elle en 2007 et dont elle a déjà été acquittée.
Caractère raisonnable de la décision contestée
[12]
À mon avis, le tribunal a rendu une décision motivée dans laquelle sont exposés d'une façon claire et intelligible les motifs de rejet de la demande d'asile. En l'espèce, la décision de rejet appartient aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit. Je me contenterai d'exposer certains aspects saillants ou déterminants du raisonnement du tribunal, et pas nécessairement dans l'ordre où ceux-ci ont été traités par le tribunal dans la décision contestée ou par les procureurs des parties à l'audition devant cette Cour.
[13]
Au niveau de l'absence de crainte subjective, le tribunal considère qu'il est peu probable que les demandeurs se soient cachés pour une période de quatre mois à Tuxtla, dans l'état de Chiapas. Cette conclusion ne m'apparaît pas déraisonnable. À l'exception de deux prescriptions médicales délivrées à Tuxtla les 4 et 10 octobre 2007, il n'y a pas de preuve crédible au dossier du tribunal corroborant les affirmations des demandeurs. Au demeurant, le tribunal se demande dans sa décision pourquoi au juste les demandeurs ont cru nécessaire de déménager au Chiapas. Après tout, leur prétendu départ fait suite à l'obtention d'un sursis à l'exécution du mandat d'arrestation et la preuve ne permet pas de conclure que la demanderesse avait reçu des menaces à cette époque.
[14]
De plus, le tribunal note qu'une lettre de l'avocat de la demanderesse l'informant que sa vie était en danger et qu'elle devrait envisager de quitter le pays, a été falsifiée par l'ajout de la date du 19 octobre 2007, inscrite en caractères différents. Le tribunal conclut que, selon toutes probabilités, cette lettre a été plutôt rédigée au cours des deux premières semaines du mois de septembre 2007 (par opposition au 19 octobre 2007). Cette conclusion m'apparaît également raisonnable puisqu'elle se fonde sur les éléments de preuve contradictoires au dossier, plus particulièrement le témoignage de la demanderesse voulant qu'elle a été informée par son avocat qu'elle pouvait retourner à Puebla à la suite de la décision favorable de la Cour mexicaine en date du 4 octobre 2007.
[15]
Le tribunal note également que la demanderesse ne fait aucunement mention des soi-disant menaces de mort qu'elle dit avoir reçues depuis octobre 2007 dans la plainte qu'elle a déposée le 24 février 2008 au ministère public. Le tribunal note également que ces derniers n'ont pas porté plainte contre M. Pellegrin Breton après l'agression contre Hernandez Rodriguez survenue le 28 février 2008 et qu'ils ont continué à vivre au même endroit et à y travailler tous les jours. Il s'agit encore là d'aspects déterminants de la revendication des demandeurs.
[16]
Cet aspect est déterminant et affecte sérieusement la demande d'asile. Les demandeurs soumettent aujourd'hui qu'il était déraisonnable pour le tribunal de conclure que la demanderesse n'avait pas mentionné dans sa déclaration présentée au ministère public les menaces de mort proférées par M. Pellegrin Breton. Ils prétendent que la plainte présentée fait mention de menaces graves. Or, une simple lecture de cette plainte permet de constater qu'il n'y a aucune mention des menaces de mort par téléphone.
[17]
Selon la preuve, le mari de la demanderesse a continué à travailler après le 28 février 2008; soit après avoir été menacé, ce qui n'est pas contesté en l'espèce. Les demandeurs font néanmoins valoir que le mari de la demanderesse a expliqué au tribunal qu'il avait besoin de travailler pour gagner sa vie. Quoiqu'il en soit, à mon avis, le tribunal pouvait raisonnablement conclure que ce fait, allié au fait que les demandeurs n'ont pas porté plainte contre M. Pellegrin Breton après l'agression et au fait qu'ils ont continué à vivre au même endroit après l'attaque, appuie la conclusion d'absence de crainte subjective ou de risque à la vie.
[18]
Les demandeurs reprochent également au tribunal d'avoir écarté ou ignoré de son analyse la preuve médicale à l'effet que la demanderesse souffre de dépression majeure et de stress post-traumatique, en plus des preuves médicales en lien avec l'agression de Hernan Rodriguez. Ce reproche m'apparaît également non fondé, considérant le fait que le récit général de la demanderesse a été jugé non crédible par le tribunal. Faut-il le rappeler, le tribunal est présumé avoir considéré l'ensemble de la preuve qui lui a été soumise. Cette présomption ne sera réfutée que si la preuve qui n'a pas été analysée est importante et porte sur un élément crucial. En l'espèce, les preuves médicales de l'état de santé de la demanderesse ne corroborent pas les faits au soutien de sa demande d'asile. Bien que la preuve médicale de l'agression de M. Gernan Rodriguez démontre qu'il a été blessé, il s'agit d'une preuve peu probante. En effet, rien ne prouve que ces blessures ont été causées par des hommes à la solde de M. Pellegrin Breton.
[19]
Les demandeurs s'en prennent au fait que le tribunal n'attache pas assez d'importance dans son analyse à la corruption que plusieurs dénoncent au Mexique. Le tribunal note au passage que la prétention des demandeurs selon laquelle le système judiciaire lui-même est corrompu ne semble pas fondée en l'espèce, puisque dans les faits, la demanderesse a effectivement pu obtenir le retrait de l'exécution du mandat d'arrestation dont elle faisait l'objet. D'autre part, le tribunal conclut que les demandeurs n'ont pas été francs en ce qui concerne le contenu du jugement mexicain portant sur le rejet des accusations criminelles. Selon le tribunal, contrairement aux affirmations de la demanderesse, le juge mexicain n'a pas indiqué que la demanderesse ou sa compagnie devaient de l'argent à la compagnie de M. Pellegrin Breton; le juge a plutôt indiqué que le défaut de payer la marchandise dès leur réception ne constituait pas un abus de confiance de la part de la demanderesse.
[20]
Bien que l'exécution du mandat d'arrestation a été suspendu, il n'empêche, selon les demandeurs, la corruption est omniprésente au Mexique, ce qui rend les conclusions du tribunal déraisonnables. Les demandeurs soutiennent que l'existence du deuxième jugement, dont les accusations sont identiques au premier, démontre que M. Pellegrin Breton a réussi à soudoyer ou intimider un juge pour obtenir un jugement en sa faveur parce que la même cause a été jugée deux fois. De toute façon, la demanderesse n'a pas pu obtenir de protection de la part de la police mexicaine, et de là, les demandeurs de conclure que leur demande d'asile aurait dû être accordée par le tribunal. Les conclusions que le tribunal tire des jugements mexicains sont aujourd'hui vivement contestées par les demandeurs qui lui reprochent d'avoir mal qualifié la nature ou la portée des procédures judiciaires, en traitant à tort toute l'affaire comme résultant d'un différend commercial -M. Pellegrin Breton ayant poursuivi la demanderesse parce qu'elle lui devait de l'argent, ce qu'elle nie fermement.
[21]
De son côté, le défendeur soumet que le tribunal n'a pas erré en déterminant que, parce que les deux décisions traitent des questions différentes, l'existence de la deuxième décision ne prouve pas que l'État de Puebla est corrompu. S'appuyant sur l'affaire
R c Kienapple
, [1975] 1 RCS 729 à la page 748, le défendeur soutient qu'il n'y a pas chose jugée entre les deux décisions. La première examine s'il y a eu abus de confiance dans le contexte criminel, tandis que l'autre considère si la demanderesse devait de l'argent à M. Pellegrin Breton au terme de la vente à crédit contractée; soit en matière commerciale. De plus, le défendeur soumet que les demandeurs ne peut invoquer que la même cause a été jugée deux fois s'ils n'ont pas soulevé cette question devant le tribunal mexicain au moment de la deuxième procédure (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 34, affirmé par
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[22]
Je n'ai pas à décider aujourd'hui si la lecture que fait le tribunal et le défendeur des jugements mexicains est correcte. Il suffit de dire ici qu'il n'était pas déraisonnable de conclure que les deux décisions traitaient de questions différentes. Essentiellement, les demandeurs m'invitent à revoir l'ensemble de la preuve et à me substituer au tribunal. Ce n'est pas le rôle du juge siégeant en révision judiciaire. Ici, je suis d'avis que toutes les conclusions du tribunal sont appuyées par la preuve au dossier et le raisonnement du tribunal ne m'apparaît pas capricieux ou arbitraire.
Aucune crainte raisonnable de partialité
[23]
Bien qu'il s'agisse d'un argument subsidiaire, les demandeurs soutiennent avec force devant cette Cour que la conduite du commissaire pendant l'audition de la demande d'asile soulève une crainte raisonnable de partialité. C'est une grave allégation que la Cour ne peut pas prendre à la légère. À ce chapitre, la Cour doit déterminer si une personne bien renseignée qui étudierait la question en profondeur, et ce, de façon réaliste et pratique, croirait qu'il existe une crainte raisonnable de partialité (
Committee for Justice and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  aux pp 394 et 395). J'ai lu attentivement les transcriptions de l'audience et je ne trouve aucun motif de reproche contre le commissaire dans les circonstances.
[24]
Les demandeurs prétendent que le commissaire avait une « attitude biaisée » et qu'il était « hargneux et négatif pendant toute l'audience de la preuve »,mais le procureur des demandeurs ne peut pointer du doigt quelque passage particulier des transcriptions où le commissaire aurait agi de manière déplacé, d'autant plus que le procureur des demandeurs continuait d'insister auprès du commissaire pour qu'il limite le champ de son enquête. Le commissaire a simplement résisté aux demandes répétées et manifestement non fondées du procureur des demandeurs de s'en tenir à la question de la protection de l'état. Les demandeurs se fondent également sur un affidavit d'un observateur à l'audience qui dit que le commissaire a « joué dans ses papiers et il a adressé son regard vers le mur » lorsque l'avocat des demandeurs a interrogé la demanderesse, mais celui-ci n'était pas présent durant toute l'audience et il faut apprécier le comportement du commissaire dans son ensemble avant de sauter à la conclusion qu'il était biaisé.
[25]
Il n'y a pas eu non plus d'accroc à l'équité procédurale lors de l'audition comme semble maintenant le suggérer le savant procureur des demandeurs. Il y a effectivement eu beaucoup de confusion à l'audition devant le tribunal sur l'interprétation ou l'effet des jugements mexicains invoqués par les demandeurs. C'est malheureux, mais les demandeurs doivent à mon avis en assumer l'entière responsabilité. Toutes les preuves de paiement des factures invoquées par la demanderesse devaient être produites en temps utile, alors que les demandeurs ont eu trois ans pour obtenir et faire traduire tous les documents pertinents, incluant le jugement le plus important sur lesquels ils se fondent maintenant.
[26]
Rappelons également que l'état du droit étranger est une question de fait qui doit être prouvée à la satisfaction du tribunal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 23). On ne peut reprocher en l'espèce au tribunal d'avoir demandé à l'interprète espagnol à l'audition de faire une traduction libre du jugement en espagnol, d'autant plus que le tribunal n'était même pas légalement obligé de considérer ce document à l'audition puisqu'il n'avait pas été traduit en français ou en anglais par les demandeurs.
[27]
Les demandeurs se plaignent également des nombreuses interventions à l'audition du commissaire. Toutefois, force est de constater que la demanderesse ne répondait pas toujours aux questions précises et légitimes du commissaire. À mon avis, if faut traiter les multiples interventions pour ce qu'elles sont, soit un simple rappel à l'ordre. Enfin, tel que noté par le défendeur, il s'agit d'un cas où les interventions énergiques du commissaire, en elles-mêmes, ne suscitent pas une crainte raisonnable de partialité; je suis d'accord avec ce dernier.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 22. D'ailleurs, aucune des interventions du commissaire n'a empêché à terme les demandeurs, qui étaient représentés par le même procureur qu'aujourd'hui, de donner des explications et de faire valoir leur point de vue.
Les droits en vertu de la Charte et des instruments internationaux ne sont pas directement menacés
[28]
Enfin, les demandeurs prétendent que leur renvoi au Mexique mettra en danger leur vie et leur intégrité physique, violant ainsi les articles 7 et 12 de la
Charte canadienne des droits et libertés
, partie I de la
Loi constitutionnelle de 1982
, constituant l'annexe B de la
Loi de 1982 sur le Canada
(R.-U.), 1982, c 11, ainsi que les obligations internationales du Canada sous l'article 3 de la
Convention contre la torture et autres peines ou traitements cruels, inhumains ou dégradants
de 1984 des Nations unies. Je suis néanmoins d'accord avec le défendeur que cet argument est prématuré, alors que les demandeurs ne sont pas en danger imminent de renvoi vers leur pays.
[29]
Pour ces motifs, la demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
[30]
Les demandeurs proposent à la Cour de certifier les questions suivantes:
a. Quel est le rôle du premier jugement de la Cour fédérale lors d'une audience
de novo
?
b. Est-ce que le commissaire au dossier à le droit d'écarter les conclusions de la Cour fédérale relatives aux faits ou au droit sans fournir d'explication claire?
Le défendeur s'oppose à la certification des deux questions ci-dessus.
[31]
Une question certifiée doit transcender les intérêts des parties au litige, aborder des questions ayant des conséquences importantes ou qui sont de portée générale et être déterminantes quant à l'issue de l'appel (voir
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 11).
[32]
À mon avis, il est clair que les questions proposées ne rencontrent pas les critères qui ont été établis par la jurisprudence. D'une part, les questions proposées ont déjà été réglées par la jurisprudence. C'est le cas de la nature d'une audience
de novo
et des questions de
stare decisis
. D'autre part, les questions proposées ne transcendent pas la décision contestée, ne sont pas d'intérêt général et ne mettraient pas fin au litige. Aucune question ne sera donc certifiée par la Cour.
JUGEMENT
[33]
LA COUR REJETTE
la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire. Aucune question ne sera certifiée par la Cour.
[End of document]