[1]
Denault, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of July 10, 1998, by an adjudicator appointed under ss. 242 et seq. of the
Canada Labour Code
[see footnote 1], who dismissed Joanne Fox's complaint of unjust dismissal and ordered Teleglobe Canada Inc. to pay Ms. Fox eight months' wages in lieu of notice plus benefits owed to her.
[2]
The issue is very straightforward: whether the adjudicator -- after holding that the complaint of unjust dismissal should be dismissed -- had jurisdiction to order compensation.
[3]
The applicant argues that the adjudicator's decision clearly dismissed the respondent's complaint of unjust dismissal and referred to the unanimous case law recognizing that an adjudicator has no jurisdiction to grant any relief after holding that a complaint of unjust dismissal should be dismissed.
[4]
The respondent argues that the adjudicator's decision is an indivisible whole and must be viewed in its entirety in the context of fair and reasonable treatment. If the court were to find that the adjudicator had erred in the exercise of his jurisdiction, the respondent suggests that the matter should be referred back to him for him to exercise it again.
[5]
It is important to note that the respondent has not sought judicial review of the adjudicator's main finding that under the circumstances, the dismissal was just. The employer's application for judicial review concerns only that part of the decision that grants eight months' compensation and related benefits. Thus the court cannot, as the respondent claimed, refer the matter back to the adjudicator for rehearing if it finds that he exceeded his jurisdiction.
[6]
In the case at bar, the adjudicator clearly exceeded his jurisdiction by ordering payment of compensation to the respondent after holding that the complaint of unjust dismissal should be dismissed. Once he held that the respondent's dismissal was not unjust, the adjudicator became "functus officio" and had no jurisdiction to issue a compensation order [see footnote 2].
[7]
The adjudicator's jurisdiction comes from s. 242(3) of the
Canada Labour Code
, which authorizes him to decide whether the dismissal was unjust. Only after holding that the dismissal was unjust can he use his powers under s. 242(4) of the
Code
, namely pay the person compensation, reinstate the person in his employ, or do any other like thing that is equitable. In the case at bar, after holding that the dismissal was
not
unjust, he could not act on the authority of article 2091 of the
Civil Code
to grant the defendant compensation, without exceeding his jurisdiction in the process.
[8]
For these reasons, the application for judicial review is allowed, without costs.
Application allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/kaw
Footnotes
1.	R.S.C. 1985, c. L-2.
2.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).