[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is a motion on behalf of the appellant in an appeal from a decision against the Registrar of Trademarks, for an order enlarging the time permitted under rule 704 for the filing of the appellant's evidence.
[2]
The decision under appeal was made by the Registrar of Trademarks on December 30, 1988, rejecting the appellant's opposition to an application by the respondent for the registration of a trademark "Maxim's Cake Shop" & Design. A notice of appeal was filed by the appellant on February 27, 1989. On March 2nd the appellant's solicitors asked the agents for the respondent for an extension of time until September 30, 1989, in which to file evidence. The respondent refused to agree to any extension of time and filed its own affidavit evidence on April 7, 1989. By the ordinary operation of rule 704(3) the appellant's evidence should have been filed and served on or about March 14, 1989, over 14 months prior to the date when this application was brought for an enlargement of time. According to an affidavit filed on behalf of the appellant in support of this motion, of the four affidavits leave for the filing of which is now sought, three were executed by July 12, 1989, but no action was taken to seek leave to file or serve them until after the fourth affidavit was executed on June 6, 1990.
[3]
The jurisprudence is clear that in an application for an extension of time under rule 704(8) the court should take into account both the reasons for the delay and the intrinsic worth of the affidavits (i.e., relevance, admissibility, and potential use to the court). It has been said in some of the cases that both factors must be weighed together [see footnote 1]. Accepting this to be the correct approach for present purposes, I understand it to mean that one must still weigh the seriousness of the delay against the potential value of the affidavits and that either may outweigh the other. Taking that approach, I believe that in this case the delay and the lack of excuse for it outweighs the potential value of these affidavits.
[4]
One cannot simply ignore the time limits specified in rule 704 or their rationale, which is to provide a summary proceeding for the disposition of an appeal from a decision of the Registrar of Trademarks. The appellant here has taken, not 15 days as required by the Rules, but over 14 months to produce its affidavits in support of its appeal. Nor has it shown any good reason for such delay. The respondent's application for the trademark in question was made on April 6, 1982, and this application was advertised for opposition purposes on April 11, 1984. One can assume that since that time at least the appellant in the present proceedings had the opportunity to prepare its case. In the view of the Registrar in his decision of December 30, 1988 [see footnote 2], the appellant had failed to do so in the proceedings before him. In particular he found its evidence inadequate and characterized much of its affidavit material as hearsay and inadmissible. Notwithstanding this clear signal of December 30, 1988, that something more was required, it was not until June and July of 1989 that the appellant had three affidavits executed in Canada in support of the appeal. Having perused those affidavits I am unable to see why they should have taken five or six months in preparation. The fourth affidavit was executed by Hervé Duquesnoy in Paris in May 1990 (a corrected version having been executed later).
[5]
Not only is the delay extraordinary, but the reasons for it are of little weight. The main explanation given for the delay, in an affidavit filed in support of this motion, describes difficulties encountered by the appellant's instructing counsel in France in dealing with officials in the appellant's Paris office. Much of the delay seems to have occurred right in that office. According to the affidavit of Frank Mulock filed in support of this affidavit:
"10. I have also been advised by French solicitors for the appellant, and do verily believe, that Mr. Pierre Cardin, principal of Maxim's Ltd., wishes to know the details of each of the appellant's trademark cases but is often away from Paris travelling on business. When he is in Paris, we are advised that it is extremely difficult to obtain precise instructions given his various activities and that this has also contributed to the delay."
While one may have some sympathy for counsel in these circumstances it is difficult to have much sympathy for the appellant itself.
[6]
These delays are particularly unacceptable given the fact that as early as March 1989, solicitors for the respondent made it clear that they would not consent to any delay.
[7]
Although I can see that some if not all of the affidavit material which the appellant now wishes to file could be helpful to the court in determining this appeal, it is not so compelling that I am prepared to ignore the long and unjustified delay in seeking its submission. There is no suggestion that these affidavits contain material only recently come to light or that there is any reason why they could not have been properly put before the Registrar some years ago. In my view the importance to be attached to the orderly process of appeals, and the lack of regard for that process by the appellant in this case, outweigh the potential value of the affidavits.
[8]
The motion is therefore dismissed.
Motion dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
Footnotes
1. See e.g.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 478, at 479-480 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 284.
2.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[End of document]