[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an application made pursuant to s. 56(5) of the
Trade Marks Act
(R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13) as well as rules 704(3) and 704(8) of the
Federal Court Rules
(C.R.C. 1978, c. 663). The motion is for an order extending the appellant's deadline until December 15, 1991 within which to file affidavit evidence showing use by others of the trademark "Helsinki Formula" and/or "Helsinki Method".
Background
[2]
On July 17, 1987 the respondent, Pantron I Corporation, filed an application to register the trademark "Helsinki Formula" based on use in Canada since at least as early as May 1984 in association with certain wares. The mark was advertised for opposition purposes on September 28, 1988, and the applicant herein as opponent filed a statement of opposition on January 27, 1989. At the hearing, with no reasons indicated, the Board member wrote at page 3:
"The applicant did not file evidence in support of its application. The applicant, however, filed a written argument while the opponent was refused a retroactive extension of time to file its written argument. During the course of these proceedings the opponent's request for leave to file further evidence pursuant to rule 46(1) of the
Trade Mark Regulations
was refused."
In a decision handed down on July 31, 1991 the Board declared the opponent's opposition as rejected.
[3]
The applicant herein as opponent had filed several grounds of opposition and the decision is replete with comments such as, "there is no evidence", "the opponent has not established", "nor is there any evidence to suggest", etc. and then at the end of page 5 in the decision it reads:
"It follows that the opponent has not met its evidential burden to show that the applied-for mark is deceptively misdescriptive of the place of origin of the applicant's wares."
Later on we read:
"There is no reliable evidence establishing ..."
And later:
"The opponent has not met its evidential burden to establish the facts underlying those grounds of opposition."
And finally:
"The absence of any reliable evidence regarding when the above-mentioned hair care preparations were first available in Canada ..."
It is clear from the above-noted quotes that the opposition was sadly lacking in its ability to present the appropriate evidence and hopes to improve on that particular aspect of its case by securing evidence from third persons before fully embarking on its appeal; and thus a request for an extension of time to file affidavit evidence.
[4]
The obvious weakness of the opponent's evidence before the Opposition Board was a clear signal to the applicant that it had to do better if it was to succeed with its appeal.
[5]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 284, Collier, J., quoted from his decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  where he said:
"It must be remembered, this is an appeal from the decision of the prothonotary. It is not a trial de novo. The prothonotary had discretion to extend the time for appeal in the manner he did. It must be shown that the prothonotary exercised his discretion on a wrong principle, or on a complete misapprehension of the facts, or for some other compelling reason requiring interference by a judge sitting in an appellate position."
He then went on in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case to state:
"I apply that test in this case. The decision to extend the time for filing affidavits was one of discretion. It is argued that there is a twofold test. First the applicant seeking to extend the time must excuse the delay. If that hurdle was not reached then no other considerations are open to, in this case, the prothonotary.
"There are two tests. One is the valid reason or excusable reason for the delay. Secondly relevance and admissibility, whether it will be in the interests of justice."
[6]
Again, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 478, Jerome, A.C.J., stated this at p. 479:
"On November 17, 1986, the appellants brought the motion for leave to file further evidence which gives rise to this appeal.
"In applications of this sort, there are several factors to be borne in mind. The first is that both the
Trade Marks Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. T-10, and the
Federal Court Rules
have been formulated so as to require summary disposition of trademark appeals. ... When an application is made not simply to file questionable affidavit material, but to file it late, we are directed to scrutinize the affidavit from several points of view. Why is it late? Why is it necessary? Is it relevant and admissible? Will it render valuable assistance to the presiding judge or is it in the nature of material that is already before the court?"
[7]
The summary nature of the
Rules
was stated by Strayer, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 242, at p. 244:
"None of this in my view amounts to a good reason for the delay in the filing of the affidavit by the respondent. It has been often stated in the jurisprudence that it is the purpose of the
Trade Marks Act
and rule 704 of the
Federal Court Rules
to provide a summary procedure for appeals in these matters. Time limits are laid out very specifically and rule 704(8), by requiring leave of the court for any late filing of affidavits, clearly indicates that not even the agreement of the parties is sufficient to justify delays in time."
Again, Strayer, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 240, at p. 242, had this to say:
"The jurisprudence is clear that in an application for an extension of time under rule 704(8), the court should take into account both the reasons for the delay and the intrinsic worth of the affidavits (i.e. relevance, admissibility, and potential use to the court). It has been said in some of the cases that both factors must be weighed together. ... Accepting this to be the correct approach for present purposes, I understand it to mean that one must still weigh the seriousness of the delay against the potential value of the affidavits and that either may outweigh the other. Taking that approach, I believe that in this case the delay and the lack of excuse for it outweighs the potential value of these affidavits."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  again drove home the point:
"The procedure contemplated by rule 704 is a summary one and its time limits are designed accordingly."
[8]
It is quite clear, therefore, that determinations under rule 704(8) are meant to be of a summary nature. Similarly, it is clear that the applicant must meet the two tests envisaged by Collier, J., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (supra). The applicant must show that there is a valid reason or excusable reason for the delay and secondly, relevance and admissibility, whether it will be in the interests of justice. First, it should be noted that the applicant has taken an early initiative getting this motion on the list before the time limit for filing affidavit evidence has passed. This is not a situation where the applicant sat back, collected its evidence and then moved later to file supplementary evidence. In my view the applicant has made a valid or excusable reason for the delay, namely, it must secure the evidence from a third party or parties. An exhibit in the affidavit of A.F. Rush shows there is some indicia of an invoice dated January 3, 1984 wherein the term "Helsinki Method" is used to describe a shampoo and conditioner but I expect this exhibit to the affidavit of A.F. Rush will have little probative value unless an affidavit is secured from an official of the corporation who actually issued the invoice. Secondly, it will be necessary for the applicant to go back at least seven years, i.e. before May of 1984 and look for evidence in support of its appeal where it must establish, inter alia, that the trademark "Helsinki Formula" is not distinctive of the respondent. On this basis I am satisfied that there is a valid reason or an excusable reason for an extension.
[9]
The affidavit of A.F. Rush indicates to me that there may very well be evidence out there in support of the applicant's proposition and I believe it is in the "interests of justice" that the applicant be afforded this relief. Of course if it is unable to improve upon the evidence it placed before the Opposition Board, the matter is pretty well determined. Also, the time requested is not unreasonable. Accordingly, an order will go extending the appellant's deadline to December 15, 1991 within which to file affidavit evidence endeavouring to show use by others of the trademark "Helsinki Formula" and/or "Helsinki Method". Costs will be in the cause.
Application allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]