[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This action by way of appeal from a judgment of the Tax Review Board dated April 29, 1982, allowing the defendant's appeal in respect of its 1977 and 1978 taxation years, came on for hearing at London, Ontario, on April 10 and 11, 1985. At issue is the taxpayer's eligibility for the year-end inventory allowance in s. 20(1)(gg) of the Income Tax Act:
"20.(1) Notwithstanding paragraphs 18(1)(a), (b) and (h), in computing a taxpayer's income for a taxation year from a business or property, there may be deducted such of the following amounts as are wholly applicable to that source of such part of the following amounts as may reasonably be regarded as applicable thereto:
...
(gg) an amount in respect of any business carried on by the taxpayer in the year, equal to that portion of 3% of the cost amount to the taxpayer, at the commencement of the year, of the tangible property (other than real property or an interest therein) that was
(i) described in the taxpayer's inventory in respect of the business, and
(ii) held by him for sale or for the purposes of being processed, fabricated, manufactured, incorporated into, attached to, or otherwise converted into or used in the packaging of, property for sale in the ordinary course of the business
that the number of days in the year is of 365; and [added by S.C. 1977-78, c. 1, s. 14(1)]."
[2]
In 1977 and 1978, the defendant was an authorized dealer under an "Authorized Agricultural Dealer Agreement", of agricultural equipment and machines for John Deere Limited. During the years in question, the relationship between the defendant company and John Deere Limited was governed by an Agricultural Dealer Agreement, which was executed by the parties on an annual basis. The relevant provisions of that agreement are:
"8. DEALER'S DUTY TO STORE AND CARE FOR CONSIGNED GOODS. The Company retains title to Consigned Goods and the Dealer will hold them as the property of the Company unless and until they are sold or leased by him on behalf of the Company under the authority set out in s. 9. Dealer will keep Consigned Goods properly warehoused and protected and will not permit removal of any part from any item of Consigned Goods. He is responsible for all loss, damage or deterioration to Consigned Goods after delivery to him. The Company will arrange for physical damage insurance on Consigned Goods against perils listed in a certificate of insurance to be supplied to the Dealer. The Cost of such coverage will be charged to the Dealer and the Dealer agrees to pay the same. The Dealer will promptly pay to the Company the full amount of any loss, damage or deterioration in Consigned Goods, however caused, which is not covered by the foregoing insurance.
"The Dealer will pay when due all charges for customs duties, sales, use, excise, personal property, or other similar taxes and penalties, license fees and other charges of any kind that may be assessed or charged on the Goods, the sale, lease, or use thereof, or the Dealer's premises. If the Dealer fails to pay such charges, the Company may pay them and the Dealer agrees to reimburse the Company on demand for all moneys so paid out, with interest at the highest contract rate permitted by law but not in excess of 14% per annum.
"At the request of the Company, the Dealer will ship any item or items of Consigned Goods requested by the Company to the destination and in the manner directed by the Company, F.O.B. the Dealer's town.
"10. CARRY-OVER DEPOSIT. The Company publishes a Schedule of Selling Periods for Consigned Goods. This Schedule provides an 'Original Selling Period' for each class of machine, applicable to all of the machines of that class shipped to the Dealer during each 'shipping period' into which the year is divided. In the case of most classes of machines, the Schedule also provides an 'Extended Selling Period' applicable to a stated percentage of machines of like kind in each particular class shipped during the shipping period, should they still be in the Dealer's possession unsold at the end of the Original Selling Period.
"If the Dealer has failed to sell during the Original Selling Period any machine which is not eligible for the Extended Selling Period, he agrees, as security for the discharge of his obligations hereunder, to pay to the Company in cash a carryover deposit of 25% of the wholesale price as of that date. A 25% carry-over deposit will be paid on the remaining machines shipped during the shipping period if they remain unsold at the end of the Extended Selling Period. Dealer will also pay an additional carry-over deposit on the last day of each succeeding twelve month period after carry-over deposit first became payable on any machine, so long as it remains on hand unsold, in the amount of 25% of the wholesale price of the machine. After the third 25% deposit has been made the annual payment shall be 25% of the difference between the wholesale price of the machine and the sum of carryover deposits made previously for that machine.
"The Company may designate certain machines shipped as being available for immediate retail sale only. The Company may from time to time designate a higher carry-over deposit and shorter Original Selling Period on such machines.
"If the Dealer sells a machine on which there has been made a carryover deposit, or on which a charge for loss, damage or deterioration has been paid, the proceeds or cash remitted by him under s. 9 shall equal the appropriate wholesale price less any such deposit and less any such payment, and in the event of loss or damage to the Goods his liability to the Company under s. 8 is limited to the appropriate wholesale price less any such deposit or payment. If Consigned Goods are returned to the Company pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, the Dealer will be credited with any carry-over deposit he has paid on the Goods returned, but not with amounts paid for damage or deterioration.
"13. TITLE TO SOLD GOODS. Title to, ownership and the right to possession of all Sold Goods shipped by the Company to the Dealer is and shall remain vested in the Company until full payment of the indebtedness therefor and any other indebtedness now or hereafter owing by the Dealer to the Company shall have been made to the Company. Sales for value received may be made to users by the Dealer in the ordinary course of retail business. If one of the events enumerated in subsections (c) through (j) of s. 3 above shall occur, the Company may, at its option:
(a) Declare immediately due and payable all indebtedness owing by the Dealer to the Company and collect the same together with court costs and reasonable attorney's fees;
(b) Discontinue or withhold delivery of Sold Goods to the Dealer or make further deliveries only on a cash or C.O.D. basis;
(c) Take possession, with or without legal process, of any Sold Goods the title to which is in the Company.
"Notice of acceleration of the maturity of the Dealer's indebtedness shall be given to the Dealer in such manner and at such time as the Company may see fit. No notice of any other action taken or to be taken by the Company hereunder shall be necessary, such notice being specifically waived by the Dealer.
"After taking possession, the Company may resell all or any part of the Sold Goods at one or more public and/or private sales without notice or without demand for performance, at any which sale or sales the Company may purchase all or any part of the property sold. Proceeds of the sale of Sold Goods shall be applied first to the expenses of retaking, holding and preparing for sale, selling and the like, including reasonable attorney's fees and legal expense and, second, to the Dealer's indebtedness to the Company. If after such application there are excess proceeds, the Company will pay them over as provided by law. If there is a deficiency after application of such proceeds, the Dealer shall be liable for it and shall pay it forthwith. At its option, the Company may accept all or part of the items in full satisfaction of the dealer's remaining indebtedness, rather than reselling them as outlined above.
"18. SHIPMENT. Shipment of Goods will be governed by the following provisions:
...
(d) Delivery to Dealer; Risk of Loss. Delivery of Goods by the Company to a carrier, including agents or employees of the Dealer as well as common and contract carriers, shall constitute delivery to the Dealer, and the Dealer shall bear all risk of damage or loss thereafter."
The Agreement refers to two types of goods, sold and consigned. Sold goods are valued at under $1,000.00 and it is not disputed that the taxpayer is entitled to the inventory allowance for them. The dispute concerns the tax status of the remaining machines and attachments with a value in excess of $1,000.00, which the Agreement refers to as "Consigned Goods".
[3]
A good deal of evidence was put in at the present trial which was not put before the Tax Review Board. In particular, the parent Canadian company, John Deere Limited, and in turn the U.S. parent company, Deere & Company, take the position that all merchandise for sale by Canadian distributors is held on consignment. On several occasions, the company expressed concern to its distributors about any effort on their part to secure the inventory allowance which is in issue in this action. Obviously, the company felt that any favourble ruling would have to be based upon the distributor's ownership of the inventory, whereas the parent company considers the consignment arrangement to be such that ownership remains at all times with the parent. In support of that position, testimony was given by Alan R. Thomson, Vice-President and Credit Manager and Director for John Deere Limited.
[4]
The defendant's evidence consisted of the testimony of Lloyd K. Northcott, President of Dresden Farm Equipment Limited, the transcript of examination for discovery of James Robinson, employee, Department of National Revenue and James P. Demels, Chartered Accountant. With regard to the consigned goods, Mr. Northcott's evidence is that the defendant places orders with John Deere Limited for specific types of equipment with various attachments or options. When the order is placed, it is not subject to cancellation by the defendant. Following manufacture the machinery is transported to the defendant unassembled. Once the goods are loaded on a transport the defendant assumes all responsibility for loss or damage and it is the defendant who must seek recourse against the carrier for any damage caused to the goods during carriage. Any taxes to which the goods are subject are the responsibility of the defendant. Although the freight and insurance costs are initially paid by John Deere Limited, those costs are included in the invoice provided to the defendant. The defendant is further liable for all costs involved in assembling the equipment and for any subsequent deterioration.
[5]
With reference to payment Mr. Northcott testified that there are basically two classes of goods. The first requires a payment of 25% of the invoiced price of the machines commencing on the anniversary date of the original invoice or delivery date. The second covers equipment which is subject to seasonal demand, for which the defendant is subject to an original selling period - a period of time given to the dealer before he has to start paying for the equipment. The dealer then enters the extended selling period and if the equipment is not sold during the original selling period, the dealer is required to make payments in addition to the original deposit on the equipment. This payment is referred to as the "carry-over deposit" in paragraph 10 of the agreement. John Deere Limited calculates the value of all machines received by the defendant in a given selling season. The defendant is then entitled to a carry-over of 25% of the machines with no carry-over deposit. The remaining 75% of the unsold machines are subject to a 25% carry-over deposit for the next three years. After that period of time the annual payment is 25% of the difference between the wholesale price of the machine and the sum of the carry-over deposits previously made for the machine.
[6]
The defendant can dispose of the equipment ordered in essentially two ways. The first, and most obvious, is through retail sale, but if the defendant is unable to dispose of equipment through retail sale, he can transfer that equipment to another John Deere dealer. Although the wholesale price of the equipment is fixed by John Deere Limited, the defendant is entitled to set both the retail and dealer transfer price. Any amount received by the defendant in excess of the wholesale price is credited to the defendant together with any carry-over deposits paid on the equipment.
[7]
The evidence of the plaintiff's witness Alan Thomson, Vice President and Credit Manager and Director for John Deere Limited, differed significantly from that of Mr. Northcott. Mr. Thomson testified that the defendant orders equipment from John Deere Limited which is subsequently shipped to the defendant on consignment. The carry-over deposit system is not a payment system for the purchase of the equipment, but rather it "is a reminder to the dealer that he has a unit in inventory that he should be putting extra effort to move because he has had it for over a year or more". The carry-over deposit is refunded or credited to the dealer either at the time of retail sale or on return of the equipment to John Deere Limited for transfer to another dealer.
[8]
With regard to dealer transfers, the witness testified that although John Deere Limited permits the transfer of goods between dealers, it is the company's policy that Territory Managers, who are employees of the company, are to initiate and approve all such transfers.
[9]
Mr. Thomson admitted that the company is not receptive to requests from dealers for cancellation of orders, although they do try to either cancel or divert orders. On cross-examinaation, however, he conceded that there is no term in the dealership agreement permitting the cancellation of orders or the return of goods. He also revealed that since the inception of the Ontario Personal Property Securities Amendment Act, S.O. 1973, c. 102, the defendant has been required to enter into a security agreement with John Deere Limited. One of those agreements was entered in evidence. He stated that that agreement, "gives us a security interest in the inventory of the dealer". On cross-examination he further admitted that the purpose of the security agreement is to secure all of the indebtedness of the defendant to the Company and that part of that security consists of the consigned goods. As a very minimum, the action of taking out mortgage security is entirely inconsistent with the thesis that ownership rests with the parent company.
[10]
The result of all of this is that both parties acted in a manner at least as consistent with the concept of owership in the distributor as in the parent company. Of far greater significance to me is that the legislation does not contain any reference to ownership, title or purchase of the inventory, only that it be a part of the taxpayer's stock-in-trade. At first reading I also assumed that if the taxpayer were to overcome the ownership hurdle, it could not meet the issue of "cost". Evidence in this case clearly substantiates that there was no obligation upon this defendant to pay for any merchandise at the time of acquisition with the possible exception of certain items which became subject to a 25% carry-over deposit. How could this taxpayer be entitled to a percentage of a non-existent cost? The legislation, however, also contains its own definition; s. 248(1) defines "cost amount" as follows:
"248.(1) In this Act,
...
'cost amount' to a taxpayer of any property at any time means, except as expressly otherwise provided in this Act,
(c) where the property was property described in an inventory of the taxpayer, its value at that time as determined for the purpose of computing his income,"
Cost is therefore specifically defined not in terms of price but in terms of value at the time of acquisition. Surely, had Parliament intended to confine the allowance in s. 20(1)(gg) to the cost of merchandise bought and paid for, it could not unintentionally have overlooked these two opportunities to so state, the first by defining ownership in plain legal terms, the second by defining cost in terms of purchase price at the time of acquisition. I have every reason therefore to concur with the analysis of the learned member of the Tax Review Board who concluded his Reasons for Judgment as follows:
"Nevertheless, the Agreement read as a whole certainly changed the true meaning of the simple words 'On Consignment'. Once John Deere had placed the shipment ordered by the appellant onto the flat deck of the motor carrier, for delivery to the yard of the appellant, risk, at that point in time, fell upon the appellant. Paragraph 8 of the John Deere Agreement clearly sets out the risks and responsibilities involved and falling upon the appellant. The appellant certainly had possession once it took delivery and cleared up any insurance matters relating to damage in transit. Once deliveries were accepted at the appellant's yard, it was obliged, pursuant to the major Agreement, to make payments therefor at specified times. It could not return the goods to John Deere. It could only sell retail, or transfer to another dealer or lease subject to the terms set out by John Deere. In that responsibility fell upon the appellant from the time of delivery, it recorded on its card system every item down to the smallest part as a liability item until it was sold and then it would be taken out of inventory.
"John Deere equipment, parts and attachments delivered to the appellant were its stock-in-trade in the same manner as a real estate agent acquiring an inventory of buildings purchased under an Agreement for Sale for the purpose of reselling at a profit. I can see no difference with respect to the question of title upon which Mr. Erlichman rested his case than from that of a real estate agent dealing in such a manner. The holding of the legal title to the equipment by John Deere as security did not affect the true issue anymore than the taking of security on all equipment, parts and attachments in the form of a chattel mortgage which could have been done.
"Referring to the words of Cattanach, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pages 5197 and 270 respectively, he says:
'In my opinion the proper test as to when property is acquired must relate to the title to the property in question or to the normal incidents of title, either actual or constructive, such as possession, use and risk.'
"In summary, all the characteristics of ownership fell upon the appellant once delivery was made to it in that the goods were entirely at its risk, they were in its possession and its use of same related to the sale, leasing or transferring to another dealer. This was its business. This constituted its use of the goods. Further, it should be clearly understood, from the evidence given by Mr. Northcott, and I found him completely honest and forthright, and obviously so did Mr. Erlichman because he did not deign to cross-examine him, that the goods, once delivered to the appellant, could not be returned to John Deere and that it had to make instalment payments thereon and ultimately pay out the full price after a certain period of time, regardless of whether it had sold or transferred the items in its possession. All machinery, parts and attachments were treated as stock-in-trade and were sold and recorded (and I may add very accurately) by his accountants.
"I think the appellant company has dealt with an onerous contract with John Deere in a very straight forward, honest and efficient manner and the evidence relating thereto was clear and uncontradicted. I therefore allow the appeal and refer the matter back to the respondent for reconsideration and reassessment."
[11]
The action is therefore dismissed with costs and the matter is returned to the Minister for the appropriate re-assessment.
Action dismissed.
Editor: David C.R. Olmstead/klf
[End of document]