[1]
Giles, Associate Senior Prothonotary
: This motion is for leave to cross-examine the affidavit Marilynn Cason on her affidavit sworn the 10th day of September 1986. Her affidavit was filed pursuant to rule 704 in a trademark matter.
[2]
Objection was taken to the timing of the motion because the respondent had not yet filed its affidavit evidence. I indicated from the bench that the procedure did not contemplate that cross-examination proceed the filing of the respondent's evidence. The respondent's affidavit evidence should be filed without regard to the matter of leave to cross-examine. I indicated that, as agreed by counsel, the respondent would be allowed until November 29th to file its affidavit evidence.
[3]
With regard to the matter of cross-examination of Marilynn Cason, the cases indicate the necessity of striking a fine balance between the desirability of dealing with proceedings of this nature in a summary manner on the one hand and on the other of insuring that the judge hearing the matter has before him all relevant information and material (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[4]
From these cases I draw the following points to guide me in striking the balance in this case.
1. cross-examination should not be permitted to determine matters which are within the capability of the examining party to determine itself e.g. cross-examination is not permitted to establish facts of public record.
2. cross-examination on an affidavit filed under rule 704 in a trademark matter is not discovery e.g. matters relevant to the issue but not relevant to the evidence in the affidavit are not a proper subject for questions on cross-examination.
3. if matters are ambiguously or vaguely dealt with in the affidavit, cross-examination may be permitted for the purpose of clarification.
4. Where the affiant being an expert or quasi-expert gives opinion evidence cross-examination may be permitted to establish the basis of the opinion in the affidavit.
5. where cross-examination is permitted it should be limited to matters relevant to the issue and the subject of the affidavit and matters logically following therefrom.
6. where leave to cross-examine is granted, attendance of a foreign affiant is not compellable but the evidence of an affiant who does not attend for cross-examination is to be given a lesser, if any, weight in the determination of the matter.
[5]
It follows that in granting leave to cross-examine Marilynn Cason I should not do so in terms which indicate that attendance will be compelled by the court and that I should indicate which parts of the affidavit may be the subject of questions on cross-examination.
[6]
With respect to paragraph 2 in which the affiant swears to sales in Canada and the United States, counsel for Truso seeks to cross-examine to establish the sales in Canada. The paragraph seems in no way ambiguous or vague, its relevance may be difficult to discern but that does not indicate a necessity for cross-examination.
[7]
Paragraph 4 indicates that a certain label has been used with respect to the manufacture and sale of a list of products in the United States. There is no statement that the label has been used in Canada. The applicant wishes to ask on cross-examination whether the label has been used in Canada. This question would be more appropriate to a discovery than to a cross-examination under this rule. The statements in this paragraph of the affidavit are neither ambiguous or vague, cross-examination on the question is not necessary.
[8]
Paragraph 6 relates to the advertizing and promotion expenses of Johnson. Truso indicates that the portion of expenses attributable to Canada is not indicated. Cross-examination is not necessary to clarify the statement in this paragraph. Cross-examination is not available under this rule to attempt to discover relevance.
[9]
In paragraph 8, the affiant has set out the circulation figures for certain magazines. These figures it is indicated were obtained from the Audit Bureau of Circulation and would be equally available to Truso. The cases make it clear that cross-examination should not be granted to save the examining party from having to do its own research.
[10]
Paragraph 10 contains the statement that Johnson held a series of training seminars in Canada but contains little detail. It is entirely possible that the affiant knows more about these seminars and should submit to questions as to the ways in which these seminars were used to aquaint people in the beauty shop industry with the Precise brand of products and how these products could best be used with customers in Canada.
[11]
In paragraph 11, the affiant has detailed the annual sales of Precise Brand Products in Canada. These figures show a marked dip in sales in 1983 and 1984. Truso wishes to ask why on cross-examination. Such a line of questioning would be more appropriate to a discovery than to a cross-examination under rule 704. The paragraph is neither ambiguous or vague. Leave will not be granted.
[12]
Paragraphs 15 and 19 attest to the affiant's belief that products sold by Johnson's Canadian distributor have been sold to Beauty Salons in Canada and sold by them for home use. In paragraph 19 the statement is based on the affiant's experience in the United States. This indicates to me that the evidence given in these paragraphs is based on the quasi expert or expert opinion of the affiant. The affiant should submit to cross-examination on the factual basis for her statements with regard to sales for in home use and purchase by the consuming public.
[13]
Paragraphs 17 and 20 contain opinion evidence of the affiant based on her experience in the United States and the experience of her informant in Canada. Counsel for Truso seeks to cross-examine concerning the facts on which this opinion is based. It was pointed out by Cattonach, J., in the Chocosuisse case at p. 225 that opinion evidence is only as good as the reasons on which it is based. There will therefore be leave to cross-examine on paragraphs 17 and 20.
[14]
Counsel asked that I consider ordering written questions and answers in view of the inconvenience to the affiant having to attend from the United States. The affiant indicates that she lives in Evanston, Illinois. I note that there are many cities in Canada where transportation to Toronto is not as readily available. However it is to be recognized that the affiant is a business executive and may have many pressing obligations other than attendance at an examination in Toronto. Consideration should therefore be given to forming questions in writing. But if the respondent's counsel is not prepared to abandon his undoubted right to oral cross-examination or having framed written questions is not satisfied with the sufficiency of the answers he will have leave to arrange for cross-examination.
ORDER:
[15]
IT IS ORDERED THAT the respondent through its counsel have leave to cross-examine Marilynn Cason on her affidavit sworn September 10th, 1986, with respect to the statements in paragraphs 10, 15, 17, 19 and 20. Cross-examination to be limited to matters relevant both to the action and to the statements made in those paragraphs.
[16]
Such cross-examination may, by agreement of counsel, be by written questions and answers but, failing agreement or the sufficiency of the written answers, leave is granted for viva voce cross-examination.
[17]
On consent the time for filing respondents' affidavit evidence is extended to November 29th, 1986.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]