 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> )
Indexed  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Beaudry, J.
May 23, 2007.
Counsel:
Andrew J. Reddon, Frank J. McLaughlin, Brian D. Edmonds and Meighan Leon, for the plaintiffs;
John Simpson, Nu-Pharm, Andrea Burke, B. Sherman, Rocco Di Pucchio, R. Benyak, Ashley Lattal, R. Benyak, for the defendants.
Solicitors of Record:
McCarthy Tétrault LLP, Toronto, Ontario, for the plaintiffs;
Goodmans LLP, Davies Ward Phillips & Vineberg LLP, Lax O’Sullivan Scott Toronto, Ontario for the defendants.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Beaudry, J.
: These reasons follow the hearings on April 16, 17, 18 and 19, 2007, at Toronto, of seven motions, brought pursuant to Rule 35(2)(b), Federal Court Rules (the Rules), SOR/98-106, in appeal from four Orders of Prothonotary Aronovitch, as set out in the following sequence:
a) First Order (Making Inquiries Order) dated August 9, 2006, Appendix “I”;
b) Second Order (the August Refusals Order) dated August 9, 2006, Appendix “II”;
c) Third Order (the November Order) dated November 24, 2006 attached as Appendix “III” to these reasons; and
d) Fourth Order (the Sherman Order) dated August 9, 2006, attached as Appendix “IV” to these reasons.
[2]
Originating from parties on both sides, the seven motions consist of a total of ten appeals of the four Orders by Prothonotary Aronovitch that deal with matters in dispute at the discovery stage of this longstanding patent infringement action, Appendix “V” attached to these reasons provides a chronology of the present motions.
[3]
One of the motions in appeal (the first motion), was brought by the defendant Nu-Pharm Inc. (Nu-Pharm), on October 10, 2006 and seeks to set aside certain parts of two Orders dated August 9, 2006:
a) the Making Inquiries Order (Appeal #1), pursuant to which Nu-Pharm was ordered to make inquiries of various non-parties to this action; and
b) the August Refusals Order (Appeal #2), in which Nu-Pharm was ordered to answer certain questions refused on examination for discovery of its representative, Mr. Benyak.
[4]
The second motion in appeal (the second motion), was brought by the Plaintiffs Merck & Co., Inc. and Merck Frosst Canada & Co. (Merck) on October 12, 2006 and seeks to set aside parts of two Orders dated August 9, 2006:
a) the Making Inquiries Order (Appeal #3), in which Prothonotary Aronovitch ruled that the Defendants, Nu-Pharm and Mr. Richard Benyak (Benyak) need not otherwise make inquires of certain third parties, including Apotex Inc. (including its Novex Pharma division), Brantford, Signa and Trillium; and
b) the August Refusals Order (Appeal #4), in which Prothonotary Aronovitch limited the nature and extent of inquiries that Nu-Pharm can make of non-parties including the above-mentioned third parties and certain former employees, including Van Doornik, Beyger, Culp and Saban. The August Refusals Order also gave effect to claims of solicitor/client privilege and ordered that Nu-Pharm and Benyak did not have to answer 17 additional questions proffered by Merck.
[5]
The third motion in appeal (the third motion) was brought by Benyak on October 12, 2006 and seeks to set aside certain portions of both the Making Inquiries Order (Appeal #5), and the August Refusals Order (Appeal #6), for the same reasons sought by Nu-Pharm in its motion to set aside the impugned portions of both Orders, as noted above in the first motion.
[6]
The fourth motion in appeal (the fourth motion) was brought by Merck on December 4, 2006 (Appeal #7), and seeks to set aside the November Order of Prothonotary Aronovitch, in which she ordered that Nu-Pharm and Benyak need not make any inquiries or requests for documents from Beyger, Culp, Van Doornik, Apotex, Novex Pharma, Delmar, Hems, BCI, Signa, Trillium or Saban beyond any previously ordered and stood down certain questions contained in Schedule “E” to the Order, where these questions involve inquiries of the aforementioned persons, until the results of the inquiries and requests previously ordered are known. In other words, the Defendants Nu-Pharm and Benyak, do not have to make further inquiries beyond those permitted under Rule 241 have been provided.
[7]
The fifth motion in appeal (the fifth motion) was brought by Nu-Pharm, on December 4, 2006 (Appeal #8), and seeks to set aside parts of the November Order of Prothonotary Aronovitch, in which she ordered that Nu-Pharm and Benyak respond to certain questions. Nu-Pharm also seeks to set aside the awarding of costs to Merck, at the high end of Column V of Tariff B.
[8]
The sixth motion in appeal (the sixth motion) was brought by Benyak (Appeal #9) on December 4, 2006, who seeks to set aside that part of the November Order, which orders him to answer certain questions refused on his examination for discovery. In addition, Benyak seeks to reverse the award of costs to Merck in relation to the November Order.
[9]
Finally, the seventh motion in appeal (the seventh motion) was brought by Merck (Appeal #10) on October 13, 2006, and seeks to set aside parts of the Sherman Order of Prothonotary Aronovitch dated August 9, 2006, wherein she ruled that Defendant Dr. Bernard Sherman (Sherman) does not have to make inquiries of corporations controlled by him and employees thereof.
I. BACKGROUND
[10]
This action was commenced by Statement of Claim dated April 29, 1999. Merck alleges that in light of their non-arms length relationship with Apotex Inc. (Apotex), which was found to have infringed Merck’s exclusive patent interest in the Canadian Patent Number 1,275,349 (the ‘349 Patent), the defendants created an elaborate diversion scheme, in order to circumvent the permanent injunction rendered against Apotex by Justice W. Andrew MacKay in the 1994 decision of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) (QL), and thereby brought to market the infringing product (Apo-Enalapril) under a new name, Nu-Enalapril. It is Merck’s position that Nu-Enalapril tablets are not only identical to Apo-Enalapril tablets, as indicated by Nu-Pharm in its materials filed with the Court (File No. T-2552-97), but it also infringes the claims in the ‘349 Patent because it is an enalapril or an enalapril maleate, the generic name of the chemical compounds that constitute the fundamental claims of the ‘349 Patent.
[11]
In order to test and prove its theory of the case, Merck has sought through discoveries to fit together the various elements of the sodium-enalapril non-infringing scheme, which involves not only Apotex’s principal, the defendant Dr. Bernard Sherman, but also Nu-Pharm, Apotex’s sister company and its President Benyak, in both their personal and corporate capacities. To get to the bottom of the composition and manufacture of Nu-Enalapril, essential elements of the issue in action, Merck has sought to question not only the defendants but to have them make inquiries and produce documents from those such as former and present employees of Nu-Pharm, its suppliers and manufacturers, who also are intimately related to Apotex within the Sherman Group of companies.
[12]
Merck wants to establish that Nu-Enalapril does indeed infringe the ‘349 Patent. It wants also to adduce evidence by way of discoveries to assemble the essential elements required to pierce the corporate veil behind which, Merck argues, Sherman, the directing mind of Apotex, uses Nu-Pharm as Apotex’s alter ego, a sham, in other words, to shield his sophisticated strategy of subterfuge to circumvent the permanent injunction granted by Justice MacKay in 1994.
[13]
For their part, the defendants vigorously defend Merck’s claims of infringement on the basis that the subject claims in the ‘349 Patent are either invalid on the stated grounds, or do not encompass Nu-Pharm’s enalapril formulation as contained in Nu-Enalapril. Nu-Pharm also commenced a Counterclaim challenging the validity of the ‘349 Patent, seeking declaratory relief to in effect declare void the ‘349 Patent.
[14]
On March 7, 2000, Merck won a contempt of Court application against Apotex for continuing to sell Apo-Enalapril in spite of the permanent injunction. In that decision,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  opinion, it is beyond a reasonable doubt that both Apotex by its officers, and Dr. Sherman in his personal capacity, committed contempt by selling, and in Dr. Sherman's case by authorizing the selling, of Apo-Enalapril product after Dr. Sherman had read the Reasons for Judgment dated December 14, 1994, which indicated that as of that day the Court had resolved that Merck was entitled to a permanent injunction prohibiting Apotex by its officers, and others, from infringing upon the valid claims of Merck's patent.
[41] It is urged for Dr. Sherman that he not be found personally in contempt. Yet he was the "directing mind" of Apotex, it was his decision about the effect of the Reasons for Judgment on December 14 that led to sales of Apo- Enalapril on the following two days, just as it was his decision to stop sales finally on the 16th of December. He knew and had read the Reasons for Judgment and his decisions were the key to conduct of Apotex officers and staff. In my opinion he committed contempt, as did the corporate defendant.
[15]
On July 13, 2001, Merck was granted leave by Prothonotary Aronovitch to commence a Third Party Action naming Apotex Pharmaceuticals Holdings Inc. (APHI) and Apotex, as Third Parties by Counterclaim. In its Reply and Defence to Counterclaim, Merck pleaded that Nu-Pharm’s Counterclaim was an abuse of process, since Nu-Pharm’s right to seek a declaration of invalidity was barred on the grounds of res judicata and issue estoppel. Nu-Pharm subsequently discontinued its Counterclaim (Discontinuance dated August 27, 2001).
[16]
On November 19, 2001, Merck moved for an Order that the Third Party Claim against APHI and Apotex continue, despite the discontinuance of Nu-Pharm’s Counterclaim. In the alternative, Merck sought an Order adding APHI and Apotex as defendants to the within action, or an Order that would result in APHI and Apotex being named as defendants to a new action to be consolidated with the within action. On February 18, 2002, Prothonotary Aronovitch denied Merck’s motion.
[17]
In its Amended Amended Fresh as Amended Reply (Reply) dated December 31, 2002, Merck specifically denied that any of the claims in the ‘349 Patent were invalid, and stated that Nu-Pharm and the individual defendants were bound by the permanent injunction issued against Apotex by Justice MacKay in 1994.
[18]
By Order dated June 24, 2002, Prothonotary Aronovitch found that Sherman controls the Apotex group of companies, and ordered Sherman to deliver further and better affidavits of documents listing all documents in their power, possession and control, including in the case of Sherman, those in the power, possession and control of the “Apotex group of companies” and produce such documents, unexpurgated, in respect of the following, subject to any claims of privilege. This list of relevant categories of documents to be produced within the power, possession and control of those companies pursuant to Rule 225(a), included documents related to the composition, formulation and active medicinal ingredient in Apo-Enalapril tablets.
[19]
At the hearings of the Plaintiffs’ Compliance Motion held March 22-23, 2006, the Court was advised that Sherman has made inquiries within the Apotex group of companies and has produced documents within the power, possession and control of the Apotex group of companies in response to discovery questions, including the admission that the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) in the allegedly infringing Nu-Enalapril is “enalapril maleate.” However, Prothonotary Aronovitch held in her Fourth Order that Sherman equivocated as to the rest of the contents of the Nu-Enalapril tablets, information that is relevant and needed to be answered.
[20]
Consequently, Merck brought a motion for an order compelling the defendant, Sherman to answer outstanding undertakings given on his examination for discovery held on April 27-30 and May 3-5, 2004; to answer questions refused on said examination for discovery; and to re-attend on discovery to answer further questions, including questions arising out of the answers provided and documents produced in respect of his undertakings and responses to outstanding questions. Merck also sought costs.
[21]
In addition, Merck brought similar motions for orders compelling the defendants Nu-Pharm and Benyak to answer the undertakings given on the examination for discovery of Benyak, in his corporate and individual capacity, held on April 6, 13, 14, 15 and 16, June 11, August, 24, 25, and 26, 2004 and March 4, 2005; to answer discovery questions refused by Benyak; to answer discovery questions asked by way of written interrogatory; to re-attend on discovery to answer further questions, including questions arising out of the answers provided and documents produced in respect of the above matters; and an order granting Merck its costs of the motion.
[22]
The above referenced motions were heard in part, in Toronto, over the course of eight hearing days held April 11, June 5, 6, 12, 13, October 18, 19, and 20, 2006. Among others, Prothonotary Aronovitch rendered three Orders on August 9, 2006 and a fourth on November 24, 2006. They form the object of the present ten appeals.
II. PERTINENT LEGISLATION
[23]
The guiding principles of the Rules of Discovery are delineated in Rule 3, which provides as follows:
General principle
3. These Rules shall be interpreted and applied so as to secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive determination of every proceeding on its merits.
Principe général
3. Les présentes règles sont interprétées et appliquées de façon à permettre d’apporter une solution au litige qui soit juste et la plus expéditive et économique possible.
[24]
Rules 233 and 238(1) make provision for the production of any document from and examination of a non party to the action respectively, as described below:
Production from non-party with leave
233. (1) On motion, the Court may order the production of any document that is in the possession of a person who is not a party to the action, if the document is relevant and its production could be compelled at trial.
Personal service on non-party
(2) Notice of a motion for an order under subsection (1) shall be personally served on the person who is in possession of the document.
Preparation of certified copy
(3) The Court may, in an order under subsection (1), give directions for the preparation of a certified copy of the document to be used instead of the original.
Examination of non-parties with leave
238. (1) A party to an action may bring a motion for leave to examine for discovery any person not a party to the action, other than an expert witness for a party, who might have information on an issue in the action.
Production d’un document en la possession d’un tiers
233. (1) La Cour peut, sur requête, ordonner qu’un document en la possession d’une personne qui n’est pas une partie à l’action soit produit s’il est pertinent et si sa production pourrait être exigée lors de l’instruction.
Signification à personne
(2) L’avis d’une requête présentée pour obtenir l’ordonnance visée au paragraphe (1) est signifié à personne à la personne qui a le document en sa possession.
Préparation d’une copie certifiée conforme
(3) La Cour peut, dans l’ordonnance visée au paragraphe (1), donner des directives au sujet de la préparation d’une copie certifiée conforme du document pour qu’elle tienne lieu d’original.
Interrogatoire d’un tiers
238. (1) Une partie à une action peut, par voie de requête, demander l’autorisation de procéder à l’interrogatoire préalable d’une personne qui n’est pas une partie, autre qu’un témoin expert d’une partie, qui pourrait posséder des renseignements sur une question litigieuse soulevée dans l’action.
[25]
The scope and procedures for examinations for discovery in matters before the Federal Courts are set out in Rules 240 to 244 of the Rules, which provide as follows:
Scope of examination
240. A person being examined for discovery shall answer, to the best of the person's knowledge, information and belief, any question that
(a) is relevant to any unadmitted allegation of fact in a pleading filed by the party being examined or by the examining party; or
(b) concerns the name or address of any person, other than an expert witness, who might reasonably be expected to have knowledge relating to a matter in question in the action.
Obligation to inform self
241. Subject to paragraph 242(1)(d), a person who is to be examined for discovery, other than a person examined under rule 238, shall, before the examination, become informed by making inquiries of any present or former officer, servant, agent or employee of the party, including any who are outside Canada, who might be expected to have knowledge relating to any matter in question in the action.
Objections permitted
242. (1) A person may object to a question asked in an examination for discovery on the ground that
(a) the answer is privileged;
(b) the question is not relevant to any unadmitted allegation of fact in a pleading filed by the party being examined or by the examining party;
(c) the question is unreasonable or unnecessary; or
(d) it would be unduly onerous to require the person to make the inquiries referred to in rule 241.
Objections not permitted
(2) A person other than a person examined under rule 238 may not object to a question asked in an examination for discovery on the ground that
(a) the answer would be evidence or hearsay;
(b) the question constitutes cross-examination.
Limit on examination
243. On motion, the Court may limit an examination for discovery that it considers to be oppressive, vexatious or unnecessary.
Examined party to be better informed
244. (1) Where a person being examined for discovery, other than a person examined under rule 238, is unable to answer a question, the examining party may require the person to become better informed and may conclude the examination, subject to obtaining answers to any remaining questions.
Further answers
(2) A person being examined who is required to become better informed shall provide the information sought by the examining party by submitting to a continuation of the oral examination for discovery in respect of the information or, where the parties agree, by providing the information in writing.
Information deemed part of examination
(3) Information provided under subsection (2) is deemed to be part of the examination for discovery.
Étendue de l’interrogatoire
240. La personne soumise à un interrogatoire préalable répond, au mieux de sa connaissance et de sa croyance, à toute question qui :
a) soit se rapporte à un fait allégué et non admis dans un acte de procédure déposé par la partie soumise à l’interrogatoire préalable ou par la partie qui interroge;
b) soit concerne le nom ou l’adresse d’une personne, autre qu’un témoin expert, dont il est raisonnable de croire qu’elle a une connaissance d’une question en litige dans l’action.
L’obligation de se renseigner
241. Sous réserve de l’alinéa 242(1)d), la personne soumise à un interrogatoire préalable, autre que celle interrogée aux termes de la règle 238, se renseigne, avant celui-ci, auprès des dirigeants, fonctionnaires, agents ou employés actuels ou antérieurs de la partie, y compris ceux qui se trouvent à l’extérieur du Canada, dont il est raisonnable de croire qu’ils pourraient détenir des renseignements au sujet de toute question en litige dans l’action.
Objection permise
242. (1) Une personne peut soulever une objection au sujet de toute question posée lors d’un interrogatoire préalable au motif que, selon le cas :
a) la réponse est protégée par un privilège de non-divulgation;
b) la question ne se rapporte pas à un fait allégué et non admis dans un acte de procédure déposé par la partie soumise à l’interrogatoire ou par la partie qui l’interroge;
c) la question est déraisonnable ou inutile;
d) il serait trop onéreux de se renseigner auprès d’une personne visée à la règle 241.
Objection interdite
(2) À l’exception d’une personne interrogée aux termes de la règle 238, nul ne peut s’opposer à une question posée lors d’un interrogatoire préalable au motif que, selon le cas :
a) la réponse constituerait un élément de preuve ou du ouï-dire;
b) la question constitue un contre-interrogatoire.
Droit de limiter l’interrogatoire
243. La Cour peut, sur requête, limiter les interrogatoires préalables qu’elle estime abusifs, vexatoires ou inutiles.
Obligation de mieux se renseigner
244. (1) Lorsqu’une partie soumet une personne, autre que celle visée à la règle 238, à un interrogatoire préalable et que celle-ci est incapable de répondre à une question, elle peut exiger que la personne se renseigne davantage et peut mettre fin à l’interrogatoire préalable à la condition d’obtenir les réponses aux questions qu’il lui reste à poser.
Renseignements additionnels
(2) La personne contrainte de mieux se renseigner fournit les renseignements demandés par la partie en se soumettant à nouveau à l’interrogatoire préalable oral ou, avec le consentement des parties, en fournissant les renseignements par écrit.
Effet des renseignements donnés
(3) Les renseignements donnés aux termes du paragraphe (2) sont réputés faire partie de l’interrogatoire préalable.
[26]
The discretionary powers of the Courts with respect to the awarding of costs between parties are set out in Rule 400. The relevant passages are provided below:
Discretionary powers of Court
400. (1) The Court shall have full discretionary power over the amount and allocation of costs and the determination of by whom they are to be paid.
. . . . .
Factors in awarding costs
(3) In exercising its discretion under subsection (1), the Court may consider
(a) the result of the proceeding;
(b) the amounts claimed and the amounts recovered;
(c) the importance and complexity of the issues;
(d) the apportionment of liability;
(e) any written offer to settle;
(f) any offer to contribute made under rule 421;
(g) the amount of work;
(h) whether the public interest in having the proceeding litigated justifies a particular award of costs;
(i) any conduct of a party that tended to shorten or unnecessarily lengthen the duration of the proceeding;
(j) the failure by a party to admit anything that should have been admitted or to serve a request to admit;
(k) whether any step in the proceeding was
(i) improper, vexatious or unnecessary, or
(ii) taken through negligence, mistake or excessive caution;
(l) whether more than one set of costs should be allowed, where two or more parties were represented by different solicitors or were represented by the same solicitor but separated their defence unnecessarily;
(m) whether two or more parties, represented by the same solicitor, initiated separate proceedings unnecessarily;
(n) whether a party who was successful in an action exaggerated a claim, including a counterclaim or third party claim, to avoid the operation of rules 292 to 299; and
(o) any other matter that it considers relevant.
Tariff B
(4) The Court may fix all or part of any costs by reference to Tariff B and may award a lump sum in lieu of, or in addition to, any assessed costs.
Directions re assessment
(5) Where the Court orders that costs be assessed in accordance with Tariff B, the Court may direct that the assessment be performed under a specific column or combination of columns of the table to that Tariff.
Further discretion of Court
(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of these Rules, the Court may
(a) award or refuse costs in respect of a particular issue or step in a proceeding;
(b) award assessed costs or a percentage of assessed costs up to and including a specified step in a proceeding;
(c) award all or part of costs on a solicitor-and-client basis; or
(d) award costs against a successful party.
Award and payment of costs
(7) Costs shall be awarded to the party who is entitled to receive the costs and not to the party's solicitor, but they may be paid to the party's solicitor in trust.
Pouvoir discrétionnaire de la Cour
400. (1) La Cour a le pouvoir discrétionnaire de déterminer le montant des dépens, de les répartir et de désigner les personnes qui doivent les payer.
. . . . .
Facteurs à prendre en compte
(3) Dans l’exercice de son pouvoir discrétionnaire en application du paragraphe (1), la Cour peut tenir compte de l’un ou l’autre des facteurs suivants :
a) le résultat de l’instance;
b) les sommes réclamées et les sommes recouvrées;
c) l’importance et la complexité des questions en litige;
d) le partage de la responsabilité;
e) toute offre écrite de règlement;
f) toute offre de contribution faite en vertu de la règle 421;
g) la charge de travail;
h) le fait que l’intérêt public dans la résolution judiciaire de l’instance justifie une adjudication particulière des dépens;
i) la conduite d’une partie qui a eu pour effet d’abréger ou de prolonger inutilement la durée de l’instance;
j) le défaut de la part d’une partie de signifier une demande visée à la règle 255 ou de reconnaître ce qui aurait dû être admis;
k) la question de savoir si une mesure prise au cours de l’instance, selon le cas :
(i) était inappropriée, vexatoire ou inutile,
(ii) a été entreprise de manière négligente, par erreur ou avec trop de circonspection;
l) la question de savoir si plus d’un mémoire de dépens devrait être accordé lorsque deux ou plusieurs parties sont représentées par différents avocats ou lorsque, étant représentées par le même avocat, elles ont scindé inutilement leur défense;
m) la question de savoir si deux ou plusieurs parties représentées par le même avocat ont engagé inutilement des instances distinctes;
n) la question de savoir si la partie qui a eu gain de cause dans une action a exagéré le montant de sa réclamation, notamment celle indiquée dans la demande reconventionnelle ou la mise en cause, pour éviter l’application des règles 292 à 299;
o) toute autre question qu’elle juge pertinente.
Tarif B
(4) La Cour peut fixer tout ou partie des dépens en se reportant au tarif B et adjuger une somme globale au lieu ou en sus des dépens taxés.
Directives de la Cour
(5) Dans le cas où la Cour ordonne que les dépens soient taxés conformément au tarif B, elle peut donner des directives prescrivant que la taxation soit faite selon une colonne déterminée ou une combinaison de colonnes du tableau de ce tarif.
Autres pouvoirs discrétionnaires de la Cour
(6) Malgré toute autre disposition des présentes règles, la Cour peut :
a) adjuger ou refuser d’adjuger les dépens à l’égard d’une question litigieuse ou d’une procédure particulières;
b) adjuger l’ensemble ou un pourcentage des dépens taxés, jusqu’à une étape précise de l’instance;
c) adjuger tout ou partie des dépens sur une base avocat-client;
d) condamner aux dépens la partie qui obtient gain de cause.
Adjudication et paiement des dépens
(7) Les dépens sont adjugés à la partie qui y a droit et non à son avocat, mais ils peuvent être payés en fiducie à celui-ci.
[27]
The Sherman Order raises the question of the obligations of an individual and any corporation that may be controlled directly or indirectly by the individual. Rule 225(a) outlines the options for an Order for disclosure. It states as follows:
Order for disclosure
225. On motion, the Court may order a party to disclose in an affidavit of documents all relevant documents that are in the possession, power or control of
(a) where the party is an individual, any corporation that is controlled directly or indirectly by the party; or
(b) where the party is a corporation,
(i) any corporation that is controlled directly or indirectly by the party,
(ii) any corporation or individual that directly or indirectly controls the party, or
(iii) any corporation that is controlled directly or indirectly by a person who also directly or indirectly controls the party.
Ordonnance de divulgation
225. La Cour peut, sur requête, ordonner à une partie de divulguer dans l’affidavit de documents l’existence de tout document pertinent qui est en la possession, sous l’autorité ou sous la garde de l’une ou l’autre des personnes suivantes :
a) si la partie est un particulier, toute personne morale qui est contrôlée directement ou indirectement par la partie;
b) si la partie est une personne morale :
(i) toute personne morale qui est contrôlée directement ou indirectement par la partie,
(ii) toute personne morale ou tout particulier qui contrôle directement ou indirectement la partie,
(iii) toute personne morale qui est contrôlée directement ou indirectement par une personne qui contrôle aussi la partie, directement ou indirectement.
[28]
Interpretation of statutes including the Federal Courts Rules is guided by the provision in section 12 of the Interpretation Act :
Enactments deemed remedial
12. Every enactment is deemed remedial, and shall be given such fair, large and liberal construction and interpretation as best ensures the attainment of its objects.
Principe et interprétation
12. Tout texte est censé apporter une solution de droit et s’interprète de la manière la plus équitable et la plus large qui soit compatible avec la réalisation de son objet.
III. ANALYSIS
[29]
These reasons follow the order in which the parties made their submissions, starting with the motions of Nu-Pharm brought on October 10, 2006. The motion by Merck against the August 9, 2006 Order with regard to the defendant Sherman is dealt with last.
A) THE MAKING OF INQUIRIES ORDER DATED AUGUST 9, 2006
[30]
Upon motion of the Plaintiffs, Merck, to compel defendants Nu-Pharm and Benyak to answer the undertakings given and answer discovery questions refused on the examination for discovery of Benyak, in his corporate and individual capacity, Prothonotary Aronovitch ordered among other things that Nu-Pharm and Benyak will make inquiries of Joseph Beyger, Antony van Doornik and Dawn Culp, and will request of each of Apotex Inc. (including its Novex Pharma division), Brantford, Signa and Trillium that they produce to Nu-Pharm and Benyak relevant documents, whereby said requests are subject to reasonable limits, but Nu-Pharm and Benyak need not otherwise make inquiries of them. It is this aspect of the Making of Inquiries Order that attracted motions of appeal not only from Nu-Pharm and Benyak but also from Merck.
i)
Standard of Review
[31]
Where a decision of a Prothonotary is discretionary, the standard of review to be applied by the Federal Court judge is set out by the Federal Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 462-65 (C.A.). This standard of review was approved by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) at paragraph 19:
19. […] Discretionary orders of Prothonotaries ought not be disturbed on appeal to a judge unless:
a) the questions raised in the motion are vital to the final issue of the case, or
b) the orders are clearly wrong, in the sense that the exercise of discretion by the prothonotary was based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts.
[32]
See also  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2003] F.C.J. No. 1725 (F.C.A.) (QL) where Justice Barry L. Strayer held as follows at paragraph 9:
9. It is common ground that when a motions judge hears an appeal from a prothonotary, assuming that no questions vital to the final issue of the case are involved, the reviewing judge can only exercise his or her own discretion in place of the prothonotary's if he or she concludes that the exercise of discretion by the prothonotary "was based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of facts ...". ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 95) F.C.A. In the present case the question for this Court is whether the prothonotary's decision was based upon a wrong principle. If so, the learned motions judge should have set it aside and exercised his own discretion.
[33]
I adopt the formulation of my colleague Justice Frederick E. Gibson in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] F.C.J. No. 344 (F.C.) (QL), who dealt with multiple motions on appeal of multiple orders as is the case here. He said at paragraph 15:
[…] the orders under review should not be interfered with unless the learned Prothonotary's decisions of either of them were or was clearly wrong in the sense that the exercise of discretion by the Prothonotary was based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts.
[34]
So too, I shall not interfere with discretionary decisions of Prothonotary Aronovitch unless her decisions are clearly wrong in the sense that the exercise of her discretion was based on a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts.
ii)
The Nu-Pharm Appeal of the Making of Inquiries Order
[35]
In its motion on appeal from parts of the Making of Inquiries Order, Nu-Pharm submits that the Prothonotary erred in determining that Nu-Pharm should be required to make inquiries of non-parties to the action or of former employees in respect of their activities subsequent to their employment at Nu-Pharm. Furthermore, Nu-Pharm has not appealed those rulings in the Making Inquiries Order that require Nu-Pharm to make inquiries of its former employees, Mr. Doornik, Mr. Beyger and Ms. Culp, that relate solely to their activities while they were employed by Nu-Pharm. Consequently, Merck improperly seeks to have Nu-Pharm make inquiries of persons (individuals and corporations) who are not parties to the action and over whom it has neither power nor control, including the following:
(a) Apotex (and “anyone  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ”);
(b) Signa, which Nu-Pharm never had a relationship with “[p] rior to working with Signa on Nu-Enalapril”, and which Merck acknowledges is at least one “generation removed from” Mr. Benyak (and thus, Nu-Pharm):
2944 Q. […] I want to know the details of the substance involved.
MR. RADOMSKI: But you'll get that from Signa.
MR. EDMONDS: Maybe I won't, maybe I will. Signa suppliers are another generation removed from Mr. Benyak.
MR. RADOMSKI: Sorry, Signa?
MR. EDMONDS: Signa suppliers is an entire another generation removed from Mr. Benyak.
Benyak Transcript, April 15, 2004 pp. 677, 686-7, Q. 2907, 2944
(c) Novex Pharma (a division of Apotex) (“Novex”);
Benyak Transcript, April 6, 2004, p. 21, Q. 66 and p. 85, Q. 326
(d) A number of former employees of Nu-Pharm, who not only left Nu-Pharm to go to Novex (a non-party to the proceeding), but have also since left Novex; or who are, for the reasons stated, otherwise unavailable to Nu-Pharm:
(i) Mr. Beyer: He is no longer employed with Novex Pharma, much less Nu-Pharm. Neither Mr. Benyak nor, to his knowledge, anyone at Nu-Pharm, have any contact information for Mr. Beyger.
(ii) Mr. van Doornik: When asked if Mr. van Doornik was “still at Novex Pharma”, Mr. Benyak stated, “I think he’s retired now. I haven’t talked to him in a long time so I don’t know”, and further advised that his current contact details were with Novex – Mr. Benyak would have to look up his home phone number in the phone book.
(iii) Ms. Culp: Formerly of Apotex, but no longer employed there.
(iv) Mr. Hems: Merck’s counsel advises that Mr. Hems was (at least formerly) with Apotex; Mr. Benyak testified that he does not know Mr. Hems.
(v) Ms. Knott: A former secretary to Mr. Benyak, who is no longer with him; Mr. Benyak testified that she is “out west”, and he has “no idea where she is.”
Benyak transcript, April 13, 2004 p. 241, Q. 1064; p. 280, Q. 1223; p. 281, Q. 1230-1232; p. 292, Q. 1279; p. 298, Q. 1323
Benyak transcript, April 15, 2004 p. 751, Q. 3248-3252
(e) Brantford Chemicals Inc.
Benyak transcript, April 15, 2004 p. 780, Q. 3399
(f) Trillium Health Care Manufacturing Inc., a supplier which manufactured Nu-Enalapril tablets for Nu-Pharm.
Benyak transcript, April 13, 2004, p. 250, Q. 1106-1107
[36]
Finally, Nu-Pharm states that by her erroneous Order, Prothonotary Aronovitch allows Merck to do indirectly what it could do directly. Merck could itself obtain the information it currently seeks to have Nu-Pharm obtain from non-parties by: (i) seeking leave to join one or more parties to the action; (ii) beginning another action, and seeking leave to consolidate it with the within action; (iii) seeking leave to examine a non-party; or (iv) seeking an Order for production from a non-party. Consequently, Nu-Pharm submits that the Prothonotary erred in ruling that Nu-Pharm should be required to make the inquiries of non-parties to the action set out in Schedule “A” attached to the Order of August 9, 2006.
[37]
For its part, Merck rejects the notion that Nu-Pharm should not be allowed to make inquiries of its former employees even with respect to their work after they left Nu-Pharm, since their work both for and on behalf of Nu-Pharm while they were employed at Novex Pharm, is particularly relevant to the broad pleadings, which allege that not only the former employees but also the corporations have worked in consort to circumvent the permanent Court injunction and persist in its infringement of the ‘349 Patent.
[38]
After having held the impugned Making of Inquires Order to the light of the submissions of Merck and Nu-Pharm, I conclude that Prothonotary Aronovitch was called upon to make a discretionary decision. That decision was not wrong. Prothonotary Aronovitch did not base her assessment on a wrong principle nor did she fall prey to a misapprehension of the facts. In my view, she paid due respect to the facts in issue and was mindful of the close ongoing collaboration between certain of the Novex Pharm employees and their former employer Nu-Pharm, all the while working on behalf of Apotex. That is why I shall dismiss Nu-Pharm’s motion appealing the Making of Inquiries Order dated August 9, 2006.
iii)
The Merck Appeal of the Making of Inquiries Order
[39]
Merck appeals the Making Inquiries Order because in its view, the Prothonotary erred in law in failing to find that Apotex was Nu-Pharm’s agent when its employees were so acting. Also, Merck argues that the Prothonotary erred in law in failing to order further inquiries pursuant to Rule 244.
[40]
In response, Nu-Pharm and Benyak assert that Prothonotary Aronovitch did not err by rejecting the request to order further inquiries pursuant to Rule 244 as the parties in question are non-parties who do not fall within the scope of individuals referred to in Rule 241. Moreover, Prothonotary Aronovitch did not establish that the former employees were agents of Nu-Pharm. She characterized them as follows:
In the particular circumstances of this case, I find as well that van Doornik and Beyger may be said to be akin to agents in respect of their areas of responsibility while at Novex Pharma. […]
[41]
The respondents argue that there is a noted distinction between being something and being “akin” to being something. The two are not the same. Consequently, there is no foundation for Merck’s argument that Apotex, as Van Doornik’s, Beyger’s and Culp’s employer, was also an agent for Nu-Pharm.
[42]
Finally, Nu-Pharm submits that there is no obligation on a party being examined to make inquiries of a corporate entity that is independent of the party being examined, even in a case where the third party is related to another defendant in the proceeding (see Intel Corp. v. 3395383 Canada Inc., [2004] F.C.J. No. 251 (F.C.) (QL) at paragraph 21).
[43]
Similarly, with respect to the production of documents in the possession and control of non parties, the respondent Nu-Pharm asserts that a party being examined is not obliged to obtain documents from a non-party. The party seeking the documents should seek production directly from the non-party, pursuant to Rule 233. Similarly, a party seeking information from a non-party should seek to examine the non-party directly, pursuant to Rule 238. At paragraph 16 in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  There is no doubt that the documents requested are relevant as the defendants have pleaded sales of the goods in Canada. Although the discovery rules are to be interpreted broadly, there is a need to apply a specific rule to a certain set of facts if those facts fit the rule. Here we have the dealers, who are non-parties, specifically covered by Rule 233(1). It is my opinion that it is an error of law to order the dealers' documents to be produced by the plaintiff when Rule 233(1) sets out a simple process to obtain the documents of a non-party. I would therefore reverse the prothonotary's decision with respect to paragraph 22 and rule that the defendants need not produce the sales documents of its dealers or retailers.
[44]
I have carefully reviewed the arguments of both parties and I turn my attention to the questions of the principle of agency and the examinations for discovery of non-parties.
a) Agency principle
[45]
Black’s Law Dictionary defines agency as follows:
A fiduciary relationship created by express or implied contract or by law, in which one party (the agent) may act on behalf of another party (the principal) and bind that other party by words or actions.
[46]
Gower and Davies set out the factors Courts take into consideration when determining whether or not a relationship of agency exists. These are as follows:
(i) A principal is bound by the transactions on his behalf of his agents or employees if the latter acted within either:
(a) the actual scope of the authority conferred upon them by their principal prior to the transaction or by subsequent ratification; or
(b) the apparent (or ostensible) scope of their authority.
(ii) A principal, qua employer, may also be vicariously liable in tort for acts of his employees or agents which, though not authorized, are nevertheless within the scope of their employment but, in general, is not criminally liable for their acts.
Gower and Davies, Principles of Modern Company Law, 7th ed. (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2003) at 129
(See also G.H.L. Fridman, Fridman’s Law of Agency, 7th edition, (Toronto: Butterworths, 1996), at 11)
[47]
I am cognizant of passages in Prothonotary Aronovitch’s Endorsement where she took particular note of the fact that the Compendium produced by Merck is replete with documents signed by Beyger, for example that indicate as follows:
[…] “Novex Pharma (for Nu-Pharm Inc.)” - with Beyger explicitly holding himself out to represent Nu-Pharm in its regulatory affairs.
The fact that Beyger and van Doornik were providing “services” to Nu-Pharm, pursuant to one or more service agreements, in my view, does not detract from the fact that they were acting for and on behalf of Nu-Pharm in the very spheres of expertise and activity in which they had been formerly employed by Nu-Pharm.
[48]
I cannot conclude that she was clearly wrong in that she based her decision upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts. I do agree that she was entitled to come to the conclusion that such pronouncements should be reserved to the Trier of Fact at Trial, where the questions of the true relationship that exists between Nu-Pharm and Apotex, whether the one is the “alter ego” of the other, are to be ultimately decided. I would therefore not interfere with the Prothonotary’s findings in this regard. Indeed, I believe that the pith and substance of that part of her Order, which is being appealed lies in her correct interpretation of the provisions in the Rules for the examination of non-parties.
b) Examination of Non-Parties
[49]
I have also carefully reviewed the arguments advanced by Merck and the responses of Nu-Pharm and Benyak and conclude that Merck’s position must fail. As noted by Prothonotary Aronovitch, the Rules make specific provisions for the examination of non-parties and the production of documents from same.
[50]
In this regard, Rules 233 and 238 are avenues open to Merck in order to pursue further inquiries including the production of documents from Apotex and its interlocking corporate network. I cannot therefore intervene as Merck would wish, particularly since I agree that Prothonotary Aronovitch was not inexact when she noted as follows:
However, the corporate entities of which Merck would have Benyak inquire, while “third parties” for the purposes of the litigation, are suppliers of services or product of whom it is appropriate, in my view, to make inquiries, solely in respect of documents, “where one can reasonably expect that because of a relationship existing between a party and some third party, that request will be honoured”. Eli Lilly and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] Hugessen J. This is subject, of course, to reasonable limits ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).
That said, other than answering proper follow-up questions on the basis of Nu-Pharm and Benyak’s own knowledge, information and belief regarding documents or information to be provided as a result of the inquiries ordered to be made, Nu-Pharm will have no further obligation to make inquiries. Anything further will require Merck to move to have documentary or other examination of third parties. It is to be hoped that such proceedings may be obviated by the inquiries to be made and documents produced.
This is aged, complex and hard fought litigation. Nothing moves except by inches. Almost all is contested. It is on that basis that I have directed the parties to seek mediation. The hope and expectation is there will have been sufficient disclosure of relevant material and information made prior to the mediation to give the parties confidence and a basis to settle.
[51]
For these reasons, the motion on appeal brought by Merck against parts of the Making Inquiries Orders is dismissed.
iv)
The Benyak Appeal of the Making of Inquiries Order
[52]
Defendant Benyak relies on Nu-Pharm submissions on its appeal of the Making of Inquiries Order and adds that since he was sued in his personal capacity and since the questions that were ordered to be answered that are at issue on this appeal relate to Nu-Pharm, the corporation, and not to Mr. Benyak in his personal capacity, he should, therefore, not be required to answer them.
[53]
Merck also relies on its submission as a respondent on the Nu-Pharm’s appeal and argues that Benyak had a duty to make inquiries prior to his examination for discovery in order to prepare him to answer the questions. That is why Merck points out that despite his apparent absence of any knowledge whatsoever, prior to his examination for discovery, Benyak made no inquiries of his relevant former employees. Similarly, he did not obtain relevant facts and documents from four suppliers of technology, wares and services related to NU-ENALAPRIL; namely, Apotex, Brantford, Signa and Trillium Health Care Manufacturing Inc. (Trillium). Merck submits that Benyak cannot escape his obligations to answer the questions. In both his personal and corporate capacities, Benyak has an obligation to become better informed and provide further answers pursuant to Rule 244.
[54]
I agree. Rule 241 is unequivocal: the duty to make inquiries to prepare for an examination for discovery is mandatory. This Rule states that “a person to be examined for discovery, such as Mr. Benyak shall, before the examination, become informed by making inquiries of any present or former officer, servant, agent or employee of the party, who might be expected to have knowledge relating to any matter in question in the action.” Here, the Prothonotary took into consideration the “apparent dearth of knowledge” on the part of Benyak about “matters of central relevance” to the action, ordered him to make inquiries as set out in the Order. I find no error in her decision and therefore, the Benyak motion to appeal parts of the Making of Inquiries Order is dismissed.
B) THE AUGUST REFUSALS ORDER DATED AUGUST 9, 2006
[55]
In the second Order, Prothonotary Aronovitch ordered that the questions contained in categories 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 of the plaintiffs’ categorized charts are relevant and are to be answered, subject to the following three points:
(a) only proper and reasonable questions are to be answered;
(b) in answer Nu-Pharm and Benyak must provide their knowledge, information and belief; to the extent the nature of the inquiries to be made of certain specific persons was defined in the Court’s Order on the Making Inquiries Questions, it is not altered by this Order; and
(c) questions answered under reserve of objection are answered subject only to the provisos that:
(i) they are answered without admitting their relevance or admissibility at trial; and
(ii) the agreement to answer them cannot be used against Nu-Pharm or Benyak in adjudicating any other question; and thus Nu-Pharm and Benyak will answer the questions set out in Schedule “A” hereto.
[56]
Prothonotary Aronovitch also ordered that Nu-Pharm and Benyak shall produce to the plaintiffs any documents agreed or ordered to be produced, as set out in the schedules hereto. Benyak is to re-attend on discovery, in his personal and corporate capacity, to answer questions that arise from the answers and documents produced as a result of this Order. Finally, the Prothonotary ordered that other than answering proper follow-up questions on the basis of Nu-Pharm and Benyak’s own knowledge, information and belief regarding documents or information to be provided as a result of the inquiries ordered to be made, Nu-Pharm will have no further obligation to make inquiries. Anything further will require Merck to move to have documentary or other examination of third parties. It is to be hoped that such proceedings may be obviated by the inquiries to be made and documents produced.
i)
Issues
[57]
The moving parties raise the following two issues:
a) Did the prothonotary err in principle or misapprehend the facts?
b) Did the prothonotary err by failing to provide an Endorsement of her August Refusals Order? As this issue is also raised in the November Refusals Order, it is addressed further in these reasons under that section.
[58]
For the reasons that follow, the response to the first question is negative. Each of the three motions of appeal against the August Refusals Order, dated August 9, 2006 shall therefore be dismissed.
ii)
Standard of Review
[59]
The appeals of the August Refusals Order are discretionary. As a result, as indicated above, I shall not intervene unless the moving parties can show that the Prothonotary was clearly wrong, or based her decisions on a wrong principle or on a misapprehension of the facts. I adopt the position of the defendant Nu-Pharm in this regard that Prothonotary Aronovitch has case managed this action for seven years and thus has intimate knowledge of the history of the action and the discovery process.
[60]
This Court and the Court of Appeal have consistently held that deference is especially owed to discretionary orders that are issued by case management prothonotaries, having regard to their intimate familiarity with the conduct of the proceeding and their powers and duties under Rule 385. In such cases, a judge should interfere “only in the clearest case of a misuse of judicial discretion” ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2007] F.C.J. No 322 (F.C.) (QL)).
iii)
The Nu-Pharm Appeal of the August Refusals Order
[61]
Nu-Pharm seeks a variation of the August Refusals Order to the extent that it orders answers to the questions it has set out in Schedule “A” of the Order. Nu-Pharm submits that the August Refusals Order was largely predicated on the Prothonotary’s ruling, without oral submissions and without reasons, that ten categories of refused questions were relevant and not otherwise improper as being a matter of privilege, expert or legal opinion, overbroad, or abusively repetitive.
[62]
Nu-Pharm further submits that Prothonotary Aronovitch erred in law by failing to follow the legal principles of discovery, such as the determination that irrelevant and/or overbroad questions are improper. Also, Nu-Pharm states that the Prothonotary erred by requiring Nu-Pharm and Benyak to answer questions that are within the examining party’s means of knowledge. These include questions which ask a party to explain documents that it has already produced or has agreed to produce in advance of producing them, and questions which improperly inquire into matters which are privileged and need not be answered.
[63]
Not surprisingly, Merck takes the opposing view. As the parties’ arguments begin to repeat themselves, I shall also repeat myself and underscore that I find nothing clearly wrong in the decision of the Prothonotary with respect to questions ordered to be answered in Schedule “A” of the said Order. Accordingly, the motion on appeal brought by Nu-Pharm against parts of the August Refusal Order is likewise dismissed. It is therefore required to answer the questions set out in the Schedules to the Order.
iv)
The Merck Appeal of the August Refusals Order
[64]
Merck argues that the Prothonotary erred in law by limiting the follow-up questions that Nu-Pharm and Benyak can answer and thereby requesting that Merck bring a motion under Rule 238 to make further inquiries of the third party. Merck argues that such a procedure anticipates the types of questions that may arise and can lead to a two-tiered system of motions in what are already complex and unwieldy legal proceedings. This, Merck argues is contrary to the goals of judicial economy and efficiency set out in the Rules (Rule 3). Finally, Merck submits that the Prothonotary erred by improperly shrouding the questions that can be answered and the documents to be produced in the cloak of solicitor/client privilege. Such an Order is misplaced at this late stage of the discovery process.
[65]
Merck points out that the defendants’ conduct as alleged in its Statement of Claim is so brazen and egregious a breach of Orders of this Court that the integrity of the Court’s process is negatively affected if it passes without condemnation. In addition, the public interest in the administration of justice, require that evidence relevant to the scheme not be allowed to be concealed behind the very business and corporate structures that are part and parcel of the scheme.
[66]
For its part, Nu-Pharm, contests the position adopted by Merck and comes to the aid of Prothonotary Aronovitch who has case managed the matter, heard and rendered innumerable Orders over the course of the seven years since the Statement of Claim was first filed. In addition, Nu-Pharm argues that with respect to the questions of privilege that the Prothonotary has inserted as a proviso to the expected answers to questions and production of documents, is a highly acceptable procedural practice being exercised with the discretion of a conscientious, experienced Prothonotary. Nu-Pharm is also of the view that the Prothonotary’s rulings with respect to claims of solicitor/client privilege were consistent with the jurisprudence and are, in any event, matters which fall entirely within her discretion. Nu-Pharm argues that as such, this Court should dismiss Merck’s motion of appeal against the August Refusals Order.
[67]
I have carefully weighed in the balance the able arguments on both sides. I am not unmoved by the concerns of judicial economy and efficiency in the procedures of discovery and fairness advanced by Counsel for Merck. I am persuaded however by the representations of Counsel for Nu-Pharm not only with respect to the expertise of Prothonotary Aronovitch in the Rules of the Federal Courts but also with her intimate knowledge of the case from its very beginnings. She has demonstrated sensitivity, patience and resolve to safeguard the general principle in her interpretation of the Rules of the Court, which as notes Rule 3 are
[. . .] applied so as to secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive determination of every proceeding on its merits.
[68]
As such, I arrive at the same conclusions as my colleague, Justice Richard Mosley in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  find no reason to conclude that the learned prothonotary's Order was clearly wrong, in the sense that the exercise of discretion by the prothonotary was based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts. […]
[69]
It is also appropriate at this stage to cite Justice John M. Evans in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] F.C.J. No. 956 (F.C.A.) (QL) at paragraphs 21, 22 and 23:
21 First, this Court is very reluctant to interfere with decisions made by a judge in the course of managing a matter prior to trial, particularly one as complex, lengthy and difficult as this one. As a result of living with the matter over time, the case management judge will have acquired an overall understanding of it which an appellate court, on the basis of hearing an appeal on a particular issue, cannot possibly match in either depth or breadth.
22 When performing essentially case management functions judges are appropriately given "elbow room" by appellate courts, so that they can get on with what is often a difficult job, calling for a mix of patience, flexibility, firmness, ingenuity, and an overall sense of fairness to all parties. These qualities are very evident in the way in which both Hugessen and Russell JJ. have performed their tasks in the present matter.
23 In my opinion, the Court should bear the above considerations in mind when both determining and applying the standards of review appropriate to the different aspects of Russell J.'s decision by virtue of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[70]
Accordingly, this appeal by motion of Merck to set aside the August 9, 2006 Refusals Order will be dismissed.
v)
The Benyak Appeal of the August Refusals Order
[71]
Counsel for Benyak adopts and relies on Nu-Pharm’s submissions on the above-mentioned motion on appeal of the August Refusals Order.
[72]
Merck submits that because of the lack of preparation and dearth of knowledge demonstrated by Mr. Benyak, it has spent three years attempting to obtain proper production from the Defendants. At discoveries, Benyak, in his personal capacity and as the corporate representative for Nu-Pharm, refused or took under advisement more than 1,500 questions including many that concerned documents which clearly fell within the Production Order. Nu-Pharm only produced two internal documents until it was compelled to produce additional documents by Order of Prothonotary Aronovitch dated June 24, 2002 (the Production Order). To this date, the Affidavit of Documents of Nu-Pharm does not contain all the documents ordered to be produced pursuant to the Production Order.
[73]
Benyak has been a senior officer (usually president) and a director of Nu-Pharm since it was incorporated in 1989. He has also been a shareholder of the company. Nevertheless, on discovery he professed to have little or no knowledge, information or belief on numerous important topics, including: preparation of his company’s regulatory filings concerning NU-ENALAPRIL; the background behind all the Apotex documents contained in the filings; the Notices of Allegation and litigation relating to the filings; the alleged 1999 agreements pursuant to which Nu-Pharm allegedly received sodium enalapril technology in exchange for $5,0000,000; the identity of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) in NU-ENALAPRIL; and the technology package that Nu-Pharm gave to its tablet manufacturer to allow it to make NU-ENALAPRIL tablets.
[74]
Similarly, submits Merck, Benyak was unable to provide information about the negotiation or execution of four key 1998 agreements, the circumstances which led Nu-Pharm to enter into them, or the consideration which flowed under them. Benyak’s evidence was that, as president and CEO of Nu-Pharm, he simply signed documents which were put in front of him. One agreement disposed of most of Nu-Pharm’s assets. The other three locked Nu-Pharm’s business under Apotex’ control. Finally, Benyak was unable to provide information concerning the details of the 1998 sale of Nu-Pharm’s shares by its parent, Apotex Pharmaceutical Holdings Inc. (APHI), to 1314138 Ontario Ltd, (whose officer and director is J. Ulster, a long time friend of Dr. Sherman), or the extent to which he benefited from the sale of NU-ENALAPRIL. For example, he indicated that:
(a) he did not know Ulster, despite the fact that he is director of 1314138 Ontario Ltd which purchased the shares of Nu-Pharm;
(b) he was unaware of the reason for the direction of $12.75 million dollars from Nu-Pharm to APHI following the sale of the Nu-Pharm shares and;
(c) he refused to provide an explanation for the vast increase in value of his Nu-Pharm shares between 1998 and 2001.
[75]
I am of the view that Merck is correct. As President of Nu-Pharm, Mr. Benyak has a duty to be informed and his refusal to respond to the questions set out in the Prothonotary’s August Refusals Order is an avowal of a dereliction of his duties. Moreover, it is not enough for Mr. Benyak to also say that the questions pertain to Nu-Pharm and he is therefore absolved of all responsibilities in both his corporate and personal capacities. As President of Nu-Pharm, he is the senior managing officer, he is not an underling but rather a director who can be considered to be a directing mind of Nu-Pharm. Personal liability applies not to lower level employees but to directors, to people such as the President, who are the directing mind and will of a company. As in his corporate capacity, Mr. Benyak is not immune in his personal capacity and has a duty to not only inform himself but also to respond to the questions as ordered by the Prothonotary.
[76]
For these reasons, the Benyak Appeal of parts of the August Refusals Order is dismissed.
C) THE NOVEMBER REFUSALS ORDER DATED NOVEMBER 24, 2006
[77]
In the November Refusals Order, Prothonotary Aronovitch ordered among other things that Nu-Pharm and Benyak respond to the questions pursuant to Rule 241 contained in Schedule “A” to the Order of November 24, 2006 and ordered costs to Merck.
i)
Issues
[78]
The parties raise the following issues with respect to the November Refusals Order:
a) Did the Prothonotary err by providing minimal reasons such as an Endorsement in her August and November Refusals Orders?
b) Did the Prothonotary base her Order on a misapprehension of the facts with respect to the questions ordered answered in Schedule “A”?
c) Did the Prothonotary err in awarding costs to Merck at the high end of Column V of Tariff B in the November Refusals Order?
[79]
For the reasons that follow, the response to each of these questions is negative. Consequently the three motions of appeals of the Order of Prothonotary Aronovitch dated November 24, 2006 will be dismissed.
ii)
Standard of Review
[80]
The Prothonotary’s decision with respect to the interpretation of the Rules is reviewable on the correctness standard. Where however it concerns the discretionary decisions not to provide an Endorsement (explanation) or to award costs, the standard of review remains that of the clearly wrong standard.
iii)
The Nu-Pharm Appeal of the November Refusals Order
[81]
Nu-Pharm seeks an Order varying the November Refusals Order to the extent that it orders answers to the questions as set out in Schedule “A” of the Order, which are based on a misapprehension of the facts. Nu-Pharm submits that, in the November Refusals Order, the Prothonotary erred in law in failing to apply the general legal principles that govern the conduct of examinations for discovery.
[82]
Notably, Nu-Pharm is critical of the ruling in that it believes that questions that have already been answered need not be answered again, and as such Schedule “A of the Order is replete with repetitive questions. Also questions relating to other litigation need not be answered in light of the implied undertaking rule, particularly where such other litigation is subject to a confidentiality order. Nu-Pharm states that many of the rulings in the November Refusals Order required Nu-Pharm to provide information relating to other legal proceedings, which are either a matter of public record, or are subject to the implied undertaking rule. Relying on the decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (2002), 225 F.T.R. 308 (F.C.T.D.), affirmed 2004 FCA 210, Nu-Pharm states that the implied undertaking rule establishes that documents and information produced as part of the Court process are confidential to the producing party, unless given in open court. Merck ought to have applied to the Court prior to the proceedings for relief from its obligation of confidentiality imposed by the implied undertaking rule to have access to documents it now seeks from Nu-Pharm, some of which are subject to solicitor/client privilege.
[83]
Nu-Pharm highlights that Merck was party to the legal proceedings in which many of the questions in Schedule “A” find their roots. Therefore, where the information it seeks in relation to these other proceedings is not already in the public record, Merck is perfectly capable of obtaining this information on its own and without the assistance of Nu-Pharm.
a) Absence of Endorsements
[84]
Much like Merck, Nu-Pharm has expressed more than a passing concern for the fact that both the August and the November Refusals Orders are not accompanied by an endorsement or any explanation for the Prothonotary’s reasons. The parties note that both Refusals Order were largely predicated on the Prothonotary’s ruling, without having had the benefit of full oral submissions and without providing any reasons, that ten categories of refused questions were relevant and not otherwise improper.
[85]
With respect to the absence of an endorsement in either Refusals Order, I rely again on  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  decision:
The lack of reasons alone will not automatically give rise to a hearing de novo on an appeal from a prothonotary's decision before a judge of this Court. This was the conclusion Justice François Lemieux reached in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R. (4th) 63 at para. 31 having reviewed the existing precedents. Justice Lemieux noted further at paragraph 32 of his reasons that:
De novo intervention is not justified when, examining all of the circumstances, including the nature of the order made, the evidence before the prothonotary, whether the exercise of discretion involves essentially a consideration of legal principles,
reasonably demonstrate the manner in which the prothonotary exercised his/her discretion
. [emphasis in the original]
[86]
The absence of endorsement does not cause prejudice to the parties. The Court is of the opinion that endorsement is not required in orders such as those contested here.
b) Cost Awards
[87]
Nu-Pharm objects to the Prothonotary’s costs award to Merck at the high end of Column V of Tariff B in the November Refusals Order, which is at variance with the Order made during the hearing. Also, Nu-Pharm submits that the Prothonotary erred in law by making a punitive award of costs and disbursements, in the circumstances of this case, and in the absence of submissions from the plaintiff in support of an award of punitive costs. The Prothonotary erred in law by refusing to consider submissions on the costs of the entire portion of the motion that has been argued to date, to allow proper consideration of the relative success of the parties in the motion thus far, despite the request of counsel for Nu-Pharm.
[88]
Counsel for Merck submits that the award of costs is discretionary and cannot be reviewed de novo. It can only be disturbed by a motions judge on appeal if it is based on a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts. The award of costs was not clearly wrong argues Merck (see First Canadians' Constitution Draft  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R. (4th) 306 at 308 (F.C.A.)).
[89]
As Merck underscores, Rule 400(1), establishes that costs are in the discretion of the Court. In determining the scale of costs to be awarded, Rule 400(3) sets out a number of factors the Court may consider in the exercise of its discretion under Rule 400(1). The relevant factors to consider include, inter alia, the result of the proceeding, any conduct of a party that tended to unnecessarily lengthen the duration of the proceedings and whether any step in the proceeding was unnecessary or taken through excessive caution. Where a step in the proceeding is unnecessary or a party’s conduct unnecessarily lengthens the duration of a proceeding, the Court may fix increased costs on an interim basis (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[90]
Contrary to the Defendants’ assertion, Merck rebuts that there is no evidence that the Learned Prothonotary’s costs award was punitive. The Prothonotary’s stated reasons for awarding costs to Merck at the high end of Column V of Tariff B, included the fact that Nu-Pharm persisted in maintaining its objections, despite the obvious relevance of hundreds of questions. It can also be inferred that she took into account Merck’s additional submissions which included:
(a) Merck’s relative success on the motion; and
(b) Nu-Pharm’s intransigence that unreasonably lengthened the hearing of this motion, protracted the discovery process and delayed the proceeding.
[91]
Merck submits that absent any evidence that the Learned Prothonotary’s costs award was clearly wrong, there is no basis for this Court to intervene.
[92]
Having considered the arguments of the parties on the awarding of costs, I agree that the Prothonotary’s award of costs is a discretionary power, which as counsel for Merck so rightly points out, ought not to be disturbed unless it can be demonstrated that it was clearly wrong. No such conclusion can be drawn here. I see also no value to the argument put forward by Nu-Pharm that the Prothonotary said at the hearing that costs should be against Apotex. The order clearly shows that costs are payable by Nu-Pharm and Benyak.
[93]
Therefore, the appeal by Nu-Pharm against the November Refusals Order is dismissed.
iv)
The Merck Appeal of the November Refusals Order
[94]
Merck submits that the Prothonotary erred in limiting the obligations of Nu-Pharm and Benyak and also by standing down additional questions submitted in Schedule “E”, until the responses of the earlier questions and that without providing an endorsement or explanation for this ruling, as was done in the August Refusals Order. Merck seeks an Order reversing in particular subsection 1(d) of the November Refusals Order, which states as follows:
(d) At this time Nu-Pharm and Benyak need make no inquiries of, nor any requests for documents from, Beyger, Culp, Van Doornik, Apotex, Novex Pharma, Delmar, Hems, BCI, Signa, Trillium, or Saban beyond any previously ordered on this motion and any previously undertaken to be made; the questions listed in Schedule “E” hereto, to the extent they involve inquiries of such persons, will be stood down and not dealt with by the parties or the Court until the results of the inquiries and requests previously ordered are known.
[95]
Nu-Pharm and Benyak submit that the Prothonotary appropriately exercised her discretion to place reasonable limits on the vast number of questions that Merck seeks to have Nu-Pharm and Benyak ask of non-parties. Further, the Prothonotary did not err in ordering the Defendants did not have to answer the 17 additional questions Merck now seeks to have answered, all of which are irrelevant and/or otherwise improper. Moreover, by making submissions of the alleged scheme to circumvent the permanent injunction, Nu-Pharm opposes Merck’s attempt to use this theory of its case to broaden the scope of the discovery to non-parties, in a manner that is impermissible in the Rules. For these reasons, Nu-Pharm and Benyak submit that Merck’s motion is without merit and, therefore, ought to be dismissed with costs.
[96]
I do not find that the Prothonotary’s ruling in this regard is clearly wrong. In light of the number of questions and the insistence of Merck to pursue examinations for discovery of non-parties via Rules 241 and 244 rather than by Rules 233 and 238, which are specifically intended for just such examinations of non parties, the Prothonotary has sought to apply the Rules to secure the just, most expeditious and least expensive determination of each question on its merits. It is purely common sense, I would rather think, for the Prothonotary to rule that Merck should wait to see the nature and calibre of the fruits of the initial examinations, before putting forward multiple other questions that may prove to be redundant. This is not clearly wrong. I see no reason to interfere with such economy of proceeding.
[97]
For these reasons, the motion by Merck to vary the November Refusals Order is dismissed.
v)
The Benyak Appeal of the November Refusals Order
[98]
Benyak has adopted and relied on the submissions of the Nu-Pharm motion of appeal of the November Refusals Order. For the reasons provided above in Nu-Pharm’s appeal of the November refusals order, the present Benyak appeal is also dismissed.
D) THE SHERMAN ORDER DATED AUGUST 9, 2006
[99]
Prothonotary Aronovitch ordered that the defendant Sherman does not have an obligation to make further inquiries in answer to questions asked concerning those corporations controlled by him including (but not limited to) Apotex Inc., Apotex Pharmaceutical Holdings Inc., Apotex Holdings Inc., Brantford Chemicals Inc., Apotex Research Inc., the “Apotex Group of Companies,” and their officers, directors and employees thereof, or concerning third party corporations including Signa S.A. de C.V. and Trillium Health Care Manufacturing Inc.
i)
Issue
[100]
The Sherman Order raises the single issue whether the Prothonotary erred by finding that Sherman has no obligation to better inform himself by making further inquiries to non parties to the action.
[101]
For the reasons that follow, the answer to that question is negative. Consequently, the Plaintiffs’ Motion of appeal of this part of the Order of Prothonotary Aronovitch dated August 9, 2006 shall be dismissed.
ii)
Standard of Review
[102]
If the Prothonotary’s decision raises a question of law then it is reviewable on a standard of correctness (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 8; and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). If it is a discretionary order, it is reviewable on the clearly wrong standard.
iii)
The Merck Appeal of the Sherman Order
[103]
Merck, the moving party on this motion of appeal, argues that Prothonotary Aronovitch erred in law by failing to order certain inquiries pursuant to Rule 244. Notably, in interpreting the meaning of the current Rule 244, the Prothonotary compared Rule 465 in the pre 1990 Rules to Rule 458 in the 1990 Rules. The Prothonotary concluded that the removal of the words “means of knowledge” in Rule 458 (now Rule 240) meant that there was no basis to extend the obligation to make inquiries under Rule 244 beyond those entities set out in Rule 241. Appearing in his personal capacity, Sherman was thus not required to make inquiries of the persons stipulated in Rule 241:
[...] any present or former officer, servant, agent or employee of the party, including any who are outside Canada, who might be expected to have knowledge relating to any matter in question in the action
[…] des dirigeants, fonctionnaires, agents ou employés actuels ou antérieurs de la partie, y compris ceux qui se trouvent à l’extérieur du Canada, don't il est raisonnable de croire qu’ils pourraient détenir des renseignements au sujet de toute question en litige dans l’action.
[104]
In so doing, Merck submits the Prothonotary failed to apply a purposive and contextual approach to her interpretation of the Rules, as is encouraged in section 12 of the Interpretation Act. Also, the Prothonotary failed to consider the amendments made between the 1990 Rules and 1998 Rules, and fell into legal error. Finally, the Prothonotary erred when she based her reasoning on two outdated cases:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). Both cases have long since been overtaken by legislative will. Moreover, neither case supports the narrow interpretation, which Prothonotary Aronovitch placed on Rule 244.
[105]
Merck adds that neither case was decided under the current Rules or addressed Rule 244 or its predecessor. Leesona was decided in 1975 under the pre-1990 Rules. It does stand for the proposition that the old Rules were broader than the new Rules. Moreover, the “general rule” referred to by Justice Walsh and cited by the Prothonotary, referred to a discovery witness submitted on behalf of a corporation. It has no application to Dr. Sherman’s discovery. Similarly, the Risi Stone decision was made under the 1990 Rules. Justice Marc Nadon’s comments were made in the context of questions seeking an interpretation of a patent or the expression of an opinion. The comments cannot be construed as general statements concerning the scope of Rule 458, much less the scope of current Rule 244.
[106]
Counsel for the respondent, Dr. Sherman argues that it is not the Prothonotary but rather the Appellant, Merck who has misconstrued the legislative intent of Rule 244. Merck seeks to have the Court overlook the fact that Dr. Sherman is sued in his personal capacity and as such he is not a corporate representative upon whom it is incumbent to make further inquiries of non-parties such as Apotex. In essence, Merck asks the Court to do what it has failed to do and that is to avail itself of the provisions of Rule 238 that clearly sets out the option for examinations of non-parties with leave of the Court.
[107]
Moreover, the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Counsel for Sherman provides a survey of the cases relied on by Merck and systematically distinguishes each from the particular situation of her client, demonstrating their inapplicability to the case.
[108]
She submits that the Court should not engage in the interpretation of Rule 244 because the Prothonotary did not say that Rule 244 is limited to 241. Prothonotary Aronovitch analyzed the case law cited by Merck and exercised her discretion properly in not forcing Sherman to seek unlimited inquiries out of corporations that are not parties to the present action.
[109]
She adds that the history of Apotex involvement was before the Prothonotary and she dealt with that. Deference should be given to the analysis in her Endorsement.
[110]
Having carefully reviewed the Endorsement in the Order of Prothonotary Aronovitch and assessed the arguments of the parties, I agree with the respondent's arguments that I need not engage in the interpretation of Rule 244 interesting as it may be, to dispose of this appeal.
[111]
Prothonotary Aronovitch wrote in her penultimate paragraph of her Endorsement:
As to Rule 244, it is not as Merck suggests unlimited or unconstrained in the obligation it imposes. Rather, it is to be read and understood in the context of Rules 240 and 241.
The Court must be mindful of what was written before those lines. In other words, the context is very important here.
[112]
Prothonotary Aronovitch considered that Dr. Sherman was sued as a personal defendant and not as a corporate representative. She dealt with the notion of formal agency between the corporations and Dr. Sherman. She analyzed Merck's submissions that Dr. Sherman is an "alter ego" of Apotex and companies related to Apotex and that the "corporate veil" should be lifted. She commented and distinguished the case law cited by Merck and finally concluded "… Merck, in my view, as placed the proverbial cart before the horse".
[113]
In my respectful view, Prothonotary Aronovitch was exercising her discretion in the evaluation of the evidence adduced before her when she released her order. I find no basis to intervene because she is not clearly wrong and her findings are not based on a misapprehension of facts.
[114]
Therefore, Merck's appeal of the Sherman Order shall be dismissed.
ORDER
[115]
THIS COURT ORDERS that:
1. Nu-Pharm’s motion dated October 10, 2006 is dismissed, costs in the cause;
2. Merck's motion dated October 12, 2006 is dismissed, costs in the cause;
3. Benyak motion dated October 12, 2006 is dismissed, costs in the cause;
4. Merck's motion dated December 4, 2006 is dismissed, costs in the cause;
5. Nu-Pharm’s motion dated December 4, 2006 is dismissed, costs in the cause;
6. Benyak motion dated December 4, 2006 is dismissed, costs in the cause;
7. Merck's motion dated October 13, 2006 is dismissed, costs in the cause.
[Appendices and Schedules omitted]
[End of document]