[1]
McKeown, J.
: The applicant, a citizen of Ukraine, seeks judicial review of a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the Board) dated January 14, 1993, wherein the applicant was found not to be a Convention refugee. The issues raised by the applicant are:
- whether the Board erred in law when it stated:
"... There was no evidence presented that the claimant was in fact a homosexual, only that he was perceived as one by some people ..."
- whether the Board failed to observe the principles of natural justice and fairness in their handling of the issue of whether or not the homosexuality and defection laws were in effect in Ukraine at the time of the hearing;
- whether the panel engaged in speculation when it stated:
"... given the changes that occurred in the Ukraine since the beginning of Perestroika and especially after the declaration of independence, it seems very unlikely that such law would remain in the books of the new country."
- whether the panel misapplied
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  cumulative aspect of the applicant's evidence.
[2]
The respondent did not contest the fact that the panel erred in speculating that the laws probably were no longer on the books of the new country. This is clearly improper for the Board to do. However, in and of itself, this would not be reversible error.
[3]
The Board seriously erred when it claimed that the applicant did not suffer persecution because:
"... There was no evidence presented that the claimant was in fact a homosexual, only that he was perceived as one by some people ..."
The persecutors were persecuting the applicant because they perceived he was a homosexual and it is totally irrelevant as to whether he was in fact a homosexual or not. The applicant was homosexually raped, and because of this he was perceived by his persecutors to be homosexual. Furthermore, an extortion attempt was made against the applicant's mother as a result of the perception that the applicant was homosexual as a result of this incident.
[4]
The applicant states that he fears persecution for two reasons should he be returned to Ukraine. He submits that he would be persecuted in a recently liberated Ukraine because of his pro-Russia political views. He would also be persecuted because he was perceived to be homosexual, and homosexuality was a crime in Ukraine. The Board made a reversible error when it failed to consider the consequences of the perception that the applicant was homosexual.
[5]
The Board also erred when it made a finding concerning the state of the law in the Ukraine without supporting evidence. The Board dealt with the question of homosexuality as a crime in the Ukraine as follows:
"The claimant introduced Article 121.1 of the
Criminal Code of the Russian Federation Republic
which states.
Homosexualism
Sexual contact of a man with another man (homosexualism) - it is punishable with imprisonment for up to five years.
"The document was not dated and the translation consists only of one part of the above stated section of the law, therefore the panel places low probative value on this document. However, the claimant maintained that this law was in effect in the Soviet Union before, and is still in effect in the Ukraine today. The panel has no doubt that this law, if it still existed, would be discriminatory, even persecutory against the homosexuals. However, given the stiff sentences for homosexual acts, would the authorities not impose even stiffer sentences for a homosexual rape? How likely is it that the police would charge the victim?" (footnote omitted)
[6]
This analysis completely ignores the applicant's clear statement that homosexuality was a crime in the Ukraine. As the Board did not question the applicant's credibility, it must be accepted in the circumstances of this case, that the applicant's evidence was credible. The Board did not address the applicant's testimony concerning the state of the law in the Ukraine. However, the Board placed a low probative value on the document filed by the applicant, purporting to state the law in Ukraine. In such a situation, it would have been proper for the Board to bring its concerns as to the validity of the document to the attention of the applicant during the hearing, to allow him the opportunity to respond to those concerns.
[7]
I should point out that if the credibility of the applicant had been in question, the Board would not have been obliged to accept as true, the statement that homosexuality was a crime in the Ukraine. However, once the Board accepted that homosexuality is a crime, by not questioning the applicant as to the validity of his documentary evidence, it is very much speculation that the police would not have charged the victim were he to approach them with his complaint. If the police perceived the applicant to be a homosexual, it is possible that he would have been charged with engaging in a homosexual act even though he was a victim.
[8]
I do not have to deal with the last two issues for the following reasons. The Board stated that the
Valentine
decision, supra, applied to the case because the claimant had not suffered persecution. However, in view of my findings that the Board erred when it determined that the applicant had not suffered persecution, the Board's decision to apply
Valentine
, supra, was also in error, as
Valentine
only applies to situations where persecution has not taken place.
[9]
Because it had incorrectly determined that persecution had not taken place, the Board did not deal with the issue of the reasonableness of the applicant not seeking state protection. However, given my findings, the issue must be addressed. There was evidence submitted by the applicant that he had sought state protection on another occasion when his mother had been harmed and the state protection had been denied. He also submitted that he feared that if he approached the state authorities to complain about his homosexual rape and the subsequent harassment he was subjected to, he would be accused of being homosexual and would be charged as a result. The Board did not question the applicant about these submissions. Because of this, in my view the issue of the availability of state protection need not be pursued further.
[10]
I allow this application. The decision of the Board is set aside and the matter is returned to a similarly constituted Board, with the direction that the Board find the applicant to be a Convention refugee.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/gms
[End of document]