[1]
Layden-Stevenson, J.
: By correspondence dated September 26, 2002, specifically stated to be a notice of allegation (NOA) pursuant to the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
(the
Regulations
) with respect to Canadian patents Nos. 1,292,693 (the '693 patent), 1,302,891 (the '891 patent) and 2,166,483 (the '483 patent), the respondent Apotex Inc. (Apotex) informed AstraZeneca Canada Inc. (AstraZeneca) that Apotex had filed with the Minister of Health (the Minister) a new drug submission (NDS) for magnesium omeprazole tablets for oral administration in strengths of 10 mg and 20 mg.
[2]
The patents referred to by Apotex are listed, for certain products, on the patent register maintained by the Minister. They were included on patent lists submitted by AstraZeneca and its corporate predecessor Astra Pharma Inc. (Astra) with the consent of AB Hassle (Hassle) and AstraZeneca AB, the owners of the patents. Thus, pursuant to the
Regulations
, Hassle and AstraZeneca AB, as owners, are parties to the application. I will refer to the applicants collectively as AstraZeneca. The Minister administers the
Regulations
and did not file submissions or participate in the hearing of this application.
[3]
AstraZeneca, by notice of application dated November 8, 2002, requests a declaration that the Apotex letter of September 26, 2002, is not a NOA as contemplated by the
Regulations
and, in the alternative, an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a notice of compliance (NOC) in respect of omeprazole magnesium tablets 10 and 20 mg until the expiration of the noted Canadian patents. AstraZeneca did not pursue its requested relief in relation to the '891 and '483 patents and at the hearing of this application, only the '693 patent was in issue.
THE '693 PATENT
[4]
The application that resulted in the '693 patent was filed on April 29, 1987, claiming priority from a UK application filed on April 30, 1986 (priority date). The '693 patent issued on December 3, 1991 and it expires in 2008. The patent has as its objective the preparation of an enteric coated dosage form of omeprazole that is resistant to dissolution in acidic media, that dissolves rapidly in neutral to alkaline media, and that has good long term storage stability.
[5]
The pharmaceutical preparation is used to treat gastric and duodenal ulcers. The active medicinal ingredient is omeprazole or omeprazole magnesium. AstraZeneca markets its product under the trade name LOSEC. The circumstances of the invention are contained in the '693 patent disclosure and are described by Mr. Justice Rothstein in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), leave to appeal dismissed March 25, 2004, S.C.C. Bulletin, 2004, p. 471 (
AB Hassle
):
"... To be effective, the omeprazole must be released in the small intestine and not in the stomach. In order to prevent the omeprazole from being degraded by acidic gastric juices in the stomach, an enteric coating covering the omeprazole core is required. The enteric coating dissolves in the neutral to alkaline environment found in the small intestine after allowing the omeprazole to pass through the stomach unaltered.
"However, if a conventional enteric coating is applied directly to the omeprazole core, the omeprazole rapidly decomposes, with the result that the pharmaceutical preparation (or, in everyday language for purposes of this case, a tablet) becomes badly discoloured and loses omeprazole content with the passage of time. This problem of storage stability can be addressed by including alkaline reacting constituents in the omeprazole core. However, when a tablet containing an alkaline core which is in direct contact with the enteric coating is ingested, some of the gastric juice in the stomach diffuses through the enteric coating into the omeprazole core during the time the tablet resides in the stomach before it is emptied into the small intestine. The gastric juice causes parts of the omeprazole core to dissolve which, in turn, interfere with and eventually dissolve the enteric coating.
"The object of the invention disclosed in the relevant patents is to provide an enteric coated tablet of omeprazole which is resistant to dissolution in the stomach. This is obtained by having an inert subcoating between the omeprazole core and the enteric outer coating."
[6]
The parties agree that, for all intents and purposes, it is Claim 1 of the '693 patent that is relevant and at the hearing, only Claim 1 was addressed. Claim 1 describes an oral pharmaceutical preparation in the following terms:
"1. An oral pharmaceutical preparation comprising: (a) a core region comprising an effective amount of material selected from the group consisting of omeprazole plus an alkaline reacting compound, an alkaline omeprazole salt plus an alkaline reacting compound and an alkaline omeprazole salt alone; (b) an inert subcoating which is soluble or rapidly disintegrating in water disposed on said core region, said subcoating comprising one or more layers of materials selected from among tablet excipients and polymeric film-forming compounds; and (c) an outer layer disposed on said subcoating comprising an enteric coating."
BACKGROUND
[7]
This is not Apotex's first NOA with respect to the '693 patent. AstraZeneca's counsel advises that Apotex first alleged non-infringement in April, 1993 and that the applicants' application in respect of that allegation was dismissed in May, 1996, by consent order wherein Apotex agreed to an order for prohibition with respect to patents other than the '693 patent. There is no evidence in the record in this respect. On December 18, 1997, an Apotex NOA alleged non-infringement of the same Canadian patents that are listed in its NOA in relation to this proceeding on the basis that its product would not contain a subcoating between the core and the enteric coating. Rather, Apotex would apply enteric coating directly to the core. AstraZeneca in turn initiated an application for an order of prohibition (T-179-98). By order of Madam Justice Tremblay-Lamer dated May 18, 1999, the NOA was deemed to be withdrawn and the application was deemed to be discontinued. The recitals in the order indicate that Apotex wished to withdraw its NOA and that such a withdrawal would render the proceedings moot.
[8]
On August 1, 2000, an Apotex NOA with respect to the same Canadian patents as those listed in its NOA in relation to this proceeding alleged that no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by Apotex of its apo-omeprazole tablets for oral administration in strengths of 10 mg, 20 mg and 40 mg. The crux of the legal and factual basis was that the Apotex tablets would not infringe because they would not contain a subcoating. The Apotex tablets would comprise cores containing the drug and an enteric coating applied directly to the cores. AstraZeneca filed a notice of application (T-1747-00) seeking the same relief sought in this proceeding. Following the hearing of the application, Mr. Justice Kelen declared that the Apotex letter dated August 1, 2000 "does not comply with the
Regulations
, and therefore does not constitute a NOA under the
Regulations
". Justice Kelen granted an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a NOC. I will return to Mr. Justice Kelen's order later in these reasons [see 223 F.T.R. 43].
[9]
Apotex appealed (A-563-02) and on November 3, 2003, its appeal was dismissed. Mr. Justice Rothstein, in
AB Hassle
, supra, construed claim 1 of the '693 patent at paragraph 17 and again at paragraph 24 [see 312 N.R. 288]:
"[17] Claim 1 describes an 'oral pharmaceutical preparation' or, in everyday language, a tablet. The tablet is described as having a core region, an inert subcoating and an outer layer or enteric coating. Claim 1 does not purport to place any limitations on the inert subcoating. It does not say that the inert subcoating must be created in any particular manner.
"[24] I conclude that patent claim 1 describes a pharmaceutical preparation which, in its finished product form, contains a subcoating or separating layer between the core and enteric coating, however the subcoating or separating layer is formed."
[10]
On September 26, 2002, Apotex forwarded the NOA referred to at the outset of these reasons and AstraZeneca initiated this notice of application. The Apotex NOA alleges both non-infringement and invalidity with respect to the '693 patent. The latter attack is based on Gillette defence, anticipation, claims broader than the invention and inutility, insufficiency, ambiguity and obviousness.
[11]
AstraZeneca's evidence on its application consisted of the affidavits of Mr. Oxhammar, Drs. Ymén, Lövgren, Burke, McGinity, Brenner and Bodmeier, Ms. Ripley and Ms. DeAbreu. Apotex's evidence consisted of the affidavits of Drs. Cima (Cima 1), Hopfenberg and Signorino and Mr. Tekie. Apotex's evidence included results from testing of the Apotex tablets. With leave of the court, Apotex filed further affidavits to establish the source and relevance of sample tablets and the formulations referred to in its evidence. AstraZeneca was granted leave to file an affidavit from Dr. Lindquist in reply to Cima 1 (Lindquist 1). With leave of the court, Apotex filed a further affidavit from Dr. Cima (Cima 2) in response to Lindquist 1. Following the cross-examination of Dr. Sherman (one of the affiants of Apotex's further affidavits), Apotex provided samples of its tablets to AstraZeneca and AstraZeneca was granted leave to file an affidavit of Dr. Lindquist regarding testing of Apotex's samples (Lindquist 2). Apotex was then granted leave to file further affidavits of Drs. Cima (Cima 3), Sodhi and Sherman and Mr. Ng-Chen-Hin. AstraZeneca was granted leave to file a responding affidavit of Dr. Lindquist (Lindquist 3).
THE NATURE OF THE PROCEEDING
[12]
As earlier mentioned, this proceeding is brought under the
Regulations
. The history and scheme of the
Regulations
are well known and need not be repeated. Suffice it to say that when a second person (usually a generic manufacturer) seeks marketing approval (a NOC) for a drug, by comparing its drug to the drug of a first person (a patent holder) for the purpose of demonstrating bioequivalence, the generic will be required to address patents listed on the patent register by a first person. The generic or second person may do so by making an allegation of invalidity, or non-infringement, or both. The issues of validity and non-infringement between the patent holder and the generic originate with a NOA served on the first person by the second person setting out the second person's allegations, including a statement of the legal and factual basis for the allegation. Following receipt of a NOA, a first person may apply to the court for an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a NOC until after the expiration of one or more of the patents. If the court finds that none of the generic's allegations is justified, the court shall grant an order of prohibition.
[13]
Apotex, the generic drug producer or second person, under s. 5 of the
Regulations
, provided its NOA to AstraZeneca regarding certain patents that AstraZeneca has listed under the provisions of s. 4 of the
Regulations
. AstraZeneca's application, in response to the Apotex NOA, is brought under s. 6 of the
Regulations
.
[14]
Section 6 proceedings are not to be likened to actions for determining validity or infringement. They are proceedings in judicial review, to be held expeditiously, whose aim is to determine whether the Minister is free to issue the requested NOC. Their scope is confined to administrative purposes:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1 (F.C.A.). The determination must turn on whether there are allegations by the second person sufficiently substantiated to support a conclusion for administrative purposes (the issue of a NOC) that an applicant's patent would not be infringed if the second person's product is put on the market:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 209 (F.C.A.).
[15]
The
Regulations
allow a court to determine summarily, on the basis of the evidence adduced, whether the allegations are justified. If a full trial of validity or infringement issues is required, this can be obtained in the usual way by commencing an action:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 245 (F.C.A.);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 76 (T.D.), affd. (2002), 291 N.R. 168; 21 C.P.R.(4th) 129 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). By merely commencing the proceeding, the applicant obtains what is tantamount to an interlocutory injunction without having satisfied any of the criteria a court would require before enjoining issuance of a NOC:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 539 (F.C.A.). By order dated June 4, 2004, the statutory stay in this proceeding has been extended to March 7, 2005.
ISSUES
[16]
The issues are as follows:
1. Threshold Issues
(a) Is the NOA and detailed statement sufficient?
(b) Does issue estoppel apply to preclude Apotex from alleging non-infringement and invalidity?
(c) Does the doctrine of abuse of process operate to preclude Apotex from alleging non-infringement and invalidity?
2. Alternative Issues
(a) Is Apotex's allegation of non-infringement of the claims of the '693 patent justified?
(b) Is Apotex's allegation of invalidity of the '693 patent justified based on:
(i) the Gillette defence;
(ii) anticipation;
(iii) claims broader than in the invention disclosed
and lack utility;
(iv) insufficiency of disclosure and/or ambiguity; and
(v) obviousness.
THRESHOLD ISSUES
Is the NOA sufficient?
Overview
[17]
AstraZeneca, in its notice of application, maintains that the NOA is not a proper NOA and detailed statement and accordingly does not comply with the
Regulations
. Broadly stated, the argument is that since the NOA strictly frames the issues in the proceedings and may not be expanded upon by the generic during the proceeding, Apotex's allegation of non-infringement is not justified because its evidence of non-infringement rests upon the notion that its subcoat is not continuous and is not inert. The NOA contains no such statements. Rather, the NOA rests solely on the position that the Apotex subcoating is not a subcoating that is applied to the core and is then covered with the enteric outer layer. Since the NOA makes no mention of the possibility of anin situ subcoat and makes no statement regarding non-infringement with respect to an in situ subcoat (that it is not continuous and not inert), Apotex cannot expand its grounds by either evidence or argument.
[18]
Apotex counters that its allegation of non-infringement is not premised entirely on a construction of the '693 patent that is limited to a formulation having a separately applied subcoating. Neither its NOA nor its evidence supports such limitation. Moreover, Apotex, for purposes of this proceeding, but without prejudice to its rights on appeal, accepts that the '693 patent extends to a subcoat created in situ, provided that such subcoat carries with it all of the characteristics of claim 1. Apotex strenuously contests that its formulation will contain such a subcoat and, on the basis of all the evidence, submits that it is clear that AstraZeneca has failed to establish that such a subcoat exists.
The NOA and Detailed Statement
[19]
The portion of the NOA and detailed statement that addresses the '693 patent is attached to these reasons as Schedule "A". Paraphrasing, the detailed statement refers to the '693 patent by its title and to a description of it as a "pharmaceutical preparation containing omeprazole or its alkaline salts intended for oral use and to the use of these preparations in the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases". Apotex describes the "essence of the invention" and states "[t]he alleged solution to the problem is asserted in the patent to be the separation from contact of the core and the enteric coating by application of a subcoating within the meaning of the patent". Then, Apotex identifies the essential elements of the '693 patent: the core; the inert subcoating; and the outer layer.
[20]
On this basis, Apotex states that the "subcoating" cannot mean material comprising a reaction product resulting from a reaction between the core material and the enteric coating when the core is brought into contact with the enteric coating. The inventors, says Apotex, intended the subcoating to be "distinct material placed between the core and the enteric coating so as to avoid their coming into contact".
[21]
The detailed statement also states that the claims of the '693 patent cannot be construed to include formulations disclosed in the patent as prior art. Formulations comprising a core with an enteric coating disposed on the core which were prepared by direct application of the enteric coating onto an omeprazole and alkaline core cannot be construed as falling within the scope of the '693 patent, otherwise the patent would be invalid as failing to claim something new because it would have within its scope that which is old. Nor, contends Apotex, can the claims be construed to include formulations disclosed within the disclosure as examples of formulations used for comparison purposes and disclaimed from being within the scope of the invention.
[22]
Apotex then states that it will not infringe claim 1 because its product will not contain a subcoating, "as discussed above" within the meaning of the '693 patent. The Apotex product will contain a core with an enteric coating disposed on the core. Specifically, the detailed statement reads:
"In formulating our product, we will bring into contact the outer enteric coating with the core and will not place a subcoating within the meaning of the patent between the core and the enteric coating, so that our formulation will consist of only components (i) and (iii), not component (ii)."
[23]
Continuing, the NOA states that Apotex is manufacturing what is taught in the prior art, specifically European Patent Application No. 124,495 (the '495 patent) published on November 7, 1984. It refers to example 12 of the '495 patent and alleges that its formulation is in accordance with the teachings of the '495 patent. Last, the NOA contains the statement that, should AstraZeneca assert that there is infringement of the '693 patent, the claims are invalid based on the Gillette defence. The remainder of the detailed statement is devoted to what is sub-titled "invalidity".
The Arguments
[24]
As stated earlier, AstraZeneca's quarrel with the Apotex NOA, regarding non-infringement, is that the focus of the allegation is the subcoating and that it must be formed by a separate step in the process. Expanding on its position, AstraZeneca says that this is the entire basis for Apotex's allegation that its formulation will not contain a subcoating. Nowhere in the NOA does Apotex suggest, if its product has a subcoat between the core and the enteric coating that results from a reaction between the two, that such subcoating will not be inert or continuous. These allegations do not exist. They do not exist because the premise of the Apotex NOA is that the'693 patent cannot be interpreted to include an in situ subcoat, a matter that has been conclusively determined by the Federal Court of Appeal. AstraZeneca asserts that the issues that Apotex raises in this proceeding are simply not contained in its NOA and detailed statement. Since AstraZeneca does not allege "that the Apotex product infringes, no matter, the Gillette defence is not properly invoked with respect to infringement". AstraZeneca says that the claim requires a subcoat and if Apotex's product has a subcoat, it infringes. The circumstances under which Gillette applies are not in play.
[25]
Apotex argues contra. It contends that there is no issue as to the nature of the reactive material at the interface of Apotex's product and that AstraZeneca is, in essence, saying that evidence regarding the nature of that reactive material goes beyond the NOA. The record, maintains Apotex, does not support AstraZeneca's contention that Apotex did not raise the issue that if it has any material between the enteric coating and the core that the material isn't "continuous, inert, film-forming and polymeric". In support of its position, Apotex points to the notice of application, a copy of which is attached as Schedule "B" to these reasons, and in particular to paragraphs 29, 30 and 31. It argues that, there, AstraZeneca says that the patent includes within its scope, a subcoating, regardless of how it was applied or generated and that, in view of Mr. Justice Kelen's decision, it is uncontroverted that Apotex will have a layer of material between the enteric coating and the core in its product. Most importantly, contends Apotex, AstraZeneca requests samples, formulation particulars, and process information relating to the Apotex NDS. Therefore, AstraZeneca knew what the issue was - does the Apotex product have reactive material that meets the confines of the patent?
[26]
Examination of AstraZeneca's supporting affidavits,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's view, reveals that AstraZeneca knew what the issue was. The record that AstraZeneca placed before Apotex contained the affidavits of experts saying that the Apotex formulation could create an inert, polymeric, film-forming material. That was the case that Apotex had to answer and it answered by filing the affidavit of Dr. Cima.
[27]
Apotex also refers to AstraZeneca's conduct subsequent to receipt of the Cima 1 affidavit. Never did it allege that Apotex had gone beyond its allegation. Rather, it moved for the right to file more evidence. There were several rounds that followed and not once did AstraZeneca ever say that the evidence was beside the point. To the contrary, it asserted that this evidence was fundamental to the final disposition of the case and that the evidence was so important that the whole case lay in the balance. AstraZeneca obtained orders to that effect. This argument, asserts Apotex, is a last-minute creation that cannot withstand the scrutiny of the record.
Analysis
[28]
In my view, Apotex's position that AstraZeneca's argument is a last-minute creation is without merit. The notice of application, at paragraph 29, is unequivocal and states:
"First, contrary to Apotex's proposed construction, the patents include within their scope a subcoating found in the finished dosage form, regardless of how it was applied or generated."
[29]
I am not persuaded by Apotex's efforts to convince me that AstraZeneca's primary ground - advanced in support of its position that the allegation of non-infringement is not justified - constitutes an indication that Apotex has addressed the existence of ma-terial, between the core and the enteric coating, that is not continuous, inert, film-forming and polymeric. To succeed on this point, Apotex must point to its detailed statement, not to AstraZeneca's notice of application. I will have more to say in relation to the notice of application later in these reasons.
[30]
After repeated readings of Apotex's NOA and detailed statement, in my view, it is the construction of the '693 patent that Apotex puts into play. The detailed statement claims that the '693 patent requires that the subcoating be "distinct material placed between the core and the enteric coating so as to avoid their coming into contact". All of Apotex's non-infringement allegations in its NOA flow from this fundamental position. Yet, in argument, Apotex says it did not restrict itself to a construction of the '693 patent that is limited to a formulation having a separately applied coat.
[31]
The detailed statement says that it (the '693 patent) "cannot mean material comprising a reaction product resulting from a reaction between the core material and the enteric coating when the core is brought into contact with the enteric coating". Yet, in argument, Apotex says that it accepts that the '693 patent extends to an in situ subcoat.
[32]
The NOA states that Apotex's product will consist only of an enteric coat and a core and will not contain a subcoat. This statement is founded on the premise that a subcoat in the '693 patent does not mean a "layer" or a "subcoat" or an "interface" (these characterizations were used interchangeably during the oral argument) that results from a reaction. The entire detailed statement revolves around Apotex's characterization of subcoat yet the allegation referencing the '495 patent makes no mention of a subcoat at all.
[33]
In short, the NOA and detailed statement simply do not contain any allegation that should the '693 patent encompass a subcoating arising from a reaction, between the core material and the enteric coating when the two are brought into contact, the reactive layer will not be continuous, inert, film-forming and polymeric. It is settled law that when a generic makes an allegation, it must provide a detailed statement of the legal and factual basis for the allegation, to which it is limited. The allegation and detailed statement are intended to fully inform the first person of the case to be met:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 272 (F.C.A.) (
AB Hassle-2
);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 1 (F.C.A.) (
Genpharm Inc.
);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 480 (F.C.T.D.), affd. (1998), 234 N.R. 8; 82 C.P.R.(3d) 384 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 129 (F.C.A.);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 447 (F.C.A.). Stated succinctly, the NOA must be sufficient to make the first person fully aware of the grounds on which the second person claims that the patent would not be infringed if the NOC issues. Whether a detailed statement is adequate depends on the facts and law relied upon in the detailed statement itself:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[34]
The NOA is dated September 26, 2002. It was on November 3, 2003, in
AB Hassle
, supra, that the Federal Court of Appeal construed the patent as "a pharmaceutical preparation which, in its finished form, contains a subcoating or separating layer between the core and enteric coating, however the subcoating or separating layer is formed". Apotex now indicates that, for purposes of this proceeding and without prejudice to its rights on appeal, the '693 patent extends to a subcoat created in situ, provided that it carries with it all of the requisite characteristics of claim 1. With respect, as I have stated, I can find nothing in the NOA to indicate such a position. To reiterate, the NOA states repeatedly that an in situ subcoat does not fall within the '693 patent.
[35]
In its written submission, Apotex maintains that it "strenuously contests that its formulation will contain such a subcoat and, on the basis of all the evidence, submits that it is clear that Astra has failed to establish that such a subcoat exists". In oral argument, Apotex, having accepted, for purposes of this proceeding, that the patent could cover an in situ subcoat, nonetheless notes that the patent does not speak of an in situ subcoat and that the expert witnesses were left "trying to develop a system to determine infringement that the patent doesn't contemplate". Apotex does acknowledge, however, the existence of reaction material  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's tablet but claims it is not an "infringing in situ subcoat" because "to infringe, it has to be continuous, inert and polymeric". I therefore take the reference in its written submissions to "such a subcoat" to mean one that infringes as a result of being continuous, inert and polymeric. I repeat myself - I can find no such statement, express or implied, in its detailed statement. Apotex does not allude to a non-infringing subcoat in its NOA in the context in which it now discusses it. Rather, it denies that reactive material is a subcoating within the meaning of the patent.
[36]
It is apparent that Apotex questions the Federal Court of Appeal's construction of the '693 patent. That construction is binding on me and for that matter on Apotex for purposes of proceedings relating to it, pursuant to the
Regulations
.
[37]
The NOA, as framed, turns on a construction issue that has been determined since the NOA was drafted. It does not (with respect to infringement) allege that the Apotex reactive material is non-infringing because it is not continuous, inert and polymeric; it alleges it does not infringe because the '693 patent does not contemplate a layer of reactive material at all. That construction is, in view of
AB Hassle
, supra, incorrect.
[38]
Apotex also argues that in putting forth its position that its reactive "layer" or "interface" or "subcoating" is non-infringing because it is not inert, continuous or polymeric, it is merely answering the case that AstraZeneca put forth and that "AstraZeneca's conduct in the proceeding estops AstraZeneca from arguing that the NOA does not disclose any allegation regarding the layer being continuous, inert or polymeric".
[39]
I agree with AstraZeneca that, notwithstanding Apotex's vigorous oral arguments in this respect, the written memorandum is silent in this regard. Since Apotex maintains that the arguments are contained at paragraph 37 of its memorandum, I have carefully reviewed that paragraph. The paragraph does not mention that Apotex's evidence is a response to AstraZeneca's case nor does it refer to AstraZeneca's conduct in relation to this proceeding. Apotex is not entitled, at the hearing, to raise arguments that are not contained in its written argument and of which AstraZeneca has not had notice. Even if I were to conclude otherwise, I would find that Apotex could not succeed.
[40]
The notice of application, in relation to the allegation of non-infringement in the NOA, says that the allegation is not justified on two premises. First, AstraZeneca states that Apotex's construction of the patent is flawed because the patent includes within its scope a subcoating found in the finished dosage form regardless of how it was applied or generated. Given the contents of the NOA and detailed statement, it is not surprising that this would be AstraZeneca's primary ground.
[41]
Second, AstraZeneca states that, in view of Mr. Justice Kelen's decision, it is uncontroverted that Apotex will have a layer of material between the enteric coating and the core in its tablets. Since the previous proceeding between these parties with respect to this product had gone to a hearing and the noted finding was contained in the reasons of the applications judge, Apotex, in my view, should not be surprised that AstraZeneca relied upon the finding to support its assertion that Apotex's allegation is not justified. As things now stand, both of the grounds that AstraZeneca advanced are conceded.
[42]
AstraZeneca then states further grounds in the alternative. While I have not reviewed all of the documents in relation to Court File No. T-1747-00, it would not surprise me if the alternative grounds are a mirror image of those advanced in the earlier proceeding.
[43]
In my view, the oral arguments of Apotex fail to recognize that AstraZeneca's position regarding the disclosure of samples, formulation particulars, and process information relating to Apotex's NDS - to enable it to assess whether a subcoat is present and whether the allegation of non-infringement is justified on any of the other alternative bases asserted by Apotex - is an alternative position. It is expressly stated to be an alternative position and, as such, it does not detract from the primary grounds upon which AstraZeneca rests its case. It is open to AstraZeneca to provide evidence in support of both its primary and alternative grounds.
[44]
I do not view the affidavits filed in support of the notice of application through the same lens as Apotex. AstraZeneca filed several affidavits in support of its application. Many of those affidavits are not relevant to this issue. For example, the affidavit of Karen Burke details information regarding the ownership of the patents, receipt of Apotex's NOA and the like. The affidavit of Daphne C. Ripley deals with the publication date for a particular reference. Dr. Kurt Lövgren, one of the inventors of the '693 patent, describes the development process of the omeprazole dosage form.
[45]
The affidavits, material to this issue, are those of Drs. James W. McGinty, Gerald S. Brenner and Roland Bodmeier, all of whom were tendered as experts. No issue was taken with respect to the qualifications of any of these individuals and for present purposes it is not necessary to review their respective areas of expertise.
[46]
Dr. McGinty's affidavit consists of 259 paragraphs, Dr. Brenner's affidavit contains 168 paragraphs and Dr. Bodmeier's affidavit includes 191 paragraphs. When viewed in isolation and at first blush, it could be said that one paragraph in the McGinty affidavit, one paragraph in the Brenner affidavit and two paragraphs of the Bodmeier affidavit invite additional evidence regarding infringement. The paragraphs cannot be construed in that manner when regard is had to the context in which they appear. The paragraphs noted by Apotex, when read fairly and in their context, relate to the construction of the '693 patent (whether it is a process or product patent) and to the matter of the insufficiency of the NOA and detailed statement (to enable a proper assessment of infringement to be conducted). The mere suggestion of possible testing processes for the purpose of demonstrating the deficiencies of Apotex's allegation do not put into play issues that enable Apotex to add, by evidence, to the substance of its detailed statement under the guise of responding to AstraZeneca's case.
[47]
In relation to AstraZeneca's conduct, Apotex refers to the application judge's reasons in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, reported at (2001), 15 C.P.R.(4th) 417 (F.C.T.D.). I do not find that authority to be of assistance here. The primary threshold issue in that case related to whether there was an abuse of process in circumstances where an NOA was withdrawn as a result of "problems regarding compliance with the
Food and Drug Regulations
". The case was concerned with prior art documents and it did not deal with alternative grounds. I do not think that it was incumbent upon AstraZeneca - in circumstances where its notice of application specifically relied upon two delineated bases of attack regarding the allegation of non-infringement and an alternative third basis - to bring a motion to strike the Apotex evidence. The record reveals that there was a motion in relation to the filing of that evidence and then some.
[48]
Nor can I see any basis for Apotex alleging prejudice because of AstraZeneca's conduct. AstraZeneca did not lead Apotex down a garden path. Apotex had clear notice of AstraZeneca's attack regarding its allegation of non-infringement as stated in paragraphs 29 and 30 of its notice of application. It also had notice of the alternative basis. It was open to and prudent for AstraZeneca to cover all avenues in relation to its alternative ground. In so doing, it does not mean that it resiles from or forfeits its primary challenges.
[49]
Apotex points to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (
Pfizer-2
), but I fail to see how it is relevant to this matter. The Federal Court of Appeal upheld the applications judge who determined, there, that the NOA was sufficient to alert Pfizer to the basis of Apotex's allegation that it would not infringe because its azithromycin tablets would not contain a dihydrate even though it did not also state that the tablets would contain monohydrate. That is not the situation here. In this matter, the detailed statement is not only silent regarding the fact that an in situ subcoat is not inert or continuous, it states that no subcoat exists.
[50]
I have also had regard to the decision of Justice vonFinckenstein in relation to this proceeding which is reported at (2004), 33 C.P.R.(4th) 326 (F.C.). In my opinion, the reasons in that case indicate that the manner in which this proceeding unfolded is illustrative of the gamesmanship that is a recurring problem in this kind of proceeding as noted by Mr. Justice Evans  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -2
and detailed in the reasons of Justice vonFinckenstein.
[51]
At the end of the day, further court orders and the filing of evidence in response does not resolve the basic issue because, as Mr. Justice Stone stated in
AB Hassle-2
, supra, "[t]he question remains whether, given the scheme of the
Regulations
and the decided cases, it is proper to raise and rely upon new facts in the s. 6 proceeding in addition to those relied upon in the detailed statement". The law is settled that the entire factual basis is to be set forth in the detailed statement rather than revealed piecemeal when some need happens to arise in a s. 6 proceeding. This requirement cannot be remedied by a court order, including an order under s. 6(7) of the
Regulations
: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra.
[52]
In the result, I would not go so far as to grant the declaration sought by AstraZeneca - that Apotex's letter dated September 26, 2002, is not a notice of allegation as contemplated by the
Regulations
- because the notice of allegation does contain an allegation of non-infringement that is supported by a detailed statement of the legal and factual basis. However, Apotex cannot add to the contents of its NOA and purport to establish non-infringement by evidence for which no basis is stated in the NOA. To that end, the NOA is deficient because it contains an allegation of non-infringement that turns on what has proven to be an incorrect construction of the '693 patent. Not having raised the allegation in its NOA that the reactive material in its product (that it now accepts is present) is not inert, continuous and polymeric, it cannot do so by way of evidence or argument. Consequently, Apotex's allegation of non-infringement is not justified.
Does Issue Estoppel apply to preclude Apotex from alleging non-infringement and invalidity?
[53]
AstraZeneca also relies on the doctrine of issue estoppel. AstraZeneca maintains that Apotex's allegation of non-infringement in its NOA in this proceeding turns on the construction of claim 1 as did its allegation of non-infringement in its NOA in the previous proceeding. The Federal Court of Appeal has determined the construction issue and Apotex is precluded from relitigating it. Apotex's concession, for purposes of this hearing, that the '693 patent extends to an in situ subcoat, in conjunction with the Federal Court of Appeal determination on construction, is dispositive. The conditions set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 1; 2004SCC 44 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), are met.
[54]
In view of my reasons in relation to the issue regarding the sufficiency of the NOA, I am inclined to agree with AstraZeneca that issue estoppel applies, for the reasons stated by AstraZeneca, regarding Apotex's allegation of non-infringement. However, in the event my determination on the first issue is wrong, I will examine the question of issue estoppel in some detail.
The Arguments
[55]
AstraZeneca asserts that the construction issue is dispositive with respect to the question of construction but, even if it were not, the question of infringement itself is the subject of issue estoppel. In the prior proceeding, the issue was whether Apotex's allegation of non-infringement of the '693 patent by reason that there was "no subcoating between the core and the enteric coating" was justified. The same question is raised in the NOA in this proceeding with respect to the same formulation. The construction of the '693 patent by the Federal Court of Appeal was premised on Apotex's acceptance that its tablets would contain an in situ subcoat, therefore, this fact was fundamental to the Federal Court of Appeal's decision and issue estoppel applies to preclude Apotex from arguing that its tablets will not contain a subcoat.
[56]
Additionally, under the
Regulations
an order of prohibition can only be granted when an allegation is not justified. In the previous proceeding, AstraZeneca sought a declaration regarding Apotex's NOA and an order of prohibition in the alternative. The court granted both. Because non-infringement was Apotex's only allegation, the order of prohibition had to be based on non-infringement. Hence a finding of infringement is implicit in the order emanating from the previous proceeding. The Federal Court of Appeal specifically recognized, in its reasons, that an order of prohibition existed and it dismissed the appeal. That order of prohibition is extant.
[57]
AstraZeneca also argues that issue estoppel applies to preclude Apotex from relying on the testing results of its tablets, or to producing samples for such analysis, and from re-litigating certain factual findings made by Mr. Justice Kelen. Apotex's failure to provide samples for testing in the previous proceeding, when it had the opportunity to put forth the evidence and chose not to, estops it from turning around and relying on it now. Additionally, it is bound by the findings of Mr. Justice Kelen that: "there will be a reactive material or interface spontaneously generated when the enteric coating, which consists of polymers, is sprayed on the core which contains omeprazole and alkaline materials"; and "the reactive material would insulate the core from dissolving and would serve the same purpose to an unknown extent as the subcoating described in claim 1 of the patent".
[58]
Relying on the reasoning of Mr. Justice Binnie in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, AstraZeneca maintains that Apotex is not entitled to a second bite at the cherry. Apotex chose a litigation strategy in the first proceeding and chose to put its case forth on the basis of construction of the patent. It lost. It cannot not now come forth and say we want to try again. AstraZeneca points to the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) (
P & G
) and says that the test is whether the determination on which it is sought to found estoppel is so fundamental to the substantive decision that the former cannot stand without the latter. Fundamental to an order of prohibition, argues AstraZeneca, is a finding that an allegation of non-infringement is not justified.
[59]
Regarding invalidity, AstraZeneca submits that Apotex is estopped from disputing the validity of the '693 patent on the basis of the reasoning in
P & G
, supra. Additionally, the question of whether the patent is valid was necessarily fundamental to the decisions of Mr. Justice Kelen and the Federal Court of Appeal. Apotex, having chosen to allege only non-infringement, necessarily accepted the validity of the '693 patent because if the patent was not valid, Apotex's formulation could not infringe the patent.
[60]
Apotex characterizes AstraZeneca's arguments as an attempt to re-write history. It says that AstraZeneca's primary relief, in the previous proceeding, was a declaration that Apotex's letter did not constitute a notice of allegation contemplated by the
Regulations
. AstraZeneca succeeded and got its declaration. In obtaining the order of prohibition, AstraZeneca got the only order the
Regulations
permit, an order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a NOC to Apotex in respect of the pharmaceutical products omeprazole or omeprazole magnesium tablets in certain dosages until after the expiration of certain patents.
[61]
There was no finding on the issue of infringement in the previous proceeding at either level of Court. The issue was one of construction. The parties were divided on the question of how the patent should be construed. It was a bona fide issue. Apotex contends that a careful reading of Mr. Justice Kelen's order reveals that the Minister is prohibited from issuing a notice of compliance with respect to this "purported notice of allegation". According to Apotex, this makes it clear that there could be another allegation. Neither Mr. Justice Kelen nor the Court of Appeal made any finding with respect to infringement. Thus, the prerequisites of issue estoppel are not met.
[62]
Referring to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Gen. Div.), Apotex says that the circumstances, there, are analogous to these circumstances and Justice Borins refused to apply the doctrine of issue estoppel when no decision had been taken on the merits. It is AstraZeneca that should be estopped from arguing that Apotex cannot rely on the testing of its samples in this proceeding when AstraZeneca took the opposite position in the previous proceeding and during the course of this proceeding. Moreover, argues Apotex, the jurisprudence "overwhelmingly establishes that, where an allegation is not decided on its merits, there is no estoppel that prevents a second person from transmitting a new allegation and advancing its case in the manner it sees fit".
[63]
Last, Apotex submits that even if the conditions with respect to issue estoppel are met, I should exercise my discretion not to apply it because to do otherwise would potentially cause an injustice to Apotex. The doctrine is a tool for ensuring the due administration of justice, not for frustrating it. There is a public interest element here and it would be manifestly unfair to allow AstraZeneca to use the
Regulations
to preserve a monopoly without ever having obtained a determination by the court that Apotex's conduct would be infringing.
[64]
Apotex did not make any submissions regarding AstraZeneca's argument that the doctrine of issue estoppel applies to Apotex's allegation of invalidity.
Analysis
[65]
I begin by noting that my determination with respect to the application of the doctrines of res judicata, issue estoppel or abuse of process is confined to proceedings brought pursuant to the
Regulations
. The scheme of the
Regulations
is not designed for res judicata determinations of the scope or validity of patents: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra;
Pfizer Canada Inc.
, supra.
[66]
Mr. Justice Binnie explains the rationale behind the doctrine ofissue estoppel, a branch of res judicata, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra:
"The law rightly seeks a finality to litigation. To advance that objective, it requires litigants to put their best foot forward to establish the truth of their allegations when first called upon to do so. A litigant, to use the vernacular is only entitled to one bite at the cherry ... An issue, once decided, should not generally be re-litigated to the benefit of the losing party and the harassment of the winner. A person should only be vexed once in the same cause. Duplicative litigation, potential inconsistent results, undue costs, and inconclusive proceedings are to be avoided.
"Finality is thus a compelling consideration and judicial decisions should generally be conclusive of the issues decided unless and until reversed on appeal. However, estoppel is a doctrine of public policy that is designed to advance the interests of justice."
[67]
The preconditions to the operation of issue estoppel are: that the same question has been decided; that the judicial decision which is said to create the estoppel was final; and, that the parties to the judicial decision were the same persons as the parties to the proceedings in which the estoppel is raised: Ibid;
P & G
, supra.
[68]
It is common ground that the judicial decision (the order of prohibition) said to create the estoppel was final and that the same parties were involved. The disagreement arises with respect to whether the issue of "infringement" can be said to have been necessarily - even if not explicitly - determined in the earlier proceeding. In other words, is the issue of infringement so fundamental to the substantive decision that the latter cannot stand without the former?
[69]
I appreciate AstraZeneca's position that Mr. Justice Kelen's order prohibiting the Minister from issuing a NOC - notwithstanding the reference "with respect to this purported notice of allegation" - must be taken to have implicitly decided that Apotex's allegation of non-infringement contained in its NOA was not justified. However, I have difficulty reconciling that position with Justice Kelen's statement that "[i]t is not possible to determine whether the allegation of non-infringement is justified based on speculation and conjecture by the experts".
[70]
In the Federal Court of Appeal, Apotex conceded that if claim 1 of the '693 patent was construed (as it was) as disclosing a tablet which contains a subcoating or separating layer between the core and enteric coating in its finished product form, however the subcoating or separating layer is formed, its appeal must fail. The Court of Appeal, in those circumstances, found it unnecessary to address the issue of infringement. Yet, had it done so, it would have had regard to Apotex's NOA. Apotex does not suggest that the conclusion could have been anything other than its allegation of non-infringement was not justified. Otherwise, it would have no reason to concede that construction of the patent was determinative.
[71]
Therefore, in my view, since Apotex alleged only non-infringement and the
Regulations
mandate that an order of prohibition shall issue where none of the allegations is justified, it is not a leap of faith to conclude that a finding that the allegation of non-infringement is not justified is fundamental to the substantive decision - the order of prohibition.
[72]
However, there is another reason why issue estoppel applies and it applies equally to the allegations of non-infringement and invalidity in this proceeding.
[73]
The general rule, stated in
P & G
, supra, is that a party in one proceeding is estopped from raising an issue that it could and should have raised in a previous proceeding between the parties. Although this form of estoppel is of the weaker variety, when the conditions are met, it is a matter of discretion as to whether the party should not be estopped. The basis for the rule is referenced in
P & G
, supra, where the Court cites Lord Denning in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  reasonable diligence to bring forward every point which he thinks would help him. If he omits to raise any particular point, from negligence, inadvertence, or even accident (which would or might have decided the issue in his favour), he may find himself shut out from raising that point again, at any rate in any case where the self-same issue arises in the same or subsequent proceedings."
[74]
The Supreme Court of Canada, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  relied upon indistinguishable reasoning when it referred, at pages 358 and 359, to a passage from
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  given matter becomes the subject of litigation in and of adjudication by a court of competent jurisdiction, the Court requires the parties to that litigation to bring forward their whole case and will not (except under special circumstances) permit the same parties to open the same subject of litigation in respect of matter (sic) which might have been brought forward as part of the subject in contest, but which was not brought forward only because they have from negligence, inadvertence or even accident, omitted part of their case. The plea of res judicata applies, except in special cases, not only to points upon which the Court was actually required by the parties to form an opinion and pronounce a judgment, but to every point which properly belonged to the subject of litigation and which the parties, exercising reasonable diligence, might have brought forward at the time."
[75]
Assuming that I were satisfied (and I am not) that, in addition to an allegation of invalidity, Apotex raises facts with respect to non-infringement in its NOA in this proceeding that it did not address in its NOA in the previous proceeding, the question (regarding both invalidity and non-infringement) is - could or should Apotex have raised those issues and facts in the previous proceeding?
[76]
Apotex points to a number of cases where the Court has rejected the first person's argument that a second person is estopped, by the doctrine of res judicata or abuse of process, from transmitting a new allegation and advancing its case in the manner it sees fit. I have reviewed each of those authorities and conclude that they do not assist Apotex in the present circumstances. A summary of the jurisprudence regarding the filing of more than one NOA is contained in the reasons of Mr. Justice Blais in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, and I need not review it in detail here. As I understand it, the jurisprudence holds that a subsequent NOA is permissible when a previous NOA has been withdrawn due to difficulties in meeting regulatory requirements or where the subsequent NOA is separate and distinct from the previous one (such as a new formulation) or where a procedural defect with respect to the previous NOA opens the door for the transmission of a subsequent NOA. In the cases advanced by Apotex, orders of prohibition had not been made in the previous proceedings, even where the matters had gotten to that stage. Here, an order of prohibition did issue and Apotex's appeal of that order was dismissed.
[77]
AGF Canadian Equity Fund
, supra, was concerned with an action. The plaintiff's statement of claim was struck without leave to amend. The plaintiff filed a new statement of claim and the Court held that the plaintiff was not precluded from so doing. The matter was not res judicata because there had never been a hearing, so there was no determination on the merits. There is no analogy to be drawn from that case. Apotex's previous NOA was not struck before the matter proceeded to a hearing. As noted, Apotex had both a hearing and an appeal with respect to its previous NOA. Nor is Mr. Justice Lemieux's decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.), where he exercised his discretion not to apply issue estoppel, of relevance here. AstraZeneca's position with respect to sample production was pleaded in the alternative and has been consistent. That was not the situation before Justice Lemieux.
[78]
The hurdle that Apotex has to get over is
P & G
, supra. In that case, P & G submitted a reissued patent for inclusion on the patent register maintained pursuant to the
Regulations
. On its face, the patent had an issue date of June 11, 1996. Genpharm moved to dismiss P & G's application for an order of prohibition on the basis that the patent was not eligible for inclusion on the patent register as it had not been submitted within 30 days of issuance as required by s. 4(4) of the
Regulations
. The Federal Court of Appeal's reasons deal with two discrete issues. It is only the question of issue estoppel that is pertinent to this matter. P & G argued that the question - whether the patent in question was eligible for inclusion on the patent register - was res judicata and subject to the doctrine of issue estoppel because in prior litigation between the same parties in relation to the same patent, the matter was or could have been raised. The Federal Court of Appeal agreed.
[79]
Apotex does not argue that it could not have alleged (in its previous NOA), in addition to its product not containing a subcoat, that its product would not, in any event, contain an interface or layer that was inert, continuous and polymeric. Rather, it says that its NOA in the previous proceeding raised a construction issue, that "construction" was the only issue and that it was a "bona fide issue" warranting determination. I do not disagree that the construction of claim 1 of the patent was a bona fide issue. Construction of a patent or specific claims of a patent is an issue in all cases.
[80]
It seems to me that Apotex's submission begs the question. It did, in the previous proceeding, allege non-infringement. Thus, it put the issue of "infringement" into play. It does not advance any explanation for its failure to put its best foot forward in the previous proceeding. To accept its submission, in my view, is tantamount to allowing it to split its case. It enables Apotex to test the waters on the construction of the patent and then, if unsuccessful (as it was), to recast its case and get a second bite at the cherry. While I would not go so far as to say (using the words of Mr. Justice Evans in
P & G
, supra) that Apotex has hidden in the weeds, holding back a defence for use in subsequent litigation, it certainly put all its eggs in one basket. This omission is not of a procedural or technical nature; it is substantive. Apotex has not persuaded me that the conditions for issue estoppel have not been met regarding the issue of "infringement".
[81]
Insofar as invalidity is concerned, Apotex makes no submissions in that regard. I am proceeding on the assumption that Apotex considers, since it did not raise invalidity in the previous proceeding, that the issue was not determined and therefore issue estoppel does not apply. AstraZeneca's position - that Apotex, by alleging only non-infringement in the previous proceeding, necessarily accepted the validity of the '693 patent because if the patent was not valid, Apotex's formulation could not infringe the patent - stands uncontroverted. Apotex does not suggest that it could not or should not have raised invalidity in the previous proceeding. Moreover, in view of counsel's response to my question in this respect (See: Transcript at pp. 1130-1133), it appears, on this issue, that Apotex may very well have been hiding in the weeds. I accept AstraZeneca's argument and my comments regarding splitting the case apply with equal force to the issue of invalidity. That issue is deemed to have been decided.
[82]
I turn now to the question of whether, notwithstanding that issue estoppel applies, I should exercise my discretion not to apply the doctrine. Both AstraZeneca and Apotex insist that justice is achieved by the position that each asserts. My task, as I see it, is to view the matter from a broader perspective and look to interests that transcend those of the immediate parties.
[83]
In considering whether to exercise my discretion  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's favour, I embark upon a fact-specific exercise involving consideration of a number of factors. My first observation is that there is no suggestion that the previous proceeding was tainted by fraud or dishonesty or that there exists fresh new evidence, previously unavailable, that conclusively impeaches the original result:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (
CUPE
). Apotex does not suggest that the record it seeks to have adjudicated in this proceeding was not available to it (or could not have been available to it) in the previous proceeding. I have also considered that Apotex does not suggest that the stakes of the previous proceeding did not warrant its full attention:
CUPE
, supra. Apotex is not a stranger to litigation.
[84]
I have considered the nature of s. 6 proceedings and the fact that their scope is confined to administrative purposes and that they are to be held expeditiously: See: paragraphs 12-15 herein.
[85]
I have considered that the
Regulations
are a public regulatory scheme for regulating the marketing of new medicines and that their purpose is to effect a balance between protection of a patentee's rights and the public interest in the encouragement of research on the one hand and the public interest in competition and cheaper medicines on the other hand:
P & G
, supra, per Mr. Justice Evans.
[86]
I have considered that the public policy in question must be of substantial importance in order to override the public interest in the finality of litigation and that the litigation, here, is between two private parties: Ibid, per Mr. Justice Rothstein for the majority.
[87]
I have considered the interests of those collaterally affected, in other words, the interests of those who have chosen to advance the grounds relied upon in a NOA (rather than splitting the case) and have been unsuccessful:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 10 C.P.R.(4th) 38 (T.D.), affd. (2002), 18 C.P.R.(4th) 558 (F.C.A.).
[88]
I have considered the public interest in the finality of litigation and specifically the uncertainty created in not knowing when it is over. I have considered the integrity and credibility of the justice system, judicial and administrative resources and costs. I have considered that this proceeding brings into question Mr. Justice Kelen's order of prohibition notwithstanding that Apotex's appeal with respect to the order was dismissed.
[89]
I am guided by the principle that although I have a discretion to refuse to apply issue estoppel, in the context of court proceedings, as contrasted with proceedings of administrative tribunals, such discretion is very limited in application and confined to narrow "special circumstances":
P & G
, supra.
[90]
I am not satisfied that this matter falls within the special circumstances exception. It boils down, in the end, to a question of whether Apotex should have more than one full opportunity to allege non-infringement and invalidity with respect to the same patent and the same formulation. I think not. The doctrine of issue estoppel applies and Apotex is estopped from alleging non-infringement and invalidity in its NOA.
Does the doctrine of abuse of process operate to preclude Apotex from alleging non-infringement and invalidity?
[91]
The court's power to prevent relitigation extends beyond the limits of the res judicata doctrine. In
CUPE
, Madam Justice Arbour discussed the three related doctrines of issue estoppel, abuse of process and collateral attack. A synopsis of the commentary in
CUPE
regarding abuse of process is provided in the paragraphs that follow. Reference to citations is omitted.
[92]
Judges have an inherent and residual discretion to prevent an abuse of the court's process. The doctrine is used in a variety of legal contexts. It is a flexible doctrine unencumbered by the specific requirements of concepts such as issue estoppel. Courts have applied the doctrine of abuse of process to preclude relitigation in circumstances where the strict requirements of issue estoppel are not met, but where allowing the litigation to proceed would nonetheless violate such principles as judicial economy, consistency, finality and the integrity of the administration of justice.
[93]
The policy grounds supporting abuse of process by relitigation are the same as the essential policy grounds supporting issue estoppel. The policy grounds include that there will be an end to litigation and that no one should be twice vexed by the same cause as well as grounds whose aim is to preserve the courts' and litigants' resources, to uphold the integrity of the legal system in order to avoid inconsistent results, and to protect the principle of finality so crucial to the proper administration of justice.
[94]
While critics have argued that when the doctrine of abuse of process is used as proxy for issue estoppel it obscures the true question, while adding nothing but a vague sense of discretion, that is not so. In all of its applications, the primary focus of the doctrine of abuse of process is the integrity of the adjudicative function of courts. The focus is less on the interests of the parties and more on the integrity of judicial decision making as a branch of the administration of justice. When the focus is properly on the integrity of the adjudicative process, the motive of the party who seeks to relitigate cannot be a decisive factor.
[95]
From the system's point of view, relitigation causes serious detrimental effects and should be avoided unless the circumstances dictate that relitigation is necessary to enhance the credibility and the effectiveness of the adjudicative process as a whole. Instances where litigation will enhance, rather than impeach, the integrity of the judicial system include: (1) when the first proceeding is tainted by fraud or dishonesty; (2) where fresh new evidence, previously unavailable, conclusively impeaches the original results; and (3) when fairness dictates that the original result should not be binding in the new context.
[96]
The discretionary factors that apply to prevent the doctrine of issue estoppel from operating in an unjust or unfair way are equally available to prevent the doctrine of abuse of process from achieving a similar undesirable result. The bar against relitigation would create unfairness in circumstances where the stakes in the original proceeding were too minor to generate a full and robust response while the subsequent stakes were considerable. Fairness would dictate that the administration of justice would be better served by permitting the second proceeding to go forward than by insisting that finality should prevail. An inadequate incentive to defend, the discovery of new evidence in appropriate circumstances, or a tainted original process may all overcome the interest in maintaining the finality of the original decision.
[97]
The doctrines of issue estoppel, collateral attack and abuse of process comprehensively address the concerns that arise when finality in litigation must be balanced against fairness to a particular litigant.
[98]
If I am wrong in my determination that issue estoppel applies, then I conclude that Apotex's NOA constitutes an abuse of process for substantially the same reasons provided under the issue estoppel section of these reasons. I reject Apotex's suggestion that the frequency of the occasions upon which it is forced to respond to an allegation of abuse of process diminishes the merits of the submission in this matter.
[99]
Having concluded as I have with respect to the threshold issues, I need not deal with the alternative issues. AstraZeneca has been successful and will have its costs. I have considered the submissions of counsel and the pertinent factors in Rule 400(3) and I award costs to be assessed at the upper end of column III of Tariff B. The assessment officer will be directed to assess second counsel fees for attendance at the cross-examinations and the hearing as well as reasonable disbursements with respect to their attendance.
[100]
AstraZeneca, in consultation with Apotex, shall submit a draft order, reflecting the appropriate disposition in accordance with these reasons, on or before February 18, 2005. In the event that they cannot agree on the terms of the order, AstraZeneca shall serve and file written submissions and its proposed draft order not later than February 18st. Apotex shall serve and file responding submissions and its proposed draft order not later than February 23th. Written submissions shall not exceed two pages, double-spaced.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/gs
SCHEDULE "A"
to the
Reasons for order dated
February 14, 2005
in
September 26, 2002 AB HASSLE,
ASTRAZENECA AB and
ASTRAZENECA CANADA INC.
and
AstraZeneca Canada Inc.,
APOTEX INC.
and THE MINISTER OF HEALTH
T-1878-02
AstraZeneca Canada Inc.
1004 Middlegate Road
Mississauga, Ontario L4Y 1 M4
Dear Sirs:
This is a Notice of Allegation pursuant to the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
(the "
Regulations
") with respect to Canadian Patent Nos. 1,292,693 (the "'693 Patent"), 1,302,891 (the "'891 Patent") and 2,166,483 (the "'483 Patent").
We have filed with the Minister of Health a New Drug Submission for magnesium omeprazole tablets for oral administration in strengths of 10 mg and 20 mg.
1. The '693 Patent Allegation
The '693 Patent contains 19 claims.
Claim 17 is a process claim and is irrelevant under the
Regulations
since this claim is not a claim for the medicine itself or a claim for the use-of the. medicine.
Claim 18 is a commercial package claim and is irrelevant under the
Regulations
since this claim is not a claim for the medicine itself or a claim for the use of the medicine.
With respect to the remainder of the claims, 1 to 16, inclusive, and 19, as well as claim 18 if it is held to be a claim for the medicine itself or a claim for the use of the medicine (hereinafter referred to as the "claims in issue"), we allege. that no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by us of the said tablets.
We further allege that each of the claims in issue of the '693 Patent is invalid.
The legal and factual basis for the aforesaid allegation is as follows.
The '693 Patent
The '693 Patent, entitled "Pharmaceutical Preparation Containing Omeprazole", relates to a pharmaceutical preparation containing omeprazole or its alkaline salts intended for oral use and to the use of these preparations in the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases.
The essence of the alleged invention in the '693 Patent is the development of a formulation which purports to solve the problem of the prior art formulations which consisted of an alkaline core containing omeprazole or an alkaline salt of omeprazole, and an enteric coating disposed on the core that led to degradation. The alleged solution to the problem is asserted in the patent to be the separation from contact of the core and the enteric coating by application of a subcoating within the meaning of the patent.
Each of the claims in issue of the '693 Patent contain among its essential elements, the following essential elements:
(i) within the formulation core region a selection from the group consisting of:
(a) omeprazole plus an alkaline reacting compound;
(b) an alkaline omeprazole salt plus an alkaline reacting compound; or
(c) an alkaline omeprazole salt alone;
(ii) an inert subcoating which is soluble or rapidly disintegrating in water disposed on said core region, said subcoating comprising one or more layers of materials selected from among tablet excipients and polymeric film-forming compounds; and
(iii) an outer layer disposed on said subcoating comprising an enteric coating.
In light of the foregoing, and in light of the very clear discussion within the disclosure, the "subcoating" in part (ii) above cannot mean material comprising a reaction product resulting from a reaction between the core material and the enteric coating when the core is brought into contact with the enteric coating. The reaction product is precisely what the disclosure and the patent are directed not to having formed and hence it is not a subcoating within the meaning of "subcoating" of the patent. It is clearly not what the patent is directed to or what the inventors intended. The patent and the inventors intended the subcoating to be distinct material placed between the core and the enteric coating so as to avoid their coming into contact.
Furthermore, the claims in issue of the patent cannot be construed to include within their scope those formulations which are referred to in the disclosure of the '693 Patent as being within the prior art. More particularly, formulations comprising a core with an enteric coating disposed on the core which were prepared by direct application of the enteric coating onto a core containing omeprazole and an alkaline reacting compound, or an alkaline salt of omeprazole optionally including an alkaline reacting compound, cannot be construed as falling within the scope of the claims of the '693 Patent, otherwise, the patent would be invalid as failing to claim something which is new, because it would have within its scope that which is old.
Finally, the claims in issue of the patent cannot be construed to include within their scope those formulations which are disclosed within the disclosure of the '693 Patent as examples of formulations which were used for comparison purposes, and were thus disclaimed from being within the scope of the,claimed invention, against those formulations which were described as being examples of the alleged claimed invention of the '693 Patent for the purpose of demonstrating the benefits of the alleged inventive formulations.
Non-Infringement
Each of the claims in issue of the '693 Patent is dependent on claim 1.
We allege that we will not infringe any of the claims in issue of the '693 Patent since we will not infringe claim 1.
Claim 1 will not be infringed since our formulation will not contain a "subcoating", as discussed above, within the meaning of the '693 Patent. Our product will contain a core with an enteric coating disposed on the core. In formulating our product, we will bring into contact the outer enteric coating with the core and will not place a subcoating within the meaning of the patent between the core and the enteric coating, so that our formulation will consist of only components (i) and (iii), not component (ii).
With respect to claims 2 to 16, inclusive, and 18 and 19, since these claims are dependent on claim 1 they will not be infringed.
We further allege additional bases of non-infringement with respect to the following claims.
With respect to claim 2, we further allege that we will not infringe this claim since our formulation does not include a subcoating layer comprised of one or more of the listed compounds.
With respect to claim 3, we further allege that we will not infringe this claim since our formulation does not include a subcoating with two or more layers.
With respect to claim 4, we further allege that we will not infringe this claim since our formulation does not include a subcoating layer comprised of the listed compounds.
With respect to claim 5, we further allege that we will not infringe this claim since our formulation does not include an alkaline core comprised of omeprazole and pH-buffering alkaline compound. Rather, our cores comprise magnesium omeprazole.
With respect to claim 6, we further allege that we will not infringe this claim since this claim is dependent on claim 5, which will not be infringed for the reasons above.
With respect to claim 13, we further allege that we will not infringe this claim on the basis of either that: (1) the water content of our final dosage forms will exceed 1.5% by weight; or (2) claim 13 is restricted to dosage forms containing omeprazole, whereas our formulation will only contain magnesium omeprazole (an alkaline salt of omeprazole).
With respect to claim 14, we further allege that we will not infringe this claim since our formulation will not contain a subcoating which further comprises an alkaline buffering compouund.
With respect to claim 15, we further allege that we will not infringe this claim since our for nulation will not contain a core comprising omeprazole or a subcoating comprised of hydroxypropyl methylcellulose.
With respect to claim 16, we further allege that we will not infringe this claim since our formulation will not contain a core comprising omeprazole and magnesium hydroxide, nor will our formulation comprise subcoating layers (inner and outer subcoating) listed in the claim.
With respect to claims 18 and 19, we further allege that we will not infringe these claims for all the reasons set out above with respect to claims 1 to 16.
In addition, given that what we are manufacturing is that which is taught in the prior art, then there clearly cannot be any infringement.
More particularly, our formulation of magnesium omeprazole tablets is taught in European Patent Application No. 124,495, published on November 7, 1984, wherein at pages 5 to 8 and at Example 12 of this Application, formulations containing a base addition salt of omeprazole (including magnesium omeprazole) are disclosed. Included within the aforementioned disclosure are references to enteric coated tablet formulations wherein the tablets are coated with an enteric coating which protects the active compound from degradation. Our formulation is in accordance with the aforementioned teachings of European Patent Application No. 124,495.
Should you assert that any of the claims in issue of the `693 Patent are infringed, we allege that the claims are invalid based upon what has become known in Canadian law as the Gillette Defence, as discussed below.
Invalidity
A. Gillette Defence
As noted above, we assert that the meaning of "subcoating" within the `693 Patent; is a subcoating which consists of material placed there by design and not any material created in situ. If you assert that any of the claims of the '693. Patent are infringed by our formulation by reason of the fact that our formulation allegedly contains a "subcoating" which is formed in situ between the core and the enteric coating, and said "subcoating" is within the meaning of the claims of" the '693 Patent, then we allege that the claims must be invalid in accordance with the principles set out in the decision of the House of Lords in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
Our formulation is within the prior art as disclosed by the teachings of European Patent Application No. 124,495, published on November 7, 1984, as discussed above. Further, the use of such a formulation to treat gastrointestinal disease is also in accordance with the teachings disclosed within European Patent Application No. 124,495.
If our formulation contains a "subcoating" within the meaning of the '693 Patent, then the enteric coated formulations disclosed within European Patent Application No. 124,495 would also contain such a "subcoating" and thus any allegedly infringed claims must be invalid.
B. Anticipation
We allege that each of the claims in issue of the '693 Patent is anticipated by European Patent Application No. 124,495, published on November 7, 1984. European Patent Application No. 124,495, at pages 5 to 8 and Example 12, teaches the preparation of an enteric coated formulation of an alkaline-salt of omeprazole (including magnesium omeprazole).
A person skilled in the art reading European Patent Application No. 124,495 would be aware, as part of his common knowledge and skill in the art, of European Patent Application No. 122,815, published on October 24, 1984, and the article entitled "Etudes des Conditions D'application des Enrobages Gastioresistants Enterosolubles a Base D'Euragit L 30 D", published in
J. Pharm. Belg.
(1987), 37, 4, 273-282.
European Patent Application No. 122,815 discloses an enteric-soluble composition for coating drugs which comprises a conventional enteric-soluble polymer in admixture with a polyanionic polymer which is soluble at low pH. This Application discloses at page 16, line 22 the following: "Also, of course, the solid formulation may be coated with another coating agent prior to application of the enteric-soluble composition of the invention. The enteric-soluble composition of the invention may, if desired, contain such conventional additives as plasticizers, film-forming materials, film-forming aids, polymer particles and/or surfactants as dispersing agents for the polymers or plasticizers, colouring agents, fillers (such as titanium dioxide, talc, or barium sulphate) or antioxidants, in order to improve the properties of the preparations, as is well known to those skilled in the art."
The article entitled "Etudes des Conditions D'application des Enrobages Gastroresistants Enterosolubles a Base D'Euragit L 30 D", teaches the application of an enteric coating on a core containing a pharmaceutically acceptable drug, wherein said core is separated from said enteric coating by the application of a subcoating layer.
As a result, the person skilled in the art, aware of the teachings of European Application No. 122,815 and the article "Etudes des Conditions D'application des Enrobages Gastroresistants Enterosolubles a Base D'Euragit L 30 D" would, when following the directions of European Patent Application 124,495 for the preparation of an enteric coated formulation containing an alkaline salt of omeprazole (including magnesium omeprazole), apply the methods disclosed within the above references for the application of an enteric coating to a tablet - which results in the incorporation of a subcoating disposed on the core containing the active ingredient, said subcoating situated between the enteric coating and the core. The resulting formulations and their use would fall within the scope of the claims of the '693 Patent.
C. Claims broader than invention and Inutility
We allege that each of the claims in issue of the '693 Patent is invalid, with the exception of claim 13, on the basis that these claims are broader than the invention disclosed because they claim any formulation with any level of water content, whereas the patent disclosure teaches only formulations containing low levels of water, and on the basis that these claims contain admittedly inoperable species where such species contain levels of water that are not low. The following excerpts from the '693 Patent are illustrative:
At page 4, line 36:
"The final, enteric dosage form is treated in a suitable way to reduce the water content to a very low level in order to obtain a good stability of the dosage form during long-term storage."
At page 8, line 24:
"It is essential for the long term stability during storage that the water content of the final dosage form containing omeprazole (enteric coated tablets, capsules or pellets) is kept low, preferably not more than 1.5% by weight."
At page 27, line 3:
"This example demonstrates the effect of the moisture content of the preparations according to the invention on storage stability.
The stability of omeprazole pellets according to the invention was compared to that of omeprazole pellets with higher water content. Omeprazole pellets were prepared according to the invention with a water content of 1%. Two other portions of the same formulation were conditioned to a water content of 2% and 5% respectively. The three formulations, packed in tight containers not containing a desiccant, were stored for one month at +50ºC. After this time the packages were opened and the pellets were assayed for the amount of omeprazole by HPLC. The formulation according to the invention had an omeprazole content of 98.5% of the initial value. The other two formulations with a water content of 2 and 5% respectively were virtually totally degraded and had only trace amounts of intact omeprazole."
With the exception of claim 13, none of the claims in issue contains as an element of the claim a limitation that the water content of the final dosage form must be kept low. The omission of this essential element from the claims results in the claims being broader than the invention disclosed, and results in formulations which lack utility. As such, the claims are invalid.
D. Insufficiency and Ambiguity
If it is asserted that a "subcoating" includes a reaction product created in situ from the direct application of an enteric coating to the core material, it cannot include every single such application because the patentee has admitted that some formulations so created failed. However, the patent disclosure does not disclose how to achieve a successful formulation with an in situ "subcoating", and more particularly, does not disclose what materials can be used (eg. what type and amount of excipients and enteric coating materials should be used, whether the compound omeprazole or an alkaline salt of omeprazole is involved in the reaction), how they are to be used (eg. thickness of the "subcoating" required, under what conditions, such as moisture content of the core, what type of solvent should be used when applying the enteric coating) to achieve such a "subcoating", or by what means (such as types of analytical methods) a person skilled in the art should employ to determine whether a subcoating created in situ was a "subcoating" within the scope of the patent. The '693 Patent does not adequately teach the making of a satisfactory "subcoating" in situ because the '693 Patent does not teach the materials, conditions, methods of manufacture or analysis, that can be used to successfully achieve such a "subcoating".
Further, the '693 Patent does not properly define the scope of its monopoly since it does not allow the person skilled in the art to ascertain with some measure of exactness the boundaries of the exclusive privilege upon which they may not trespass during the exercise of the grant since the practice of the prior art (application of an enteric coating directly onto a core) can create a "subcoating" in situ. The claims in issue are therefore insufficient and ambiguous.
We further allege the '693 Patent does not meet the requirements of s. 34 of the
Patent Act
in that the patent disclosure does not correctly and fully describe the invention, set out clearly in such full, clear and concise and exact terms as to enable any person skilled in the art to make or construct the formulation covered by the claims in issue. Each of the claims in issue includes as an element of the formulations "an inert subcoating which is soluble or rapidly disintegrating in water disposed on said core, said subcoating comprising one or more layers of materials selected from among
tablet excipients
...". However, neither the disclosure nor the claims of the '693 Patent teach the identity or type of tablet excipients the claims refer to.
E. Obviousness
We allege that each of the claims in issue of the '693 Patent is invalid on the basis of obviousness. The '693 Patent carries as its earliest priority filing date, the date of April 30, 1986. We will rely on this date as the date of the invention of the '693 Patent in the absence of any evidence to the contrary.
The essence of the alleged invention in the '693 Patent is the development of a formulation which purports to solve the problem of the prior art formulations which consisted of an alkaline core containing omeprazole or an alkaline salt of omeprazole, and an enteric coating disposed on the core that led to degradation. The alleged solution to the problem is asserted in the patent to be the separation from contact of the core and the enteric coating by application of a subcoating within the meaning of the patent.
Omeprazole was known to be acid-labile (degrades in acidic environments). It was also known to enteric coat oral dosage formulations containing such compounds in order to protect them upon ingestion from the acidity present in the stomach.
Also known was that omeprazole was stabilized in mixtures with alkaline reacting compounds. Also known was the fact that the alkaline salts of omeprazole, including magnesium omeprazole, were more stable than the neutral form of omeprazole.
Because of its stability problems in acid, it was obvious to prepare an enteric coating of an oral dosage form containing omeprazole stabilized with an alkaline reacting compound or as an alkaline salt of omeprazole. In fact, European Patent Application No. 124,495 taught the enteric coating of tablets containing alkaline salts of omeprazole.
The `693 Patent admits that the problem which it seeks to address is the prevention of degradation which occurs by reason of contact between the alkaline core containing omeprazole or an alkaline salt of omeprazole, and the enteric coating which occurred in the prior art formulations. Such degradation, according to the patentee, resulted in the formulations becoming badly discoloured and losing omeprazole content with the passage of time.
The solution to the above problem, as disclosed and claimed by the `693 Patent, involves a formulation in which contact is avoided between the core and the enteric coating by the use of an "inert subcoating which is soluble or rapidly disintegrating in water disposed on said core region, said subcoating comprising one or more layers of materials selected from among tablet excipients and polymeric film-forming compounds", applied to the core containing omeprazole prior to the application of the outer enteric coating over said subcoating.
Persons skilled in the art would be led directly and without difficulty to this solution.
Omeprazole was not the first acid-labile compound to be formulated into a pharmaceutical dosage form which contained an outer enteric coating. Known in the art were enteric coated formulations of pharmaceutically active substances which were formulated within an alkaline core. Also known was the fact that enteric coatings which were applied directly onto an alkaline core could react with the core thus degrading the enteric coating and potentially compromising the stability of the acid-labile substance within the core. As a means of preventing such degradation of the enteric coating, it was known to incorporate a "subcoating" between the alkaline core and the enteric coating for the purpose of preventing contact between the enteric coating and the alkaline core.
As such, persons skilled in the art, given the state of the art, would have known to apply, and would have applied, an inert subcoating which is soluble or rapidly disintegrating in water disposed on said core region, said subcoating comprising one or more layers of materials selected from among tablet excipients and polymeric film-forming compounds, to the alkaline core containing omeprazole or its alkaline salt prior to the application of the enteric coating in order to prevent the degradation which occurs by reason of contact between the core and the enteric coating. The person skilled in the art would have done so without any difficulty in the manner that satisfied the requisite bioavailability of the pharmaceutically active substance by the application of known techniques.
Persons skilled in the art would have also known to use such formulations for the purpose of treating gastrointestinal conditions and diseases. Also, the inclusion of instructions within a commercial package containing such a formulation for the use in the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases would have also been obvious.
The making and use of such formulations thus were obvious to persons skilled in the art in light of the state of the knowledge of such person skilled in the art having regard to his/her knowledge including the documents listed within Schedule A.
Additionally, it is our intention to rely on any and all admissions contained within the '693 Patent as to the state of the prior art and any and all admissions made by you and/or your employees in the court decisions and journal publications listed within Schedule B.
Persons skilled in the art would have also known to use such formulations for the purpose of treating gastrointestinal conditions and diseases. Also, the inclusion of instructions within a commercial package containing such a formulation for the. use in the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases would have also been obvious.
The making and use of such formulations thus were obvious to persons skilled in the art in light of the state of the knowledge of such person skilled in the art having regard to his/her knowledge including the documents listed within Schedule A.
Additionally, it is our intention to rely on any and all admissions contained within the '891 Patent as to the state of the prior art and any and all admissions made by you and/or your employees in the court decisions and journal publications listed within Schedule B.
G. Double Patenting
The '891 Patent, set to expire on June 9, 2009 (17 years from the date of issue), generally relates to enteric coated formulations containing an acid-labile pharmaceutically active substance or an alkaline salt of such substances within an alkaline core, wherein said core and enteric coating are separated by a subcoating layer. Claims 1 to 17, inclusive, are claims directed to specific formulations, while claim 19 is direct to the use of such formulations in the manufacture of a medicament for the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases.
The '693 Patent, set to expire on December 3, 2008 (17 years from the date of issue), generally relates to enteric coated formulations containing omeprazole (an acid-labile pharmaceutically active substance) or an alkaline salt of omeprazole within an alkaline core, wherein said core and enteric coating are separated by a subcoating layer. Claims 1 to 16, inclusive, are claims. directed to specific formulations, while claim 19 is directed to the use of such formulations in the manufacture of a medicament for the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases.
In the event you should assert that any of the claims in issue of the '891 Patent include within their scope the compounds omeprazole or an alkaline salt of omeprazole (including magnesium omeprazole), we allege that each of the claims is invalid on the bases of each of same invention type double patenting and obviousness type double patenting over the '693 Patent since the claims in issue would include embodiments within the scope of the claims of the '693 Patent or are not inventive over the subject matter disclosed within the claims of the '693 Patent.
E. Double Patenting
We allege that each of the claims in issue of the '483 Patent is invalid on the bases of each of same invention type double patenting and obviousness type double patenting over the '693 Patent and Canadian Patent No. 2,166,794.
(i) The `693 Patent
Each of the claims in issue of the. '483 Patent is invalid on the basis of same invention type double patenting and obviousness type double patenting over the '693 Patent. The '693 Patent (set to expire on December 3, 2008) discloses and claims an enteric coated formulation which comprises; (i)within its core the compound magnesium omeprazole; (ii) a subcoating layer disposed on-the core which separates the core from the enteric coating; and (iii) an outer enteric coating layer. The '693 Patent additionally discloses the use of such formulations for the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases.
The compound magnesium omeprazole, described and claimed within the formulations of the '693 Patent, encompasses all forms of magnesium omeprazole. It is not restricted to forms of magnesium omeprazole which have a degree of crystallinity lower than 70% as determined by x-ray powder diffraction. As such, the claims in issue of the '483 Patent fall within the scope of the claims of the '693 Patent and are therefore invalid.
If the claims in issue of the '483 Patent are not for the same invention as claimed within the '693 Patent, then we allege that the claims in issue are invalid on the basis of obviousness type double patenting since there is nothing further inventive in substituting magnesium omeprazole having a degree of crystallinity higher than 70% as determined by x-ray powder diffraction (said compound being the subject matter of Canadian Patent No. 2,166,794, not the '483 Patent) for the magnesium omeprazole described and claimed within the formulations or uses of the '693 Patent.
(ii) Canadian Patent No. 2,166,794
As indicated, claims 1 to 13; inclusive, of the '483 Patent relate to an enteric coated formulation containing within the core, magnesium omeprazole-having a degree of crystallinity. higher than 70% as determined by x-ray powder diffraction, and wherein said core is separated from the enteric coating by one or more subcoating layers. These claims are invalid on the bases of same invention type double patenting and obviousness type double patenting since the formulations covered by these claims are within the scope of claims 20 to 22, inclusive, of Canadian Patent No. 2,166,794 or are not inventive in light of them.
Canadian Patent No. 2,166,794 describes and claims as its inventive subject matter the compound magnesium omeprazole having a degree of crystallinity
Yours very truly, APOTEX INC.
Bernard C. Sherman, Ph.D., P.Eng. Chairman and C.E.O.
BCS/jm
SCHEDULE "B"
to the
Reasons for order dated
February 14, 2005
in
AB HASSLE, ASTRAZENECA AB and
ASTRAZENECA CANADA INC.
and APOTEX INC. and THE
MINISTER OF HEALTH
T-1878-02
Court File No.T-1878-02
FEDERAL COURT - TRIAL DIVISION
AB HASSLE, ASTRAZENECA AB
and ASTRAZENECA CANADA INC.
Applicants
and
APOTEX INC. and THE
MINISTER OF HEALTH
Respondents
APPLICATION UNDER PATENTED
MEDICINES (NOTICE OF
COMPLIANCE)
REGULATIONS SOR/93-133 as am
SOR/98-166, SOR/99-379
NOTICE OF APPLICATION
TO THE RESPONDENTS
A PROCEEDING HAS BEEN COMMENCED by the applicants. The relief claimed by the applicants appears on the following page.
THIS APPLICATION will be heard by the Court at a time and place to be fixed by the Judicial Administrator. Unless the Court orders otherwise, the place of hearing will be as requested by the applicants. The applicants request that this application be heard at Toronto.
IF YOU WISH TO OPPOSE THIS APPLICATION, to receive notice of any step in the application or to be served with any documents in the application, you or a solicitor acting for you must prepare a notice of appearance in Form 305 prescribed by the
Federal Court Rules, 1998
and serve it on the applicants' solicitors WITHIN 10 DAYS after being served with this notice of application.
Copies of the
Federal Court Rules, 1998
, information concerning the local offices of the Court and other necessary information may be obtained on request to the Administrator of this Court at Ottawa (telephone 613-992-4238) or at any local office.
IF YOU FAIL TO OPPOSE THIS APPLICATION, JUDGMENT MAY BE GIVEN IN YOUR ABSENCE AND WITHOUT FUTHER NOTICE TO YOU
DATE: November 8, 2002
Issued by: "________________"
Kevin Kelly
Registry Officer
Agent du greffe
Address of local office:
330 University Avenue
7th Floor
Toronto, Ontario
M5G 1R7
Federal Court of Canada
330 University Avenue
7th Floor
Toronto, Ontario
M5G 1R7
Cour Fédérale du Canada
330 avenue University
7ième étage
Toronto, Ontario
M5G 1R7
TO: The Minister of Health
c/o Therapeutic Products Programme
Bureau of Policy and Coordination
Submission & Information Policy Division
Finance Building (#2)
A.L. #0201A1
Tunney's Pasture
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 1B9
attn: Mr. David K. Lee
AND TO: The Deputy Attorney General of Canada
Department of Justice
2 First Canadian Place
Suite 3400
34th Floor, Exchange Tower
Toronto, Ontario M5X 1K6
Eric Peterson
Tel: 416-973-9638
Fax: 416-973-5004
AND TO: Apotex Inc.
150 Signet Drive
Toronto, Ontario M9L 1T9
APPLICATION
THIS IS AN APPLICATION PURSUANT to the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
, as amended ("
Regulations
").
THE APPLICANTS MAKE APPLICATION FOR:
(a) a declaration that Apotex' letter dated September 26, 2002 is not a Notice of Allegation as contemplated by the
Regulations
;
(b) in the alternative, an Order prohibiting the Minister of Health ("Minister") from issuing a Notice of Compliance ("NOC") to Apotex Inc. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) in respect of omeprazole magnesium tablets 10 and 20 mg until the expiration of Canadian Patents Nos. 1,292,693 ("'693"), 1,302,891 ("891"), and 2,166,483 ("`483") (collectively the "Patents");
(c) costs of this application; and
(d) such further and other relief as to this Honourable Court may seem just.
THE GROUNDS FOR THE APPLICATION are:
The Patents and The Patent Register
1. The Patents are listed by AstraZeneca Canada Inc. ("AstraZeneca") for certain products on the Patent Register maintained by the Minister, including in respect of omeprazole magnesium tablets 10 mg and 20 mg. The patents were included on patent lists submitted by AstraZeneca and its corporate predecessor Astra Pharma Inc. ("Astra") with the consent of AB Hassle ("Hassle") and AstraZeneca AB, the owners of the patents. As such, Hassle and AstraZeneca AB are parties to the application pursuant to the
Regulations
.
Apotex' Notice of Allegation
2. This proceeding has been commenced in response to a letter from Apotex dated September 26, 2002 addressed to AstraZeneca and asserted to be a Notice of Allegation ("NOA") under the
Regulations
. In the NOA Apotex purports to make allegations of non-infringement and invalidity regarding the Patents.
3. In alleging non-infringement, Apotex has made certain assertions regarding the `693 patent, including the construction of the patent.
4. In particular, Apotex asserts:
"The essence of the alleged invention in the `693 Patent is the development of a formulation which purports to solve the problem of the prior art formulations which consisted of an alkaline core containing omeprazole or an alkaline salt of omeprazole, and an enteric coating disposed on the core that led to degradation. The alleged solution to the problem is asserted in the patent to be the separation from contact of the core and the enteric coating by application of a subcoating within the meaning of the patent.
Each of the claims in issue of the `693 Patent contain among its essential elements, the following essential elements:
(i) within the formulation core region a selection from the group consisting of
(a) omeprazole plus an alkaline reacting compound;
(b) an alkaline omeprazole salt plus an alkaline reacting compound; or
(c) an alkaline omeprazole salt alone;
(ii) an inert subcoating which is soluble or rapidly disintegrating in water disposed on said core region, said subcoating comprising one or more layers of materials selected from among tablet excipients and polymeric film-forming compounds; and
(iii) an outer layer disposed on said subcoating comprising an enteric coating.
In light of the foregoing, and in light of the very clear discussion within the disclosure, the 'subcoating' in part (ii) above cannot mean material comprising a reaction product resulting from a reaction between the core material and the enteric coating when the core is brought into contact with the enteric coating. The reaction product is precisely what the disclosure and the patent are directed not to having formed and hence it is not a subcoating within the meaning of 'subcoating' of the patent. It is clearly not what the patent is directed to or what the inventors intended. The patent and the inventors intended the subcoating to be distinct material placed between the core and the enteric coating so as to avoid their coming into contact.
Furthermore, the claims in issue of the patent cannot be construed to include within their scope those formulations which are referred to in the disclosure of the `693 Patent as being within the prior art. More particularly, formulations comprising a core with an enteric coating disposed on the core which were prepared by direct application of the enteric coating onto a core containing omeprazole and an alkaline reacting compound, or an alkaline salt of omeprazole optionally including an alkaline reacting compound, cannot be construed as falling within the scope of the claims of the `693 Patent, otherwise, the patent would be invalid as failing to claim something which is new, because it would have within its scope that which is old.
Finally, the claims in issue of the patent cannot be construed to include within their scope those formulations which are disclosed within the disclosure of the `693 Patent as examples of formulations which were used for comparison purposes, and were thus disclaimed from being within the scope of the claimed invention, against those formulations which were described as being examples of the alleged claimed invention of the `693 Patent for the purpose of demonstrating the benefits of the alleged inventive formulations."
5. Apotex has made similar (though not identical assertions) with respect to the construction of the other two patents.
6. Apotex has asserted non-infringement of claim 1 of the `693 patent on the basis, inter alia, that:
"Claim 1 will not be infringed since our formulation will not contain a 'subcoating', as discussed above, within the meaning of the `693 Patent. Our product will contain a core with an enteric coating disposed on the core. In formulating our product, we will bring into contact the outer enteric coating with the core and will not place a subcoating within the meaning of the patent between the core and the enteric coating, so that our formulation will consist of only components (i)and (iii), not component (ii)."
7. Apotex has made a similar assertion with respect to claim 1 of the `891 patent and `483 patents. With respect to the `483 patent Apotex also asserts non-infringement of claim 1 on the basis that its formulation will contain only amorphous magnesium omeprazole.
8. In addition, Apotex has asserted a number of additional grounds for non-infringement (which are not set out for brevity) in respect of the claims of the patents. The additional grounds allege non-infringement based on, inter alia, the various characteristics of Apotex' proposed product.
9. Apotex has asserted that each of the patents are invalid. Apotex asserts the following grounds in support of the allegation of invalidity:
⋅ Gillette Defence
⋅ Anticipation
⋅ Claims Broader than Invention and Inutility (not asserted for `483 patent)
⋅ Additional Ground of Inutility (`891 patent only)
⋅ Insufficiency and Ambiguity (not asserted for `483 patent)
⋅ Obviousness (relying on some 52 documents)
⋅ Double Patenting (`891 and `483 patents only)
The Previous Proceedings
10. This is the third time that Apotex has alleged that its omeprazole magnesium tablets will not infringe the patents.
(i) Court File T-179-98
11. In a letter dated the December 18, 1997 Apotex alleged in respect of omeprazole magnesium tablets that it would not infringe the patents, stating:
"
Re: Omeprazole Magnesium Tablets
This is a Notice of Allegation pursuant to Section 5(3)(b) of the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
With respect to all of the patents listed in your Form IV Patent Lists, other than patent 1264751, we allege that no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by us of tablets containing omeprazole magnesium salt.
The legal and factual basis for the aforesaid allegation is as follows:
. . . . .
Patent 1292693, 1302891 and 2166483
The claims of these patents cover compositions comprising a core containing a medicine, an inert subcoating, and an outer enteric coating. Our tablets will not fall within the scope of the claims of these patents.
More specifically, our tablets will comprise cores containing omeprazole magnesium, and an enteric coating applied directly to the cores without any subcoating between the cores and the enteric coating. Hence, our tablets will not infringe, by reason there being no subcoating between the cores and the enteric coating."
12. In response to the December 18, 1997 letter, AstraZeneca (then Astra Pharma) initiated Court File T-179-98 under the
Regulations
seeking an Order of Prohibition.
13. Apotex filed no evidence in support of its assertion of non-infringement in T-179-98.
14. A hearing on the merits of Apotex' allegation was scheduled to begin on May 25, 1999 (in conjunction with two other related matters).
15. Court File T-179-98 was terminated by Order of Madame Justice Tremblay-Lamer dated May 18, 1999 which stated in part:
"WHEREAS Apotex wishes to withdraw its notice of allegation dated December 18, 1997, which notice of allegation gave rise to the within proceeding. ...
WHEREAS the withdrawal of the Notice of Allegation will render the proceedings herein moot.
WHEREAS the Applicants and Apotex consent to the issuance of the following order.
IT 1S HEREBY ORDERED:
1. Notice of Allegation is hereby deemed to be withdrawn by Apotex.
2. This application is deemed to be discontinued."
(ii) Court File T-1747-00
16. The second proceeding was initiated in response to a letter dated August 1, 2000, which alleged:
"This is a Notice of Allegation pursuant to the
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
.
We have filed with the Minister of Health a New Drug Submission for Apoomeprazole tablets for oral administration in strengths of 10 mg, 20 mg and 40 mg.
With respect to patents 1292693, 1302891 and 2166483, we allege that no claim for the medicine itself and no claim for the use of the medicine would be infringed by the making, constructing, using or selling by us of the said tablets.
The legal and factual basis for the aforesaid allegation is as follows:
'The claims of these patents cover compositions comprising a core containing a medicine, an inert subcoating, and an outer enteric coating. Our tablets will not fall within the scope of the claims of these patents.
More specifically, our tablets comprise cores containing the drug, and an enteric coating applied directly to the cores without any subcoating between the cores and the enteric coating. Our tablets will not infringe, by reason there being no subcoating between the cores and the enteric coating.
With respect to the other patents on your patent lists, the Minister will not be able to issue a Notice of Compliance until the
Regulations
have been satisfied in relation to each patent. Accordingly, in relation to each such patent, we will either await expiry of the patent or serve a Notice of Allegation at a future date.'
17. By Order dated September 4, 2002, Mr. Justice Kelen disposed of Court File T-1747-00 after a hearing on the merits. He declared that Apotex' letter did not constitute a Notice of Allegation and prohibited the Minister from issuing an NOC:
3. This application is allowed for a declaration that the Apotex letter dated August 1, 2000 does not comply with the
Regulations
, and therefore does not constitute a Notice of Allegation under the
Regulations
;
4. The Minister of Health is prohibited from issuing a Notice of Compliance with respect to this purported Notice of Allegation; ...
18. In the course of granting judgment, Mr. Justice Kelen made, inter alia, the following findings of fact regarding Apotex' proposed product, which are binding on Apotex in the present proceeding:
1. There will be a reactive material or "interface" spontaneously generated when the enteric coating, which consists of polymers, is sprayed on the core which contains omeprazole and alkaline materials;
2. The nature of the reactive material or interface cannot be known without analytical testing of the tablets themselves;
. . . . .
4. The reactive material would insulate the core from dissolving and would serve the same purpose to an unknown extent as the sub-coating described in Claim 1 of the Patent;
. . . . .
6. It is not possible to determine whether the allegation of non-infringement is justified based on speculation and conjecture by the experts. This is particularly frustrating when the best evidence, and probably the conclusive evidence. would be the results of analytical testing of the Apotex tablets themselves;
7. The overwhelming conclusion of the Court from the expert evidence is that the Apo-omeprazol [sic] tablets could have been analytically tested to identify the existence of the reactive layer or reactive material or spontaneous subcoating, and to obtain key technical information about its characteristics. Without this information, the experts are speculating, guessing, and "shadow-boxing";
19. In his Reasons for Order, Mr. Justice Kelen also found that disclosure of samples of Apotex' product was necessary (Apotex had refused to produce such samples), stating.
"[64] Where the results of the direct application of the enteric coat to the core to truly not infringe the patents, it seems reasonable that Apotex would have conducted a chemical analysis and submitted the results. In  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Court had the benefit of a scientific analysis of the omeprazol [sic] tablets in question. This is the best evidence. Apotex could have submitted this evidence to prove non-infringement in this case, but declined at its own risk and peril. Justice in this case required this evidence.
"[65] The refusal by Apotex to provide samples and the resultant speculative and inconclusive expert evidence, underlines the applicants' first submission that the Notice of Allegation is deficient in providing the detailed factual and legal information required under the
Regulations
. The Court agrees that the NOA is deficient in this respect because without the information, the experts' evidence about infringement is inconclusive and speculative."
The Present Proceeding
(a) The NOA does not comply with the Regulations
20. The Applicants submit that the NOA is not a proper Notice of Allegation and Detailed Statement and accordingly does not comply with the
Regulations
.
21. The letter from Apotex is an abuse of process in view of Court Files T-179-98 and T-1747-00 because, inter alia, the present allegation is not separate and distinct from those previously made by Apotex. The present letter is an abuse whether the previous proceedings are taken together or individually.
22. By initiating and voluntarily terminating Court File T-179-98 before disposition on the merits, and then compelling initiation of the present proceeding, Apotex has gained an advantage and the Applicants have been prejudiced.
23. Moreover, in view of the second proceeding in Court File T-1747-00 and the Order of Mr. Justice Kelen, the present allegation is an abuse.
24. The present NOA, in the absence of sample tablets from Apotex, is deficient and represents a further, separate abuse.
25. Where a generic has made an allegation, all legal and factual bases that were raised or could reasonably have been known by the generic ought to have been raised. The Applicants rely upon the doctrines of abuse of process, res judicata and issue estoppel.
26. Consequently as the NOA in respect of the allegation of non-infringement does not comply with the
Regulations
and is an abuse of process, this Court ought to declare that the NOA is not an allegation contemplated by the
Regulations
.
27. In any event, Apotex' allegation is not justified on the legal and factual bases asserted.
(b) Allegation of Non-infringement
28. AstraZeneca submits that the allegation of non-infringement is not justified for the following reasons.
29. First, contrary to Apotex' proposed construction, the patents include within their scope a subcoating found in the finished dosage form, regardless of how it was applied or generated.
30. Second, in the present case , in view of the decision of Mr. Justice Kelen, it is uncontroverted that Apotex will have a layer of "material" between the enteric coating and the core in its tablets.
31. Further, and in the alternative, the Applicants submit that Apotex must disclose samples, formulation particulars and process information relating to the NDS for Apotex' omeprazole magnesium presently before the Minister. Such disclosure is necessary in order to allow the Applicants to assess whether a subcoat is present and/or whether the allegation of non-infringement is justified on any of the other alternative bases asserted by Apotex.
32. The Applicants have no knowledge or access to knowledge regarding the existence, contents or date of filing of any new drug submission or the formulation particulars or process information for magnesium omeprazole product referred to in the letter. Further, the Applicants have no access to samples of Apotex' product.
33. With respect to the allegation of invalidity, Applicants rely upon the jurisprudence which confirms the presumption of patent validity applies in proceedings under the
Regulations
. In any event, the Applicants deny that the patents are invalid on any of the bases asserted by Apotex in the NOA.
34. Pursuant to the
Regulations
this Court shall make an Order prohibiting the Minister from issuing an NOC until after the expiration of a patent which is subject to one or more allegations if it finds that none of the allegations is justified.
35. The
Patent Act
, R.S.C. 1985 c. P-4, as amended, including ss. 55.1 and 55.2.
36. The
Patented Medicines (Notice of Compliance) Regulations
SOR/93-133, as amended SOR/98-166 and SOR/99-379.
37. The
Federal Court Act
and
Rules
.
38. The
Food and Drugs Act
and the
Food and Drug Regulations
.
39. Such further and other grounds as counsel may advise and this Honourable Court may permit.
THIS APPLICATION WILL BE SUPPORTED BY the following material:
40. The affidavits of one or more appropriate individuals.
41. Such further and other materials as counsel may advise and this Honourable Court may permit.
November 8, 2002
________________________________
SMART & BIGGAR
Barristers & Solicitors
438 University Avenue
Suite 1500
Toronto, Ontario M5G 2K8
Gunars A. Gaikis
J. Sheldon Hamilton
Yoon Kang
Tel: (416) 593-5514
Fax: (416) 591-1690
Solicitors for the Applicants
[End of document]