[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The applicants were examined by the IRB's Convention Refugee Determination Division (CRDD) on October 18, 1994. The applicants were found not to be Convention refugees in a CRDD decision dated March 14, 1995 and communicated to the applicants on May 1, 1995. The applicants made application for leave and judicial review on May 15, 1995 and on September 28, 1995, in an amended order, a judge granted leave. The applicants seek to have the CRDD's decision Nos. A94-00723-26 quashed.
[2]
The applicants, Charleen Cathleen, Charles, Sheridan, Jason and Shannon De Connick, are all citizens of South Africa. They arrived in Canada in March of 1994 after fleeing South Africa for persecution reasons. The parents, Charleen Cathleen and Charles, made application for Convention refugee status on behalf of the entire family. In their Personal Information Forms (PIFs), the applicants state that they feared persecution because of two reasons, racial tension and a vendetta. Chief among these reasons was the vendetta and their related fear of "Zulu revenge practices". The applicants have been allegedly stalked, harassed and threatened with death by the family of Mavis, a Zulu former domestic, murdered while in their employ by their longstanding Zulu male employee, Ben. They state that the police in South Africa are unable to protect them. They cite as an example that even after moving from a suburb of Johannesburg to a suburb of Pretoria to flee the harassment, Mavis' brother tracked them down and broke into their new residence. This incident resulted in a stab wound to the hand of the male applicant. They reported the incident to the police, but received no response because at the time the police were attending to incidents in another neighbourhood. The second reason the applicants fear persecution is because they characterize themselves as neutral Whites. As neutral Whites, the applicants fear persecution from both the militant anti-White Blacks of South Africa and the right wing Afrikaners led by Eugene Terre Blanche.
[3]
The CRDD considered the applicants' submissions and arrived at a negative determination. It decided that, although the applicants' account of their personal experiences was generally credible (p. 15) and did possess a subjective fear of persecution (p. 22), their particular circumstances did not place them within the definition of Convention refuge as provided for in s. 2 of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, and interpreted by the courts in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 1; 20 Imm. L.R.(2d) 85 (hereinafter
Ward
) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). The CRDD stated (p. 22 of its reasons):
"* * * At the same time, the panel finds based on all the evidence before it that the experiences of the claimants in South Africa and those they fear should they return to South Africa do not amount to persecution within the meaning of the definition.
"We reiterate here that the claimants have not presented clear and convincing proof of the state's inability to protect them. The panel has found the protection available to the claimants in South Africa to be adequate though not necessarily perfect. The claimants are able and have shown themselves willing to seek state protection notwithstanding their dim view of the quality of the protection offered.
"Having considered all the evidence before us we find that there is not a reasonable chance of persecution of the claimants should they return to South Africa."
[4]
The applicants, in their submissions, reject the construction of the CRDD's deemed "particular social group" of "families subject to Zulu revenge practices". The CRDD decided that, based on this social group, there was insufficient evidence to establish a well-founded fear of persecution. The applicants built a much smaller "ship" in which to sail the seas of persecution, named the "perceived members of Ben's family". This new group is the applicants' attempt to place themselves in a position where a "well-founded fear of persecution" exists. Moreover, for them, the reality of what they have inflated into "Zulu revenge practices" is neither more nor less than the late Mavis' angry brother. For Ben it may well be another matter.
[5]
The applicants cite
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) for the proposition that a family constitutes a "particular social group" (memorandum of argument, applicants' record pp. 151-158). Although the applicants are not "blood related" to Ben, they state that the perception of being members of Ben's family is what is important. This idea of perceived membership in a particular social group was put forth in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). The applicants submit that because of this perceived membership in Ben's family they feared persecution from the family of Mavis. The applicants state that the persistent death threats and harassment they faced amounts to persecution (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)). The applicants also submit there is evidence that, although willing, they were unable to obtain the protection of the State because State protection was inadequate (
Ward
, supra). Finally, the applicants state that it would be capricious of the CRDD to find the applicants credible and deny their claim because the documentary evidence is silent on the issue of "Zulu revenge practices". This general proposition is from
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 82 (T.D.).
Particular Social Group (psg)
[6]
The <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, although dealing with a "particular social group" (psg) consisting of a family, is distinguishable from the instant matter in that the family members were extremely politically active and the persecution feared by the applicant was delivered by a willing totalitarian state. Although, as was decided in
Ward
, supra, the persecution feared needs not to be delivered by the State, the Convention refugee definition in the
Act
requires that it be a well-founded fear of persecution and not a personal grudge vendetta or other personal hostility. The second part of the family as a psg construction requires that application of the principle stated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, that membership in a group does not need to be formal, but only perceived. The applicants put forward no independent evidence that a white family employing a black worker is perceived as part of the worker's family. Such bizarre cross-cultural, cross-racial identity must have been noticed by some objective authorities in over a century in a country where apartheid has only recently been dismantled. The CRDD discussed the particular social group, "families subject to Zulu revenge practices", in its decision and found that this construction did not constitute a particular social group. It stated (CRDD decision, p. 17):
"Given the research into this practice conducted by the IRB Documentation Centre, which came up with no information, and given the lack of any reference to such a practice in any of the other documentary evidence before the panel, we do not accord the evidence regarding the alleged practices much weight. In our view the documentary evidence normally would be expected to mention such a practice. It did not. In view of the issues explained above we find that the problems experienced by the claimants and then their fear related to those experiences with Mavis' family [are] unrelated to a Convention ground. It appears to be part of a package of stereotypes about Blacks. We find that no such PSG can be constructed. In any case, the claimants were the targets, presumably, because the actual murderer, Ben, was unavailable."
[7]
The applicants say they were to be considered as "perceived members of Ben's family". This psg is an even more tenuously built straw hut. In order for the court or CRDD to accept this psg it first has to find that a family under these circumstances in a psg; then it must also agree that the Euro applicants are perceived to be members of a Black employee's family. These two unlikely propositions, under these peculiar circumstances, must be accepted without any independent documentary evidence. The applicants also submitted that they fear persecution because of their "race", as they describe, "neutral White South Africans". The court finds no error in the CRDD finding that the applicants were not members of a particular social group and agrees with the applicants that they are White South Africans.
[8]
The applicants say that they put up bail for Ben. They brought no word on that subject. It is not known in this proceeding whether their bail has been forfeited or whether Ben has been taken back into custody. The facts of this scenario could have significant bearing on Mavis' brother's attitude to the applicants since they last heard of him. The applicants bear the onus to bring out the facts.
Well-founded Fear Of Persecution
[9]
The court, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, and many other decisions including
Ward
, supra, held that not only must a subjective fear exist, but that it is imperative that an objective fear of persecution exist as well. "Persecution" in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was described as being an infliction of repeated acts of cruelty or a particular course or period of systematic infliction of punishment. Can one believe in persecution by Mavis' brother who is hostile it seems, but much outnumbered by the Euro applicants in a country where police protection, such as it is, is accorded to Euros in preference to Afros? The CRDD considered the evidence and on that evidence decided that the applicants did not have a well-founded fear of persecution. The CRDD specifically considered the evidence of the harassment by Mavis' family and decided that it was not sufficiently prejudicial to constitute persecution for Convention refugee purposes. The CRDD stated at p. 16 of its decision:
"The threats and violence against the claimants' persons and property arising out of Mavis' murder are, by the claimants' own acknowledgement, a playing out of a personal vendetta by the family of the deceased against an employee of longstanding of the family of the claimants."
[10]
This personal vendetta, although not discussed at length by the CRDD in its decision, is important to the issue of persecution. There are cases that follow the proposition that harassment and beatings related to a personal vendetta do not amount to persecution under the
Act
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  through a period of significant change, the applicants, as neutral Whites, should be the best situated to deal with the change. The CRDD further concluded that the applicants were also able to live in South Africa in relative peace until the death of Mavis (p. 19, CRDD decision).
"This suggests to the panel that notwithstanding stated concerns about general violence and disorder, it was the personal vendetta of Mavis' family which prompted the claimants' departure and refugee claim. We have found above that there is no connection of this vendetta to a Convention ground."
[11]
Considering the above, the CRDD did not err in either characterization of the harassment as a vendetta or its conclusion of a no well-founded fear of persecution.
State Protection
[12]
The truism enunciated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at p. 134, by Mr. Justice Heald that a subjective and objective fear of persecution must exist to establish a well-founded fear of persecution has an exception. Mr. Justice La Forest, in
Ward
, supra at p. 722 S.C.R., put forth the proposition that a well-founded fear of persecution can exist without the objective component where the state is unable or unwilling to protect the applicant, thus:
"Having established that the claimant has a fear, the Board is, in my view, entitled to presume that persecution will be likely, and fear well-founded, if there is an absence of state protection. The presumption goes to the heart of the inquiry, which is whether there is a likelihood of persecution. But I see nothing wrong with this, if the Board is satisfied that there is a legitimate fear, and an established inability of the state to assuage those fears through effective protection. The presumption is not a great leap. Having established the existence of a fear and a state's inability to assuage those fears, it is not assuming too much to say that the fear is well-founded."
[13]
The applicants stated that they were unable or unwilling to further seek protection of the State of South Africa. It was again decided in
Ward
that "unable and unwilling" refers not only to the applicants but also to the State. "Thus ineffective State protection is encompassed within the concept of 'unable' and 'unwilling'." (
Ward
, supra at p. 719 S.C.R.). But above all, that from which the State is to protect is "persecution", not personal vendettas, Mavis' brother, neighbourhood thugs, unless a high proportion of the residents of New York, Detroit and Miami Beach qualify as Convention refugees.
[14]
The applicants to their credit did advance testimonial proof of a lack of State protection as required by
Ward
if no explicit State admission is proffered. However, the CRDD addressed this evidence and decided that little weight should be attributed to it because of the subjective, negative and anecdotal nature of the material. No trustworthy independent documentary evidence was presented to support the applicants' submission that there was a lack of State protection with regard to White South Africans or to "perceived members of Ben's family". The hard, independent documentary evidence submitted to the CRDD by the applicants does little to support the applicants' position. The court acknowledges that South Africa is experiencing trying times and that all South Africans will be living in a radically new order. The evidence of bloodshed, attacks on Whites and police deaths are tempered with evidence of the disproportionate number of Blacks being the victims of violence and the plethora of reported incidents of police brutality. Finally, the evidence suggests that the South African Police, whose officers are predominantly Euros, could protect the population if it wanted to, but continues to concentrate its protection in predominantly white regions. Although, the applicants have presented evidence of instances where they called police and police did not respond to their satisfaction, this is not conclusive of a lack of State protection in light of the documentary evidence placed before the CRDD. The applicants told that they left South Africa for Canada shortly after these incidents. There is no evidence that the applicants made a formal request to authorities for protection, nor was there any evidence presented that they looked for a further internal flight alternative. The CRDD concluded by stating that the applicants did not sufficiently avail themselves of the protection of the State. Based on the evidence adduced, the court comes to the same conclusion. Apart from the evidence, surely every rational person understands that not even the most totalitarian State can protect everyone 24 hours per day including from property damage and pet killing. After all, crimes are committed in every country. What makes a country desirable is merely a low
rate
of crime. A State ought to be able to protect better from usually organized persecution, than random crime, unless the alleged "persecution" resembles the sporadic crimes of Mavis' brother.
[15]
Finally, the court in
Ward
, supra, at pp. 725-726 S.C.R., reaffirmed the presumption that a State is capable of protecting its citizens:
"* * * Absent a situation of complete breakdown of state apparatus, such as that recognized in Lebanon  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  protecting a claimant.
. . . . .
"Although this presumption increases the burden on the claimant, it does not render illusory Canada's provision of a haven for refugees. The presumption serves to reinforce the underlying rationale of international protection as a surrogate, coming into play where no alternative remains to the claimant. Refugee claims were never meant to allow a claimant to seek out better protection than that from which he or she benefits already."
[16]
Although, the applicants submitted some evidence to support their assertion that the State of South Africa was unable to protect them, the CRDD has the discretion and experience to weigh that evidence for its relevance to the matter. Mr. Justice Rouleau, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), stated with regard to s. 68(3) of the
Immigration Act
and the CRDD's powers to weigh evidence:
"The tribunal was correct in taking the view that pursuant to s. 68(3) of the
Immigration Act
, the evidence was admissible and that it was the tribunal's duty to assess the evidence and decide what weight to attach to it. However, given the inflammatory nature of the evidence, it was also incumbent on the tribunal to indicate in its decision what weight, if any, it had in fact ascribed to the factum. Having failed to refer to the factum in its decision, the tribunal erred."
[17]
In the instant matter the CRDD did exactly what Rouleau, J., advised. The CRDD examined the evidence, weighed it and gave explanation for why it favoured some evidence over other evidence.
[18]
The respondent acknowledges that the CRDD did find that the applicants were generally credible, however, this finding does not fly in the face of the CRDD's decision as the applicants would suggest. The issues of credibility and "well-founded fear" are mutually exclusive and one does not necessarily depend on the other. It is completely reasonable that the CRDD found the applicants generally credible in recounting their personal experiences, by believing that Mavis was murdered by Ben and that Mavis' family was then now harassing them, while finding that a well-founded fear of persecution does not exist.
[19]
After a review of the record and hearing counsel, the court finds that the CRDD was not unreasonable in their decision nor did they make any reviewable errors. Tribunal decisions are usually held to be reviewable only when patently unreasonable (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 348; 21 C.R.R.(2d) 236; 24 Imm. L.R.(2d) 117, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 75 W.A.C. 1; [1994] 7 W.W.R. 1; 92 B.C.L.R.(2d) 145; 14 B.C.R.(2d) 217; 22 Admin. L.R.(2d) 1; 114 D.L.R.(4th) 385, and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra). Because of the aforementioned reasons, the court will not interfere with the CRDD's decision and consequently the application is dismissed.
[20]
The applicants' thus-far unique story does not raise a serious question of general importance.
[21]
This court notes the CRDD panel's precatory last statement therein:
"The panel wishes to note that it is of the opinion that this case merits serious consideration on humanitarian and compassionate grounds."
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/kaw
[End of document]