[1]
Joyal, J.
[Translation]: The applicant, a citizen of the Dominican Republic, claimed refugee status on October 2, 1990, on the basis of her political opinion and membership in a particular social group.
[2]
On her personal information form she said she was a member of the Dominican Liberation Party (DLP), which denounced the allegedly "wrongful" policies of the party in power, the Christian Social Reform Party of Dr. Joaquin Balaguer. On May 1, 1989, the applicant participated in a demonstration which resulted in her being imprisoned. While she was detained she said she was interrogated at length and tortured physically and psychologically by the police, who now had her photograph and prints. She subsequently received several anonymous threats which led her to seek the aid of the police. Since the latter's response was evasive, she sought protection from the Canadian government.
Convention Refugee Determination
Division's Decision
[3]
On September 1, 1993, the Convention Refugee Determination Division concluded that the applicant's claim had been abandoned pursuant to s. 69.1(6) of the
Immigration Act
. The decision read as follows:
"On December 17, 1992, you and your counsel were informed by the Convention Refugee Determination Division that a hearing would be held on March 25, 1993.
Your counsel was not present at the hearing.
On May 28, 1993, you and your counsel were informed by the Convention Refugee Determination Division that a hearing would be held on August 5, 1993, to allow you to give reasons why the Refugee Division should not conclude your claim had been abandoned.
You were not present at the hearing.
THE CONVENTION REFUGEE DETERMINATION DIVISION ACCORDINGLY CONCLUDES THAT YOUR CLAIM WAS ABANDONED."
Applicant's Position
[4]
The applicant argued that there had been an abuse of law and denial of natural justice for the following reasons. First, when the Board found that the claim had been abandoned at the hearing of August 5, it did not give the applicant an opportunity to explain the reasons for her absence on the said day. Second, the applicant argued that the I.R.B. should give any claimant an opportunity to be heard at a hearing by his or her free testimony, without constraint and with knowledge of the facts, in a neutral proceeding. Third, the applicant submitted that although there was a hearing on August 5, 1993, she had sound family reasons for not being present. The applicant's three young children were all ill at this time and as their state of health was giving her concern she forgot the date of the hearing; it was not until the children had recovered that she went to the I.R.B. offices to find out what had happened to her case.
[5]
The applicant accordingly asked the court to lift the abandonment in this case so she could explain to the proper authorities the grounds in support of her claim.
Respondent's Arguments
[6]
In response the respondent argued that the Board reached its decision in accordance with the power conferred on it by s. 69.1(6) of the
Immigration Act
, which I will cite later in these reasons.
[7]
The respondent contended that the facts in the record were sufficient for it to conclude that there had been abandonment, in particular as:
- the summonses were issued to the applicant in person and she acknowledged receipt of them;
- the applicant has always been represented by counsel;
- the applicant received several summonses giving her an opportunity to be heard before the Refugee Division concluded she had abandoned her claim;
- the applicant neglected to proceed on March 25, 1993;
- the applicant was not present at her hearing on August 5, 1993, though she had been duly summoned; and
- the applicant was represented by counsel at the hearing of August 5 and accordingly her counsel could make any representations necessary on the client's behalf.
[8]
The respondent argued that the applicant had had an opportunity to be heard several times before the Refugee Division concluded there was abandonment, and the applicant had not taken those opportunities to present her arguments. In the respondent's submission, the applicant had not shown that she intended to proceed at the hearing with diligence, in view of the adjournments and the fact that she personally acknowledged receipt of her summonses. These actions tended to suggest a lack of interest. In short, the respondent argued that neither ignorance nor negligence are good grounds for invalidating the Refugee Division's decision.
[9]
The respondent maintained that the applicant had not shown that the conclusions of fact were capricious or that they were not based on the evidence presented. In support the respondent cited judgments of the Supreme Court of Canada in which it was held that where a court has to review the judgment of a first instance tribunal it should not intervene in that tribunal's findings of fact unless it can be shown that there was clear and overriding error, and in the respondent's submission that is not the case here.
[10]
The respondent accordingly maintained that the reasons given by the applicant are not sound reasons on the basis of which the court could grant the relief sought.
Conclusions
[11]
As mentioned by the respondent in his response the
Act
provides for certain situations, stated in s. 69.1(6), in which the Refugee Division can conclude that an applicant has abandoned his claim. In the case at bar para. (a) of that provision is relevant.
"69.1(6) Where a person who claims to be a Convention refugee
(a) fails to appear at the time and place set by the Refugee Division for the hearing into the claim,
(b) fails to provide the Refugee Division with the information referred to in subsection 46.03(2), or
(c) in the opinion of the Division, is otherwise in default in the prosecution of the claim,
the Refugee Division may, after giving the person a reasonable opportunity to be heard, declare the claim to have been abandoned and, where it does so, the Refugee Division shall send a written notice of its decision to the person and to the Minister."
[12]
Section 32 of the
Convention Refugee Determination Division Rules
is also applicable:
"32(1) Before declaring a claim to have been abandoned pursuant to subsection 69.1(6) of the Act or an application to have been abandoned pursuant to subsection 69.3(2) of the Act, the Refugee Division shall serve on the parties a notice to appear directing them to attend a hearing on the abandonment.
"(2) The notice to appear shall also inform the parties that where, at the end of a hearing concerning an abandonment, the Refugee Division does not declare the claim or application to have been abandoned, the Refugee Division will forthwith commence or resume the hearing into the claim or application."
[13]
In the case at bar, the applicant had several opportunities to present her case but failed to proceed or was absent. Additionally, her counsel appeared on August 25 to represent her client's interests.
[14]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), involving an application to stay the execution of a deportation order, the applicant asked the court to lift the abandonment so he could explain his case. Reed, J., refused to grant the application, explaining that the applicant had been given two opportunities to present his case at hearings and had deliberately absented himself from each one.
[15]
In short, it is a procedural question whether there is the type of error in the Refugee Division's decision that will justify intervention by this court.
[16]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), my brother Gibson, J., stated that it was the Refugee Division's duty to ensure that a claimant had an opportunity to explain himself before the Division concluded that there had been an abandonment. In that case, however, the circumstances in the record were quite different from those at bar and in my opinion that decision is not relevant.
[17]
I feel that there is more to be learned from the judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 383, in which Hugessen, J.A., said the following:
"How can it be argued that the applicant in this case did not have a reasonable opportunity to be heard? He was properly notified of the date and place of the hearing. His counsel was present and was able to make representations on his behalf. If his presence was necessary to the success of his appeal, then he should have been present and ordinarily he must bear the consequences of his absence.
"When a party fails to appear before a court, it is the duty of the court to determine whether he or she was really advised of the date and place of the sitting. But the court's duty goes no further than that. The court is not obliged to conduct a sort of in-house investigation to determine the possible reasons for his absence. On the contrary, it is entitled to expect that parties will keep properly given appointments. If a party fails to appear, it is for the party, and not the court, to put forward his explanations or excuses, if there be any."
[18]
In the case now before the court it is clear that the applicant, the hearing of whose claim was adjourned several times, was formally notified that the Refugee Division would be considering the question of her abandonment. She was duly represented by counsel and the record contains the latter's attempts to contact the applicant, though without success, when nothing had been heard from her since June 1993.
[19]
In the exercise of its statutory jurisdiction the Refugee Division rendered judgment. A court cannot intervene unless it finds an error of law or, as is alleged, a breach of natural justice, but I am not persuaded that such a situation exists in this case. The application must therefore be dismissed.
[20]
The facts in the record indicate that the applicant is the mother of three children, each born in Canada since she came here in 1990. Perhaps she may be entitled to other relief under the
Immigration Act
: but this is a question which I must leave with her learned counsel to decide on what measures seem proper to her.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/nmg