 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FC 681)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Blanchard, J.
May 28, 2008.
Counsel:
Alain Valières, for the applicant;
Edith Savard and Alain Langlois (Articling Student), for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Alain Valières, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant;
John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
I.
Introduction
[1]
Blanchard, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for a judicial review of a pre-removal risk assessment (PRRA) officer's decision dated August 13, 2007, refusing the applicant's request for an exemption from the requirement to obtain a permanent resident visa from outside Canada, based on humanitarian and compassionate grounds, filed under subsection 25(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the Act).
II.
Factual background
[2]
The applicant was born in Tehran, Iran, on May 1, 1983, and is an Iranian citizen.
[3]
On February 4, 2001, the applicant's father died. He was a manager at the National Iranian Oil Company. The applicant attributes his father's death to the actions of the government, which apparently had him poisoned.
[4]
The applicant openly expresses his disagreement with religious practices in Iran. He claims to have been suspended from school for a three-week period in 2000 because of his opposition to Islamic prayers.
[5]
In spring 2002, the applicant allegedly attended a Catholic church. For that reason, he was apparently arrested, detained and beaten for four (4) days.
[6]
In December 2002, members of the "sepah" (Islamic Revolution's Guards Corps) were searching for the applicant because of his opposition to Islam. To avoid being imprisoned, the applicant went to stay in the city of Karaj with a friend of his mother. The applicant's mother informed him that he was being accused of being anti-revolutionary and anti-religious and of having distributed anti-Islamic pamphlets.
[7]
With the assistance of an agent, the applicant left Iran on January 16, 2003. He passed through Bangkok, Taipei and Hong Kong and arrived in Vancouver on or around February 2, 2003.
[8]
On March 17, 2003, the applicant claimed refugee protection based on a fear of persecution by reason of his religion (perception of having converted to Christianity) and his political opinions (perception of being an enemy of the Iranian regime).
[9]
Following a hearing held on December 2, 2003, the Immigration and Refugee Board's Refugee Protection Division (the RPD) rejected his refugee protection claim on the same day in an oral decision. The RPD determined that the applicant was not credible and did not believe his story.
[10]
On May 17, 2004, the applicant requested an exemption from the requirement to submit his visa application from outside Canada. On August 9, 2007, he forwarded an update to his file.
[11]
The request was reviewed and refused on August 13, 2007, on the grounds that there were insufficient humanitarian and compassionate considerations surrounding the applicant's personal situation to grant the request for an exemption. This application challenging that decision was filed on November 7, 2007.
III.
Impugned decision
[12]
In her decision dated June 18, 2007, the PRRA officer made the following findings:
(a) If the applicant were to return to Iran to apply for a visa in accordance with the Act, he would not be separated from any family members living in Canada. The presence of his mother in Iran would be an advantage for the applicant, who could benefit from moral and logistical support on his return;
(b) The applicant's presence in Canada for the last four years does not indicate a clear attachment to Canada. The officer noted that he spent the first twenty years of his life in Iran;
(c) The documentary evidence does not demonstrate that the applicant has worked steadily since his arrival in Canada. He filed two records of employment that totalled about four weeks of work over a period of four years and some evidence demonstrating a bank deposit of $25,000 with all subsequent transactions being withdrawals and no additional deposits. He also applied for only one work permit (October 6, 2004) since his arrival in Canada. Consequently, the PRRA officer concluded that the applicant was unable to demonstrate that he could provide for his needs;
(d) Despite the fact that Professor John Murphy acknowledged that he had given the applicant $25,000 and that he is ready to support him in his endeavours, the PRRA officer noted that Professor Murphy is not a Canadian citizen and that that process does not meet the sponsorship standards of the Canadian government;
(e) The PRRA officer noted that the applicant is 24 years old and in good health. He holds a secondary school diploma and a subsequent diploma from the Shahid Bahonar Vocational School in Tehran. For these reasons, the applicant is qualified to continue his studies or to enter the job market in Iran until he can apply for a permanent resident visa in accordance with the Act;
(f) Regarding the risk of persecution, abuse or torture because of his political opinions attributed to those of his father, who died on February 4, 2001, the PRRA officer concluded that the facts on the record are insufficient to determine that the applicant would encounter disproportionate, unusual or undeserved hardship if he had to return to Iran;
(g) Regarding the risk of persecution, abuse or torture because of the applicant's religious beliefs, the PRRA officer noted several contradictions on that issue and the applicant's failure to establish a conversion and beliefs in a religion other than Islam that are such as would put him at risk of persecution;
(h) Concerning the applicant's allegation that he arrived in Canada using false documents and that, on his return to Iran, he would risk being detained, tortured and abused, the PRRA officer noted that the applicant's personal profile would not put him at risk on his return to Iran;
(i) The fact that two aunts of the applicant were acknowledged to be refugees does not confirm the personal risks of persecution, threats to his life or torture alleged by the applicant.
[13]
For these reasons, the PRRA officer refused the request for exemption and concluded [Translation] "that the humanitarian and compassionate considerations surrounding the applicant's personal situation are insufficient to grant the request for an exemption from applying for an immigrant visa through a Canadian embassy abroad before arriving in Canada".
IV.
Issue
[14]
Did the officer err in her assessment of the evidence when she determined that the applicant would not encounter disproportionate, unusual or undeserved hardship if he had to apply for a permanent resident visa from outside Canada in accordance with the Act?
V.
Standard of review
[15]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Supreme Court of Canada found that there should be only two standards of review: correctness and reasonableness. The Court indicated that the standard of correctness must be maintained in respect of jurisdictional and some other questions of law (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at paragraph 50). When applying the correctness standard, a reviewing court will not show deference to the decision-maker's reasoning process; it will rather undertake its own analysis to decide whether the decision is correct.
[16]
The Supreme Court also indicated that, in judicial review, reasonableness is concerned mostly with the existence of justification, transparency and intelligibility within the decision-making process. But it is also concerned with whether the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at paragraph 47).
[17]
Guidance with regard to the questions that will be reviewed on a reasonableness standard can be found in the existing case law (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at paragraph 54). The following factors will determine whether deference ought to be given to a tribunal: whether there is a privative clause, whether the decision-maker has special expertise in a discrete and special administrative regime and what the nature of the question of law is (see <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at paragraph 55).
[18]
Using the pragmatic and functional approach, the Supreme Court of Canada determined in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL) at paragraphs 57-62, that the appropriate standard of review for H&C applications is reasonableness
simpliciter
.
[19]
In this case, the Act does not contain a privative clause. Although it does provide a possible recourse to judicial review, it cannot be done without leave of the Federal Court. As for the decision-maker's expertise, in this case, the decision-maker is the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration or her delegate. The Minister has some expertise relative to courts in immigration matters, particularly with respect to when exemptions should be granted from the requirements that normally apply. This is a factor militating in favour of deference. Finally, on the nature of the problem in question, the decision about whether to grant an H&C exemption involves a considerable appreciation of the facts of the person's case, and is not one which involves the application or interpretation of definitive legal rules. Given the highly discretionary and fact-based nature of this decision, this is a factor militating in favour of deference.
[20]
For these reasons, I am of the opinion that the standard of review applicable in this case is reasonableness.
VI.
Analysis
[21]
The applicant's claims can be summarized as follows:
(a) First, the applicant alleges that the PRRA officer made an error in her reasons when she claimed that the applicant had not submitted any new evidence that would make it possible to establish that his religious beliefs contrary to Islam are such that he may be persecuted on his return to Iran. The applicant is relying on paragraph 113(
a
) of the Act to state that there are very strict requirements for filing new evidence and that therefore the PRRA officer could not require new evidence from him.
(b) Second, the applicant claims that the PRRA officer refused his request on the basis of unfounded assumptions and not on the basis of the evidence before her. More specifically,
(i) she refused to consider the applicant's life to be in danger because of the time that had elapsed between the death of his father and the applicant's departure from Iran. She failed to take into account the fact that, while he was abroad, the applicant had become a target, something he was not while he was in Iran because of his youth;
(ii) the PRRA officer failed to take into account the circumstances of and the explanations concerning the conspiracy surrounding his father's death;
(iii) the PRRA officer failed to take into account the fact that the applicant would be at risk if he returned to Iran. The documentary evidence, including the report IRN29286.E, as well as the applicant's sworn statement, demonstrate the danger that the applicant would be in if he returned;
(c) Third, the applicant maintains that the PRRA officer failed to properly evaluate the applicant's integration into Canada. He is challenging the finding that he is not properly integrated into Canadian society because he has not had steady employment in this country. In addition, he claims that a negative finding was made based on the fact that he had a substantial amount of money that made it possible for him not to work in Canada.
[23]
I will deal with these claims below.
New evidence
[24]
I cannot accept the applicant's argument that subsection 113(
a
) of the Act provides very strict requirements for filing new evidence and that, because of this, the PRRA officer could not have required new evidence from him. The respondent is correct in noting that the request presented before the PRRA officer concerned an exemption from the requirement to apply for a visa from outside Canada. However, paragraph 113(
a
) of the Act applies only to reviewing PRRA applications that are applications to the Minister for protection by individuals who are subject to a removal order. In this case, the applicant filed a request for an exemption from the requirement to obtain a permanent resident visa from outside Canada on humanitarian and compassionate grounds on May 1, 2004. The onus is on the applicant to demonstrate that the hardship that he would face, if he had to apply for his permanent resident visa in the usual manner, would be disproportionate, unusual or undeserved. For these reasons, I am of the opinion that the PRRA officer was not in error when she noted that the applicant had failed to submit any new evidence that would establish that his religious beliefs are such that he could be persecuted.
Assessment of the evidence
[25]
In this case, the applicant alleges that the PRRA officer made several errors in her assessment of the evidence, especially concerning the following: (i) the danger to his life because of his religious beliefs, (ii) his father's death and the fact that the applicant is now a target wanted by the Iranian authorities, (iii) the fact that the documentary evidence favourable to him was ignored, and (iv) the fact that she failed to properly assess the applicant's integration into Canada.
[26]
An applicant has a high threshold to meet when requesting an exemption from the application of subsection 11(1) of Act. The applicant has the burden of presenting the facts on which his request is based in order to demonstrate that he would encounter disproportionate, unusual or undeserved hardship if he had to apply from outside Canada. In my opinion, the applicant has failed to discharge this burden in this case. The PRRA officer weighed all the factors relevant to the applicant's request, including those that the applicant relied on.
[27]
The applicant's allegations concerning the PRRA officer's assessment of the evidence are not valid. The applicant was unable to explain why he had waited for almost two years after the death of his father to leave Iran. In addition, the applicant was unable to explain why his family, including his mother and his brothers, had stayed at their family home in Iran, when they were also targeted by the Iranian authorities, just as the applicant was. I cannot find that the PRRA officer erred in determining that such conduct was contrary to establishing the merits of a subjective fear in favour of the applicant and his family.
[28]
The PRRA officer's finding that there were some contradictions in the documentary evidence that undermined the applicant's claim that he would be persecuted because he opposed Islam was open to her. More specifically, the applicant did not address the contradictions in how frequently he went to church and the discrepancies between the dates that the anti-Islamic pamphlets were printed and distributed and the length of his employment at a printing shop. Several of these contradictions had been indicated by the RPD. The PRRA officer correctly attached weight to the RPD decision and noted that the applicant had not submitted any new evidence establishing a conversion to a faith other than Islam which would have put him at risk or in danger on his return. The officer did not err in her assessment of that evidence.
[29]
As for the documentary evidence, it is clear from the reasons that the PRRA officer took into account the documentation on the objective situation in Iran. She mentioned in her analysis various pieces of documentary evidence, including the documentation submitted by the applicant. I am of the opinion that the officer did not err in her assessment of the documentary evidence.
[30]
Finally, I cannot find errors in the PRRA officer's finding concerning the applicant's degree of integration into Canadian society. Although the applicant had provided a bank statement showing a $25,500 deposit on May 11, 2004, it was then followed by several withdrawals but no new deposits. In addition, the applicant has worked for only a short period of four weeks over a total of four years. He has no family in Canada and is not married. Because of the deference this Court owes to the PRRA officer in assessing the facts, I cannot characterize her decision on this issue as being unreasonable.
VII.
Conclusion
[31]
In light of the foregoing, I am of the opinion that the PRRA officer's decision refusing the request for exemption on humanitarian and compassionate grounds is not unreasonable. I am satisfied that the decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law. Consequently, this application for judicial review will be dismissed.
VIII.
Certified question
[32]
The applicant proposed the following question to be certified:
[Translation]
When dealing with an H&C application concerning a religious conversion, must officers necessarily consider the effects of religious practices on Canadian soil in the case of removal?
[33]
In this case, the applicant's allegations that he has converted to Catholicism and that he has practised that religion here in Canada were both assessed by the PRRA officer, who has rejected them. Earlier, I determined that the PRRA officer had not erred in making this finding. The applicant did not prove his allegation. I am of the opinion that the question raised cannot be determinative in an appeal.
[34]
I am also of the opinion that the proposed question is related and restricted to the facts of the case at bar and does not transcend the interests of the immediate parties to the litigation.
[35]
For these reasons, the question will not be certified (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 5).
JUDGMENT
[36]
THE COURT ORDERS AND ADJUDGES that
1. The application for judicial review is dismissed.
2. No question is certified.
ANNEX
Immigration and Refugee Protection
Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2
11. (1) A foreign national must, before entering Canada, apply to an officer for a visa or for any other document required by the regulations. The visa or document shall be issued if, following an examination, the officer is satisfied that the foreign national is not inadmissible and meets the requirements of this Act.
(2) The officer may not issue a visa or other document to a foreign national whose sponsor does not meet the sponsorship requirements of this Act.
25. (1) The Minister shall, upon request of a foreign national who is inadmissible or who does not meet the requirements of this Act, and may, on the Minister's own initiative, examine the circumstances concerning the foreign national and may grant the foreign national permanent resident status or an exemption from any applicable criteria or obligation of this Act if the Minister is of the opinion that it is justified by humanitarian and compassionate considerations relating to them, taking into account the best interests of a child directly affected, or by public policy considerations.
(2) The Minister may not grant permanent resident status to a foreign national referred to in subsection 9(1) if the foreign national does not meet the province's selection criteria applicable to that foreign national.
113. Consideration of an application for protection shall be as follows:
(
a
) an applicant whose claim to refugee protection has been rejected may present only new evidence that arose after the rejection or was not reasonably available, or that the applicant could not reasonably have been expected in the circumstances to have presented, at the time of the rejection;
(
b
) a hearing may be held if the Minister, on the basis of prescribed factors, is of the opinion that a hearing is required;
(
c
) in the case of an applicant not described in subsection 112(3), consideration shall be on the basis of sections 96 to 98;
(
d
) in the case of an applicant described in subsection 112(3), consideration shall be on the basis of the factors set out in section 97 and
(i) in the case of an applicant for protection who is inadmissible on grounds of serious criminality, whether they are a danger to the public in Canada, or
(ii) in the case of any other applicant, whether the application should be refused because of the nature and severity of acts committed by the applicant or because of the danger that the applicant constitutes to the security of Canada.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Il s’agit d’une demande de contrôle judiciaire d’une décision rendue le 13 août 2007 par l’agente d’examen des risques avant renvoi (ERAR) refusant la requête du demandeur pour une dispense de l’obligation d’obtenir son visa de résident permanent à l’extérieur du Canada pour des motifs d’ordre humanitaire présentée aux termes du paragraphe 25(1) de la
Loi sur l’immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, L.R.C. 1985, ch. I-2 (la Loi).
II.
Contexte factuel
[2]
Le demandeur est né le 1 mai 1983 à Téhéran en Iran et détient la citoyenneté de ce pays.
[3]
Le 4 février 2001, le père du demandeur est décédé. Il était dirigeant au sein de la compagnie « National Iraninan Oil Company ». Le demandeur impute le décès de son père aux actes du gouvernement qui l’aurait empoisonné.
[4]
Le demandeur exprime ouvertement son désaccord avec les pratiques religieuses en Iran. Il prétend avoir été suspendu de l’école pour une durée de trois semaines en 2000, en raison de son opposition aux prières islamiques.
[5]
Au printemps 2002, le demandeur aurait fréquenté l’Église catholique. Pour cette raison, il aurait été arrêté, détenu et battu pendant quatre (4) jours.
[6]
En décembre 2002, les membres du « sepah » (les gardes révolutionnaires iraniens) recherchaient le demandeur pour son opposition à l’Islam. Afin d’éviter d’être emprisonné, le demandeur est allé demeurer dans la ville de Karaj, chez un ami de sa mère. La mère du demandeur l’informa qu’il était accusé d’être antirévolutionnaire, antireligieux et d’avoir distribué des pamphlets contre l’Islam.
[7]
Avec l’aide d’un agent, le demandeur a quitté l’Iran le 16 janvier 2003. Il est arrivé à Vancouver le ou vers le 2 février 2003 en passant par Bangkok, Taipei et Hong Kong.
[8]
Le 17 mars 2003, le demandeur a présenté une demande pour obtenir le statut de réfugié fondée sur une crainte d’être persécuté du fait de sa religion, perception d’être convertit au Christianisme; et de ses opinions politiques, perception qu’il serait un ennemi du régime iranien.
[9]
Suite à une audience qui fut tenue le 2 décembre 2003, la Commission de l’immigration et du statut de réfugié (section de protection des réfugiés) (la SPR) a refusé sa demande pour statut de réfugié le même jour dans une décision orale. La SPR a déterminé que le demandeur n’était pas crédible et n’a pas cru son histoire.
[10]
Le 17 mai 2004, le demandeur a présenté une demande de dispense de l’obligation de présenter sa demande pour visa à l’extérieur du Canada. Il a fait parvenir une mise à jour à son dossier le 9 août 2007.
[11]
La demande fut examinée et refusée le 13 août 2007 au motif que les considérations humanitaires reliées à la situation personnelle du requérant sont insuffisantes pour accorder la demande de dispense. La présente demande attaquant cette décision fut déposée le 7 novembre 2007.
III.
Décision contestée
[12]
Dans sa décision du 18 juin 2007, l’agente ERAR arrive aux conclusions suivantes :
a) En cas de retour en Iran pour y faire une demande de visa conformément à la loi, le demandeur ne serait pas dans une situation où il serait séparé de certains membres de sa famille vivant au Canada. La présence de la mère du demandeur en Iran représenterait un avantage pour le demandeur qui pourrait bénéficier d’un support moral et logistique à son retour;
b) La présence du demandeur au Canada depuis les quatre dernières années ne représente pas un attachement définitif à la terre d’accueil. On souligne qu’il a passé les vingt premières années de sa vie en Iran;
c) La preuve documentaire ne démontre pas que le demandeur a travaillé de façon régulière depuis son arrivée au Canada. Il a déposé deux relevés d’emploi qui totalisent environ 4 semaines de travail sur une période de quatre ans, une preuve démontrant un dépôt bancaire de 25 000 $ avec les transactions subséquentes étant exclusivement des retraits sans aucun dépôt additionnel et le demandeur a sollicité un seul permis de travail depuis son arrivée au Canada (le 6 octobre 2004). Conséquemment, l’agente ERAR a conclu que le demandeur a été incapable de démontrer qu’il pourrait subvenir à ses besoins;
d) Malgré le fait que le professeur John Murphy reconnaît avoir versé une somme de 25 000 $ au nom du requérant et être prêt à supporter ce dernier dans ses démarches, l’agente ERAR note que le professeur Murphy n’est pas citoyen canadien et que cette procédure ne rencontre pas les normes de parrainage du gouvernement canadien;
e) L’agente ERAR note que le demandeur a 24 ans, est en bonne santé et possède un diplôme d’études secondaires ainsi qu’un diplôme subséquent du « Shahid Bahonar Vocational School » à Téhéran. Pour ces raisons, le demandeur a les qualités pour être en mesure de procéder à nouveau à des études ou accéder au marché du travail en Iran le temps de se conformer à la loi pour sa demande de visa;
f) Sur la question de risques de persécution et/ou de mauvais traitements ou torture pour les opinions politiques du requérant imputées à celles de son père décédé le 4 février 2001, l’agente ERAR a conclu que les faits au dossier ne sont pas suffisants pour déterminer qu’il puisse exister des difficultés excessives, inhabituelles ou injustifiées si le demandeur devait retourner en Iran;
g) Quant à la question des risques de persécution et/ou de mauvais traitements ou torture en raison des croyances religieuses au demandeur, l’agente ERAR souligne plusieurs contradictions à ce sujet et a noté le défaut du demandeur d’établir une conversion et des croyances autre qu’à l’Islam qui seraient telles qu’il risquerait être persécuté;
h) En ce qui a trait à l’allégation du demandeur qu’il est arrivé au Canada muni de faux documents et qu’il risque d’être détenu, torturé et de subir des mauvais traitements à son retour en Iran, l’agente ERAR note que le demandeur n’a pas un profil personnel le mettant au risque advenant un retour en Iran; et
i) Le fait que deux tantes du demandeur furent reconnues comme étant des réfugiées ne permet pas de confirmer les risques personnels de persécution, de menaces à sa vie ou de torture alléguée par le demandeur.
[13]
Pour ces motifs, l’agente ERAR a refusé la demande de dispense de visa en concluant « que les considérations humanitaires reliées à la situation personnelle du [demandeur] sont insuffisantes pour accorder la demande de dispense de faire une demande par l’intermédiaire de l’ambassade canadienne à l’étranger afin d’obtenir un visa d’immigrant préalablement à l’arrivée au Canada. »
IV.
Question en litige
[14]
L’agente a-t-elle errée dans son appréciation de la preuve en déterminant que le demandeur ne subirait pas de difficultés inhabituelles, injustifiées, ou excessives s’il était tenu de présenter, hors Canada, une demande de visa de résident permanent conformément à la Loi?
V.
Norme de contrôle
[15]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la Cour suprême du Canada a conclu qu’il ne devrait y avoir que deux normes de contrôle, soit celle de la décision correcte et celle de la décision raisonnable. La Cour a indiqué que la norme de la décision correcte doit continuer de s’appliquer aux questions de compétence et à certaines autres questions de droit (voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> au paragraphe 50). La cour de révision qui applique la norme de la décision correcte n’acquiesce pas au raisonnement du décideur. Elle entreprend plutôt sa propre analyse au terme de laquelle elle décide si ou non la décision du tribunal est correcte.
[16]
La Cour suprême enseigne également que dans le cadre d’une révision judiciaire, l’appréciation du caractère raisonnable d’une décision tient principalement à la justification de la décision, à la transparence et à l’intelligibilité du processus décisionnel. De plus, elle cherche à voir l’appartenance de la décision aux issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit (voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> au paragraphe 47).
[17]
La jurisprudence actuelle peut être mise à contribution pour déterminer quelles questions emportent l’application de la norme de la raisonnabilité (voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> au paragraph 54). La déférence qu’il y a lieu d’accorder à un tribunal sera déterminée en fonction des facteurs suivants: l’existence d’une clause privative; si le décideur possède une expertise spéciale dans un régime administratif distinct et particulier; et la nature de la question en litige (voir <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> au paragraphe 55).
[18]
À laide de la méthode pragmatique et fonctionnelle, la Cour Suprême du Canada a déterminé, dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , [1999] A.C.S. n
o
39 (Lexis), aux paragraphes 57-62, que la norme de contrôle appropriée pour les demandes basées sur des considérations humanitaires est celle de la décision raisonnable
simpliciter
.
[19]
Dans le présent dossier, la Loi ne contient pas de clause privative. Bien qu’on y prévoie la possibilité de recourir au contrôle judiciaire, elle ne peut se faire sans l’autorisation de la Cour fédérale. Quant à l’expertise du décideur, en l’espèce, le décideur est le ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l’Immigration ou son représentant. Le ministre a une certaine expertise par rapport aux tribunaux en matière d’immigration, surtout en ce qui concerne les dispenses d’application des exigences habituelles. Ce facteur milite en faveur de la retenue. Finalement, en ce qui a trait à la nature de la question, la décision d’accorder une dispense fondée sur des raisons d’ordre humanitaire demande principalement l’appréciation de faits relatifs au cas d’une personne, et ne porte pas sur l’application ni sur l’interprétation de règles de droit précises. Le fait que cette décision soit de nature hautement discrétionnaire et factuelle est un facteur qui milite en faveur de la retenue.
[20]
Pour ces motifs, je suis d’avis que la norme de contrôle applicable en l’espèce est celle de la décision raisonnable.
VI.
Analyse
[21]
Les prétentions du demandeur se résument ainsi :
a) Premièrement, le demandeur allègue que l’agente ERAR a commis une erreur dans ses motifs en soutenant que le demandeur n’avait soumis aucun nouvel élément de preuve permettant d’établir que ses croyances religieuses à l’encontre l’Islam sont telles qu’il puisse être persécuté à son retour en Iran. Le demandeur s’appuie sur l’alinéa 113(a) de la Loi pour affirmer qu’il ne pouvait déposer de nouveaux éléments que dans un cadre très strict et donc, l’agente ERAR ne pouvait exiger de nouvelles preuves de sa part.
b) Deuxièmement, le demandeur affirme que l’agente ERAR a rejeté sa demande en s’appuyant sur des suppositions sans fondement et sans se baser sur la preuve déposée devant elle. Plus précisément:
i) Elle a refusé de considérer que la vie du demandeur est en danger en raison du délai s’étant écoulé entre la mort de son père et son départ de l’Iran. Elle n’a pas pris en compte le fait que le demandeur est devenu une cible depuis qu’il est à l’étranger; chose qu’il n’était pas lorsqu’il résidait en Iran en raison de son jeune âge;
ii) L’agente ERAR n’a nullement pris en considération les circonstances de la mort ainsi que les explications quant au complot entourant le décès du père du demandeur;
iii) L’agente ERAR n’a pas pris en compte le fait que le demandeur serait à risque en cas de retour en Iran. La preuve documentaire, dont le rapport IRN29286.E, ainsi que sa déclaration sous serment, démontrent le danger pour le demandeur en cas de retour; et
c) Troisièmement, le demandeur soutient que l’agente ERAR n’a pas convenablement évalué l’intégration du demandeur au Canada. Il conteste la conclusion qu’il n’est pas convenablement intégré à la société canadienne parce qu’il n’a pas travaillé régulièrement dans ce pays. De plus, le demandeur affirme qu’on a tiré une conclusion négative du fait qu’il disposait de sommes d’argent importantes lui permettant de ne pas travailler au Canada.
[23]
Je traiterai de ces prétentions ci-dessous.
Nouveaux éléments de preuve
[24]
L'argument du demandeur à l'effet que l'alinéa 113(
a
) de la Loi n'envisage le dépôt de nouveaux éléments que dans un cadre très strict, et que l'agente ERAR ne pouvait exiger de nouvelles preuves de sa part, ne peut être retenu. Le défendeur a raison de souligner que la demande présentée à l'agente ERAR visait une dispense de l'obligation de demander un visa à l'extérieur du Canada. Or, l'alinéa 113(
a
) de la Loi s'applique seulement à l'étude d'une demande ERAR qui est en soit une demande au ministre pour protection par un individu visé d'une mesure de renvoi. En l'espèce, le demandeur avait déposé une demande de dispense de l'obligation d'obtenir son visa de résident permanent à l'extérieur du Canada en raison de l'existence de considérations d'ordre humanitaire le 1 mai 2004. Il revient au demandeur de prouver que les difficultés auxquelles il ferait face, s'il devait déposer sa demande de résidence permanente selon la procédure habituelle, seraient inhabituelles, injustifiées ou excessives. Pour ces motifs, je suis d'avis que l'agente ERAR n'a pas commis d'erreur en notant que le demandeur n'avait soumis aucun nouvel élément de preuve permettant d'établir que ses croyances religieuses sont telles qu'il puisse être persécuté.
Appréciation de la preuve
[25]
En l'espèce, le demandeur allègue que l'agente ERAR a commis plusieurs erreurs quant à l'appréciation de la preuve, notamment en ce qui a trait (i) au danger à sa vie en raison de ses croyances religieuses; (ii) de la mort de son père et le fait qu'il est maintenant une cible recherchée par les autorités iraniennes; (iii) que la preuve documentaire lui étant favorable fut ignorée; et (iv) qu'elle n'a pas convenablement apprécié l'intégration du demandeur au Canada.
[26]
Un demandeur doit satisfaire à un critère élevé lorsqu'il demande d'être exempté de l'application du paragraphe 11(1) de la Loi. Le demandeur a le fardeau de présenter les faits sur lesquels sa demande repose afin de démontrer qu'il subirait des difficultés inhabituelles, injustifiées ou excessives, s'il devait présenter sa demande hors du Canada. Je suis d'avis que le demandeur n'a pas réussi à décharger ce fardeau dans le présent cas. L'agente ERAR a soupesé tous les facteurs pertinents à la demande du demandeur, y incluant ceux qui ont été invoqués par ce dernier.
[27]
Les reproches du demandeur en ce qui a trait à l'appréciation de la preuve faite par l'agente ERAR ne sont pas valables. Le demandeur n'a pas été en mesure d'expliquer pourquoi il a attendu près de deux ans après le décès de son père pour quitter l'Iran. De plus, le demandeur a été incapable d'expliquer pourquoi sa famille, dont sa mère et ses frères, est demeurée en Iran, dans leur domicile familial, alors qu'ils étaient des cibles des autorités iraniennes au même titre que le demandeur. Je ne peux conclure que l'agente ERAR a commis une erreur en déterminant qu'un tel comportement allait à l'encontre de l'établissement du bien-fondé d'une crainte subjective en faveur du demandeur et des membres de sa famille.
[28]
Il était aussi loisible à l'agente ERAR de noter certaines contradictions dans la preuve documentaire qui minait la prétention du demandeur qu'il serait persécuté en raison de son opposition à l'Islam. Plus spécifiquement, les contradictions quant à la fréquence à laquelle il se rendait à l'église ou encore la discordance entre, d'une part, des dates d'impression et de distribution de pamphlets contre l'Islam et, d'autre part, la durée de son emploi dans une imprimerie, n'ont pas été adressés par le demandeur. Plusieurs de ces contractions ont été relevées par la SPR. L'agent ERAR, a juste titre, a accordé du poids à cette décision de la SPR et a noté que le demandeur n'a soumis aucune nouvelle preuve permettant d'établir une conversion et des croyances autres qu'à l'Islam qui mettrait ce dernier a risque ou en danger à son retour. L'agente n'a pas erré dans son appréciation de cette preuve.
[29]
En ce qui a trait à la preuve documentaire, il ressort des motifs que l'agente ERAR a pris en compte la documentation sur la situation objective existant en Iran. Dans son analyse, l'agente fait mention de divers éléments de preuve documentaire, incluant la documentation soumise par le demandeur. Je suis d'avis que l'agente n'a pas erré dans son appréciation de la preuve documentaire.
[30]
Finalement, je ne peux trouver d'erreurs dans la conclusion de l'agente ERAR quant au niveau d'intégration du demandeur à la société canadienne. Bien que le demandeur a produit un relevé bancaire démontrant un versement de 25 500 $ le 11 mai 2004. Subséquemment, il y a eu plusieurs retraits mais aucun dépôt. De plus, le demandeur n'a travaillé que pour une courte période de 4 semaines sur une période totale de 4 ans. Le demandeur n'a aucune famille au Canada et n'est pas marié. En raison de la déférence que cette Cour doit à l'agente ERAR dans l'appréciation des faits, je ne peux qualifier sa décision sur cette question de déraisonnable.
VII.
Conclusion
[31]
Compte tenu de tout ce qui précède, je suis d'avis que la conclusion de l'agente ERAR, rejetant la demande de dispense pour motifs humanitaires n'est pas déraisonnable. Je suis satisfait que la décision est parmi les issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit. En conséquence, cette demande de contrôle judiciaire sera rejetée.
VIII.
Question Certifiée
[32]
Le demandeur Propose la question suivante pour certification:
Lors de l'étude d'une demande pour motifs humanitaires impliquant une conversion religieuse, les agents doivent-ils nécessairement considérer les effets des pratiques religieuses en territoire canadien en cas de renvoi?
[33]
En l'espèce, les allégations du demandeur voulant qu'il se soit converti au catholicisme et qu'il ait pratiqué cette religion ici au Canada ont toutes deux été examinées par l'agent ERAR qui les a rejetées. Plus haut, j'ai déterminé que l'agent ERAR n'a pas erré en concluant ainsi. Le demandeur n'a pas fait preuve de son allégation. Je suis d'avis que la question soulevée ne peut être déterminante quant à l'issue de l'appel.
[34]
Je suis aussi d'avis que la question proposée est liée et limitée aux faits du dossier en cause et ne transcende pas l'intérêt des parties au litige.
[35]
Pour ces motifs la question ne sera pas certifiée. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , à la p. 5.)
JUGEMENT
[36]
LA COUR ORDONNE ET ADJUGE que :
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée.
2. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
ANNEX
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, L.R.C. 1985, ch. I-2 :
11. (1) L'étranger doit, préalablement à son entrée au Canada, demander à l'agent les visa et autres documents requis par règlement, lesquels sont délivrés sur preuve, à la suite d'un contrôle, qu'il n'est pas interdit de territoire et se conforme à la présente loi.
(2) Ils ne peuvent être délivrés à l'étranger dont le répondant ne se conforme pas aux exigences applicables au parrainage.
25. (1) Le ministre doit, sur demande d'un étranger interdit de territoire ou qui ne se conforme pas à la présente loi, et peut, de sa propre initiative, étudier le cas de cet étranger et peut lui octroyer le statut de résident permanent ou lever tout ou partie des critères et obligations applicables, s'il estime que des circonstances d'ordre humanitaire relatives à l'étranger - compte tenu de l'intérêt supérieur de l'enfant directement touché - ou l'intérêt public le justifient.
(2) Le statut ne peut toutefois être octroyé à l'étranger visé au paragraphe 9(1) qui ne répond pas aux critères de sélection de la province en cause qui lui sont applicables.
113. Il est disposé de la demande comme il suit:
a
) le demandeur d'asile débouté ne peut présenter que des éléments de preuve survenus depuis le rejet ou qui n'étaient alors pas normalement accessibles ou, s'ils l'étaient, qu'il n'était pas raisonnable, dans les circonstances, de s'attendre à ce qu'il les ait présentés au moment du rejet;
b
) une audience peut être tenue si le ministre l'estime requis compte tenu des facteurs réglementaires;
c
) s'agissant du demandeur non visé au paragraphe 112(3), sur la base des articles 96 à 98;
d
) s'agissant du demandeur visé au paragraphe 112(3), sur la base des éléments mentionnés à l'article 97 et, d'autre part:
(i) soit du fait que le demandeur interdit de territoire pour grande criminalité constitue un danger pour le public au Canada,
(ii) soit, dans le cas de tout autre demandeur, du fait que la demande devrait être rejetée en raison de la nature et de la gravité de ses actes passés ou du danger qu'il constitue pour la sécurité du Canada.
[End of document]