[1]
Noël, J.
: The plaintiff claims damages in the amount of $50,000 for assault, intimidation and the intentional infliction of nervous shock. The plaintiff claims that while in the employ of Canada Oil and Gas Lands Administration, Calgary office (hereafter COGLA), she was subjected to numerous and continuous acts of assault and intimidation at the hands of her supervisor, one Tomas Stalinski.
[2]
In an amended statement of claim filed with leave of this court, the plaintiff also claims that other named and unnamed Crown servants were negligent in failing to take the necessary steps to restrain and prevent Mr. Stalinski from committing or continuing to commit the alleged acts. This latter claim was attacked by counsel for the defendant as being barred by statute. For the reasons which appeal in the last part of this judgment, I have come to the conclusion that the cause of action raised by the amended statement of claim is separate and distinct from that raised by the original claim and was barred by statute at the time it was raised.
[3]
I now turn to the original claim.
Background
[4]
COGLA is a branch of both the Department of Energy, Mines and Resources (hereafter E.M.R.) and the Department of Indian Affairs. Its administrator reported to the Deputy Ministers of both departments. COGLA was created in 1981 by bringing together employees of both departments (some 120 in total) in order to administer the National Energy Program. The final implementation of COGLA was completed in 1985.
[5]
Its offices were situated in Calgary, St. John's, Halifax, Yellowknife. A smaller office was located in Inuvik and a laboratory in Dartmouth. The principal function of the Calgary office was to provide information to members of the oil and gas industry and to issue various licences. From its inception, the Calgary office was run by Mr. Stalinski.
[6]
He has been employed with the public service since 1972, acting in various capacities. Prior to his appointment with COGLA, he was with the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, Oil and Gas Division. His formal job title with COGLA was that of Oil and Gas Liaison Officer. In the first years, Mr. Stalinski was the sole employee in COGLA's Calgary office.
[7]
However, given an increasing workload, it became necessary to hire temporary help from time to time. For that purpose, the term position of Assistant Liaison Officer was created in 1984. The position basically involved the performance of general clerical duties.
[8]
Plaintiff was born in 1944, she was educated in Calgary where she obtained her high school diploma in 1963, a secretarial diploma in 1965 and a Bachelor of Arts degree with specialization in Anthropology in 1977. In 1979, she completed two years of the Master's program in Anthropology. The plaintiff was divorced in 1973 and was, at the time relevant to this action, supporting a child as a single mother.
[9]
She had been employed as a secretary with the Canadian Western Natural Gas Company Limited from 1964 to 1968. From 1978 to 1983, she worked as a teacher's assistant, later as a curatorial assistant, and finally was employed under contract with the National Museum of Canada. This latter contract expired in July of 1983.
[10]
During the following year, plaintiff unsuccessfully searched for employment. She participated in a one month course on career development sponsored by the Government of Canada which was aimed specifically at assisting unemployed women in reentering the workforce.
[11]
In the summer of 1984, the plaintiff applied for the position of Assistant Liaison officer with COGLA. She was one of several applicants for the position. She was interviewed on July 6 by Mr. Stalinski and on that same day she was hired.
[12]
During the interview, however, Mr. Stalinski had apprehensions relating to the plaintiff's psychological health. After the interview, he consulted a Manpower officer who had had prior occasion to speak to the plaintiff. His concerns having seemingly been put to rest, he then telephoned the plaintiff to offer her the position. In a later memorandum to senior management, Mr. Stalinski refers to his impressions of the plaintiff during the interview as follows:
"Throughout the interview she was extremely nervous, and more than once she was stopped, told to relax, and give the response that she felt the interviewer wanted made. In addition, throughout the interview, she did not once make normal contact. This lack of contact caused me to have certain reservations. My concern was that Miss Boothman was exhibiting mannerisms also exhibited by a former employee who had some rather serious personality disorders that made it impossible for them to function in a normal work environment. It was, then, as a result of these specific concerns that I consulted with a contact in the Federal Service that had been in a position to speak with Miss Boothman on a number of occasions.
"My concerns were expressed and my contact responded that they had not seen this particular problem, but that it was entirely possible it had been missed insofar as they thought I was a rather perceptive person, and they too expressed concern. The circumstances were discussed, at length, and upon conclusion of the conversation we both felt that the likely cause of the behaviour exhibited by Miss Boothman was as a result of her personal circumstances at that time, and that, given time, she would likely prove to be an asset.
"The end result of the entire interview process was that, as a consequence of Miss Boothman's obvious intelligence, and because of the fact that she did, in fact, place first in the interview questions, and because of her personal circumstances, the position would be offered to her. On my recommendation, and with unvoiced reservations on my part, this was done."
[13]
What followed between July of 1984 and January 1985, date when the plaintiff was dismissed from her employment, is a tale of what can be modestly described as a stormy and tumultuous working relationship and a most disruptive working environment.
Facts
[14]
The facts of the case are quite lengthy. However, I believe it necessary to describe them in some detail.
[15]
The plaintiff began working at COGLA on July 9, 1984. The Calgary office is located in the Harry Hayes Building and is one of many federal public service offices in the building. Throughout the relevant period, plaintiff and Mr. Stalinski worked alone in these premises. The office was at the time in a most squalid state. It was filthy to the point where mouse excrement could be found all over the piles of dirty dishes left in the kitchen. Mr. Stalinski had been content leaving the office in that condition. One of the tasks which plaintiff undertook at the beginning of her term of employment was to bring the office to a reasonable state of cleanliness.
[16]
On the plaintiff's first day of work, Mr. Stalinski approached her in regards to his apprehensions at the interview. He told her that her lack of eye contact suggested to him that she had a lot of guilt and would perhaps need time off for mental reasons. He alluded to information which he had received from third parties and added that she had only received the job on paper, implying that her hold on the position was less than solid.
[17]
The plaintiff was shaken by this discussion and, the following day, sought information with respect to comments which were made to Mr. Stalinski. Mr. Stalinski responded by telling her that comments made by third parties were none of her business and pointed out that he had information about her from sources of which she was unaware.
[18]
On July 13, the plaintiff was asked to fill out a personal history form. She wanted explanations as to the reasons for this form but Mr. Stalinski scolded her for having asked. Later, after having encountered difficulties in filling out the form and not wanting to seek help from Mr. Stalinski, plaintiff phoned Ottawa for assistance. While she was on the phone, Mr. Stalinski came in, ordered her off the phone and warned her that all subsequent communications to Ottawa had to go through him.
[19]
Mr. Stalinski then ordered the plaintiff to turn over the personal history form to him for his review. He photocopied the form, sent the original to Ottawa and kept the copy in the filing cabinet. The plaintiff was unhappy with the fact that she was forced to surrender a copy to Mr. Stalinski and that he would be keeping a copy. A strong argument developed and the plaintiff was threatened with dismissal.
[20]
During her second week at COGLA, plaintiff was instructed by Mr. Stalinski to allow his friend into the office to run her wedding invitations through the postage meter. Plaintiff questioned Mr. Stalinski about the propriety of this practice but was told in response that he would allow her to run her Christmas cards through the meter.
[21]
On July 19, Mr. Stalinski set out to teach the plaintiff how to open the office safe. The plaintiff had some difficulty with the instructions and, after a few unsuccessful attempts, she was berated by Mr. Stalinski. He ordered her to sit in front of the safe and continue to practice as he stood over her watching her every move. After repeated insults, the plaintiff was reduced to tears.
[22]
Similarly, on July 31, Mr. Stalinski ordered the plaintiff to retype a memo several times contending that the margins were incorrectly reproduced. When the plaintiff questioned this requirement, Mr. Stalinski again threatened her by stating that she was on dangerous ground.
[23]
On August 2, plaintiff inadvertently opened a door leading to the corridor, without knowing that, at the same time, Mr. Stalinski was on the other side trying to unlock the door to come in. In the process, Mr. Stalinski's hand was jerked. Mr. Stalinski became extremely angry and threatened bodily harm should she ever open the door while he had his key out.
[24]
That same day, Mr. Stalinski insulted and humiliated the plaintiff in the presence of his wife for using the letter date as opposed to the metric date on a letter.
[25]
On August 7, plaintiff saw an older gentlemen in the reception area looking for the Immigration office which was on the same floor. Plaintiff got up from her desk and escorted the gentleman to that office. In so doing, the plaintiff forgot to close the door behind her. When she returned, she was confronted by Mr. Stalinski. He yelled profanities at her and threatened her with physical violence if she ever left the door open again.
[26]
On August 10, the plaintiff received finger print forms in a personal and confidential envelope addressed to her. These forms were required for security clearance purposes. She went to the local police station to have her finger prints taken and then, pursuant to the written instructions on the forms, forwarded them to Ottawa. On her return, Mr. Stalinski shouted at her for not having informed him that he had received these forms and for having sent the forms directly to Ottawa. He told her that his instructions superseded whatever instructions she received from Ottawa.
[27]
On August 13, Mr. Stalinski told the plaintiff that she should quit her job and that, in any event, he had received permission to terminate her employment. He testified that around that time, he realized that he had made what he termed as a "hideous mistake" in hiring her.
[28]
The following day, Mr. Stalinski ripped out the ribbons from the plaintiff's typewriter and threw them angrily over the plaintiff's shoulder. He did so because, as he stated, he did not like that type of ribbon. The plaintiff was shaken by this event and decided to contact the Human Rights Commission to complain of the abuse to which she was being subjected.
[29]
On the morning of August 15, Mr. Stalinski ordered the plaintiff into his office and informed her that he would henceforth be monitoring all of her breaks and that she was not to leave the office without his permission.
[30]
Later that day, Mr. Stalinski again ordered the plaintiff into his office. She was questioned about the incoming and outgoing mail. During the course of this conversation, a heated argument developed. In anger, Mr. Stalinski exclaimed, "What do I have to do to get you to do what I tell you? Bash your head in!". This exchange terrified the plaintiff and this feeling was made more intense because of the presence of a hammer on the edge of Mr. Stalinski's desk.
[31]
On August 20, in another argument about the checking of cross-references, Mr. Stalinski scolded her for wasting time all the while brandishing in an animated fashion a screwdriver in the proximity of her face.
[32]
On the same day, the plaintiff filed a formal complaint with the Canadian Human Rights Commission in which she detailed many of the events referred to above and set forth various allegations of mismanagement on the part of Mr. Stalinski.
[33]
On August 27, the plaintiff brought to the attention of the Senior Management of COGLA in Ottawa the state of affairs in the COGLA office in Calgary. She first spoke to G.R. Campbell, Assistant Director General, Resource Evaluation Branch. On the same day, she forwarded a copy of the formal complaint which she had lodged with the Human Rights Commission to the Senior Management of COGLA in Ottawa. Mr. Campbell contacted Mr. John Stewart who was an executive officer of COGLA in Ottawa and asked him to look into matters.
[34]
In light of the seriousness of the allegations made by the plaintiff, Mr. Stewart decided to visit the Calgary office. On August 29, he interviewed the plaintiff and Mr. Stalinski separately. Mr. Stalinski was very upset that the plaintiff had involved Ottawa officials into private office matters, and with the fact that his actions were being questioned. On August 28, he forwarded to Mr. Don Sherwin, the Director General, Resource Evaluation Branch in Ottawa, a formal recommendation that the plaintiff's employment be terminated. This recommendation was not acted upon.
[35]
During her interview with Mr. Stewart, plaintiff complained that her privacy was continuously being invaded by Mr. Stalinski, and that she feared for her personal safety. This is one of a number of instances where plaintiff expressed fear for her safety. Mr. Stewart testified that, in the course of his visit, it became apparent to him that plaintiff had psychiatric and emotional problems, and he offered the plaintiff the services of a psychiatrist. Plaintiff refused this offer on the grounds that she did not trust psychiatrists.
[36]
After this meeting, Mr. Stewart made arrangements with Mr. Earle of the Public Service Commission to allow the plaintiff to use his office, located down the hall from the COGLA office in Calgary, whenever she felt threatened. Mr. Stewart then returned to Ottawa with the task of considering the matter further and determining what action should be taken.
[37]
In the meantime, the problems continued in the COGLA office. On August 31, the plaintiff asked Mr. Stalinski whether he might allow her $2 from the petty cash so that she could purchase a dust mask. She stated that the file room which she was reorganizing had accumulated dust which she believed could be harmful to her health. Mr. Stalinski's diary reveals the following with respect to this request:
"84-08-31 - 10:30
"Miss Boothman makes a request 'to take a couple of bucks from petty cash to get a mask that is used around sprays and dust' because in her view, it is warranted. She feels the dust from the files is injurious to her health. She was informed that her request would be considered.
"84-08-31 - 10:31
"Miss Boothman is called into my office to be given an alternative task to perform while I consult with Ottawa over her unusual request. She asks when she will get her mask, and is informed that the matter is under consideration as to whether I felt the government ought to incur that particular cost. She became somewhat louder and was insistent that this must be done. At this point a visitor (visitors) entered, and to maintain privacy for a short period of time I shut the door. Miss Boothman rushed up and loudly proclaimed she would not be in an office with me with the door closed. I told Miss Boothman to, then, sit at her desk until I was ready to continue.
"84-08-31 - 10:41
"Miss Boothman did not come when requested, but rather quips 'I'll be there in a sec Tom!'. About a minute later when she came in, she was asked for an explanation for her absence. She replied that she was on a coffee break. Upon further questioning it was admitted, by Miss Boothman, that she had also been to the self-serve store asking for dust masks. Upon attempting to give oral instructions to Miss Boothman regarding her alternate task, it was decided it would be easier to type them to make matters clear.
"84-08-31 - 13:05
"Miss Boothman is informed that dust masks will be purchased for her use before she will be expected to continue the task earlier assigned. She is also instructed that she is not authorized to make enquiries at the self-serve store, and ought to make all requests, for whatever, to me (as long as I am not to be away for an extended period of time). She made the remark that there might be times when she would have to 'use her own discretion' in making enquiries as to the availability of anything in the DSS store. She was informed that
all
requests for materials for use in the office
must
be made through me and that she was
not
authorized to undertake independent action. Miss Boothman gave indications that she was about to argue, and was therefore dismissed from my office."
[38]
On September 5, the plaintiff and Mr. Stalinski had another heated exchange. On this occasion, Mr. Stalinski ordered the plaintiff out of his office, forced the door closed in plaintiff's face and then locked the door to prevent her from entering.
[39]
On September 6, Mr. Stewart phoned Mr. Stalinski to inquire as to the state of affairs in the office. The essence of this conversation was recorded by Mr. Stalinski as follows:
"84-09-06 - 13:20
"John Stewart called asking how things were. He was told there was no appreciable change and that her attitude was abominable. He mentioned that he had a chap from EMR Procurement call Detective Harger regarding the fraud problem and procurement procedures. I mentioned I was aware that there were a number of incidents. Quite obviously Miss Boothman has been bending Ottawa's ear as far as this problem is concerned, as well. Interesting that she did not consider it necessary to tell me she felt it necessary to involve Ottawa."
[40]
On September 10, plaintiff opened the door to the file room when she saw Mr. Stalinski standing there with his keys out waiting to unlock the door. Plaintiff testified that Mr. Stalinski showed extreme anger and reported this incident to Mr. Stewart the next day.
[41]
On September 12, Mr. Stewart began reviewing the plaintiff's complaint to the Human Rights Commission and came to the conclusion that there had been mismanagement and that instances of harassment had indeed occurred. He was also convinced that the plaintiff had emotional and psychiatric problems. This condition had become apparent to him from the moment he became involved. As a result of these findings, Mr. Stewart recommended that a financial and operations audit be conducted, and that alternative arrangements for the supervision of the plaintiff be implemented.
[42]
Mr. Stalinski was not in Calgary between September 17 and September 25, as he had to travel to Ottawa to undergo a psychiatric evaluation at the request of senior management. The results of this evaluation were not put in evidence during the trial.
[43]
The financial and operations audit conducted at the request of Mr. Stewart together with Mr. Stewart's own investigation revealed that Mr. Stalinski had used the office facilities to conduct his personal locksmithing business. Numerous instances of mismanagement on the part of Mr. Stalinski also came to light. There had been misuse of the petty cash, Mr. Stalinski had made unauthorized charges to the public for government publications. He had also failed to forward to Ottawa some eighteen boxes of confidential information. Incoming correspondence had not been filed, and logs were not kept. He had misled management in the compilation of workload statistics. The investigation also showed that Mr. Stalinski had failed in the supervision of the plaintiff, that he had not provided her with proper instructions and that he had clearly harassed the plaintiff.
[44]
On the strength of these findings, Mr. Stewart contacted senior officials in Ottawa and sought advice from Ms. Sallie Cherry, a staff relations officer with the Department of Energy, Mines and Resources, as to what specific action should be taken.
[45]
It was decided that, given the fact that no prior documented evidence of misbehaviour existed with respect to Mr. Stalinski, the only appropriate action was to give him an oral reprimand. Mr. Stewart and others travelled to Calgary for the purpose of giving the oral reprimand and to apologize to the plaintiff. This was done on October 3, in the course of separate meetings. Both the plaintiff and Mr. Stalinski were also informed that a new financial, operational and supervisory arrangement was being implemented.
[46]
The arrangement was that both Mr. Stalinski and the plaintiff were to report directly to Mr. Rudi Klaubert, a COGLA officer who assumed supervisory authority over them. This supervisory authority, however, was to be exercised from Ottawa, thus leaving Mr. Stalinski and the plaintiff alone in the same office in Calgary. Oral instructions were initially given to both Mr. Stalinski and the plaintiff with regards to their respective duties within the office and the behaviour which they were to exhibit.
[47]
On October 12, the plaintiff wrote to Mr. Klaubert in a follow-up to a prior telephone conversation during which she indicated that her desk had been rearranged in her absence and that various items were found missing, such as an Oxford dictionary, business cards and a file of accumulated legislative changes which she had been instructed to maintain. She also complained abut a loose electrical cord which had been left across the entrance of the file room.
[48]
After reviewing the matter, Mr. Klaubert addressed a memorandum to Mr. Stalinski. The October 11 memorandum reads as follows:
"To avoid further conflict in that office, you are hereby instructed not to make
any
changes to Ms. Boothman's work station(s) without my prior approval.
"You are also instructed to ensure that no situations that could be hazardous to either the personal security of the staff or the physical security of the premises be allowed to exist. Unauthorized and/or hazardous wiring and extension cords are specifically included in this instruction."
[49]
On October 19, plaintiff again wrote to Mr. Klaubert complaining that files were removed from her desk. Again, on October 31, she complained that her phone was moved and later, that the wastepaper basket and other accoutrements surrounding her desk had been displaced. All of these events were recorded by the plaintiff and communicated to Mr. Klaubert.
[50]
In early November, the plaintiff provided Mr. Stalinski with a note reminding him that, in accordance with Mr. Klaubert's instructions, there was to be no social communication between them and that he was not to displace items on or about her desk.
[51]
On November 7, all coat hangers had disappeared from the plaintiff's wardrobe. She passed a note to Mr. Stalinski asking when they would be returned and he replied that they would not be returned as the hangers were his personal property.
[52]
On November 8, Mr. Stalinski was in the plaintiff's personal work space and as she was standing outside the door searching for her keys, he jerked the door open suddenly frightening the plaintiff. The plaintiff reported this incident to Mr. Klaubert.
[53]
On November 13, the plaintiff received a notice of contributory status form from the Department of Supply and Services, Superannuation Division. She could not locate the incoming envelope to identify the return address. She passed a note to Mr. Stalinski asking whether he had the envelope and if so, whether it could be returned to her. Mr. Stalinski became very upset and asked why she wanted the envelope. After some dispute, Mr. Stalinski told her that he had torn the envelope in pieces and thrown it into the wastepaper basket, and then ordered her out of his office. The plaintiff returned to the office a few minutes later with a note indicating that she would like to have the torn up pieces. Mr. Stalinski later relinquished the pieces to the plaintiff, but only after having consulted with Mr. Klaubert. The plaintiff again wrote to Mr. Klaubert to complain about these events.
[54]
At that juncture, Mr. Klaubert wrote a further memo to both plaintiff and Mr. Stalinski indicating that the situation at the COGLA office continued to be intolerable and instructing both parties to make the necessary effort to rectify the situation.
[55]
The plaintiff viewed this letter as a personal reprimand and a partial blame for the situation. She wrote to Mr. Klaubert on November 14 and stated:
"The purpose of this letter is to express in general terms conditions in the work environment here and to relate some of the affects of these circumstances. I am also asserting here my right to make the most of life and the fact that I am acting in defense of that right.
"The new office arrangements are much improved and very much appreciated. Nevertheless, I am still subject to and vulnerable to harassment and vulnerable to my responses to these pressures. Because I must cope with unexpected and unpredictable adverse behaviour on the part of the liaison officer, because I must be able to record these incidents as accurately as possible, because I have no witnesses (and little other human contact during the day other than with the liaison officer), I find myself chronically in a state of fear and expanded awareness, functioning daily at concert pitch, with corresponding alterations in my personality being manifested in defensiveness and other signs of distress. Another facet of this is the increased vulnerability to pain which I am experiencing; however, I am very resourceful and am getting some help and support. By far not the least of that support has come from you and the actions of your administration and I am indeed grateful. But I remain feeling insecure and overly aroused often for long periods of time because it often appears there is nothing to stop the liaison officer from doing practically anything hurtful he wishes, and I would have no witness to back up my account of the problem, in spite of your assurances that you are watching this situation carefully. I do recognize your faithfulness however. Some difficulties have arisen because I am also dependent for information from you as my supervisor, and I am often not sure where I stand on issues when no results are forthcoming at this end. Negative motives have also been misapplied to me while defensive statements are made on the liaison officer's behalf. I will grant that some innuendo and nuance have affected both sides in our discourse, leaving me with the acknowledgment, which I graciously extend to you, that forgiveness has been generous and genuinely given. Such difficulties are inevitable when trying to cope with these particular circumstances and problems. It is because of the possibility of inadvertent and unintended communications breakdowns and their affects that I am confirming a change in our communication pattern which I discussed with you by telephone. I will therefore recapitulate: Frequently the liaison officer is on the phone making reports which may or may not be associated with a particular incident. He is, however, very quick in calling following
any
encounter with me. His reports must be recorded or at least assessed by you in some manner. Knowing this, I then feel compelled to enter my part in the record, especially if I think there has been a problem or conflict or whatever. It is very unnerving though to have every move monitored when the originator of the report is not a person who's judgment I would trust. (However, if this is necessary, I can live with it.) Also, some of the situations connect to other situations indirectly and/or sequentially by context and there may be a myriad of details which are not included. You have always received my calls fairly and welcomed them, but I am sure this reporting by telephone is destructive to our otherwise very good rapport, having a compounding effect on the problem. I am also sure, despite your brave efforts, this must be extremely difficult to you and hard to deal with. I will, therefore, not be calling you to discuss the difficulties in the future, unless there is an emergency. You will get my reports in writing. Of course I will call every day to discuss other matters, as you suggested, and I hope any distortion in our efforts or apprehensions will be avoided.
"I wish to acknowledge and agree with your emphasis that as much progress as possible must be made on my particular work plan project. There is nothing I would like better than to see an end to the diversions caused by my need to submit reports, to engage in additional communications, to visit the nurse, and to ponder over futile problems which were entirely avoidable. The project you have assigned is interesting, providing me with daily discoveries; it is also peaceful and enjoyable and I am thankful to have it."
[56]
The plaintiff was provided with a written work plan which outlined her new duties. These involved specific work projects to be completed by March 31, 1985. In addition, the plaintiff was given the added responsibility of performing the duties of liaison officer whenever Mr. Stalinski was absent.
[57]
On November 16, the plaintiff entered Mr. Stalinski's office to access the filing cabinet where various files were located. She saw the hammer, which Mr. Stalinski had been instructed to take home, lying on his desk. She wrote to Mr. Klaubert about this and indicated that she had found this to be traumatic.
[58]
On November 26, while the plaintiff was using the photocopying machine, Mr. Stalinski walked up directly behind her and stood there for some time within very close proximity. The plaintiff recorded this event in a note to Mr. Klaubert indicating that she had found this behaviour intimidating. Later, on November 29, Mr. Stalinski was found to have been listening in on the plaintiff's telephone conversations.
[59]
On December 4, the plaintiff left the outer door opened and locked the inner door in order to allow some air into the room. Mr. Stalinski came in and left both doors open. The plaintiff again locked the inner door. When Mr. Stalinski returned a few minutes later, he became furious and yelled at the plaintiff, ordering her to keep the inner door unlocked. Later that day, the plaintiff went to the filing cabinet to log a mail entry and found a square-ended screwdriver in the cabinet where the hammer had been left previously.
[60]
On December 11, plaintiff wrote to Mr. Klaubert. Plaintiff had not accepted Mr. Klaubert's earlier criticism of her. The letter was written with a view of reestablishing her working relationship with Mr. Klaubert. The body of the letter reads:
"I think it is wrong for us to subtly hurt one another through the use of an official file, especially since this is in blatant contradiction to our verbal interactions.
"If you will forgive me for not being able to attend to my work plan project duties (while reporting harassment and other difficulties) at the Calgary office, I will forgive you for reprimanding and criticising me in writing for the said perceived neglect.
"I do not want or need your sympathy. Our joy will be full in your charity. My compliments of the Season!"
[61]
I will have more to say on the contents of this letter later.
[62]
On December 20, the plaintiff discovered that a cart which was used to move files had gone missing. When she asked Mr. Stalinski about its location, he slammed the door of his office in her face. On December 28, the cart had disappeared again and this time, when the plaintiff approached Mr. Stalinski, he yelled at her calling her a bitch.
[63]
Later that morning, the plaintiff and Mr. Stalinski got into another heated argument. The plaintiff was approaching Mr. Stalinski's office when he got up and slammed the door in her face, knocking the plaintiff down. When she got up and opened the door, Mr. Stalinksi forced the door closed on her and once again the plaintiff was knocked to the floor. Upon seeing this, a passerby in the hallway came to the plaintiff's assistance, helping her up from the floor. Seeing this, Mr. Stalinski pulled the lady's hand from the plaintiff's arm, told her that she was in a restricted area and ordered her out of the premises. When the plaintiff got up, she went to get the cart. Mr. Stalinski ordered her to leave it alone and grabbed the other end. A tug-of-war ensured and Mr. Stalinski eventually jerked the cart with force from the plaintiff's hands.
[64]
In light of the intensity of this exchange and its potential repercussions, Mr. Stalinski recorded this event. In a memorandum to Mr. Klaubert, he states:
"Boothman was not in the office 84-12-31 during the hours that I am usually here. I received a report that she was in the Passport Office at approximately 16:10 on the second date noted above. At that time she made numerous references to the bruises that she had on her body -- bruises I assume that she obtained as a result of trying to break down doors, while implying that I was the person or think that had inflicted them upon her. She apparently went on to ask if nobody cared what happened in the offices next door, and warned that it was only a matter of time before something terribly serious happened there, and they obviously didn't care.
"Boothman then said something along the lines that she was looking for the nice lady in blue that helped her on the previous Friday. The woman she was referring to was seen hovering solicitously over Boothman after she had begun to calm down on the first noted date. As a result of the solicitousness exhibited by the woman, Boothman recommenced her wailing and extremely abusive behaviour, prolonging the outrage. I entered the area and instructed the woman to leave inasmuch as she was in a restricted area without authorization. The woman did so, but categorically refused to identify herself."
[65]
This event convinced senior officials that definitive action had to be taken. A few days later, on January 4, 1985, during a meeting held in the COGLA office in Calgary between the plaintiff, Mr. Stewart, Mr. Klaubert and Sallie Cherry, the plaintiff's employment was terminated. She was advised that she would be paid until January 7, and that she was to vacate the premises on that day.
Issue
[66]
The main issue before the court is whether the actions of Mr. Stalinski amount to a wrongful assault, harassment and infliction of nervous shock on the person of the plaintiff and, if so, whether the Crown can be made liable for those actions.
Position Of The Plaintiff
[67]
The plaintiff's argument is to the effect that during her tenure at the COGLA office in Calgary, she was marred by repeated abuse at the hands of Mr. Stalinski, which abuse led to psychological trauma. The plaintiff maintains that the defendant must be held liable for the actions of her servant as these actions were taken within the context of his employment.
[68]
As a result of these actions, the plaintiff argues that she has suffered loss and damages including mental and emotional distress and fear, and psychological harm resulting in her diminished ability to secure employment and earn a living.
Position Of The Defendant
[69]
The defendant argues that Mr. Stalinski did not assault, harass or interfere with the plaintiff in any way. In the alternative, the defendant maintains that if such actions did take place, Mr. Stalinski was not acting in the course of his employment at the time and, therefore, the defendant is not accountable for his actions.
[70]
As for the plaintiff's claim of damages, the defendant's position is that no damages were incurred and if such damages were suffered, they are attributable to the plaintiff's own negligence in failing to comply with Mr. Stalinski's instructions and in conducting herself in a disorderly and disgraceful manner.
Findings
[71]
Mr. Stalinski struck me as an authoritative man, paternalistic and even military in his approach to those falling under his authority. He repeated on numerous occasions that he would deal with the plaintiff in the same way he would with his children and that she, like them, should accept his authority, experience and wisdom. He was accurately described by counsel for the defendant as "a man who had his problems". He is also a keen and astute observer of human nature and was able to discern plaintiff's emotional fragility from a brief employment interview.
[72]
The structure of the COGLA office in Calgary and its distance from Ottawa and the senior management allowed Mr. Stalinski almost complete autonomy in the running of the office. Prior to September 1984, visits to the Calgary office from Ottawa management barely took place. The evidence indicates that Mr. Stalinski had come to consider the COGLA office in Calgary as his own and that he used it for his personal locksmithing business. He had very set ways in the manner in which he ran the office and in the performance of his supervisory functions. He cherished his authority and autonomy and he was most concerned about any event which could provoke the intrusion of senior management in Ottawa into his style of management.
[73]
In August of 1984, the plaintiff was responsible for bringing to Ottawa's attention a number of serious deficiencies in Mr. Stalinski's management style. These complaints ultimately led to the financial and administrative audit which culminated in findings of impropriety. The seriousness of this investigation and of its conclusions is evidenced by a note entitled "Disciplinary Interview With T. Stalinski Wednesday October 3, 1984", which reads in part:
"... stated that the reason for meeting was to resolve serious problems of carrying on personal business, wilful nonperformance of duties, inflating workload statistics and improper behaviour. T. Stalinski interjected to say that he was willing in general to accept that this was the case.
. . . . .
"D. Sherwin discussed the wilful neglect of duties by T. Stalinski. Specifically he mentioned the failure to put in 7½ hours each day and the failure to send 18 boxes of confidential material to Headquarters and actually deny having them. He pointed out that the latter had created embarrassment because the companies had insisted that the information had been sent and we said that it was never received. Now an apology had to be made. T. Stalinski agreed that he had not done what he should have but did not offer an explanation when asked. Later he said he had withheld the information because he was unhappy with the job. When he realized the seriousness of the matter, he could not bring himself to send the material because it was embarrassing. Prior to the formation of COGLA he viewed his job as primarily one of liaising with industry on the technical aspects of the metrification program. He did not see data management as his primary role.
"D. Sherwin also went into detail on the lack of filing of correspondence to which T. Stalinski replied that he did not see any purpose in keeping piles of paper. He added that DIAND had told him to destroy this correspondence. D. Sherwin pointed out that it was essential to keep good records including those on who came to the office and what was examined. T. Stalinski said that he was never asked to keep a log.
"D. Sherwin told T. Stalinski that the operational audit had suggested that the workload statistics had been misleading. T. Stalinski stated that this was not so. He said that there had been far less work lately because there are quiet periods from time to time. As the discussion progressed T. Stalinski admitted that there has been a general fall-off in the workload over the past two years.
. . . . .
"Sherwin also said that in his view T. Stalinski's behaviour was a clear case of harassment. When T. Stalinski asked for instances, he cited the example of T. Stalinski ordering L. Boothman out of the public view room in front of a client. When L. Boothman asked for instructions on how to fill a reader-printer with paper. He also cited the reports of verbal threats. These were not denied but in his defence T. Stalinski stated that L. Boothman took his comments out of context. D. Sherwin gave him the Treasury Booklet on Harassment, asked him to read it, told him that harassment was very seriously and could lead to dismissal."
[74]
Mr. Stalinski was very prone to using violent language and his use of such language towards the plaintiff gradually increased as the plaintiff showed her determination to resist his attempts to control and dominate her. Examples of this type of verbal abuse were related to Mr. Klaubert on several occasions. Indeed, in November 1984, Mr. Stalinski admitted to Mr. Klaubert that "I am so mad at that woman I could kill her", and "I am not putting up with this bitch for one more minute", and again that "I cannot bear much more of this before I will wring her neck gently, between my hands until all life has ceased". Mr. Stalinski also stated on prior occasions that he wanted to shove his fist down plaintiff's throat, that he would break her fingers, that he would rip off her lips, that he would break her arm and that he would bash her head in. Mr. Stalinski's attitude with regard to these threats is that he had no intention to carry them out, but that just uttering them made him feel better.
[75]
The most troublesome part of this course of action is that, on occasion, these threats were made while Mr. Stalinski was brandishing a screwdriver in the proximity of plaintiff's face or while a hammer lay sitting on his desk. Mr. Stalinski was well aware of the fact that plaintiff feared for her physical safety and that the presence of tools in the office was having a traumatizing effect on her. In a conversation with Mr. Klaubert which the latter reflected in a subsequent memorandum, he said that he was purposely leaving tools around the office, such as a utility knife, to irritate plaintiff.
[76]
In addition to these repeated threats, Mr. Stalinski continuously sought to control and dominate the plaintiff. He specifically ordered the plaintiff to have no contact with Ottawa on any matter and made it his prerogative to review any and all requests made by the plaintiff. He listened in on her telephone conversations. He made it a point to exploit the plaintiff's sensitivities with derogatory comments about her abilities and her emotional and psychological health. This pattern of behaviour continued in the presence of third parties as was evidenced by Mr. Stalinski berating the plaintiff in front of his wife. Mr. Stalinski wasted no efforts in showing the plaintiff that he held her future in his hands. In fact, on several occasions, Mr. Stalinski would threaten the plaintiff's job. He tried to tighten his hold on the plaintiff by warning her that her every move would be noted by him. He tampered with her work station. While these latter actions may seem somewhat trivial taken in isolation, Mr. Stalinski was well aware of the fact that, in the case of the plaintiff, they were engendering extreme emotional reactions.
[77]
The defendant argued that the plaintiff had a strong predisposition and vulnerability to the suffering of which she now complains prior to joining COGLA, and that her present state cannot be attributed to her work experience with COGLA.
[78]
The evidence indicates that following plaintiff's separation from her husband in 1973, she sought the help of a psychiatrist on six or seven occasions before deciding to end the consultations. She decided to end the consultations because she claims that her psychiatrist performed a sexual display in front of her in his office, and that in her own words she was not going to compromise herself. Her mistrust of psychiatrists in general was apparent during her testimony.
[79]
More recently, however, plaintiff did have a series of three meetings with a female psychiatrist. She stopped seeing this psychiatrist because this psychiatrist purportedly gave a report which completely distorted plaintiff's life and caused the plaintiff to suffer a serious depression. Again, in 1990, plaintiff consulted another psychiatrist which she stopped seeing because, according to her, the psychiatrist's therapeutic method was not suitable to her particular problem.
[80]
After her experience at COGLA, plaintiff had two other employments, neither of which she was able to hold. She was first a library assistant, a position which she quit when she found that she could not cope with her supervisor. She quit her second job as coordinatory of cultural resources for the City of Calgary after five months. The plaintiff claims that she was subjected to a traumatizing experience of sexual harassment during almost the full period of this last employment. Plaintiff continues to be unemployed to this day.
[81]
During the trial, two experts were called by the plaintiff and their reports were filed as read. These reports relate to the impact of the COGLA events on the plaintiff's mental health. Dr. Frank Schnell, who is the plaintiff's family physician, stated that he had the plaintiff under his care from May 1986 to September 1989, and that during that time, plaintiff consulted him on seventeen occasions. With respect to the plaintiff's condition, he states:
"The following point from list contributes symptoms taken directly from writings communicated to me by Ms. Boothman during my appointments and encounters with her:
(a) Symptoms and conditions that are the result of a 'torture' via methods and behaviour applied to deliberately fragment or breakdown her personality or identity structure and destroy her self-worth resulting in dismissal from her said employment.
(b) Intense emotional pain, crying and frequent episodes that are experienced as the result of her understanding that she has been scapegoated, lied to, slandered, unable to reach others for help, undervalued, and not believed. She feels that this has been intensified by her inability to find other employment.
(c) Patient experiences intense worry, periodic anxiety attacks, periodic despair, acute reactive depression, occasional suicidal feelings, feels of persecution, general physical phenomena which she describes as being accompanied by intense chest pains, difficulty breathing, crying, and grieving.
(d) Ms. Boothman feels that her symptoms are intensified by social isolation in crises, by feelings of aloneness with the problems, and by the affirmations of her counsellor that nobody cares.
(e) Ms. Boothman relates to me that the symptoms reappear or recur with acute intensity in association with events or experiences similar to the original traumas when the patient feels she is not believed, or when she feels she is not heard when communicating pertinent information particularly to people in investigating or helping roles."
[82]
At paragraph 5, he observes:
"... that Ms. Boothman's predominant symptoms centre around the following:
(a) A preoccupation and obsession with thoughts pertaining to the work place events that culminated in her dismissal from the Department of Energy, Mines and Resources. She certainly very much would like to pursue this matter, and seek recognition that she was 'wronged', and try to seek some compensation to allow her to get on with her life.
(b) Emotional ability often including tearfulness, despair and anger in response to what she perceives as an unfair situation.
(c) Depressive symptomatology, including elements of hopelessness."
[83]
At paragraph 7, he states:
"It was my impression during the time that she was under my care, that Ms. Boothman suffered from depression with obsessive features. Of course, I am unable to say if this diagnosis has undergone any change over the last three years since September 1989. In September 1989, it was also my opinion that these symptoms could have been caused by traumatic events alleged to have occurred during Ms. Boothman's employment with the Department of Energy, Mines and Resources Canada."
[84]
Finally, at paragraph 9, Dr. Schnell concludes:
"At the time of my last appointment involving Ms. Boothman, I was unable to give a definitive prognosis as to whether or not her symptomatology would improve or disappear over time. At the time I certainly felt that Ms. Boothman strongly perceives, and has been hurt deeply, by the events that she related to me as occurring at the place of employment with the Federal Department of Energy, Mines and Resources. However, at the time I was uncertain as to whether or not there is any form of treatment that could help her with the exception of time."
[85]
Dr. Schnell is not a psychiatrist although he did take general courses in psychiatric medicine. He stated that he had suggested to the plaintiff that she consult with a psychiatrist but that the plaintiff refused.
[86]
The second expert was Hilde Houlding, a professional social worker and counsellor who is presently Director of Counselling at the Calgary Family Service Bureau. Ms. Houlding has a Bachelor's and a Master's degree in Social Work and has been employed with the Bureau since 1962. Her counselling activities focus primarily on adult couples and individuals, and she has a particular interest in the treatment of trauma induced by prolonged exposure to repeated episodes of violent physical, verbal or sexual assault within the context of the family.
[87]
From July 1986 to March 21, 1989, the plaintiff attended fifty-two counselling sessions. In paragraph 10 of her report, Ms. Houlding states:
"The onset of Ms. Boothman's phobic apprehension of harassment, and loss of emotional control and employment in the work environment was precipitated by the traumatic events which took place during her employment with the Department of Energy, Mines and Resources Canada."
[88]
In the subsequent paragraphs, Ms. Houlding provides a detailed account of the events which took place at COGLA as related to her by the plaintiff and opines as to the psychological impact of these events on the plaintiff. She concludes her review of the events by stating:
"As a result of the events at the Department of Energy, Mines and Resources Canada, Ms. Boothman has been under prolonged distress and has subsequently suffered acute emotional and psychological pain, social isolation, stigmatization, abaissement of her identity, and suicidal despair."
[89]
As to her prognosis for future recovery, she states:
"The prognosis for future recovery is doubtful. The acute post traumatic stress symptoms have persisted with minimal modification for over five years. The frequency and intensity of recurring crisis preclude consideration of employment. Further the time involved in bringing this matter before the court requires the victim to maintain a vigilant state and conduct repeated mental rehearsal of events to strengthen recall rather than facilitating the natural post-traumatic healing process and gradual suppression of painful recall."
[90]
Ms. Houlding testified that although she does refer some of her clients to psychiatrists, she believed it inappropriate in this case as the essential trust relationship would be missing due to plaintiff's grave apprehensions about psychiatrists.
[91]
Ms. Houlding recognized during cross-examination that the plaintiff had discussed with her the subsequent events of sexual harassment which allegedly occurred while she was in the employ of the City of Calgary. She stated that the plaintiff had become hypervigilant as a result of the COGLA experience, and that she had been surprised by the fact that the plaintiff had been able to keep her subsequent employment as long as she did.
[92]
Ms. Houlding recognized that the sole source of the factual outline upon which she based her conclusions was the plaintiff. However, on the faith of her extensive experience in dealing with similar cases, she concluded that plaintiff was credible with respect to the events which she related to her. When asked whether the plaintiff's fears and traumas could be self-generated, Ms. Houlding testified that it was difficult to identify the precise cause of her fears, but that she believed that the external factors stemming from the plaintiff's experience with COGLA precipitated the severe fears from which she now suffers.
[93]
The plaintiff testified that she can cope with work as such, but cannot deal with what she calls social contacts and pressures arising in the work place. She described herself as "acute reactive" and insists that this problem does not originate from within her but results from her traumatic work experience at COGLA. She believes that she will never be able to refrain from reacting to social pressures and that she continues to have overwhelming feelings of wanting to die.
[94]
There can be no doubt that the plaintiff suffered from psychological and emotional difficulties prior to her experience with COGLA and during her tenure, she exhibited behaviour consistent with this state. Her emotional insecurity was particularly apparent in her dealings with Mr. Klaubert. Plaintiff seized on Mr. Klaubert's efforts to assist her and made advances to him. As discussed earlier, her letter to him wherein she states, "Our joy will be full in your charity" is evidence of plaintiff's difficulties in relationships.
[95]
It is clear that the plaintiff suffered from feelings of fear and insecurity at the time she was hired at COGLA. What is also clear, however, and in this sense I fully accept the testimony of Ms. Houlding, is that the events at COGLA made her condition measurably worse by triggering the severe state of depression from which the plaintiff now suffers.
Analysis
[96]
The
Crown Liability Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-50, governs the liability of the Crown in tort and, in order to establish her case, the plaintiff must come within the parameters of s. 3(a) and s. 10 of that
Act
. They provide that:
"3. The Crown is liable in tort for the damages for which, if it were a private person of full age and capacity, it would be liable
(a) in respect of a tort committed by a servant of the Crown
. . . . .
"10. No proceedings lie against the Crown by virtue of paragraph 3(a) in respect of the Crown unless the act or omission would apart from the provisions of this Act have given rise to a cause of action in tort against that servant or the servant's personal representative."
[97]
In order to engage the vicarious liability of the Crown, the plaintiff must first establish that a tort has been committed by a servant of the Crown, and then demonstrate that this tort was committed in the course of the servant's employment.
[98]
Dealing with the first question, it is clear from the evidence that when Mr. Stalinski hired the plaintiff, he was well aware of her mental vulnerability. In my view, Mr. Stalinski did not hire plaintiff despite that vulnerability as he professed, but because of it. He was looking to hire an employee who would readily submit to his control, and plaintiff, because of her apparent fragile state, was a fitting candidate. He exploited that vulnerability from the onset, initially to assert his control and domination over the plaintiff and later, when that failed, with the view of causing her to break down and quit her job. The first thing he did on plaintiff's initial day of employment was to convey to her the fact that he was aware of her mental problem and that she had only gotten the position on paper. The only conceivable reason for those remarks was to make it clear to plaintiff, from the very beginning, that her future with COGLA was wholly within his control.
[99]
Mr. Stalinski's language and actions towards plaintiff grew progressively more violent as plaintiff showed her determination to resist his attempts to dominate her. He intentionally assaulted the plaintiff on numerous occasions by wilfully creating an apprehension of immediate harmful or offensive contact and, on one occasion, resorting to direct force against the plaintiff thereby causing bodily harm. In addition, Mr. Stalinski humiliated, insulted, manipulated and harassed the plaintiff at every turn. He exploited her and succeeded in destroying the plaintiff's self-esteem. He intended to cause her harm and succeeded in that attempt. The damage resulting from these actions is psychological in nature and includes depression and anxiety attacks, feelings of suicidal despair and social isolation.
[100]
The law with respect to the intentional infliction of nervous shock and that of assault causing emotional or psychological harm has been the focus of much commentary.
[101]
In an essay found in Prof. Linden's work entitled
Studies in Canadian Tort Law
(Butterworths, 1968), Jeremy S. Williams comments on the tort of intentional infliction of nervous shock and makes the argument that, as an exception to the general rule, a defendant should be held liable where he has actual notice of a person's vulnerability and intentionally seeks to cause that person harm which goes to the heart of that vulnerability. At page 142, the author states that:
"Persons with constitutional weaknesses making them more susceptible to nervous shock than those of average hardihood present a problem. It would be simple to allow them recovery on the same basis as ordinary members of the community, but this is thought to impose an unnecessarily heavy burden on defendants. An actor should be entitled to assume that persons likely affected by his actions have normal fortitude. Conduct which would not cause nervous shock to a normal person should not be regarded as tortious. Justice Schauer, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  appears to reflect the psychological fact that solicitude for the interests of the actor weighs less in the balance as his moral guilt increases and the social utility of his conduct diminishes'. However, where a defendant has actual notice that a potential plaintiff has a pre-existent vulnerability there will be liability, as an exception to the usual rule, because such actions carry a greater moral reprehendsibility."
[102]
The case law on this point originates with the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In this case, a verbal hoax misfired and caused nervous shock to the person of the plaintiff. Wright, J., said:
"The defendant has, as I assume for the moment, wilfully done an act calculated to cause physical harm to the plaintiff - that is to say, to infringe her legal right to personal safety, and has in fact thereby caused physical harm to her. That proposition without more appears to me to state a good cause of action, there being no justification alleged for the act. This wilful injuria is in law malicious, although no malicious purpose to cause the harm which was caused nor any motive of spite is imputed to the defendant."
[103]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.), Madame Justice McLachlin, while sitting as a Justice of the Supreme Court of British Columbia, accepted the rule laid down in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. H.C.J.), the court found that the rule in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  assisted in obtaining his unlawful eviction. As a result, the plaintiff suffered serious psychological trauma. In this case, Catzman, J., thoroughly canvassed the rule in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  page 138, he states:
"To start with, the
Wilkinson
principle is clearly distinguishable in function from the tort of assault. While this is no place for an exhaustive catalogue of the distinctions, I would offer the following:
(a) In assault, the apprehension felt by a plaintiff must be of imminent and unwelcome physical contact to
himself
. In
Wilkinson
cases, that
may
be so, but typically is not. Thus, Mrs. Wilkinson was afraid only for her husband's safety, as was Mrs. Purdy in her case: while Mademoiselle Janvier's fear was not of physical contact at all, any more than Miss Rahemtulla's was; and poor old Mrs. Bielitski was stricken with unnecessary grief for her supposedly dead son, rather than any fear for herself.
(b) Assault is commonly held, upon the somewhat shaky authority ... to be an essentially physical tort, necessarily involving some physical gesture and thus incapable of being committed by words alone. In contrast, the tort committed in
Wilkinson
cases is typically ... entirely verbal ...
(c) In one respect, the
Wilkinson
tort, generally complementary to assault, is narrower that the latter tort. For in assault, a plaintiff need only show 'apprehension', the slightest emotional disquiet or annoyance being apparently enough.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  sufficient in law to amount to that unscientific notion of 'nervous shock'."
[105]
Catzman, J., then went on to postulate the requirements for establishing the tort of intentional infliction of nervous shock. At page 140, he enumerates those requirements as follows:
"(i) An overt act, whether physical, verbal or both by the plaintiff.
"(ii) Intent by the defendant* to do that act or to speak those words.
"(iii) Circumstances which would lead a reasonable person in the position of the defendant to foresee a reasonable likelihood of fear or emotional upset on the part of the plaintiff ...
"(iv) Actual harm amounting to nervous shock - i.e., going beyond the kind of emotional upset needed to satisfy element (iii) ... and going beyond, in many instances, the limits of reasonable prevision."
(* In the reported case the sentence reads: "Intent by the
plaintiff
to do that act or speak those words". It is obvious that this should read "Intent by the
defendant
" and therefore I have taken the liberty of writing it as such in the above quote.)
[106]
In the case at hand, Mr. Stalinski, as had the defendant in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, acted in the knowledge of plaintiff's condition, but the distinguishing feature is that he deliberately exploited her condition with the view of bringing her to collapse mentally and quit her job. Not only was there general wilful injuria of the
Wilkinson
type, but there was also the malicious purpose to cause the plaintiff to breakdown mentally. There is accordingly no issue of remoteness or foreseeability in the present case, nor is there any question as to whether the actions of Mr. Stalinski would have caused nervous shock to a normal person. When a person knowingly exploits another's emotional and mental vulnerability thereby causing a severe and lasting mental breakdown, it is no answer to state that a normal person would not have been so adversely affected.
[107]
Once it has been proven that a tort has been committed by a servant of the Crown, it remains for the plaintiff to establish that the tort was committed in the course of the servant's employment. The jurisprudence with respect to the liability of a master for the actions of its servants is canvassed in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Dubé, J., states, at page 799:
"Learned counsel for the defendant claimed that a master is not responsible for damage by his servant when the latter is not acting within the scope of duty but on a 'frolic of his own'. She quoted a number of authorities on the subject. As I pointed out to her at the hearing, it used to be that a bailee was not responsible for the loss of property by the theft of his own servant, unless the bailee had given occasion for the theft by his own negligence, or by that of some other of his servants employed to take care of the property. However, the Court of Appeal has now held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 737, that the responsibility of the bailee must depend on whether the servant by whom the theft is committed is one to whom the charge or custody of the thing stolen has been entrusted by his master. In other words, if such a servant steals the thing entrusted to him, he is acting nevertheless in the course of his employment. He is doing fraudulently what he is employed to do honestly.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  were found liable for the theft of the stole by an employee whose duty it was to clean it.
"It is a question of fact whether the employment merely provided an opportunity for the theft, or was part of the task on which the servant was engaged.
"A master will not get off his liability merely because his servant was temporarily going on a frolic of his own. The question is whether the activity was reasonably incidental to the performance of his authorized duties, or involved so substantial a departure that the servant must be regarded as a stranger vis-à-vis his master."
[108]
This has been the law in Canada for some time.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Mr. Justice Ritchie, in a case involving the theft of a parcel of diamonds by officers of the Customs Postal Branch, stated:
"Customs officers are required by s. 44(3) of the
Post Office Act
... to 'deal with' dutiable mail in accordance with the laws relating to customs pending delivery to the addressee or return to Canada Post Office, and it was in the course of so dealing with the respondent's parcel of diamonds that an employee or employees of the Crown converted them to his or their own use.
The employee or employees concerned were thus doing fraudulently that which they were employed to do honestly and the theft was therefore, in my view, committed under circumstances as to render the employer liable for the loss
. The law governing these circumstances has been stated in
Story on Agency
, 7th Ed. para. 452, in terms which have been approved in this court on more than one occasion. It is there said:
'... he (the principal) is held liable to third persons in a civil suit for the frauds, deceits, concealments, misrepresentations, torts, negligences, and other malfeasances, or misfeasances, and omissions of duty, of his agent, in the course of his employment, although the principal did not authorize, or justify, or participate in, or, indeed, know of such misconduct, or even if he forbade the acts, or disapproved of them.'" (Underlining is mine)
[109]
I can see no difference in law between the case where a servant who, entrusted with the supervision of personnel, abuses that authority in the manner described in these reasons, and that of a servant entrusted with the care of goods who converts those goods for his or her own use. In both cases, the wrong is directly attributable and connected to the duty or responsibility conferred on the servant.
[110]
In the case at hand, Mr. Stalinski was placed by his employer in a special position of trust. As Mr. Sherwin, Director General, Resource Evaluation Branch, stated in the disciplinary letter written to Stalinski on October 26, 1984:
"You must realize that, due to the fact that the Calgary Office is removed from direct Headquarters supervision, you are in a special position of trust in terms of doing your job and conducting yourself in a manner that reflects well on COGLA, and on you as an employee."
[111]
Mr. Stalinski was without supervision. He had ultimate authority to hire, and exercised that authority in a wrongful manner. He was the sole authority in a two person office and, after having been placed in that position by his employer, he used that authority to inflict upon plaintiff mental pain and suffering, to harass her, intimidate her, interfere with her, and on occasion assault her. He was placed in this position notwithstanding the fact that Mr. Sherwin and other senior officials of COGLA knew him to be a difficult individual, abrasive in his behaviour, evasive vis-à-vis his responsibilities, and prone to losses of temper.
[112]
The evidence indicates the occurrence of a prior event where, again, a female employee working alone under Mr. Stalinski's orders left her job after suffering a mental breakdown. If senior officials in Ottawa failed to make the connection between the two occurrences, Mr. Stalinski did not as is evidenced by his memorandum of September 1984 to Don Sherwin wherein, in an attempt to get plaintiff terminated, he stated:
"My concern was that Ms. Boothman was exhibiting certain mannerisms also exhibited by a former employee who had some rather serious personality disorders that made it impossible for them to function in a normal work environment."
[113]
In my view, when an employer places an employee in a special position of trust, he or she bears the responsibility of ensuring that the employee is capable of trust. That is the rationale which stands behind the vicarious liability of an employer.
[114]
Mr. Stalinski used the position of trust in which he was placed by his employer to cause harm to the plaintiff. In so doing, he was acting in the course of his employment and the defendant's liability was thereby engaged.
Damages
[115]
I now turn to the issue of damages. As noted earlier, if Mr. Stalinski knowingly exploited the plaintiff's vulnerability, thereby making her condition extensively worse, I can see no basis whatsoever for allowing the wrongdoer to escape his liability on the ground that the plaintiff had a preexistent vulnerability. That being said, it remains that the award for damages must be measured so as to compensate plaintiff for the actual damages suffered and, in that regard, the plaintiff's preexistent vulnerability is relevant.
[116]
I have referred to the case law with respect to awards under the heading of nervous shock which highlights the distinction between an action framed in negligence and one framed in tort per se, i.e., an intentional tort. The basis for this distinction can be gleaned from a reading of the case law which I canvassed earlier. The cases of
Wilkinson, Rahemtulla
and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> involved intentional torts and, in each case, damages were awarded for psychological or emotional distress similar to that from which the plaintiff suffers. Other cases, notably
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , establish that, in an action framed in negligence, recognizable psychiatric illness must be proven, and stress, strain, upset and anxiety are not compensable. The difference of approach in cases of negligence and of tort was commented on by Professor Prosser in
Law of Torts
, 4th Ed. (1971). At page 30, he notes:
"There is a definite tendency to impose greater responsibility upon a defendant whose conduct has been intend to do harm, or morally wrong. More liberal rules are applied as to the consequences for which he will be held liable, the certainty of proof required, and the type of damage for which recovery is to be permitted, as well as the measure of compensation. The defendant's interests have been accorded substantially less weight in opposition to the plaintiff's claim to protection when moral iniquity is thrown into the balance. Apparently the courts have more or less unconsciously worked out an irregular and poorly defined sliding scale, by which the defendant's liability is least where his conduct is merely inadvertent, greater when he acts in disregard of consequences increasingly likely to follow, greater still when he intentionally invades the rights of another under a mistaken belief that he is committing no wrong, and greatest of all where his motive is a malevolent desire to do harm."
[117]
In the case at hand, the actions of Mr. Stalinski took plaintiff from a fragile emotional state, which was noted by Mr. Stalinski at the time she was hired, to a state of mental collapse and severe nervous depression, the impact of which she continues to exhibit some seven years after the fact. In terms of damages, it matters little, in the circumstances of this case, that plaintiff had a predisposition as it has been shown that it is the wilful exploitation of that predisposition which caused the damages for which she is now seeking compensation.
[118]
It has been authoritatively held in this country that there is jurisdiction to award punitive damages or exemplary damages where a defendant deliberately exposes the plaintiff to risk without justification ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), McGillvray, J.A., said:
"In the present case the award was of a lump sum of $5,000. In claims of this nature it is not the practice to allow a separate and distinct sum for punitive damages but such, when the circumstances justify it, may be taken into account in the overall assessment. As they are not to be assessed separately there is no compelling necessity that they should be specifically claimed."
[119]
Yet, the distinction between compensatory damages and punitive damages must be maintained. As Lord Reid stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.):
"The only practical way to proceed is first to look at the case from the point of view of compensating the plaintiff. He must not only be compensated for proved actual loss but also for any injury to his feelings and for having had to suffer insults, indignities and the like. And where the defendant behaved outrageously very full compensation may be proper for that. So the tribunal will fix in their minds what sum would be proper as compensatory damages. Then if it has been determined that the case is a proper one for punitive damages the tribunal must turn its attention to the defendant and ask itself whether the sum which it has already fixed as a compensatory damages is or is not adequate to serve the second purpose of punishment or deterrence. If they think that sum is adequate for the second purpose as well as for the first they must not add anything to it. It is sufficient both as compensatory and as punitive damages. But if they think that sum is insufficient as a punishment then they must add to it enough to bring it up to a sum sufficient as punishment. The one thing which they must not do is to fix sums as compensatory and as punitive damages and add them together. They must realise that the compensatory damages are always part of the total punishment."
[120]
It is always difficult for the court to ascertain damages with any precision. The court must look at the evidence and the state of the plaintiff and, as Lord Reid said in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by plaintiff is $50,000.
[121]
The sole factor militating against that award lies in the fact that, at the relevant time, plaintiff refused to accept the offers of medical assistance extended by the COGLA officials. Plaintiff argued that she was justified in refusing this assistance because she did not trust psychiatrists. This may be so, but, in assessing damages, the court must look objectively at the means which were made available to plaintiff to minimize or contain the damages from which she now suffers. In not responding to the offers of medical assistance, she failed in her duty to minimize her damages.
[122]
In view of all the evidence, I award the following:
1. For damages suffered as a result of the intentional infliction of nervous shock, the sum of $5,000 for pain and suffering and $20,000 for loss of future earnings.
2. For pain and suffering as a result of the assaults on her person, the sum of $5,000.
3. Given the reprehensible conduct of Mr. Stalinski, his outrageous and unacceptable behaviour towards the plaintiff, the fact that the sum of $30,000 is inadequate for the purpose of deterrence, I would add to that amount the sum of $10,000 as exemplary damages.
Additional Claim Raised By Amended
Statement Of Claim
[123]
By her amended statement of claim, plaintiff further alleges that senior management was negligent in failing to take the necessary steps and measures to prevent Mr. Stalinski from committing or continuing to commit the above-described wrongful acts.
[124]
In her amended statement of defence, the defendant alleges, inter alia, that the claim raised in negligence by the amended statement of claim is barred by
Limitations of Actions Act
, R.S.A. 1980, c. L-15.
[125]
At the end of the hearing on the original statement of claim, I pointed out to counsel for the plaintiff, during argument, that he was seeking recovery on grounds which were not reflected by the statement of claim. It is a result of this comment that plaintiff moved to amend her statement of claim under rule 420. Counsel for the defendant consented to the amendment on terms that he be allowed to file an amended defence and that he be allowed to adduce evidence on the new allegations.
[126]
I allowed the amendment because it appeared to me at that time that it could be necessary to the determination of the real question in controversy between the parties. I have since heard evidence on these amended allegations, and I have come to the conclusion that they raise a cause of action which was distinct from that originally raised, and statute barred at the time where the amended claim was filed, that is on November 6, 1992.
[127]
Section 51 of the
Limitation of Actions Act
of Alberta provides that an action in negligence "... may be commenced within two years after the cause of action arose, and not afterwards". While the negligence alleged by the amended statement of claim is related to the wrongful acts of Mr. Stalinski, it nevertheless raises a distinct and separate ground of action. As the facts on which this additional claim is framed took place back in 1984 and 1985, I must conclude that it cannot be sustained as it was made out of time.
[128]
Plaintiff recognized so much but argued that the defendant was estopped from raising the limitation period as a defence by reason of the consent which was given to the filing of the amended statement of claim. In my view, the defendant was not thereby estopped from raising any defence. In fact, the amendment was granted subject to the defendant's unlimited right to respond by way of an amended defence, and it was open to the defendant to raise the statute of limitation as a defence at the time of filing of the amended defence.
[129]
Plaintiff further argued that the material facts allowing her to raise a further claim in negligence were only communicated to her in September of 1992 when she was given full discovery of the relevant documents by the defendant. Plaintiff therefore concludes that the starting point for the computation of the limitation period is September of 1992, and not the time when the events giving rise to the claim of negligence took place.
[130]
A review of the massive amount of documentary evidence emanating from the plaintiff and generated at the time when the relevant events took place indicates that plaintiff, from the very beginning, held the belief that she had been wronged by the inappropriateness of the actions of senior management. Quite clearly her main contention was with the actions of Mr. Stalinski, but it is clear that she was most mindful of what she viewed as the failings of senior management at the time when the original action was launched in July of 1986. I therefore cannot accept that plaintiff only became aware of this additional cause of action in September of 1992.
[131]
Finally, plaintiff argues that an amendment to a statement of claim, once duly made, takes effect retroactively from the time when the original document which it amends took effect. It follows, plaintiff argues, that the cause of action in negligence must be held to have been raised in July of 1986, when the original claim was filed. I do not believe that, in the face of a limitation statute, an amendment which alleges a new cause of action can be considered to have been made at a time other than that at which it was actually made, unless the court, in allowing the amendment, actually rules on the issue of limitation. This is not the case here.
[132]
For the above reasons, I must come to the conclusion that the cause of action in negligence raised by the amended statement of claim was barred by statute at the time it was made and, hence, cannot succeed. I had reserved the issue of costs on plaintiff's motion to amend her statement of claim. In the circumstances, I have concluded that no order should be made in that regard.
Award
[133]
On the original claim, judgment is awarded to plaintiff in the amount of $40,000. Interest shall be calculated pursuant to the Alberta
Judgment Interest Act
, c. J-0.5. The
Act
states that prejudgment interest shall be awarded when the cause of action arose. Given the nature of the claim which essentially deals with the cumulative effect of various acts, I believe the effective date to be January 4, 1985.
[134]
With respect to the $10,000 award for pain and suffering for assault and intentional infliction of nervous shock, s. 4(1) prescribes that prejudgment interest for such nonpecuniary damages shall be calculated at 4% a year.
[135]
With respect to the $20,000 award for loss of future earnings, s. 4(2) prescribes that the rate of prejudgment interest for pecuniary damages shall be fixed every year by the Lieutenant Governor. It should therefore be computed by reference to the rate prescribed annually.
[136]
Under s. 2(2), no prejudgment interest is to be computed on the $10,000 award for exemplary damages.
[137]
Counsel may, if the need arises, submit their proposed interest calculations for adjudication.
[138]
Costs are awarded against the defendant.
Judgment for plaintiff.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]