 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Roland Kotai, Roland Kotai, Laura Kotai and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 693)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Kane, J.
June 20, 2013.
Counsel:
Maureen Silcoff, for the applicants;
Ndija Anderson, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Silcoff, Shacter, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Kane, J.
: The applicants seek judicial review pursuant to section 72 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [the
Act
] of the decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (the Board), dated June 12, 2012, which found that the applicants were not Convention refugees nor persons in need of protection pursuant to sections 96 and 97 of the
Act
. For the reasons that follow, the application is dismissed.
Background
[2]
The applicants, the Kotai family, include the principal applicant, his wife, and their two children. The applicants are Hungarian citizens of Roma ethnicity. They arrived in Canada in 2010 seeking refugee protection due to the racism and discrimination they had experienced in Hungary. The applicants described one incident of vandalism of their home in 2010 when a brick was thrown at the window. The police responded, but the applicants could not identify the perpetrators and no arrests were made. The applicants also described an incident in 2010 when four skinheads accosted them, called them "dirty gypsies", and spat at them. This incident was not reported to the police. The applicants also alleged that one of their children was placed in a segregated Roma kindergarten class and that the mother had experienced insensitive treatment by doctors during the birth of her son.
The decision under review
[3]
The Board found that the determinative issue was state protection. The Board noted that the applicants feared the Hungarian Guard and skinhead groups in Hungary and acknowledged the specific incidents the applicants alleged but concluded that the applicants had failed to rebut the presumption of adequate state protection with clear and convincing evidence. The Board noted that the applicants had contacted the police on one occasion and that the police had responded. With respect to their allegations of discrimination in education, and poor treatment during the birth of the younger child, the Board noted that the applicants had not sought any recourse, for example, to the Equal Treatment Authority, nor had they made any complaints to other authorities.
[4]
Although the majority of the Board's decision is a description of the programs and initiatives in Hungary which are intended to address discrimination and violence against Roma people, many of which are not relevant to the applicant's circumstances, the Board did focus on the applicants' particular experiences in determining whether they would face persecution upon their return.
[5]
The Board acknowledged that the documentary evidence of the government's efforts to protect the Roma is mixed, that right-wing extremism incites violence against the Roma, and that Roma face discrimination and persecution on many levels. However, the Board found that in the particular circumstances, the applicants had not demonstrated that state protection was so inadequate that they need not have approached the authorities at all or that they need not have sought assistance from other authorities, including the Minorities Ombudsman's Office or the Independent Police Complaints Board.
[6]
The Board also acknowledged that the country condition documents support the view that protection is not perfect and many areas require improvement. The Board added that there was no evidence of a complete breakdown of the state and there was evidence of the serious efforts underway to improve the situation of the Roma. The Board considered whether the state was able to protect the applicants to the degree reasonable in the circumstances, noting that the police had responded when called. There was no evidence that the past personal experience of the applicants would lead them to believe that state protection would not be adequate or reasonably available if they returned to Hungary.
[7]
The Board noted that the fact that the police did not arrest anyone following the vandalism on the applicants' home could be due to many factors, including lack of identification by the applicants.
The Issues
[8]
The applicants submit that the decision is unreasonable on five grounds: first, that the police should have investigated the vandalism despite the lack of identifiable suspects and their failure to do so and their failure to prevent such attacks, which are increasing in frequency, demonstrates a lack of state protection; second, that the onus on an applicant to rebut the presumption of state protection must be considered in the context of the spectrum of democracy; third, that the Board failed to consider the increase in racist violence and the heightened need for protection; fourth, that the other agencies referred to by the Board to address discrimination and persecution of Roma are not relevant or effective; and, fifth, that the Board misstated and misapplied the test for state protection.
[9]
The respondent submits that the Board considered all of the country condition evidence, acknowledged that it was mixed, and focussed its consideration on whether the applicants had rebutted the presumption of state protection within that context (i.e. within the democracy spectrum). The respondent submits that the Board's decision is reasonable.
Standard of Review
[10]
The applicable standard of review of the decision of the Board is reasonableness which calls for deference. The role of the Court on judicial review is not to substitute any decision it would have made but to "determine if the outcome 'falls within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law':
Dunsmuir
, at para 47. There may be more than one reasonable outcome. However, as long as the process and the outcome fit comfortably with the principles of justification, transparency and intelligibility, it is not open to a reviewing court to substitute its own view of a preferable outcome":
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] 1SCR 339 at para 59.
Is the Board's decision reasonable
?
[11]
While the applicants have raised five grounds to support their position that the decision is not reasonable, all the grounds are related to each other and to how the Board assessed the adequacy of state protection and the applicant's efforts to rebut the presumption of state protection.
[12]
With respect to the police response to the incident of vandalism, which did not result in any arrests, the applicant relies on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  where Justice Zinn noted at paragraph 14:
"Further, I note that accepting a report of criminal conduct does not establish adequate police protection when no steps are taken to investigate the complaint. If police had no obligation to investigate a complaint where the assailant was unknown, their job would be remarkably easier. "
[13]
I note that in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice Zinn identified several reasons to allow the application for judicial review other than due to the assessment of state protection. In that case, the applicants alleged that they had to overcome resistance to even file the report and that the police did not make any effort to investigate. In the present case, the applicants indicated that the police did respond and took statements from the female applicant and her parents. There is no suggestion that the police resisted taking their report or indicated that they would not follow up, only that no suspects were identified.
[14]
The applicants' submission that the police have an obligation to prevent racist attacks against Roma, in addition to responding to incidents after the fact, and that their failure to do so establishes a lack of state protection, imposes an unrealistically high standard on the police and could make the obligation on refugee claimants to avail themselves of state protection, to the extent that state protection is available, meaningless. The prevention of all crime is simply not possible. The evidence of recent violence, which the applicant submits shows that police failed to prevent and protect, was considered by the Board. The Board found that there was no evidence of a complete breakdown of the state nor did the recent violence demonstrate that there was no state protection to the extent that this would absolve the applicants of their onus to seek state protection. The Board noted the initiatives underway in an effort to deter and prevent racist attacks and also acknowledged that there was room for improvement.
[15]
I agree that not all democratic countries provide the same level of democracy and, as noted by the applicants, there is a "democracy spectrum". The onus on an applicant to rebut the presumption of state protection is commensurate with the level of democracy in the country.
[16]
As noted by Justice Rennie in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[9] In a democratic country there is a presumption that a state can protect its own citizens. As such, the onus is on the applicant to rebut this presumption and prove the state's inability to protect through "clear and convincing" evidence:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[10] This principle, however, does not stand in isolation. It is tempered by the fact that the presumption varies with the nature of the democracy in a country. Indeed, the burden of proof on the claimant is proportional to the level of democracy in the state in question, or the state's position on the "democracy spectrum":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[11] Democracy alone does not ensure effective state protection. The Board must consider the quality of the institutions providing that protection. As well, the Board must look at the adequacy of state protection at an operational level and consider persons similarly situated to the applicant and their treatment by the state:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[17]
In the present case, the Board's reasons as a whole indicate that it considered the "mixed" evidence about the initiatives underway in Hungary and their effectiveness, and that this mixed evidence provided the context within which the Board assessed the adequacy of state protection and the applicant's efforts to seek state protection.
[18]
The Board canvassed the programs, policies, mechanisms, and institutions in Hungary that address discrimination, several of which had no application to the circumstances of the applicants, but do demonstrate the range of initiatives underway. The Board acknowledged that despite these initiatives, the Roma still face discrimination, including from the police who may not always respond and are sometimes the perpetrators of discrimination. However, the government has taken measures to deal with corrupt, incompetent police officers.
[19]
The Board also canvassed the educational system and noted that if the children faced discrimination, the applicants could have sought recourse through the Equal Treatment Authority, a body which provides recourse to members of national and ethnic minorities with interactions with the authorities.
[20]
With respect to the applicant's submission that the Board failed to consider the documentary evidence of recent increases in violence against Roma, which demonstrates that state protection is inadequate and that the applicants would face this violence upon their return, I note that the Board specifically referred to the US Department of State Report, 2010, among other country condition documents, which did indicate that violent and racially motivated attacks were continuing. The Board referred to the public's concern about the racially-motivated violence and again noted that the government had established a process to hold police accountable where they abuse their power or fail to address racist violence.
[21]
As the applicants submit, the Board referred to many agencies that would not have been of benefit to them. I agree that many of the Board's references to measures implemented in Hungary to address racism, including the Minorities Ombudsman and the Equal Treatment Authority, would not have any role in the direct protection of Roma against violence. However, these agencies may have been a resource with respect to the applicants' concerns about the segregated kindergarten class or the mistreatment in the hospital.
[22]
Both the applicant and respondent agree that the police are primarily responsible for state protection against violent attacks.
[23]
As noted by Justice de Montigny in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2012] FCJ 1444 at para 15, it is the police that have the responsibility for the protection of citizens:
[15] The jurisprudence of this Court is very clear that the police force is presumed to be the main institution mandated to protect citizens, and that other governmental or private institutions are presumed not to have the means or the mandate to assume that responsibility. As Justice Tremblay-Lamer aptly stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at paras 24-25:
24 In the present case, the Board proposed a number of alternate institutions in response to the applicants' claim that they were dissatisfied with police efforts and concerned with police corruption, including National or State Human Rights Commissions, the Secretariat of Public Administration, the Program Against Impunity, the General Comptroller's Assistance Directorate or through a complaints procedure at the Office of the Attorney General (PGR).
25 I am of the view that these alternate institutions do not constitute avenues of protection
per se
; unless there is evidence to the contrary, the police force is the only institution mandated with the protection of a nation's citizens and in possession of enforcement powers commensurate with this mandate. For example, the documentary evidence explicitly states that the National Human Rights Commission has no legal power of enforcement ("Mexico: Situation of Witness to Crime and Corruption, Women Victims of Violence and Victims of Discrimination Based on Sexual Orientation").
See also:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  25 Imm LR (2d) 267 at para 11.
[24]
The police are the key players with respect to the applicants' experience and concerns about racially-motivated crime and crime in general. The Board assessed the adequacy of state protection for the applicants in the context of the circumstances the applicants had faced, i.e. that the applicants had experienced two incidents and had sought police assistance on one occasion and the police had responded.
[25]
With respect to the test for state protection, the applicants allege that the Board correctly set out the test only once at paragraph 11, and thereafter set out the wrong test and applied the wrong test.
[26]
At paragraph 11 of the decision, the Board noted:
"A claimant must show that they have taken all reasonable steps in the circumstances to seek protection, taking into account the context of the country of origin, the steps taken, and the claimant's interactions with the authorities. In determining whether protection is adequate, it is important to analyse not merely whether a legislative and procedural framework for protection exists, but also whether the state, through the police or other authorities, is able and willing to effectively implement that framework."
[27]
Later in the decision the Board commented that:
"It would be remiss for me to state that the government's efforts have eradicated corruption, however, based on the preponderous (sic) of documentary evidence before me, and the circumstances particular to this case, I find that Hungary is making
serious efforts
to address the issues of corruption and criminality." [my emphasis]
[28]
The Board also acknowledged the inconsistencies in the documentary evidence, however, the objective evidence of country conditions suggested that, while not perfect, Hungary is making "
serious efforts
to address these problems, and that the police and government officials are both willing and able to protect victims." [my emphasis]
[29]
The Board further stated that state protection must be adequate and that no government can guarantee the protection of all of its citizens at all times, concluding as follows: "Consequently, as long as the government is taking
serious steps
to provide or increase effective protection for individuals then the individual must seek state protection." [my emphasis]
[30]
The applicant submits that the Board focussed on serious efforts and serious steps, which is not the test, rather than focussing on the willingness and current ability of the government to provide adequate state protection.
[31]
The Supreme Court of Canada set out the rationale underlying the international refugee protection regime in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para 18. That regime is meant to be relied upon when the protection one expects from the state in which the person is a national is unavailable, and even then, only in certain situations. It is considered to be surrogate or substitute protection in the event of a failure of national protection. Persecuted individuals are required to first approach their home state for protection before the responsibility of other states becomes engaged.
[32]
There is a presumption that a state is capable of protecting its citizens. The presumption can be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence that state protection is inadequate or non-existent:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. Such evidence must be reliable and have probative value; claimants "must adduce relevant, reliable and convincing evidence which satisfies the trier of fact on a balance of probabilities that the state protection is inadequate": <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at para 30.
[33]
The jurisprudence has established that serious efforts of state protection are not sufficient when there is no willingness or ability to provide adequate state protection. The standard is adequate state protection, not perfection. However, willingness on its own is not enough.
[34]
As noted by Justice Kelen in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "Serious efforts by the state to provide protection are relevant to, but not determinative of, the question of whether protection is adequate. No standard of perfection is required."
[35]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Justice Crampton summed up the approach as follows:
[52] Based on the foregoing review of the cases cited by the parties, I agree with the Respondent that the law is now well-settled that the appropriate test for assessing state protection is whether a country is able and willing to provide adequate protection. In short, a claimant for protection under sections 96 or 97 of the IRPA must establish, with clear and convincing evidence, and on a balance of probabilities, the inability or unwillingness of the state to provide adequate protection. This burden of proof remains the same regardless of the country being assessed, although the evidentiary burden required to rebut the presumption of adequate state protection will increase with the level of democracy of the state in question. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paras. 25 and 26.)
[36]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] FCJ 358 at para 47, Justice Scott noted:
[47] However, as this Court has pointed out on a number of occasions, the mere willingness of a state to ensure the protection of its citizens is not sufficient in itself to establish its ability. Protection must have a certain degree of effectiveness: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 696;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . As such, an applicant can rebut the presumption of state protection by demonstrating either that a state is unwilling, or that a state is
unable
to provide adequate protection: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[37]
Although the Board referred to state protection many times and used different wording, when the terms "serious steps" and "serious efforts" are read in their context, it is apparent that the Board had the correct test for state protection in mind, and was aware that both ability and willingness to provide adequate state protection are necessary. The Board applied the correct test to the circumstances of the applicants and assessed the applicants' efforts to rebut the presumption of state protection in the context of the "democracy spectrum".
[38]
The applicants submit that the present circumstances are very similar to those in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], where this Court allowed the application for judicial review. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the applicants recounted several incidents of violence over the years. The applicants made one attempt to report an incident and the police would not take the report.
[39]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Justice Gagné found that the Board failed to engage in a case specific and meaningful analysis of the evidence that supported the applicant's position and did not assess the mixed evidence, similar to the mixed evidence in the present case, with a view to the applicant's situation. As a result, Justice Gagné noted that she was unable to assess whether the Board had ignored relevant evidence.
[40]
The present case can be distinguished from <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The applicants reported one incident to the police and the police attended and took a report. In addition, the Board consistently referred to the circumstances of these applicants in assessing whether they had taken reasonable steps to rebut the presumption of state protection in the context of the mixed evidence that was before the Board. The Board referred extensively to evidence in support of the applicant's position as well as evidence of the initiatives underway to address racism and discrimination. I cannot conclude that the Board ignored relevant evidence.
[41]
The country conditions do not suggest that the situation is so bleak that all Roma, regardless of their particular circumstances, should not be expected to make reasonable efforts to seek state protection before seeking refugee protection in another country.
Conclusion
[42]
The Board considered the extensive and conflicting documentary evidence and considered the circumstances of the applicants in that context. Although there is jurisprudence from this Court which has found that there is inadequate state protection for the Roma in Hungary, and as a result, the onus on the particular applicants to rebut the presumption of state protection is low or non-existent, each case must be determined on its facts. Moreover, the role of the Court is not to re-weigh the evidence or re-make the decision of the Board in the absence of an error on its part. In the present case, the Board's decision that there was adequate state protection for these applicants and that these applicants had not rebutted the presumption of adequate state protection with clear and convincing evidence was reasonable. The Board did not ignore or misconstrue the evidence before it. The Board considered a wide range of documents, referred to the key documents, and set out its findings in a transparent manner to support the decision it reached.
[43]
The application for judicial review is dismissed. No question was proposed for certification.
JUDGMENT
[44]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The application is dismissed
2. There is no question for certification.
.........................
Roland Kotai, Roland Kotai,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demandeurs sollicitent, en vertu de l'article 72 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27 [LIPR], le contrôle judiciaire de la décision du 12 juin 2012 par laquelle la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et de la protection des réfugiés [la Commission] a conclu qu'ils n'avaient pas qualité de réfugiés au sens de la Convention, ni celle de personnes à protéger suivant les articles 96 et 97 de la Loi. Pour les motifs exposés ci-après, la demande est rejetée.
Contexte
[2]
Les demandeurs, la famille Kotai, comprennent le demandeur principal, son épouse et leurs deux enfants. Les demandeurs sont des citoyens hongrois d'origine rom. Ils sont arrivés au Canada en 2010 et ont présenté une demande d'asile parce qu'ils faisaient l'objet de racisme et de discrimination en Hongrie. Les demandeurs ont décrit un incident de vandalisme survenu en 2010, lors duquel une brique avait été lancée sur une fenêtre de leur domicile. La police est intervenue, mais les demandeurs n'ont pas pu identifier les auteurs du méfait et aucune arrestation n'a été portée. Les demandeurs ont aussi fait état d'un autre incident survenu en 2010 au cours duquel quatre skinheads les ont abordés, les ont traités de [traduction] « sales bohémiens » et ont craché en leur direction. L'incident n'a pas été signalé à la police. Les demandeurs ont également affirmé que l'un de leurs enfants avait été placé dans une classe réservée aux Roms à l'école maternelle, et que la mère avait été traitée sans aucun égard par les médecins lors de l'accouchement de son fils.
La décision contrôlée
[3]
La Commission a conclu que la question déterminante était la protection offerte par l'État. La Commission a constaté que les demandeurs craignaient la Garde hongroise et les groupes de skinheads en Hongrie, et a reconnu que les incidents particuliers décrits par les demandeurs avaient eu lieu. La Commission a cependant conclu que les demandeurs n'avaient pas réussi, au moyen d'une preuve claire et convaincante, à réfuter la présomption selon laquelle la protection de l'État est adéquate. La Commission a constaté que les demandeurs avaient fait appel à la police à une occasion et que celle-ci était intervenue. En ce qui concerne les allégations de discrimination à l'école et de mauvais traitements lors de la naissance du plus jeune enfant, la Commission a constaté que les demandeurs n'avaient exercé aucun recours, par exemple auprès de l'Autorité pour l'égalité de traitement, ni déposé de plainte auprès d'autres autorités.
[4]
Bien que la décision de la Commission soit essentiellement constituée d'une description des programmes et des initiatives de lutte à la discrimination et à la violence contre le peuple rom existants en Hongrie, dont bon nombre ne s'appliquent pas à la situation des demandeurs, la Commission a néanmoins mis l'accent sur les expériences propres des demandeurs pour déterminer s'ils seraient exposés au risque de persécution à leur retour.
[5]
La Commission a reconnu que la preuve documentaire traitant des efforts déployés par le gouvernement pour assurer la protection des Roms varie, que l'extrémisme de droite incite à la violence contre les Roms et que les Roms subissent de la discrimination et de la persécution sur plusieurs plans. Cela dit, la Commission a constaté que, compte tenu de leur situation particulière, les demandeurs n'avaient pas démontré que la protection de l'État était à ce point inadéquate qu'il n'était pas la peine qu'ils s'adressent aux autorités ou demandent de l'aide auprès d'autres autorités, dont le Bureau du protecteur des minorités ou l'Autorité indépendante chargée d'examiner les plaintes déposées contre la police (l'IOPCB).
[6]
La Commission a également reconnu que les documents relatifs à la situation dans le pays en cause appuient la thèse selon laquelle la protection de l'État n'est pas parfaite et qu'il y aurait place à l'amélioration à plus d'un chapitre. La Commission a ajouté que rien ne démontrait que l'appareil étatique s'était complètement effondré, et que des éléments de preuve témoignaient des efforts importants entrepris pour améliorer la situation des Roms. La Commission a examiné si l'État avait été capable d'assurer un degré de protection raisonnable aux demandeurs dans les circonstances, soulignant que la police était intervenue lorsqu'elle avait été appelée. Rien ne permettait de penser que, à la lumière de leurs expériences personnelles passées, les demandeurs pourraient être amenés à croire que la protection de l'État serait inadéquate ou qu'ils ne pourraient raisonnablement en bénéficier s'ils retournaient en Hongrie.
[7]
La Commission a souligné que de nombreux facteurs pouvaient expliquer pourquoi la police n'avait arrêté personne après l'incident de vandalisme au domicile des demandeurs, entre autres le fait que les demandeurs n'avaient pas réussi à identifier le ou les auteurs de l'acte.
Les questions en litige
[8]
Les demandeurs affirment que la décision est déraisonnable pour cinq raisons: premièrement, la police aurait dû faire enquête sur l'incident de vandalisme même si aucun suspect n'avait été identifié; le fait qu'ils n'ont pas enquêté et n'ont pas pu prévenir de telles agressions, de plus en plus fréquentes, témoigne de l'absence de protection de l'État; deuxièmement, le fardeau de réfuter la présomption de protection de l'État qui incombe au demandeur doit être considéré à l'aune de l'éventail démocratique; troisièmement, la Commission n'a pas tenu compte de l'augmentation de la violence à caractère raciste et du besoin accru de protection; quatrièmement, les autres organismes de lutte contre la discrimination et contre la persécution auxquels la Commission a fait référence ne s'appliquent pas en l'espèce ou ne sont pas efficaces; cinquièmement, la Commission a mal énoncé et mal appliqué le critère relatif à la protection de l'État.
[9]
Le défendeur affirme que la Commission a examiné tous les éléments de preuve relatifs à la situation dans le pays en cause, qu'elle a reconnu qu'ils étaient variés et qu'elle a axé son analyse sur la question de savoir si les demandeurs avaient réfuté la présomption de la protection de l'État dans ce contexte (soit l'éventail démocratique). Le défendeur soutient que la décision de la Commission est raisonnable.
Norme de contrôle
[10]
La norme de contrôle applicable à la décision de la Commission est celle de la décision raisonnable, de sorte qu'il faut faire preuve de déférence. Lorsque la norme de la raisonnabilité s'applique, le rôle de la Cour n'est pas de substituer la décision qu'elle aurait prise à celle faisant l'objet du contrôle judiciaire, mais plutôt de « déterminer si celle-ci fait partie des "issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit" (
Dunsmuir
, par. 47). Il peut exister plus d'une issue raisonnable. Néanmoins, si le processus et l'issue en cause cadrent bien avec les principes de justification, de transparence et d'intelligibilité, la cour de révision ne peut y substituer l'issue qui serait à son avis préférable »:
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , au paragraphe 59.
La décision de la Commission est-elle raisonnable?
[11]
Les demandeurs ont exposé cinq motifs pour appuyer leur affirmation selon laquelle la décision n'est pas raisonnable; or, tous les motifs sont reliés entre eux et à la question de savoir comment la Commission a évalué le caractère adéquat de la protection de l'État et des efforts déployés par les demandeurs pour réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État.
[12]
En ce qui concerne l'intervention de la police lors de l'incident de vandalisme, qui n'a débouché sur aucune arrestation, le demandeur invoque la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  où le juge Zinn déclare ce qui suit au paragraphe 14:
En outre, je souligne que le fait qu'une plainte relative à une conduite criminelle a été acceptée ne signifie pas que la police offre une protection adéquate si rien n'est fait pour enquêter sur la plainte. Le travail de la police serait infiniment plus facile si elle n'était pas tenue de mener une enquête lorsque l'identité de l'agresseur est inconnue.
[13]
Je remarque que, dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , le juge Zinn a exposé plusieurs raisons justifiant l'accueil de la demande de contrôle judiciaire, outre l'évaluation de la protection de l'État. Dans cette affaire, les demandeurs ont affirmé qu'ils avaient eu à surmonter les réticences à prendre leurs plaintes et que la police n'avait rien fait pour enquêter. En l'espèce, les demandeurs ont déclaré que la police était intervenue et avait recueilli les déclarations de la demanderesse et de ses parents. Rien ne laisse penser que la police aurait été réticente à prendre leur déposition ou qu'elle n'aurait pas assuré de suivi, la seule chose est qu'aucun suspect n'a été identifié.
[14]
Les demandeurs affirment que la police est tenue de prévenir les attaques contre les Roms, en plus d'intervenir après coup dans les cas d'incidents, et que le fait qu'ils ont failli à cette obligation témoigne du défaut de protection de l'État; or, une telle affirmation revient à soumettre la police à une norme déraisonnablement élevée et, éventuellement, à vider de son sens l'obligation imposée aux demandeurs d'asile de se réclamer de la protection de l'État, dans la mesure où elle est existante. Il est tout simplement impossible de prévenir toutes les infractions criminelles. La Commission a tenu compte d'éléments de preuve relatifs à des actes de violence récents, qui montrent, selon le demandeur principal, que la police a été incapable de prévenir et d'assurer une protection. La Commission a constaté que rien n'indiquait que l'appareil étatique s'était complètement effondré ni que les actes de violence récents signifiaient que la protection de l'État était inexistante au point de dispenser les demandeurs du fardeau qui leur incombe de solliciter la protection de l'État. La Commission a pris note des initiatives en cours visant à empêcher et à prévenir les attaques racistes et a également reconnu qu'il y avait place à l'amélioration.
[15]
Je conviens que tous les pays démocratiques ne présentent pas le même degré de démocratie et que, comme les demandeurs l'ont fait remarquer, il existe un « éventail démocratique ». Le fardeau qui incombe à un demandeur de réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État est proportionnel au degré de démocratie dans le pays.
[16]
Le juge Rennie a affirmé ce qui suit dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 11:
[9] On peut présumer que, dans un pays démocratique, l'État peut protéger ses propres citoyens. C'est au demandeur qu'il incombe de réfuter cette présomption et de démontrer, par une preuve « claire et convaincante », l'incapacité de l'État d'assurer la protection (
Canada (Procureur général) c. Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, au paragraphe 50;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> et 44;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[10] Ce principe s'inscrit dans un contexte, toutefois, et il n'est pas absolu, la présomption variant selon la nature de la démocratie dans le pays en cause. Le fardeau de preuve incombant au demandeur d'asile est proportionnel au degré de démocratie dans ce pays et à la place qu'y occupe l'État dans l' « éventail démocratique » (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 22).
[11] La démocratie à elle seule n'est pas gage d'une protection efficace de l'État. La Commission doit prendre en compte la qualité des institutions qui assurent la protection. La Commission doit en outre examiner si la protection de l'État est suffisante au niveau opérationnel et prendre en considération les personnes qui se sont trouvées dans une situation semblable à celle du demandeur ainsi que leur traitement par l'État (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[17]
En l'espèce, il y a lieu de constater, d'après l'ensemble des motifs de la Commission, que celle-ci a examiné les éléments de preuve « variés » au sujet des initiatives entreprises en Hongrie et de leur efficacité, et qu'elle a évalué le caractère adéquat de la protection de l'État et les efforts déployés par les demandeurs pour l'obtenir à l'aune de ces éléments de preuve variés.
[18]
La Commission a analysé les programmes, politiques et institutions en Hongrie qui luttent contre la discrimination, dont plusieurs ne s'appliquaient pas du tout à la situation des demandeurs, mais qui illustraient la variété des initiatives en cours. La Commission a reconnu que malgré ces initiatives, les Roms font toujours l'objet de discrimination, notamment de la part de la police qui n'intervient pas toujours et qui pratique parfois la discrimination. Le gouvernement a toutefois pris des mesures à l'égard des agents de police corrompus et incompétents.
[19]
La Commission a également examiné le système d'éducation et constaté que si les enfants faisaient l'objet de discrimination, les demandeurs auraient pu chercher réparation auprès de l'Autorité pour l'égalité de traitement, une instance qui offre un recours aux membres des minorités nationales et ethniques et qui interagit avec les autorités.
[20]
En ce qui concerne l'observation du demandeur selon laquelle la Commission n'a pas tenu compte des éléments de preuve documentaire relatifs à la hausse récente d'actes de violence commis à l'encontre des Roms, qui montre que la protection de l'État est inadéquate et que les demandeurs seraient exposés à cette violence à leur retour, je note que la Commission a expressément fait référence à un rapport du Département d'État des États-Unis de 2010, entre autres documents sur la situation dans le pays, qui révèle que les agressions violentes et à caractère raciste continuaient d'être commises. La Commission a fait état des préoccupations au sein de la population suscitées par la violence à caractère raciste et a encore une fois constaté que le gouvernement avait mis en œuvre un processus visant à tenir responsables les policiers qui abusent de leur pouvoir ou qui n'interviennent pas pour contrer la violence à caractère raciste.
[21]
Les demandeurs soutiennent que la Commission a fait état d'un grand nombre d'organismes qui ne leur auraient été d'aucun secours. Je conviens que la Commission a cité de nombreuses mesures mises en œuvre par la Hongrie pour contrer le racisme, dont le Bureau du protecteur des minorités et l'Autorité pour l'égalité de traitement, qui ne participent pas directement à la protection des Roms contre la violence. Ces organismes auraient cependant pu offrir du soutien aux demandeurs préoccupés par la ségrégation en classe de maternelle ou par les mauvais traitements à l'hôpital.
[22]
Le demandeur et le défendeur s'entendent sur le fait que la police a la responsabilité première d'assurer la protection de l'État contre les agressions violentes.
[23]
Comme l'affirme le juge de  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2012] ACF 1444, au paragraphe 15, c'est la police qui a la responsabilité d'assurer la protection des citoyens:
[15] La jurisprudence de la Cour établit très clairement que la police est présumée être la principale institution chargée d'assurer la protection des citoyens et que les autres institutions publiques ou privées sont présumées n'avoir ni les moyens ni le rôle d'assumer une telle responsabilité. Comme la juge Tremblay-Lamer l'a si justement affirmé dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , aux paragraphes 24 et 25:
24 En l'espèce, la Commission a fait état de divers autres organismes auprès desquels les demandeurs, se disant insatisfaits des efforts de la police et croyant celle-ci corrompue, auraient pu s'adresser, comme la Commission nationale des droits de la personne, la Commission des droits de la personne d'un État, le Secrétariat de l'administration publique, le Programme de lutte contre l'impunité, la Direction d'aide du contrôleur général, ou encore le Bureau du procureur général de la République au moyen de sa procédure de plainte.
25 Or, j'estime que ces autres institutions ne constituent pas, en soi, des voies de recours. Sauf preuve du contraire, la police est la seule institution chargée d'assurer la protection des citoyens d'un pays et disposant, pour ce faire, des pouvoirs de contrainte appropriés. Ainsi, par exemple, il est expressément mentionné dans la preuve documentaire que la loi ne confère à la Commission nationale des droits de la personne aucun pouvoir de contrainte ( « Mexique: Situation des témoins des crimes et de la corruption, des femmes victimes de violences et des victimes de discrimination fondée sur l'orientation sexuelle » [Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié du Canada. Recherche sur les pays d'origine: Exposé]).
Voir également:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  25 Imm LR (2d) 267, au paragraphe 11.
[24]
La police a joué le principal rôle dans les expériences passées et les préoccupations des demandeurs au sujet des crimes à caractère raciste et des crimes en général. La Commission a évalué le caractère adéquat de la protection de l'État pour les demandeurs dans les situations qu'ils ont vécues, à savoir qu'ils ont subi deux incidents, qu'ils ont sollicité l'aide de la police à la suite de l'un deux et que la police est intervenue.
[25]
En ce qui concerne le critère de la protection de l'État, les demandeurs font valoir que la Commission n'a correctement énoncé le critère qu'une seule fois au paragraphe 11, et qu'elle a par la suite utilisé et appliqué le mauvais critère.
[26]
La Commission a déclaré ce qui suit au paragraphe 11 de la décision:
Le demandeur d'asile doit démontrer qu'il a pris toutes les mesures raisonnables dans les circonstances pour obtenir une protection, et ce, compte tenu de la situation générale qui a cours dans le pays d'origine, des mesures prises par le demandeur d'asile et de la relation de ce dernier avec les autorités. Pour établir si la protection de l'État est adéquate, il importe d'examiner non seulement la question de savoir s'il existe des mécanismes de protection législatifs ou procéduraux, mais aussi de déterminer si l'État, par l'intermédiaire de la police ou d'autres autorités, peut et veut mettre ces mécanismes en œuvre.
[27]
Plus loin dans la décision, la Commission a formulé l'observation suivante:
Il serait négligent de ma part de déclarer que les efforts du gouvernement ont permis d'éradiquer la corruption. Cependant, j'estime que, selon la prépondérance de la preuve documentaire dont je dispose et compte tenu des circonstances propres à la présente affaire, la Hongrie déploie de
sérieux efforts
pour régler le problème de la corruption et de la criminalité. [Non souligné dans l'original.]
[28]
La Commission a également reconnu que les éléments de preuve documentaire présentaient des incohérences; toutefois, la preuve objective sur la situation dans le pays donnait à entendre que la situation n'est certes pas parfaite, mais que la Hongrie fait « des
efforts sérieux
pour régler ces problèmes; et que les représentants de la police et du gouvernement veulent protéger les victimes et sont capables de le faire » [non souligné dans l'original].
[29]
La Commission a ensuite déclaré que la protection de l'État doit être adéquate et qu'aucun gouvernement ne peut garantir la protection de chacun de ses citoyens en tout temps, concluant ainsi: « Ainsi, tant que le gouvernement prend des
mesures sérieuses
pour fournir une protection ou accroître la protection offerte, il incombe aux citoyens de chercher à obtenir cette protection. » [Non souligné dans l'original.]
[30]
Le demandeur affirme que la Commission a mis l'accent sur les efforts sérieux et les mesures sérieuses, qui ne constituent pas le critère, plutôt que sur la volonté et la capacité du gouvernement d'assurer la protection de l'État adéquate.
[31]
La Cour suprême du Canada a exposé la raison d'être du régime international de protection des réfugiés dans
Canada (Procureur général) c Ward
, [1993] 2 RCS 689, au paragraphe 18. Ce régime a été établi dans le but d'être appliqué lorsque la protection qu'on s'attend à ce que l'État fournisse à ses ressortissants ne peut être fournie, et même alors, dans certains cas seulement. Il est considéré comme une protection auxiliaire ou supplétive fournie en l'absence de protection nationale. Les personnes persécutées sont tenues de s'adresser à leur État d'origine pour obtenir sa protection avant que la responsabilité d'autres États ne soit engagée.
[32]
Il existe une présomption selon laquelle un État est en mesure de protéger ses citoyens. Cette présomption peut être réfutée par une preuve claire et convaincante établissant le caractère inadéquat ou l'inexistence de la protection de l'État:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. Une telle preuve doit être digne de foi et avoir une valeur probante; les demandeurs doivent « produire une preuve pertinente, digne de foi et convaincante qui démontre au juge des faits, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, que la protection accordée par l'État en question est insuffisante »: arrêt <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 30.
[33]
La jurisprudence a établi que de sérieux efforts pour assurer la protection de l'État ne sont pas suffisants en l'absence d'une volonté ou de la capacité d'assurer une protection adéquate. La norme vise une protection adéquate et non parfaite. Or, la volonté seule ne suffit pas.
[34]
Comme l'a fait remarquer le juge  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> : « Les efforts sérieux faits par l'État en vue d'assurer une protection est un facteur pertinent, mais non déterminant, pour la question de savoir si la protection est adéquate. Cette protection n'a pas à satisfaire à une norme de perfection. »
[35]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> le juge Crampton a résumé l'approche comme suit:
[52] En fonction de l'analyse qui précède des causes citées par les parties, je suis d'accord avec le défendeur que le droit établit maintenant clairement que le critère approprié pour évaluer la protection de l'État est de savoir si le pays est capable et désireux de fournir une protection adéquate. En bref, une personne qui demande à être protégée en vertu des articles 96 ou 97 de la LIPR doit établir, par une preuve claire et convaincante, selon la prépondérance des probabilités, l'incapacité ou l'absence de volonté de l'État de fournir une protection adéquate. Ce fardeau de la preuve demeure le même, peu importe le pays qui fait l'objet de l'évaluation, même si le fardeau de présentation requis pour réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État adéquate augmentera avec le niveau de démocratie de l'État en question. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, aux par. 25 et 26.)
[36]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2011] ACF 358, au paragraphe 47, le juge Scott a déclaré:
[47] Cependant, comme notre Cour l'a fait observer à maintes occasions, la simple volonté d'un État d'assurer la protection de ses citoyens ne suffit pas en soi à établir sa capacité de les protéger. La protection doit présenter un certain niveau d'efficacité: voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  ACWS (3d) 696;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  paragraphe 32. Un demandeur peut donc réfuter la présomption d'existence d'une protection de l'État en démontrant soit qu'un État n'est pas disposé à lui offrir une protection suffisante, soit qu'il en est
incapable
: voir
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  paragraphe 52.
[37]
Bien que la Commission ait fait référence à la protection de l'État à maintes reprises et utilisé différentes formulations, lorsque les expressions « mesures sérieuses » et « efforts sérieux » sont lues dans leur contexte, il est clair que la Commission avait à l'esprit le critère approprié pour la protection de l'État, et savait que la capacité et la volonté de fournir une protection de l'État adéquate sont nécessaires. La Commission a appliqué le bon critère à la situation des demandeurs et évalué les efforts des demandeurs pour réfuter la présomption de l'État à la lumière de « l'éventail démocratique ».
[38]
Les demandeurs font valoir que les circonstances de la présente affaire sont très semblables à celles de
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], dans laquelle la Cour a accueilli la demande de contrôle judiciaire. Dans <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , les demandeurs ont relaté plusieurs incidents de violence survenus au fil des ans. Les demandeurs avaient tenté de signaler un incident à la police, mais celle-ci n'a pas voulu prendre leurs plaintes.
[39] <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Molnar
, la juge Gagné a conclu que la Commission n'avait pas procédé à une analyse propre au cas et approfondie des éléments de preuve militant en faveur de la position du demandeur, et n'avait pas examiné la preuve variée, semblable à celle en l'espèce, en fonction de la situation du demandeur. Par conséquent, la juge Gagné a constaté qu'elle n'était pas en mesure d'établir si le tribunal avait omis de tenir compte d'éléments de preuve pertinents.
[40]
La présente affaire se distingue de <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Les demandeurs ont signalé un incident à la police, et la police est venue sur les lieux et a pris les plaintes. En outre, la Commission a toujours tenu compte de la situation de ces demandeurs pour examiner s'ils avaient pris des mesures raisonnables pour réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État compte tenu des éléments de preuve variés dont elle disposait. La Commission s'est largement appuyée sur les éléments de preuve étayant la position du demandeur ainsi que sur les éléments de preuve portant sur les initiatives entreprises pour contrer le racisme et la discrimination. Je ne peux conclure que la Commission a ignoré des éléments de preuve pertinents.
[41]
La situation dépeinte dans les documents sur les conditions dans le pays en cause n'est pas à ce point sombre qu'elle donnerait à croire qu'aucun Rom, indépendamment de sa situation propre, ne devrait pas déployer des efforts raisonnables pour obtenir la protection de l'État avant de demander l'asile dans un autre pays.
Conclusion
[42]
La Commission a examiné la preuve documentaire abondante et contradictoire et tenu compte de la situation des demandeurs dans ce contexte. Bien que la jurisprudence de la Cour ait établi que la protection de l'État est inadéquate pour les Roms en Hongrie et que, par conséquent, le fardeau qui incombe aux demandeurs en question de réfuter la présomption de la protection de l'État est peu exigeant ou inexistant, chaque affaire doit être tranchée en fonction des faits qui lui sont propres. De plus, le rôle de la Cour ne consiste pas à évaluer de nouveau la preuve ou à rendre la même décision que la Commission en l'absence d'une erreur de sa part. En l'espèce, la décision de la Commission, à savoir qu'une protection de l'État adéquate était offerte à ces demandeurs et que ces demandeurs n'avaient pas réfuté la présomption de protection adéquate de l'État au moyen d'une preuve claire et convaincante, était raisonnable. La Commission n'a pas ignoré ou mal interprété la preuve dont elle disposait. Elle a examiné une multitude de documents, s'est appuyée sur des documents clés et a exposé ses conclusions de façon transparente pour appuyer la décision à laquelle elle était venue.
[43]
La demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée. Aucune question n'a été proposée pour certification.
JUGEMENT
[44]
LA COUR STATUE que
:
1. La demande est rejetée.
2. Il n'y a aucune question à certifier.
[End of document]