[1]
Pinard, J.
[Translation]: By a notice pursuant to s. 18(1)(b) of the
Citizenship Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29, the applicant, pursuant to a request to this effect by the respondent, has submitted the case at bar to this court for it to "decide whether the respondent obtained Canadian citizenship by fraud, false representation or knowingly concealing material circumstances". The relevant provisions of the said
Citizenship Act
must be reproduced here:
"10(1) Subject to s. 18 but notwithstanding any other section of this Act, where the Governor-in-Council, on a report from the Minister, is satisfied that any person has obtained, retained, renounced or resumed citizenship under this Act by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances,
(a) the person ceases to be a citizen, or
(b) the renunciation of citizenship by the person shall be deemed to have had no effect,
as of such date as may be fixed by order of the Governor-in-Council with respect thereto.
"10(2) A person shall be deemed to have obtained citizenship by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances if the person was lawfully admitted to Canada for permanent residence by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances and, because of that admission, the person subsequently obtained citizenship.
"18(1) The Minister shall not make a report under s. 10 unless the Minister has given notice of his intention to do so to the person in respect of whom the report is to be made and
(a) that person does not, within thirty days after the day on which the notice is sent, request that the Minister refer the case to the court; or
(b) that person does so request and the court decides that the person has obtained, retained, renounced or resumed citizenship by false representation or fraud or by knowingly concealing material circumstances.
"18(2) The notice referred to in subs. (1) shall state that the person in respect of whom the report is to be made may, within thirty days after the day on which the notice is sent to him, request that the Minister refer the case to the court, and such notice is sufficient if it is sent by registered mail to the person at his latest known address.
"18(3) A decision of the court made under subs. (1) is final and, notwithstanding any other Act of Parliament, no appeal lies therefrom."
[2]
The formalities provided for in these sections of the
Act
were duly carried out, as well as those mentioned in the relevant rule 920 of this court.
[3]
The respondent was born in Haiti on September 13, 1939. She can neither read nor write and speaks Creole. However, she made an effort to begin learning French in 1976 and now speaks it well enough to make herself understood.
[4]
The respondent was admitted to Canada as a nonimmigrant on March 29, 1973 for a period valid until April 15, 1973. On April 30, 1973 she went to the immigration office in Montreal seeking landed status. A report was made to a special inquiry officer pursuant to ss. 5(t), 22 and 28(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. I-2, as amended. The inquiry was held on May 25, 1973 and on the same day a deportation order was made against the respondent pursuant to ss. 5(t), 27(3) and 28(1) of the said
Immigration Act
. The respondent at once appealed and was released on $100 bail. The execution of the deportation order was accordingly stayed pending the decision of the Immigration Appeal Board.
[5]
On November 29, 1974, the respondent, without waiting for this decision, left Canada voluntarily and returned to Haiti. She had earlier, on November 2, 1974, gone to the immigration office in Montreal to give notice of her intention to return to live in her country of origin. In this court, the respondent swore that by thus voluntarily leaving Canada she always believed that she had terminated and put an end to all proceedings regarding her deportation from Canada.
[6]
However, on May 27, 1975, the Immigration Appeal Board denied the respondent's appeal from the decision made by the special inquiry officer on May 25, 1973, and at the same time directed that the deportation order made against her on May 25, 1973 "be put into effect as soon as possible". Despite the indication on a sheet attached to this decision of the Immigration Appeal Board that a copy of the decision was to be sent to the respondent, there is no evidence that any effort was made to inform her of the said decision in Haiti. For her part, the respondent stated that she learned of this decision in June 1990 for the first time, when she received in Canada the notice regarding revocation of her Canadian citizenship pursuant to s. 18(1)(b) of the
Citizenship Act
.
[7]
The respondent made a second application for permanent residence in Canada, this time in Port-au-Prince, Haiti on or about March 17, 1976. She was admitted to Canada as a landed immigrant on April 9, 1976.
[8]
On August 28, 1981 the respondent applied for Canadian citizenship, which was granted on October 6, 1981. She took the citizenship oath on December 8, 1981 and then obtained citizenship certificate No. 3138537.
[9]
The notice regarding revocation of her citizenship, issued pursuant to s. 18(1)(b) of the
Citizenship Act
, was served on the respondent on June 14, 1990, that is over fourteen years after her admission to Canada as a landed immigrant.
[10]
What the applicant charges the respondent with having done is "obtaining Canadian citizenship by fraud or false representation or by knowingly concealing a material circumstance, namely that of having a deportation order made against her by the Canadian authorities". In particular, as appears from the summary of facts and evidence filed by the applicant pursuant to rule 920, he charges the respondent with two omissions.
"(1) With respect to her application for permanent residence on March 17, 1976:
- on March 17, 1976 the respondent stated in her application for permanent residence that a deportation order had never been made against her in Canada, whereas such action was taken against her by the Canadian Immigration authorities on May 25, 1973.
"(2) With respect to her application for Canadian citizenship on August 28, 1981:
- in the form she completed for this purpose, she was asked the following question: 'Are you now or have you ever been, alone or with others, the subject of an order of deportation from Canada?' The respondent answered this question on oath in the negative, whereas as we have seen a deportation order was made against her on May 25, 1973."
[11]
Before going any further, it should be noted that none of the relevant forms or questionnaires was completed by the respondent herself as she is illiterate, and that when her signature was required she was only able to make an X.
[12]
Turning now to the first omission alleged against the respondent, the permanent residence application form in question shows that the respondent answered "no" to the following question, contained in paragraph 11(2)(d) of the form:
"Have you or any persons covered by this application been denied admission to Canada or any other country or
been deported from Canada
or any other country?" (My Emphasis)
[13]
As I see it, the answer the respondent is supposed to have made to this question is not really false. As she left Canada voluntarily before the order preceding her deportation was confirmed, the respondent was never actually deported from Canada as the said order was never carried out. It is true that subsequently, on April 9, 1976, when she was admitted to Canada as a landed immigrant, a form prescribed by the Minister of Manpower and Immigration indicates that the respondent answered "no" to this further question:
"Have you or any member of your family ever suffered from any mental illness or tuberculosis, been convicted of a criminal offence or been denied admission to Canada or
been the subject of a deportation order
?" (My Emphasis)
[14]
However, there are so many separate points combined in this one question, printed on a form which gives just enough space to answer "yes" or "no", that it is unreasonable to blame an illiterate person for answering by a simple "no" here. After all, the applicant's allegation applies only to the part of the question regarding a deportation order, an order which was never carried out. Further, in the circumstances I find it plausible that the respondent could have believed, as she said she did, that the deportation order of May 25, 1973 had been cancelled by her voluntary departure from Canada, and believed this until in June 1990 the applicant informed her of his intention to make a report to the Governor-in-Council to revoke her Canadian citizenship.
[15]
As to the second allegation, though the question to which the respondent answered "no" concerned only the "deportation order" portion, I consider that she could have been justified in answering as she did since, as I have just concluded, she still believed until June 1990 that the deportation order against her and the related appeal proceedings had been terminated when she left Canada voluntarily. The respondent had all the more reason to believe that the said order had been terminated since no action had been taken against her in this regard since her return to Canada became known some five years and four months earlier.
[16]
Accordingly, in this case the presumption mentioned in s. 10(2) of the
Citizenship Act
never came into being and in the circumstances the applicant did not even succeed in shifting the simple burden of establishing on a balance of probabilities that, in the context of ss. 10 and 18 of the said
Act
, the respondent had obtained Canadian citizenship by fraud or false representation, or by knowingly concealing material circumstances. On the contrary, the weight of the evidence leads me to conclude that the respondent did not obtain Canadian citizenship by one of these three means. Judgment is rendered accordingly.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk