[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an application by the defendant, Novopharm Ltd. for an order pursuant to rule 1909 staying the operation of the order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary dated April 6, 1992.
[2]
The grounds for the said application, as stated in the application, are the following:
"The Order is on appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal.
"The appeal can be heard in a matter of three or four months.
"Staying the operation of the Order will obviate the need to go to substantial effort and expense which may prove unnecessary if the appeal is allowed.
"Compliance with the Order now will unfairly limit discovery and seriously prejudice the defendant's case on defence."
[3]
The order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary of April 6, 1992, orders the defendant to provide certain further and better particulars within 21 days from the date of his order.
[4]
Plaintiffs' action is one for infringement of certain claims of Canadian Patent no. 980688 issued on December 30, 1975 for an invention entitled "Tablet Formulation". The patent expires in approximately three months.
[5]
Plaintiffs' statement of claim was filed into the Court Registry on December 2, 1991. The defendant filed a statement of defence and counterclaim and particulars of objection on February 3, 1992.
[6]
By letter dated February 6, 1992, to the defendant's solicitor, plaintiffs' solicitors requested further and better particulars. Responses were provided by the solicitors for defendant on or about March 4, 1992.
[7]
The plaintiffs considered the particulars supplied by the defendant to be unsatisfactory and, as a result, brought a motion for particulars by notice of motion dated March 16, 1992. On April 6, 1992, the plaintiffs successfully moved before the Associate Senior Prothonotary for an order for particulars of certain allegations made in the statement of defence and particulars of objection.
[8]
By notice of motion dated April 15, 1992, the defendant appealed from the said order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary on the grounds that the Associate Senior Prothonotary erred in law in ordering the particulars and that the plaintiffs' motion was not supported by affidavit evidence.
[9]
The motion for an appeal was heard by the Associate Chief Justice who, on September 9, 1992 issued reasons for order dismissing the defendant's appeal. [See 56 F.T.R. 282.]
[10]
The defendant has appealed the order of the Associate Chief Justice to the Federal Court of Canada, Appeal Division, on or about September 16, 1992.
[11]
By notice of motion dated September 29, 1992, supported by an affidavit of Malcolm S. Johnston, the defendant now applies for a stay of the order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary pending the appeal pursuant to rule 1909 of the
Federal Court Rules
and on the grounds above stated.
The Law
[12]
The present application is made pursuant to rule 1909 of the
Federal Court Rules
, which states:
"1909. A party against whom a judgment has been given or an order made may apply to the court for a stay of execution of the judgment or order or other relief against such judgment or order, and the court may by order grant such relief, and on such terms, as it thinks just."
[13]
As regards the jurisprudence concerning the issue of a stay, I believe I could do no better than to quote the principles of law and the cases submitted to me by counsel for the plaintiffs and defendant, as I am satisfied there is no significant disagreement between them as to what the law is.
[14]
The Federal Court may, in its discretion, stay proceedings in any cause or matter where, for any reason, it is in the interest of justice that the proceedings be stayed.
[15]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Mr. Justice Cattanach, in a case involving patents, stay of proceedings where a motion to strike a statement of claim was dismissed and there was an appeal from the refusal to grant the motion to strike, states, at pages 230 and 231:
"There are elements of similarity in the exercise of a discretion to grant a stay and to grant an interlocutory injunction.
"Thus it would appear that because of the delay involved the plaintiff would not suffer
irreparable harm
(a condition precedent to the granting of an injunction) in the sense that damages recoverable at law would not be an adequate remedy.
"On balance, therefore, it appears appropriate that the stay should be granted because the detriment to the defendant on the refusal thereof exceeds the detriment to the plaintiff in relation to that refusal." (Emphasis added)
[16]
Therefore, what must be shown, in order for a stay to be granted, is that the applicant must show it has an arguable case, will suffer irreparable harm and that the balance of convenience is in its favour.
[17]
I am satisfied that a stay of an interlocutory order, as in the present case, should only be granted in the clearest of cases and the onus is on the applicant to show that he or she has an arguable case, will suffer irreparable harm and that the balance of convenience favours the granting of a stay.
[18]
Mr. Justice McNair, in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  should only be granted in the clearest cases and the court's discretion should only be exercised sparingly: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
"The onus is on the defendant to show that oppression or vexation would result if the stay was not granted and a balance of convenience tending in favour of a stay is not sufficient. The continuance of the action must result in irreparable injury to the applicant, while the granting of the stay must not result in an injustice, to the other parties: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (affirmed (1973) F.C. 640):
'If proceedings were stayed every time an appeal is launched against one of the many interlocutory decisions which are rendered in a case such as the present one, some of which appeals could with leave proceed to the Supreme Court, it would be possible for defendants to obtain delays running into many years before the proceedings could be brought to trial on the merits and the ends of justice would thus be frustrated. This would be an abuse of the legal process.'
"The onus also is on the party requesting the stay to establish that the continuance of the action will result in irreparable injury. Cattanach, J., in determining whether matters arising from a judgment under appeal should be stayed stated this proposition in the case of
Baxter Travenol  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 219:
'I accept as an initial premise that the well-established practice is not to grant a stay except in special circumstances and that the onus is on the applicant to show that special circumstances exist.
'As I appreciated the fundamental basis of the contention by counsel for the defendant it was that the expense of the reference and the inconvenience thereof might well prove an abortive exercise should the Appeal Division reverse the decision of the trial judge.
'In my view that circumstance of itself does not warrant the grant of the stay sought and to do so would be contrary to the weight of authority. It is against the ordinary course of the courts to stay inquiries pending the outcome of an appeal unless it can be shown that irreparable injury will otherwise be caused.'
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a case with very similar facts to the case at bar, Cattanach, J., reiterated the well-established principles with regard to the granting of a stay of execution. He added that the onus is on the applicant to show special circumstances requiring the stay. In the absence of other factors, the fact that an appeal would be rendered abortive is not sufficient to constitute special circumstances. The appeal does not become nugatory by the continuance of the action, for if the appeal succeeds, the admissions obtained on discovery might not become capable of being introduced at trial."
Discussion
[19]
I am satisfied from the evidence that the applicant (defendant) will not suffer any irreparable harm if a stay is not granted nor that the balance of convenience lies in its favour.
[20]
The defendant filed the affidavit of Malcolm S. Johnston, a solicitor of record on behalf of defendant. As to the issue of irreparable harm, Mr. Johnston states, in paragraphs 9 and 10:
"9. To provide the particulars requested by the plaintiffs would take substantial effort and expense for the defendant which particulars, after the appeal, may not be needed.
"10. It is recognized that the scope on discovery is defined by the pleadings. To provide the particulars now, however, would unfairly limit the defendant's discovery of the plaintiffs and would thereby seriously prejudice the defendant's case on defence."
[21]
Although it may take a substantial effort and expense, I have no evidence as to the issue of expense, to provide the particulars I cannot conclude that this can, nor should it be considered, as irreparable harm. It
may
cause serious inconvenience for the defendant to supply the particulars but that is all. Inconvenience or serious inconvenience is not irreparable harm.
[22]
I agree with the submission of counsel for plaintiffs, when he states in his memorandum of argument "If the defendant's appeal should be successful, the particulars provided can simply be disregarded and the action can proceed as if the particulars had never been provided."
[23]
The fact that the defendant's appeal from the order of the Associated Chief Justice is to be heard in three to four months, and there is no guarantee of this, is immaterial to the issue. Both the Associate Senior Prothonotary and the Associate Chief Justice have decided that certain particulars should be given and it appears to me that the plaintiffs would be the party inconvenienced if it cannot receive the particulars, in that, plaintiffs would not be in a position to clearly understand defendant's case and would not be in a position to properly conduct an examination on discovery. The fact that defendant agrees to stay all proceedings while the appeal is pending, is, I believe, immaterial.
[24]
With respect to counsel for defendant, I cannot conclude that the present case is one where I should grant a stay.
[25]
The application is denied with costs in favour of the plaintiffs. The defendant shall have 21 days from today's date to forward to the plaintiffs the particulars ordered by the Associate Senior Prothonotary in his order of April 6, 1992.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David C.R. Olmstead/sms
[End of document]