[1]
Reed, J.
: The request for a stay of the removal order which is scheduled to be executed on March 1, 1994, is dismissed.
[2]
Whether or not there is a serious issue underlying the applicant's challenge to the September 28, 1993 decision of the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board is not known. A challenge to that decision is the foundation of the applicant's claims in this court.
[3]
The applicant is being deported because of convictions for drug related offences. He spent a period of time incarcerated in a penitentiary and during that time an immigration inquiry was held. This led to a removal order being issued against him. It is that decision which the Appeal Division confirmed. The applicant has been in this country since 1974 and has family here.
[4]
Unfortunately, the counsel which the applicant originally hired, not his present counsel, lacked knowledge of the relevant statutory provisions governing the applicant's case. In addition, she apparently repeatedly assured the applicant that all was well when it was not and, then, made serious errors even within the procedure which she elected to follow.
[5]
In the first place, the applicant's former solicitor failed to write to the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board within ten days, as required by the
Immigration Act
, asking that written reasons for the September 28, 1993 decision be provided. Instead a "boiler plate" application for leave to commence judicial review of that decision was filed in this court on October 14, 1993. There is nothing in that application to indicate the grounds which underlay the Board's decision or the grounds on which leave was being sought. It is one of those incredibly unhelpful and frustrating applications which signals to a reader that it is likely that counsel has absolutely no idea what the grounds of his or her client's application might be but they have nevertheless initiated action to seek leave to commence a judicial review proceeding. There was a time, when counsel, as officers of the court, exercised more discretion and sought to ascertain whether or not there were really any grounds for such before commencing a court application. Counsel who are respected in the field still do this. It is clear that there are far too many however who do not. It is a sad reflection on the lack of professional responsibility which exists.
[6]
In the leave application which was filed on October 14, 1993, the "boiler plate" provisions which the applicant's former counsel used stated that the applicant had received written reasons for the decision with respect to which leave was being sought. This triggered the operation of rule 10 of the
Federal Court Immigration Rules
. In such circumstances, the perfecting of the application is required within 30 days of the date of the commencement of the application. This time limit expired on November 15, 1993. The file was sent to the court, by administrative staff sometime after that date. On December 15, 1993, the leave application was dismissed, by Madame Justice McGillis, "due to the failure of the applicant to file an application record". On the same day, the court administration received a letter, hand delivered, from the applicant's former solicitor stating that she had made a mistake and that the applicant had
not
received written reasons. The letter stated:
"In this respect, we do not intend to file our record until 30 days from the date we receive the written reasons from the tribunal or in the alternative that we are notified by the respondent that no written reasons will be given."
[7]
It is clear that counsel for the applicant still did not seem to realize that she was not dealing with a convention refugee case but a decision of the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board respecting deportation as a result of criminal convictions and with respect to which written reasons should have been requested long before the month of December.
[8]
On January 10, 1994, the applicant's former counsel filed a motion for reconsideration of the order of the court which had been issued on December 15, 1993. The ground on which reconsideration was sought was the error in the application of October 14, 1993 stating that written reasons had been received by the applicant when they had not. This application was dismissed by Madame Justice McGillis on January 25, 1994:
"Upon reviewing the documentation submitted by both parties on the application for reconsideration, I have determined that no explanation has been offered by the applicant to account for or explain the delay in bringing the motion. Counsel for the applicant was notified on December 16, 1993 of the Order dismissing the application for leave but failed to bring the motion for reconsideration in a timely manner. It is therefore ordered that the application for reconsideration is dismissed."
[9]
The applicant first learned that his application for leave had been dismissed when he was called in for a removals interview by immigration officials. It was the immigration officials who told him. He then sought an opinion from his present counsel who, in the applicant's words, after the applicant had retrieved a copy of his file from the court:
"... reviewed the documentation and advised me that my counsel had failed to make the statutory request for Reasons for Decisions from the Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board. He also advised me that my counsel had failed to file the material with the court and, as a result, this application for judicial review had dismissed. My counsel pointed out that, although I had not received written Reasons of the decision, my former counsel, Ms. Codina, had erroneously stated in the Notice of Motion seeking judicial review that Reasons for decision had been received." [see footnote 1]
[10]
On February 19, 1994, the applicant informed his former counsel that he was instructing another counsel and that his former counsel was no longer to represent him. Despite that instruction the former counsel filed, on February 21, 1994, another motion for reconsideration. This sought reconsideration of the decision by Madame Justice McGillis which had been given on January 25, 1994. The affidavit signed by the applicant's former counsel in support of that motion states, in part:
"In order to ascertain the reasons of the decision of the Immigration Appeal Board, our office has ordered a tape of the proceedings so that we can confirm the details of the decision. We are still awaiting the tape of the proceedings.
"It is submitted that without a transcription of the proceedings, the applicant is not in a position to file appropriate submissions or to complete the application record in order to perfect the appeal.
"Although our office was notified on December 16, 1993 of the order dismissing the application for leave, I was not appraised of the decision until January 7th, 1994, since I was out of the country between December 16, 1993 and January 7th, 1994."
[11]
I am not sure why counsel expects a tape of the proceedings to contain the reasons. The appeal of the original deportation decision was heard by the Appeal Division in July 1993. A decision on the appeal was reserved. The decision to dismiss the appeal was rendered by the Board on September 28, 1993 and this was communicated in writing to the applicant on October 2, 1993. Written reasons for that decision do not exist because none were ever requested by the applicant or his counsel.
[12]
The applicant's present solicitor has now requested reasons. Whether they can be prepared so long after the decision is not known. Counsel for the respondent asserts that it is highly unlikely, indeed, she says impossible. Whether such is possible will depend upon factors such as whether the individuals who heard the appeal are still members of the Board and whether they kept comprehensive enough notes of their reasons so that these might now be prepared in a formal written text.
[13]
The applicant's present counsel also withdrew the motion for reconsideration filed on February 21, 1994 and replaced it with an application for reconsideration which describes the above litany of incompetence as well as other relevant factors. Concurrently he filed a motion for the stay of the removal order which is scheduled to be executed March 1, 1994.
[14]
The motion for a reconsideration cannot be considered at this time. In the first place, counsel for the respondent has not had enough time to prepare in order to respond to it. Secondly, I am reluctant to entertain a reconsideration of another judge's decision. I think such motions, except in the rarest of circumstances, should be brought before the judge whose decision it is sought to reconsider. Thirdly, whether there is any merit at all to the proposed challenge to the September 28, 1993 decision is still not known. This would be relevant to any discussion of reconsideration.
[15]
There have been a number of decisions of this court which have dealt with the incompetence of counsel:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 81 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , for example, it was held that the incompetence of the applicant's representative resulted in a breach of the rules of natural justice, since these dictate that an individual is entitled to a competent and careful representative.
[16]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], I granted a stay of a deportation order when I was convinced from the facts proven by affidavit, that there was a serious issue underlying the foundation of the applicant's claims. There was alleged bias on the part of the Tribunal and persuasive documentation was presented in support of that allegation. In the present case, while incompetence on the part of the former solicitor has been demonstrated, there is no evidence to show that a serious issue exists with respect to the decision which forms the basis of the applicant's proceedings in this court, the decision of September 28, 1993. If any does exist, the failure to have evidence thereof adduced is, of course, also the result of the former solicitor's incompetence. I have to conclude, then, that the applicant has not proven that a serious issue exists with respect to any invalidity of the removal order.
[17]
Insofar as irreparable harm is concerned, the applicant asserts that this will arise as a result of the separation from his family, particularly from his daughter, which will occur with his deportation. He described the effects which resulted from separation during the time he was incarcerated. Counsel for the applicant argues that irreparable harm will also arise because if any grounds are found for seeking a reopening before the Board this will not be possible if the applicant has already been deported.
[18]
With respect to the first ground, I have not been persuaded that the evidence is sufficiently strong to support a finding of irreparable harm. With respect to the second, it is based on hypothetical and speculative events which do not establish irreparable harm.
[19]
The disposition of this motion would be fairly straightforward were it not for the shockingly sloppy way in which the applicant's case was dealt with. I have asked myself whether in the circumstances of this case it should be sufficient for the applicant to prove incompetent representation by counsel alone in order to justify a finding that a serious issue to be decided exists. I have asked myself whether the court has any discretionary authority, on that basis alone, to grant a stay. No member of the legal profession likes to see an individual disadvantaged because they have chosen incompetent or negligent counsel. It reflects badly on the whole profession. Mistakes are bound to be made but there is a distinction between inadvertent mistake or simple misjudgment and studied indifference, incompetence and carelessness.
[20]
I have answered both the questions, I have put to myself, in the negative. The general rule, in the courts, is that a client is considered to have authorized and be bound by the representations made on his or her behalf by counsel. The system cannot operate if this is not so. In my view, to grant a stay in circumstances where the only prejudice the applicant can demonstrate is that he may or may not have grounds for judicial review, but does not know because his former counsel did not properly prepare his case, would create an unworkable precedent. It is the professional accreditation bodies, such as the Law Society, not the courts, which have the mandate to regulate the professional performance of their members. I have no doubt that this is a very difficult task. One does not want to unfairly prejudice a person's professional standing because of what may be an isolated instance of misjudgment. At the same time, the reputation of the profession, in the eyes of the public, is tarnished with every such blemish. When the profession as a whole is tarnished, those members who are conscientious, dedicated and able also suffer.
[21]
For the reasons given the application to stay the removal order was dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/dlr
Footnote
1. Affidavit of February 22, 1994.
[End of document]