 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 237)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Zinn, J.
March 7, 2013.
Counsel:
Hamza Kisaka, for the applicant;
Nimanthika Kaneira, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Hamza N.H. Kisaka, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Zinn, J.
: The applicant challenges the decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board that found that he was neither a Convention refugee nor a person in need of protection under section 96 and subsection 97(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27, respectively. The determinative issues challenged by the applicant are the Board's findings of state protection and the availability of an internal flight alternative (IFA).
[2]
In my view, the Board's section 97(1) findings were reasonable and this application must be dismissed.
[3]
The applicant is a citizen of Kenya. In his early teens, his parents sent him off to attend secondary school with relatives in order to avoid recruitment by the "Mungiki," a"politico-religious" criminal group and movement in Kenya whose views are generally antithetical to "western" values. Their influence, especially in rural and impoverished areas, is significant; one main tactic is to recruit boys and young men into the organization. Like many gangs, it extorts vulnerable people in exchange for its "protection."
[4]
Around or after graduating from college in the early 2000's, the applicant claimed that he and some members of his family and extended family started "a group known as "Tethya Uthetheke" whose main goal was to educate the youth on better means of living apart from living on the hand outs that they collect from people for protection, fight against female genital mutilation, right for girl child education and women empowerment." In short, this group was aimed at counteracting the influence of the Mungiki.
[5]
The applicant claimed that because they had started that group, the Mungiki killed his brother, Henry, in 2002. No corroborating evidence was provided that Henry was deceased, or killed by the Mungiki, or killed by the Mungiki because he started or participated in Tethya Uthetheke. Furthermore, there was no evidence that the applicant or anyone else attempted to have the police investigate Henry's alleged murder, or to obtain a police report. The applicant testified that "we did not get police reports or anything about it, so we believe there was something behind it." The applicant also testified that Tethya Uthetheke "started in 2003 that is when actually started," i.e. after his brother's death. Perhaps surprisingly, the Board did not challenge the applicant's credibility or the accuracy of his evidence regarding his brother's death.
[6]
Between 2001 and 2009, the applicant moved to and resided in Botswana where he met his current wife. With the exception of the alleged murder of the his brother and the description of one incident involving the applicant's cousin and that cousin's wife in 2004, for which no link to the Mungiki or Tethya Uthetheke was even alleged, the applicant's PIF is entirely silent as to that period of time and, more specifically, what Tethya Uthetheke was doing. The applicant's evidence at the hearing shed little light on how Tethya Uthetheke operated during this period, who was involved, or whether there were further incidents with the Mungiki. Again, the Board did not challenge this evidence, or lack thereof.
[7]
In 2009, according to his PIF, when the applicant "got a chance to come and school here in Canada," despite the alleged deadly friction between his family's opposition group and the Mungiki, he ...
"had to send [his] wife back to Kenya [i.e. where the Mungiki operated] where she established a small business of chicken rearing. Unfortunately the business lasted only 8 months since Mungiki had demanded her to pay protection fee, which she could not afford. At that time Mungiki had become more of a government arm that operates without fear. She was threatened with circumcision and had to flee to her home district in Makueni where she lives with her aunt [name]. She could not go to her parent's house because it would be too easy to be traced."
[8]
It is not at all clear based on the record why the applicant "had" to send his wife back to Kenya in early 2009, into the path of the Mungiki. Moreover, in light of the Mungiki's alleged threats to mutilate his wife after he departed, and their apparent pursuit of and speculated attempts at "tracing" her location, it is not clear why the applicant remained in Canada, studying accounting and working part-time on a student visa in Canada, without interruption. Whatever the reason, according to the PIF, this is what allegedly happened next:
While my wife was still in hiding in Makueni with our children, we still continued with our campaign through the Tethya Utetheke with my other sister Elizabeth. Unfortunately Elizabeth was killed by Mungiki in October 7, 2010 in Nairobi. She was attacked while she slept in her house in Huruma estate.
[9]
As proof of Elizabeth's murder at the hands of the Mungiki, the applicant provided the Board with a "Permit for Burial" issued by the Republic of Kenya, which shows nothing more than that Elizabeth passed away in October 2010. No cause of death is identified and there was no independent evidence that she had died at the hand of the Mungiki. Even the applicant's evidence in this respect was hearsay.
[10]
Despite that his sister had been brutally murdered by the Mungiki for her involvement in Tethya Uthetheke, the group he co-founded, and that his wife and children remained in Kenya and had previously been specifically threatened and forced into hiding by the Mungiki, the applicant remained in Canada studying accounting and working part time through the fall and winter of 2010, and into the spring of 2011, without status.
[11]
Then, in April 2011, the applicant applied for another student visa in Canada. It issued on June 6, 2011, and was valid until September 30, 2011. Within a week of this visa being issued, the applicant was on a plane to Kenya "to see [his] wife and children due to the fear she was having after [his] sister [Elizabeth] was killed" some eight months earlier.
[12]
He says that two incidents occurred to him while in Kenya. First, he was assaulted in his house at night by some youth whom he believed were Mungiki. They stole his passport and ran away when neighbours were awakened. He says that he went to the neighbouring police station and reported the incident. The policeman asked him if he had money because if he could pay then the policeman would see if he could get the passport back. The applicant says that he understood that the policeman would obtain it from the Mungiki if he paid. He did and he recovered his passport.
[13]
Second, when visiting his father, he was attacked by "Cousin John" and seven men who asked why his wife had failed to pay the protection fees. It was at this point that he learned that his Cousin John was part of the Mungiki. When he informed them that his wife would not pay any money, they beat him. He says that "they slashed me with a machete on my right hand finger as I covered my head; I was also hit with a blunt object until I was unconscious." He says that he was taken to Matuu district hospital after obtaining a P3 form from the police at Matuu Police station since he could not attend at the hospital without a police report. He says that he was admitted for two days. When he recovered, he returned to Canada.
[14]
His oral evidence differed in substantial detail from this Personal Information Form (PIF) account; however, the Board made no mention of these differences. Moreover, the Board makes no reference to the fact that these police reports do not mention the Mungiki or Cousin John; rather, they mention "unknown" persons.
[15]
The applicant claims that the Mungiki want to kill him and his family for supporting Tethya Uthetheke and not supporting them financially, that he is unable to obtain state protection, and that there is no IFA in Kenya. The board found that there was both state protection and an IFA in Kenya.
State Protection
[16]
The applicant submits in his memorandum that he:
... took all reasonable steps to seek state protection in Kenya before he fled. The applicant reported the incidents to the Police. It is further submitted that the respective institutions did not act appropriately within the urgency of the acts complained of and if the applicant had waited much longer, it would have put his live [sic] in danger. Applicant's brother and sister were murdered and murders have not been resolved by the police.
[17]
In my view, based on the record, the applicant did not take all reasonable steps to seek state protection in Kenya. First, there is no evidence that he or anyone made any effort to get the police involved in Henry's alleged murder in 2002. Similarly, there was no evidence about the police's involvement after Elizabeth's alleged murder in 2010, although he claims that her son reported her death.
[18]
The applicant himself made little effort to seek state protection after the two 2011 incidents involving him. The first attempt- to report his stolen passport - was only a local attempt. The applicant's allegation of complicity or corruption for one police officer at the Matuu police station is no more than a single local failing in the state protection apparatus. It is trite that that is not sufficient evidence of failed state protection: See, e.g.,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Regarding the second, far more serious incident, it is not at all clear based on the applicant's evidence what steps he actually took to seek the protection of the state. While he produced a request for a police report allegedly made on July 3, 2011, the day after the alleged beating, it concerns only some electronics stolen on July 2, 2011; there is no indication whatsoever that any police report was made about the far more serious beating.
[19]
The P3 form noted at various points that"unknown" persons allegedly attacked the applicant, even though the applicant testified that he knew at that point that it was Cousin John that had tracked him down and who was behind the attack. This contradicts the applicant's claim that he identified Cousin John to the police. In any event, even if the applicant's oral testimony is to be preferred, his second attempt was no more than another local attempt, and no less at the same police station he allegedly already knew was complicit with the Mungiki. Thus, objectively, the applicant did not demonstrate that he exhausted the state protection available to him in Kenya.
[20]
The Board's finding that the applicant had not rebutted the presumption of state protection, on these facts, is reasonable.
Internal Flight Alternative
[21]
The applicant's argument regarding IFA is terse: the Board failed to appreciate that Cousin John, "leader of Mungiki," awaits the applicant in Kenya and will track him down "through familiar connection[s]." Thus, it does "not really matter which part of the country the claimant may relocate."
[22]
The simple answer is that the Board was faced with evidence that contradicts that submission. Despite Cousin John's alleged ability to find the applicant throughout Kenya, the applicant's wife and family have lived safely in Kenya since before the most recent incidents. Although the Board did not expressly decide so, it goes without saying that it was entitled to conclude that Cousin John was not in fact the kind of threat alleged by the applicant.
[23]
Further, the Board, citing independent reports, does a credible job of setting out the geographic areas in which the Mungiki operate and it finds, reasonably, that the organization is not pervasive throughout Kenya. The applicant has the burden of establishing that there is no IFA. Quite simply, he failed to do so.
[24]
This application must be dismissed. No question was proposed for certification.
JUDGMENT
[25]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
this application is dismissed and no question is certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demandeur conteste la décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié du Canada portant qu'il n'avait pas la qualité de réfugié au sens de la Convention ni celle de personne à protéger aux termes de l'article 96 et du paragraphe 97(1) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, c 27, respectivement. Les questions déterminantes contestées par le demandeur sont les conclusions de la Commission au sujet de la protection de l'État et de l'existence d'une possibilité de refuge intérieur (PRI).
[2]
Je suis d'avis que les constatations faites par la Commission à la lumière du paragraphe 97(1) étaient raisonnables et que la présente demande doit être rejetée.
[3]
Le demandeur est un citoyen du Kenya. Lorsqu'il était jeune adolescent, ses parents l'ont envoyé étudier dans une école secondaire en compagnie d'autres membres de sa famille pour qu'il ne soit pas recruté par les « Mungiki », un groupe criminel et un mouvement « politico-religieux » kényan dont les principes s'opposent généralement aux valeurs occidentales. Ce groupe exerce une influence importante, particulièrement dans les régions rurales et pauvres; l'une des principales tactiques de l'organisation est de recruter des garçons et de jeunes hommes. Comme bon nombre de gangs, il extorque de l'argent aux personnes vulnérables en leur offrant en échange de les « protéger ».
[4]
Le demandeur a affirmé qu'au début des années 2000, vers la fin de ses études au collège, ou peu après avoir obtenu son diplôme, il a fondé avec certains membres de sa famille et de sa famille élargie [traduction] « un groupe appelé "Tethya Uthetheke" qui visait principalement à éduquer les jeunes en leur montrant qu'il existe de meilleures façons de gagner sa vie que de s'approprier les biens des personnes qu'ils protègent, à lutter contre les mutilations génitales féminines, et à prôner le droit à l'éducation des filles et l'autonomisation des femmes ». Bref, le groupe cherchait à contrer l'influence des Mungiki.
[5]
Le demandeur a déclaré que parce qu'ils avaient fondé ce groupe, les Mungiki ont tué son frère Henry en 2002. Aucun élément de preuve corroborant n'a été produit pour établir le décès de Henry, ou son meurtre par les Mungiki au motif qu'il avait fondé Tethya Uthetheke ou pris part au groupe. De plus, rien n'indiquait que le demandeur ou quelqu'un d'autre avait demandé à la police d'enquêter sur le prétendu meurtre de Henry, ou tenté d'obtenir un rapport de police. Selon le témoignage du demandeur, [traduction] « nous n'avons pas obtenu de rapports de police, ni rien qui ait concerné l'affaire, ce qui à notre avis cachait quelque chose ». Le demandeur a également affirmé que le groupe Tethya Uthetheke [traduction] « avait vu le jour en 2003, c'est le moment où il avait réellement commencé », soit après la mort de son frère. Étonnamment peut-être, la Commisssion n'a pas mis en doute la crédibilité du demandeur ni l'exactitude de son témoignage au sujet de la mort de son frère.
[6]
En 2001, le demandeur a déménagé au Botswana, où il a rencontré son épouse actuelle, et il y résidé jusqu'en 2009. Hormis le prétendu meurtre de son frère et la description d'un incident impliquant le cousin du demandeur et l'épouse de ce cousin en 2004, au sujet duquel aucun lien avec les Mungiki ou Tethya Uthetheke n'a même été allégué, le Formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP) du demandeur ne fait aucunement mention de cette période ni, plus précisément, des activités de Tethya Uthetheke. Le témoignage du demandeur à l'audience a apporté peu de précisions sur le fonctionnement de Tethya Uthetheke durant cette période ni sur les personnes qui en faisaient partie, et il n'a pas non plus permis de savoir si d'autres incidents s'étaient produits avec les Mungiki. La Commission n'a pas non plus contesté ce témoignage, ou cette absence de témoignage.
[7]
En 2009, selon son FRP, le demandeur [traduction] « a eu la chance de se rendre au Canada pour y étudier », malgré les désaccords mortels allégués entre le groupe d'opposition de sa famille et les Mungiki, et il
[traduction]
« a dû renvoyer [son] épouse au Kenya [c.-à-d. où les Mungiki étaient actifs], où elle a mis sur pied une petite affaire d'élevage de poulet. Malheureusement, l'affaire n'a duré que huit mois, car les Mungiki ont exigé qu'elle leur verse un montant en échange de leur protection, ce qu'elle ne pouvait se permettre. À l'époque, les Mungiki agissaient de plus en plus comme un organe du gouvernement dénué de scrupules. Elle a été menacée d'excision et a dû fuir dans son quartier d'origine à Makueni où elle habite avec sa tante [nom]. Elle n'a pas pu se rendre à la maison de ses parents, car elle aurait été trop facilement retrouvée ».
[8]
Le dossier n'établit pas clairement pourquoi le demandeur a « dû » renvoyer sa femme au Kenya au début de 2009, sur le territoire des Mungiki. De plus, compte tenu du fait que les Mungiki auraient menacé de mutiler sa femme après qu'il soit parti, qu'ils auraient poursuivi son épouse et tenté de la « retrouver », il est difficile de comprendre pourquoi le demandeur est resté au Canada, où il étudiait la comptabilité et travaillait à temps partiel grâce à un visa d'étudiant, sans interruption. Quelle que soit la raison, voici ce qui se serait produit ensuite d'après le FRP:
[traduction]
Tandis que mon épouse se cachait toujours à Makueni avec nos enfants, nous avons poursuivi notre campagne avec Tethya Uthetheke, ma sœur Elizabeth et moi. Malheureusement, Elizabeth a été tuée par les Mungiki le 7 octobre 2010 à Nairobi. Elle a été attaquée dans son sommeil chez elle, à Huruma Estate.
[9]
En guise de preuve du meurtre d'Elizabeth par les Mungiki, le demandeur a présenté à la Commission un [traduction] « permis d'inhumer » délivré par la République du Kenya, sur lequel il est seulement indiqué qu'Elizabeth est décédée en octobre 2010. La cause du décès ne figure pas sur le document, et aucun élément de preuve indépendant n'a démontré qu'elle avait trouvé la mort aux mains des Mungiki. Même le témoignage du demandeur à cet égard repose sur des ouï-dire.
[10]
Même si sa sœur avait été brutalement assassinée par les Mungiki en raison de sa participation au groupe Tethya Uthetheke, qu'il avait cofondé, et même si son épouse et ses enfants se trouvaient toujours au Kenya et qu'ils avaient déjà été expressément menacés par les Mungiki et contraints de se cacher d'eux, le demandeur est resté au Canada pour étudier la comptabilité et travailler à temps partiel durant l'automne et l'hiver 2010, jusqu'au printemps 2011, sans statut.
[11]
Ensuite, en avril 2011, le demandeur a présenté une autre demande de visa d'étudiant pour le Canada. Le visa lui a été accordé le 6 juin 2011 et il était valide jusqu'au 30 septembre 2011. Dans la semaine qui a suivi la délivrance du visa, le demandeur s'est rendu au Kenya en avion [traduction] « pour voir [son] épouse et [ses] enfants parce que son épouse était terrifiée depuis la mort de [sa] sœur [Elizabeth] » survenue quelque huit mois plus tôt.
[12]
Il affirme que deux incidents se sont produits tandis qu'il se trouvait au Kenya. Premièrement, il a été attaqué à son domicile une nuit par des jeunes qui étaient selon lui des Mungiki. Ils lui ont volé son passeport et ont pris la fuite lorsque les voisins se sont réveillés. Il prétend s'être rendu au poste de police du quartier et avoir signalé l'incident. L'agent de police lui a demandé s'il avait de l'argent, car s'il le payait, l'agent de police tenterait de retrouver son passeport. Le demandeur dit en avoir déduit que l'agent de police l'obtiendrait des Mungiki s'il le payait. Il l'a fait et il a retrouvé son passeport.
[13]
Deuxièmement, lors d'une visite chez son père, il a été attaqué par « cousin John » et par sept hommes qui lui ont demandé pourquoi sa femme n'avait pas payé les frais de protection. C'est à ce moment qu'il a appris que son cousin John faisait partie des Mungiki. Lorsqu'il leur a dit que son épouse ne leur verserait pas d'argent, ils l'ont battu. Selon sa déclaration: [traduction] « ils m'ont entaillé les doigts de la main droite avec une machette tandis que j'essayais de me protéger la tête; j'ai également été frappé par un objet contondant jusqu'à sombrer dans l'inconscience ». Il affirme avoir été transporté à l'hôpital du district de Matuu après avoir obtenu un formulaire P3 de la police au poste de police de Matuu, car il ne pouvait pas se rendre à l'hôpital sans rapport de police. Il déclare avoir été admis pour deux jours. Une fois remis sur pied, il est reparti pour le Canada.
[14]
Son témoignage oral différait grandement de son compte rendu figurant sur son Formulaire de renseignements personnels (FRP), sur une multitude de détails; or, la Commission n'a relevé aucune de ces différences. La Commission n'a pas non plus noté le fait que ces rapports de police ne mentionnent pas les Mungiki ni le cousin John, et qu'ils font plutôt référence à des personnes [traduction] « inconnues ».
[15]
Le demandeur affirme que les Mungiki veulent tuer sa famille et lui-même pour avoir soutenu Tethya Uthetheke et ne pas les avoir soutenus financièrement, qu'il est incapable d'obtenir la protection de l'État, et qu'il n'y a pas de possibilité de refuge intérieur (PRI) au Kenya. La Commission a conclu à l'existence de la protection de l'État et à la PRI au Kenya.
Protection de l'État
[16]
Dans ses conclusions écrites, le demandeur soutient qu'il a
[traduction]
effectué toutes les démarches nécessaires pour obtenir la protection de l'État au Kenya avant de quitter le pays. Le demandeur a signalé les incidents à la police. Il allègue aussi que les institutions concernées n'ont pas réagi adéquatement compte tenu de l'urgence des actes faisant l'objet de sa plainte, et que si le demandeur avait attendu plus longtemps, sa vie aurait été menacée. Le frère et la sœur du demandeur ont été assassinés et les meurtres n'ont pas été résolus par la police.
[17]
À la lumière du dossier, je suis d'avis que le demandeur n'a pas effectué toutes les démarches raisonnables pour demander la protection de l'État au Kenya. Tout d'abord, rien ne laisse penser que lui ou quiconque ait fait quoi que ce soit pour attirer l'attention de la police sur le prétendu meurtre de Henry en 2002. De même, aucun élément de preuve ne donnait à croire que la police avait fait quoi que ce soit après le prétendu meurtre d'Elizabeth en 2010, même si le demandeur prétend que le fils d'Elizabeth a signalé son décès.
[18]
Le demandeur lui-même n'a pas fait de réelle tentative pour obtenir la protection de l'État après les deux incidents dans lesquels il a été impliqué en 2011. La première tentative - lorsqu'il a signalé le vol de son passeport - n'a été faite qu'auprès des autorités locales. L'allégation de complicité ou de corruption formulée par le demandeur au sujet d'un agent de police du poste de police de Matuu n'est rien d'autre qu'une tentative ratée de faire appel à l'appareil de protection étatique à l'échelle locale. Il est bien établi que cela ne constitue pas une preuve suffisante d'impossibilité d'obtenir la protection de l'État: voir par exemple
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 36. Au sujet du deuxième incident, beaucoup plus grave, les éléments de preuve fournis par le demandeur ne permettent pas de savoir quelles mesures celui-ci a réellement prises pour obtenir la protection de l'État. Bien qu'il ait produit une demande de rapport de police qui aurait été faite le 3 juillet 2011, le lendemain de son agression, elle ne fait état que de quelques appareils électroniques volés le 2 juillet 2011; il n'y a absolument aucune indication qu'un rapport de police aurait été rédigé au sujet de l'agression, beaucoup plus grave.
[19]
Il figure à plusieurs endroits sur le formulaire P3 que des personnes « inconnues » auraient agressé le demandeur, même si le demandeur a déclaré dans son témoignage qu'il savait à l'époque qu'il s'agissait de son cousin John qui l'avait retracé et qui avait orchestré l'agression. Ce fait contredit l'affirmation du demandeur selon lequel il aurait dénoncé son cousin John à la police. Quoi qu'il en soit, si l'on choisit de s'en tenir à son témoignage oral, sa seconde tentative n'était rien de plus qu'une tentative auprès des autorités locales, et en outre effectuée au même poste de police dont il prétendait avoir découvert qu'il était de mèche avec les Mungiki. Ainsi, objectivement, le demandeur n'a pas fait la preuve qu'il avait épuisé tous les recours dont il disposait au Kenya pour obtenir la protection de l'État.
[20]
À la lumière des faits exposés, la Commission a eu raison de conclure que le demandeur n'avait pas réfuté la présomption relative à la protection d'État.
Possibilité de refuge intérieur
[21]
L'argument du demandeur relativement à la PRI est laconique: la Commission n'a pas relevé que le cousin John, [traduction] « chef des Mungiki », attend le demandeur au Kenya et retrouvera sa trace [traduction] « en faisant appel à des contacts communs ». Par conséquent, [traduction] « la région du pays où le demandeur pourrait se réinstaller importe peu ».
[22]
La réponse toute simple est que la Commission a été mise devant des éléments de preuve contredisant sa prétention. Malgré la capacité alléguée du cousin John à retrouver le demandeur où qu'il fût au Kenya, l'épouse et la famille du demandeur avaient vécu en sécurité au Kenya avant les incidents les plus récents. Même si la Commission ne l'a pas expressément fait, elle était sans conteste en droit de conclure que le cousin John ne constituait pas en réalité une menace au sens où le demandeur tentait de le faire croire.
[23]
De plus, la Commission, en citant des rapports indépendants, montre de façon crédible les régions géographiques où les Mungiki sont actifs et conclut raisonnablement que l'organisation n'est pas implantée dans l'ensemble du Kenya. Il incombait au demandeur de démontrer qu'il n'existe pas de PRI. Il ne l'a tout simplement pas fait.
[24]
La présente demande doit être rejetée. Aucune question n'a été proposée pour certification.
JUGEMENT
[25]
LA COUR STATUE que
la présente demande est rejetée et qu'aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]