[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: The plaintiffs' appeal pursuant to rule 336(5) of the
Federal Court Rules
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 663, from an order of Giles, A.S.P., dated December 14, 1994, wherein the plaintiffs were directed to provide particulars to a number of allegations contained in their amended statement of claim. The defendants cross-appeal seeking to dismiss the main action because of the plaintiffs' failure to furnish the particulars as ordered. When the matter came on for hearing before me at Toronto, Ontario, on December 19, 1994, in brief oral reasons I dismissed the appeal and indicated that these written reasons would follow. At that time, the defendants were permitted to withdraw their cross-appeal without prejudice.
[2]
The plaintiff, Astra Aktiebolag ("Astra AB") is a corporation formed under the laws of Sweden in 1913. Astra AB is a multinational organization which conducts research, development, manufacture, marketing and the sale of healthcare products. These products include prescription pharmaceutical, non-prescription pharmaceutical and medical devices. Some of the medical apparatus developed and sold by Astra AB includes urinary catheters, dental implants, pericardial patches and syringes. Current annual sales of Astra AB and its related and subsidiary companies are estimated to be approximately $3.0 billion (USD).
[3]
The plaintiff, Astra Pharma Inc. ("Astra Canada"), is a corporation established under the laws of the Province of Ontario since 1954. Astra Canada is a wholly owned subsidiary of Astra AB and is also involved in research, development, manufacture, marketing and sale of healthcare products, such as prescription and non-prescription pharmaceuticals and medical apparatus. Annual Canadian sales of these products by Astra Canada are estimated to be in excess of $200 million (CND).
[4]
Astra AB is the owner of trademarks and registrations in Canada listed in Schedule A of its Amended Statement of Claim. Those trademarks have and continue to be used in Canada by Astra Canada under license, in association with the marketing and sale of healthcare products. Collectively, the Astra set of companies have carried on business in the industry using various business styles, including Astra, Astra Hospital Division, Astra Interpharm, Astra Lab, Astra Chemicals and Astra Pharmatek.
[5]
The defendants, Aastra Corporation ("Aastra Corp."), Aastra Aerospace ("Aastra Aero"), Aastra Advanced Ceramics Inc. ("Aastra Ceramics") are related corporations formed under the laws of the Province of Ontario. Collectively, these corporations have common premises, management and ownership.
[6]
A Statement of Claim was filed by Astra AB and Astra Canada on October 24, 1994. The claim alleges that the defendants have commenced using trademarks in Canada associated with biotechnology products and services and trade names associated with a business that develops, manufactures, markets and sells biotechnology products to persons involved in biotechnology. The plaintiffs also allege that the defendants have commenced using trademarks in association with a business that develops processes and products to be used in the research and development of pharmaceuticals. The plaintiffs contend that by using these trademarks and trade names incorporating the name "AASTRA" by the defendants, it has or will result in confusion and deception of persons in the healthcare, pharmaceutical or biotechnology industry. They argue this will result in a depreciation of the value of the goodwill attached to the ASTRA trademarks and trade name.
[7]
On December 2, 1994, the defendants sought an Order directing the plaintiffs to provide them with particulars of material facts relied on in support of the allegations contained in the Amended Statement of Claim filed on December 7, 1994 by the plaintiffs. The result of that application was an Order by Giles, A.S.P., dated December 14, 1994, which reads in part as follows:
"1. THIS COURT ORDERS THAT the plaintiffs are required to deliver particulars of the following allegations in the Amended Statement of Claim:
(a) Provide particulars of 'biotechnology' as used in the amended statement of claim.
(b) With respect to the word 'recently' in paragraph 11, particulars such that the time period can be distinguished from the word 'recently' in paragraphs 19 & 20.
(c) With respect to paragraphs 14 and 15, particulars as to 'at least as early as 1986' need not be provided without prejudice to the defendant's right to move for further particulars if it is indicated that any of the acts complained of are alleged to have been carried out by the defendants prior to that date.
(d) With respect to paragraph 11, particulars of the advances are not necessary.
(e) With respect to paragraph 20, to the extent that this paragraph is not particularized by the delivery of the greater particularity ordered in one of the earlier paragraphs, particulars of the processes and products referred to."
[8]
The plaintiffs attack the Order on the grounds that Giles, A.S.P., proceeded on a wrong principle of law and misapprehended the facts. Notably, they contend that there was no evidence upon which the learned prothonotary could have concluded that the particulars were both necessary for pleading and not within the defendant's knowledge.
[9]
The relevant portions of rule 336(5) of the
Federal Court Rules
affording the right of appeal from an order or decision of a prothonotary are as follows:
"Rule 336(5) Any person affected by an order or decision of a prothonotary, other than a judgment under Rules 432 to 437, may appeal therefrom to the court and such an appeal shall be made by an application of which a notice shall be given to all interested parties setting forth the grounds of objection and served within 14 after the order or decision complained of, and four clear days before the day fixed for hearing the same, or served within such time as may be allowed ..."
[10]
While rule 336(5) grants the right of appeal from such a decision or order of a prothonotary, it is markedly silent on the standard of review to be applied.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) at pp. 463-464, MacGuigan, J.A., set out the applicable standard of review as follows:
"I also agree with the Chief Justice in part as to the standard of review to be applied to a discretionary decision of a prothonotary. Following in particular Lord Wright in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), at p. 484, and Lacourcière, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Div. Ct.), discretionary orders of prothonotaries ought not be disturbed on appeal to a judge unless:
(a) they are clearly wrong, in the sense that the exercise of discretion by the prothonotary was based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts, or
(b) they raise questions vital to the final issue of the case.
"Where such discretionary orders are clearly wrong in that the prothonotary has fallen into error of law (a concept in which I include a discretion based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts), or where they raise questions vital to the final issue of the case, a judge ought to exercise his own discretion de novo."
It is this standard I will apply to resolve the issues before me.
[11]
Particulars are ordered to resolve specific problems that arise in defining the issues between the litigants at various times in the pretrial period. Rule 415 authorizes the making of an order for particulars:
"Rule 415(1) Subject to paragraph (2), every pleading shall contain the necessary particulars of any allegation including, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing words,
(a) particulars of any misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, wilful default or undue influence on which the party pleading relies; and
(b) where a party pleading alleges any condition of the mind of any person, whether any disorder or disability of mind or any malice, fraudulent intention or other condition of mind except knowledge, particulars of the facts on which the party relies.
"(2) Where in any case it seems more convenient to do so, particulars may be set out in a separate document attached as a schedule to the pleading.
"(3) The court may order a party to file and serve on any other party further and better particulars of any allegation in his pleading, or a further and better statement of the nature of the case on which he relies, and the order may be made on such terms as seem just.
"(4) Without limiting the generality of paragraph (3), where a party alleges as a fact that a person had knowledge or notice of some fact, matter or thing, the court may, on such terms as seem just, order that party to file and serve on any other party
(a) where he alleges knowledge, particulars of the facts on which he relies; and
(b) where he alleges notice, particulars of the notice.
"(5) Where the applicant for an order under this Rule did not apply in writing to the party against whom the order is sought for the particulars that he requires, the court may in its discretion refuse to make the order unless of opinion that there were sufficient reasons for such an application in writing not having been made or may take such omission into account in deciding what order to make as to the costs of the application."
Rule 415 supplements the general provisions dealing with pleadings which are found in rule 407, 408, and 409:
"Rule 407(1) Every pleading is to be filed and, subject to Rule 306, a copy thereof is to be served on the other parties forthwith after filing.
"(2) A copy of every document referred to in a pleading shall be served on each party on whom a pleading is served at the same time as the pleading is served or within 30 days of that time, unless
(a) such party waives his right to such copy; or
(b) the court, for special reason, otherwise orders.
"(3) The statement of material facts in a pleading shall be divided into paragraphs, numbered consecutively, each paragraph containing, as nearly as may be, a separate allegation. Dates, sums and numbers shall be expressed in figures and not in words.
"(4) Every pleading shall on its face be entitled of the day and year on which it is filed, and shall also be entitled in the cause.
"(5) Every pleading shall show the name and address of the party filing it and, if the party is not a natural person, shall show the legal character of the party; and, if the pleading is filed on behalf of the party by an attorney or solicitor, it shall show the name and business address of the attorney or solicitor. SOR/79-58, s. 3.
"Rule 408(1) Every pleading must contain a precise statement of the material facts on which the party pleading relies.
"(2) Without limiting the generality of paragraph (1), the effect of any document or the purport of any conversation referred to in the pleading must, to the extent that it is material, be briefly stated, and the precise words of the document or conversation should not be stated, except in so far as those words are themselves material.
"(3) A party need not plead any fact if it is presumed by law to be true or as to which the burden of proof lies on the other party (e.g. consideration for a bill of exchange), unless the other party has specifically denied it in his pleading.
"(4) A statement that a thing has been done or that an event has occurred, being a thing or event the doing or occurrence of which, as the case may be, constitutes a condition precedent necessary for the case of a party, is to be implied in his pleading.
"(5) Whenever it is material to allege notice to any person of any fact, matter or thing, it shall be sufficient to allege such notice as a fact unless the form or precise terms of such notice be material.
"Rule 409. A party shall plead specifically any matter (e.g, performance, release, a statute of limitation, prescription, fraud or any fact showing illegality)
(a) that he alleges makes a claim or defence of the opposite party not maintainable;
(b) that, if not specifically pleaded, might take the opposite party by surprise; or
(c) that raises issues of fact not arising out of the preceding pleading."
[12]
The purpose of particulars has been summarized by the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at pp. 887-888:
"The principles governing an application of this kind were well stated by Sheppard, J.A., in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.C.A.).] where he stated at pp. 605 and 606:
'Hence it appears that an examination for discovery follows upon the issues having been previously defined by the pleadings and the purpose of such discovery is to prove or disprove the issues so defined, by a cross-examination on the facts relevant to such issues.
'On the other hand the purpose of particulars is to require a party to clarify the issues he has tried to raise by his pleading, so that the opposite party may be able to prepare for trial, by examination for discovery and otherwise. The purpose of particulars was stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , by Jesse, M.R., at p. 639, as follows:
"The whole object of pleadings is to bring the parties to an issue, and the meaning of the rules of Order XIX, was to prevent the issue being enlarged, which would prevent either party from knowing when the cause came on for trial, what the real point to be discussed and decided was. In fact, the whole meaning of the system is to narrow the parties to definite issues, and thereby to diminish expense and delay, especially as regards the amount of testimony required on either side at the hearing."'"
[13]
Counsel underlines the fact that this is not a situation where a single instance of infringement is alleged, but "continuous" infringement and therefore argues the defendant must be aware of the activities it carries out. I am unable to accept this argument.
[14]
It is no answer in this case to merely say that these matters should be within the knowledge of the defendants. Where pleadings are inadequate, the fact that the defendants may or must know the true facts is not a valid objection to an order for particulars. The defendants are entitled to know the nature of the case against them and have all the facts necessary to plead intelligently. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  7, 1994 makes some of the following references to "biotechnology":
"	. . . . .
"11. Recently, with scientific advances in the genetic and microbiological sciences, the research, development and manufacture of pharmaceutical have increasingly involved the application of
biotechnology
.
12. A leading application of
biotechnology
is in the research and development of pharmaceuticals.
. . . . .
"19. However, the defendants have recently commenced the use in Canada, of trademarks in association with
biotechnology
products and services and of trade names in association with a business which develops, manufactures, markets and sells
biotechnology
products and services to persons involved with
biotechnology
. ..." (italics mine)
[16]
While the plaintiffs' prayer for relief claims injunctive relief, including a declaration that the defendants' activities are in contravention of s. 7(b) of the
Trade-marks Act
, and damages or an accounting of profits, the word "biotechnology" is absent.
[17]
What is alleged is that the defendants are somehow by using "biotechnology" in connection with their passing off activities, committing an actionable wrong or that that constitutes infringement. There is no indication in the pleadings why that is wrong or how it is connected to the trademarks at issue. A bald declaration of infringement that fails to set out the basis for that infringement, falls short of the standard required by rule 408.
[18]
Furthermore, biotechnology does not appear as of yet to have well defined boundaries.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Supreme Court of Canada in addressing the issue of patentability of a life form found it necessary to define the type of biotechnological processes it was considering. As such, the court recognized implicitly that if it was going to render a decision on that issue, there was an obligation to define the team's limitations.
[19]
Similarly here, in order to narrow or define the issues and permit the defendants to adequately plead in defence, it is appropriate that the plaintiffs either leave the offending material out of their Amended Statement of Claim or, alternatively, provide particulars of the word biotechnology each time it is used, in accordance with the terms specified in the original Order by Giles, A.S.P.
[20]
I am satisfied, therefore, that the Order made by the Associate Senior Prothonotary did not fall into an error of law or misapprehension of the facts. Accordingly, on December 19, 1994, I dismissed the appeal with costs in the cause and indicated that the time for appeal would run from the date of filing of these reasons.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/saf
[End of document]