INDEX
PARA #
INTRODUCTION
1
AGREED STATEMENT OF FACTS
6
RELIEFS SOUGHT
7
1) By the Plaintiffs
7
2) By the Defendant
10
THE ISSUES
11
THE EVIDENCE
14
1) An Overview
14
a) On Behalf of the Plaintiffs
14
b) On Behalf of the Defendant
18
c) Joint Exhibits
21
2) A Brief Summary of the Testimony
22
RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE COPYRIGHT ACT
30
POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES
31
1) The Plaintiffs' Submissions
31
a) Introduction
31
b) Subsistence and Ownership of Copyright
33
c) Infringement of Copyright
46
2) The Defendant's Submissions
52
a) Introduction
52
b) Subsistence and Ownership of Copyright
58
c) Infringement of Copyright
61
d) Defences
66
i) Overriding Public Interest
66
ii) No Standing
70
iii) Fair Dealing
71
iv) The Discretionary Nature of Injunctive Relief - Estoppel, Laches, Acquiescence, etc.
79
v) Implied Licence
81
e) The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
84
f) Free-Standing Photocopiers
87
3) The Plaintiffs' Reply Submissions
89
a) Overriding Public Interest and Public Policy
89
b) No Standing
93
c) Fair Dealing
94
d) Estoppel, Laches, Acquiescence, etc.
99
e) Implied Licence
107
f) The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
109
g) Free-Standing Photocopiers
111
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS
115
1) Subsistence of Copyright
115
2) Ownership of Copyright
146
3) Infringement of Copyright
150
4) Defences
168
i) Overriding Public Interest and Public Policy
168
ii) No Standing
171
iii) Fair Dealing
173
iv) Estoppel, Laches, Acquiescence, etc.
179
5) The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
182
6) Free-Standing Photocopiers
189
RELIEFS
193
1) By the Plaintiffs
193
2) By the Defendant
201
A POSTSCRIPT
203
COSTS
204
PAGE #
SCHEDULE "A"
83
SCHEDULE "B"
99
SCHEDULE "C"
105
Introduction
[1]
Gibson, J.
: These actions were com­menced by Statements of Claim each filed the 2nd of July, 1993. The actions involve allegations of infringements of copyrights owned by the plaintiffs. The alleged in­fringements result from the photocopying policies and activities of the defendant in supplying for the legal profession and the judiciary, limited copies of legal materials published by the plaintiffs and held in the defendant's "Great Library" at Osgoode Hall in Toronto.
[2]
Since February, 1996, the photocopying policies of the defendant have been reflected in its "Access to the Law Policy", adopted in Convocation on the 28th of January, 1996, which is in the following terms:
"
Access To The Law Policy
"The Law Society of Upper Canada, with the assistance of the resources of the Great Library, supports the administration of justice and the rule of law in the Province of Ontario. The Great Library's compre­hensive catalogue of primary and secondary legal sources, in print and electronic media, is open to lawyers, articling students, the judiciary and other authorized researchers. Single copies of library materials, required for the purposes of research, review, private study and criticism, as well as use in court, tribunal, and government proceedings, may be provided to users of the Great Library.
"This service supports users of the Great Library who require access to legal materials while respecting the copyright of the publishers of such materials, in keeping with the fair dealing provisions in s. 27 of the
Canadian Copyright Act
.
Guidelines to Access
1.
The Access to the Law
service pro­vides single copies for specific purposes, identified in advance to library staff.
2. The specific purposes are research, review, private study and criticism, as well as use in court, tribunal, and government proceedings. Any doubt concerning the legitimacy of the request for these purposes will be referred to the Reference Librarian.
3. The individual must identify him/her­self and the purpose at the time of making the request. A request form will be completed by library staff, based on information provided by the requesting party.
4. As to the amount of copying, dis­cretion must be used. No copies will be made for any purpose other than that specifically set out on the request form. Ordinarily, requests for a copy of one case, one article or one statutory reference will be satisfied as a matter of routine. Requests for substantial copying from secondary sources (e.g. in excess of 5% of the volume or more than two citations from one volume) will be re­ferred to the Reference Librarian and may ultimately be refused.
5. This service is provided on a not for profit basis. The fee charged for this service is intended to cover the costs of the Law Society."
In adopting the Access to the Law Policy, Convocation noted that the Policy reflected the policy followed by the Great Library for many years and that the Policy was not to be regarded as being a change in the defen­dant's approach to the matter of copying of holdings of the Great Library. As will be seen from the Agreed Statement of Facts that follows, while there may have been no change in policy at the time the Policy was adopted, there was certainly a change in the manner in which compliance with the Policy was monitored.
[3]
The Policy applies directly to what is known as the custom photocopy service of the Great Library, although aspects of it reflect the defendant's policy regarding self-service photo­copying by users of the Library at photocopy machines made available in the facilities of the Library on a price-per-page-copied basis. These actions are primarily concerned with the custom photocopy ser­vice, although, as will be seen, counterclaims of the defendant seek declarations regarding self-service photocopying as well.
[4]
By Orders of the Associate Chief Justice dated the 6th of July, 1998, the three actions were set down for hearing at the same time. All three plaintiffs were represented by the same counsel. With the agreement of coun­sel, the three actions were heard together, essentially on the basis of evidence regarding policies and practices of the plaintiff Canada Law Book Inc. There was no dispute that evidence regarding policies and practices of the other two plaintiffs would be sub­stantially similar. In the result, there was no dispute that a decision on the evidence that was before the court would be determinative of all three actions.
[5]
On the 12th of November, 1998, ten days before the commencement of the trial of these actions, counsel for the defendant served Notices of Constitutional Question on counsel for the plaintiffs and on the At­torneys-General. In response, counsel for the plaintiffs filed motions to strike out the Notices of Constitutional Question for ir­regularity. In the event, no Attorney-General sought to exercise his or her entitlement to adduce evidence and to make submissions in the actions in accordance with s. 57(4) of the
Federal Court Act
[see footnote 1]. Further in the event, no submissions were put before the court that went to the constitutional validity, applicability or operability of an Act of Parliament or of the legislature of any province or of a regulation thereunder [see footnote 2]. In the result, the motions brought on behalf of the plaintiffs were not dealt with. For the purposes of these reasons and the related judgments, they are treated as abandoned.
Agreed Statement Of Facts
[6]
At the opening of the trial, counsel jointly filed an extensive Agreed Statement of Facts. Following the trial, by agreement, it was modified in editorial and technical respects, and slightly expanded. In its modified form, it reads as follows:
"1. The plaintiffs are Canadian publishers of law textbooks, law reports and other legal publications.
"2. The plaintiff, Thomson Canada Limited, carries on business as Carswell Thomson Professional Publishing ('Cars­well'), and is a company incorporated under the laws of Ontario. Carswell and its predecessors have operated in Canada since 1864.
"3. The plaintiff, CCH Canadian Limited ('CCH'), is a company incorporated under the laws of Canada. CCH has operated in Canada since 1945.
"4. The plaintiff, Canada Law Book Inc. ('Canada Law Book'), is a company in­corporated under the laws of Ontario. Canada Law Book and its predecessors, Canada's oldest legal publishing operation, have operated in Canada since 1855.
"5. There are four major law book pub­lishers in Canada: Carswell, Canada Law Book, CCH and Butterworths. [see foot­note 3]
"6. In 1797, the Parliament of Upper Canada passed
An Act for the better regulating the Practice of Law
37 Geo. 3 (1797), c. 13 (U.C.) permitting lawyers to organize a society 'to be called the Law Society of Upper Canada'.
"7. In 1822, the defendant Law Society of Upper Canada was incorporated by statute of the Parliament of Upper Canada (
An Act to repeal part of and amend an Act passed in the thirty-seventh year of His Majesty's Reign, entitled '
An Act for the better regulating the practice of Law
' and to extend provisions of the same
, 2 Geo. 4 (1822), c. 5 (U.C.)).
"8. In 1840, the Parliament of Upper Canada granted the Law Society of Upper Canada the power to appoint to the Office of Reporter of Her Majesty's Court of Queen's Bench in the Province, and 'that it shall be the duty of the Reporter, to Report as well the substance of such of the verbal decisions of the court as shall be of general importance, and to Report also such decisions as may be delivered in writing'. The Reporter was 'subject to such rules and regulations for the discharge of the duties of his office, and the publication of the Reports', as would be made by the Law Society in Convocation 'with the approbation of the judges of the Province'. In addition, the Reporter was 'at liberty to print and publish such Report, or a digest thereof', and it was his 'duty so to do whenever thereto required by the said Law Society in Convocation, and in such manner and mode as the said Law Society shall direct'.
"9. With passage of
An Act respecting the Law Society of Ontario
, S.O. 1871-72, C. 6, the defendant was 'authorized to appoint, from time to time, such persons, being members of the Law Society, of the degree of barrister at law ... to be editors and reporters of the decisions of the Superior Courts.' In addition, the Benchers in convocation 'shall make regulations for the printing and publishing the said reports of the said decisions, and the distribution of the said reports, and the price and mode of issuing thereof, and all such other regulations in respect thereto, as they may at any time consider necessary; and any profits arising from the said reports shall form part of the general funds of the Law Society.' This legislative provision re­mained in all essential respects the same until 1970.
"10. In 1964, s. 54 of
The Law Society Act
was amended to include the ability of benchers to 'enter into agreements for printing and publishing the reports in whole or in part with such person or per­sons on such terms or conditions as the benchers may from time to time deter­mine'.
"11. In 1970,
The Law Society Act
was amended and the defendant was authorized through Convocation to make regulations 'respecting the reporting and publication of the decisions of the courts', subject to the approval of the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council. In 1970, Convocation made the following regulations which were approved by the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council: 'The Libraries and Reporting Committee may make provision for the distribution of copies of reasons for judgment on such terms as the Committee may from time to time determine'. This regulation remains in place today. [see footnote 4]
"12. The defendant has a statutory ob­ligation to disseminate the judicial de­cisions of the Ontario courts.
"13. The defendant fulfills part of its statutory obligation to disseminate judicial decisions through the distribution of the
Ontario Reports
to its members.
"14. The defendant, as a statutory non-profit corporation without share capital, has governed the legal profession of what is now the province of Ontario, pursuant to the
Law Society Act
and its predecessor statutes, since 1822.
"15. The defendant has maintained and operated the Great Library at Osgoode Hall as the primary library for its members since 1845.
"16. The Great Library is funded by mem­bers of the defendant and is intended to serve members of the Ontario Bar and the judiciary.
"17. Before 1996, the defendant's Library and Reporting Committee was responsible for overseeing the Great Library. The Great Library is now a responsibility of the Professional Development and Competence Committee.
"18. The plaintiffs' sales representatives have, from time to time, attended at the Great Library to sell the plaintiffs' products to the Great Library.
"19. Before the advent of photocopy machines, lawyers were required to take the entire book or volume containing a reported judicial decision into court or were required to copy by hand the relevant judicial decision.
"20. It had become a practice since at least the late 1970s or early 1980s to make copies of reported judicial decisions, in­cluding those published by the plaintiffs, and to give such copies to judges (or other presiding officers) and other parties in making submissions in judicial pro­ceedings.
"21. For many years, free-standing photo­copiers have been maintained by the defen­dant on its premises for use by patrons of the Great Library and operated using coin and pre-paid card.
"22. The plaintiffs have been aware of the availability and use of free-standing photo­copying machines in the Great Library to make copies of reports, statutes, parts thereof, and extracts from legal periodical articles and texts since at least as early as 1974.
"23. The defendant does not directly monitor the use made by patrons of the Great Library of the free-standing photo­copy machines in the Great Library other than by posting a sign above the photo­copiers.
"24. Since the mid 1980s, a sign has been posted above the defendant's free-standing photocopiers which states that 'The copy­right law of Canada governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyright material. Certain copying may be an infringement of the copyright law. This library is not responsible for infringing copies made by users of these machines.'
"25. The defendant first began to provide copies by facsimile transmission machines in 1988.
"26. The defendant's photocopying request forms used before January, 1996 did not require the requester to convey the purpose for which the photocopying was required. All request forms since January 1996 require a person who requests the copies to state the purpose for the photocopying at the time the request is made.
"27. Prior to 1996, there were no written instructions to staff about finding out the purpose for which the copies were needed. Beginning in January 1996, the defendant's Access to the Law Policy required its staff to ask for the purpose for which the copies are required.
"28. Approximately 20% of the copying requests to the Great Library come from requesters outside of Toronto.
"29. The defendant charges a lower rate to requesters outside of Toronto .
"30. About 75 percent of the photocopies made by the defendant are for individual reported judicial decisions.
"31. The materials copied by the Great Library include materials published by all three plaintiffs.
"32. About 19 percent of the items re­quested and filled by the Great Library are for materials published by the three plain­tiffs.
"33. In publishing judicial decisions, the plaintiffs will add, among other things, citations to legal materials in which the plaintiffs claim copyright.
"34. Judges commonly cite in their reasons for decision the plaintiffs' and the defen­dant's publications, including reported judicial decisions and textbooks.
"35. Order-in-Council, P.C. 1996-1995, SI/97-5 [see footnote 5], states that:
'Whereas it is of fundamental importance to a democratic society that its law be widely known and that its citizens have unimpeded access to that law;
And whereas the Government of Canada wishes to facilitate access to its law by licensing the reproduction of federal law without charge or permission;
Therefore His Excellency the Governor General-in-Council, on the recom­mendation of the Minister ... hereby makes the annexed
Reproduction of Federal Law Order.
Reproduction Of Federal Law Order
Anyone may, without charge or request for permission, reproduce enactments and consolidations of enactments of the Government of Canada, and decisions and reasons for decisions of federally-constituted courts and administrative tribunals, provided due diligence is exer­cised in ensuring the accuracy of the materials reproduced and the reproduc­tion is not represented as an official version.'
'Attendu que, pour une société démo­cratique, il est d'une importance fon­damentale que sa législation soit largement diffusée et que ses citoyens y aient libre accès;
Attendu que le gouvernement du Canada souhaite faciliter l'accès à sa législation en autorisant la reproduction de la légis­lation fédérale sans frais ni permission.
À ces causes, sur recommendation de la ministre ... Son Excellence le Gouver­neur Général en conseil prend le
Décret sur la reproduction de la législation fédérale
, ci-après.
Décret sur la reproduction
de la législation fédérale
Toute personne peut, sans frais ni de­mande d'autorisation, reproduire des textes législatifs du gouvernement du Canada et des codifications de ceux-ci, ainsi que des décisions et des motifs de décision de cours et de tribunaux ad­ministratifs établis par le gouvernement du Canada, pourvu qu'une diligence raisonnable soit exercée pour veiller à ce que les documents reproduits soient exacts et que la reproduction ne soit pas présentée comme une version officielle.'
"36. The respective plaintiffs have pub­lished the following:
Reported judicial decisions:
(a)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> th) -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> d) - Canada Law Book
Summary of judicial decision:
(c)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> d) - Canada Law Book
Index:
(d) Pages B1 to B13 of the topical index of [1997] G.S.T.C. - Carswell
"37. On February 3, 1993, the Great Library made one copy of each of the following items and delivered on February 4, 1993 such copies (along with copies of six other reported judicial decisions) by mail to Ms. Jean Cumming, a member of the defendant at the time, and money was paid by Ms. Cumming pursuant to defen­dant's invoice number GLX930456. At that time, which was prior to adoption of its Access to the Law Policy, the defendant did not inquire of Ms. Cumming as to the purpose for which the copies were needed. Her requests were made for the purpose of gathering evidence for the plaintiffs to determine if any legal actions were to be taken against the defendant. This purpose was not disclosed to the staff of the Great Library who received her telephone order:
(a)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
(b)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> d).
"38.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Canada Law Book has added, among other things, a headnote to the reasons for decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.R. starting at page 90 (Maritime Law Book), volume 9 of C.R.R.(2d) starting at page 62 (Canadian Law Information Council), volume 52 of O.A.C. starting at page 366 (Maritime Law Book), volume 7 of C.O.H.S.C. starting at page 1 (Carswell) and [1992] S.C.J. No. 34 (QuickLaw).
"42.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Canada Law Book has added, among other things, a headnote to the reasons for decision of the Ontario Court (General Division) in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  published the decision and reasons for decision of the Ontario Court (General Division) in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  decision to members of the Ontario Bar.
"45. The defendant has added a headnote to the judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  page 225.
"46. The judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QuickLaw).
"47. On February 4, 1993, the defendant made one copy of the following item and on February 4, 1993 delivered such copy by facsimile transmission to Ms. Jean Cumming, a member of the defendant at the time, and money was paid by Ms. Cumming pursuant to defendant's invoice number GLX930450. At that time, which was prior to adoption of its Access to the Law Policy, the defendant did not inquire of Ms. Cumming as to the purpose for which the copy was needed. Her request was made for the purpose of gathering evidence for the plaintiffs to determine if any legal actions were to be taken against the defendant. This purpose was not dis­closed to the staff of the Great Library who received her telephone order:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> d).
"48. On January 7, 1998, the defendant made one copy of the following item and on January 7, 1998 delivered such copy (along with copies of 10 other reported judicial decisions published in the G.S.T.C.) by courier to Mr. David Sloane, a member of the defendant at the time, and money was paid by Mr. Sloane pursuant to defendant's invoice number GLX980046. Mr. Sloane stated his reason 'for re­questing these cases is to effect legal re­search for a client who is considering engaging in a litigation matter':
Pages B1 to B13 of the topical Index of [1997] G.S.T.C.
"49. On February 5, 1993, the defendant made one copy of Chapter 13 (totalling 32 pages out of 713 pages) of the legal text­book
Forensic Evidence in Canada
and delivered on February 8, 1993, such copy by facsimile transmission to Ms. Jean Cumming, a member of the defendant at the time, and money was paid by Ms. Cumming pursuant to defendant's invoice number GLX930471. At that time, which was prior to adoption of its Access to the Law Policy, the defendant did not inquire of Ms. Cumming as to the purpose for which the copy was needed. Her request was made for the purpose of gathering evidence for the plaintiffs to determine if any legal actions were to be taken against the defendant. This purpose was not dis­closed to the staff of the Great Library who received her telephone order.
"50. The plaintiff Canada Law Book pub­lished the following annotated statutory instrument:
(a)
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999.
"51. There are lawyers who made requests of the defendant to copy a number of different reported judicial decisions pub­lished in the same law report series pub­lished by the plaintiffs. For example:
(a) Between January 30 and February 6, 1992, the defendant copied and delivered to the law firm Dyson & Kacaba copies of 21 reported judicial decisions (totalling 226 pages) from the law report series
Reports of Family Law
published by the plaintiff Carswell. Such copies were picked up by the requester.
(b) Between February 19 and 25, 1992, the defendant copied and delivered to the law firm McMillan Binch copies of 18 reported judicial decisions (totalling 258 pages) from the law report series
Canadian Criminal Cases
published by the plaintiff Canada Law Book. 17 of the 18 copies were picked up by the re­quester and one of the 18 copies was sent to the requester by facsimile trans­mission.
"52. For many decades, the plaintiffs' publications carried a notice which reads in part: 'No part of this publication may be reproduced ... by any ... means ... without the written permission of the publisher.'
"53. The purchase price of the plaintiff's (sic) publications has continually increased over the years.
"54. Since September 1993, the plaintiffs Canada Law Book and Carswell have made available, for a fee, copies of their respective reported judicial decisions to lawyers and the general public who request them.
"55. The defendant has received requests for multiple copying of extracts from the
Ontario Reports
in educational casebooks and the like and permission has been given for that purpose.
"56. For about a month, approximately between mid-July and mid-August in 1995, a notice appeared in the law reports pub­lished by the plaintiff Canada law Book which reads, in part, as follows:
'No part of this book may be reproduced ... by any photographic ... means ... without the written permission of the publisher.
However, copyright is not infringed by:
a) the making of a copy of any work to hand over to a judge or other presiding officer and to other parties in judicial proceedings;
(b) the reproduction of any work by a judge or other presiding officer in any decision in judicial proceedings; or
(c) anything done for the purposes of parliamentary proceedings.
"Judicial proceedings" includes pro­ceedings before any court, tribunal or person having authority to decide any matter affecting a person's legal rights or liabilities.'
"57. In or about the 4th quarter of 1995, a notice began to appear in the law reports published by the plaintiffs Canada Law Book and Carswell which reads, in part, as follows:
'No part of this publication may be reproduced ... by any photographic ... means ... without the written permission of the publisher.
A licence, however, is hereby given by the Publisher [the plaintiffs];
a) to a lawyer to make a copy of any part of this publication to give to a judge or other presiding officer or to other parties in making legal sub­missions in judicial proceedings;
(b) to a judge or other presiding officer to produce any part of this publication in judicial proceedings; or
(c) to anyone to reproduce any part of this publication for the purposes of parliamentary proceedings.
"Judicial proceedings" include pro­ceedings before any court, tribunal or person having authority to decide any matter affecting a person's legal rights or liabilities.'
"58. In or about January 1996, a notice began to appear in the
Ontario Reports
published by defendant which reads, in part, as follows:
'No part of this publication may be reproduced ... by any means, including photocopying ... without the written permission of the copyright holder ... The Law Society of Upper Canada. ...
Copies of individual decisions appearing in this report may be made for the pur­poses of research, private study, review, criticism, or use in court, tribunal and government proceedings.'
"59. A cease and desist letter was sent by Mr. Ronald Dimock on behalf of Canada Law Book, Carswell Thomson Professional Publishing, CCH Canadian Limited and Butterworths Canada to the Treasurer of the Law Society of Upper Canada on March 29, 1993.
"60. The cease and desist letter dated March 29, 1993, was the first notice given to the defendant by the plaintiffs that the defendant's custom photocopying service is alleged to infringe copyright.
"61. Butterworths Canada Ltd. has not brought an action against the defendants alleging copyright infringement.
"62. Butterworths Canada Ltd. published the
Ontario Reports
for the defendant at the time these actions were commenced and continues to do so to this day."
Reliefs Sought
1)
By The Plaintiffs
[7]
In their Statements of Claim, the plain­tiffs seek:
- permanent injunctions restraining the defendant, its agents and servants from either directly or indirectly:
- distributing any copies of any of the literary works in which the plaintiffs own copyright;
- marketing, exhibiting, offering for sale or dealing in any copies of the works in which the plaintiffs own copyright;
- delivery up for destruction of all in­fringing copies of any of the literary works in which the plaintiffs own copyright;
- damages;
- an accounting of profits;
- prejudgment and post-judgment interest;
- solicitor and client costs; and
- such further and other relief as the court considers to be just.
[8]
At the opening of the trial, counsel for the plaintiffs advised the court that the plain­tiffs were abandoning their claims to dam­ages or profits and, of course, the claims to pre-judgment interest and post-judgment interest would fall as a consequence.
[9]
At the opening of argument for the plaintiffs, counsel provided written sub­missions containing revised and much more focussed claims for relief. The claims are more focussed in at least two respects. First, as forecasted at the opening of the trial, the claims for damages and accounting of pro­fits, and the related claims for pre-judgment and post-judgment interest were dropped. In addition, the claims for orders for delivery up for destruction of infringing materials were also dropped. Second, the generalized claims for injunctions were dropped and claims for declarations were added regarding subsistence of copyright, ownership of copy­right and infringement of copyright in specific publications or portions of publications of the plaintiffs which were entered as exhibits at the trial and in respect of which testimony was adduced. Flowing from the claims for declarations, claims for injunctive relief related specifically to the exhibited publications and portions of publications were added. The plaintiffs' revised claims for relief are in the following terms:
"I. a declaration that copyright subsists in the following works:
(a) (i) the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(ii) the reported judicial decision of
R.
v
. CIP Inc.
(1992) published in 71 C.C.C.(3d) 129;
(iii) the reported judicial decision of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> v
. Etobicoke
(1993) published in 93 C.L.L.C. § 14,042;
(b) (i) the headnote in the reported 			judicial decision of
Meyer v
. Bright
(1992) published in 94 D.L.R.(4th) 648;
(ii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision of
R.
v
. CIP Inc.
(1992) published in 71 C.C.C.(3d) 129;
(iii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> v
. Etobicoke
(1993) published in 93 C.L.L.C. § 14,042;
(c) the annotated
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
;
(d) the case summary of
Confederation Life
v
. Shepherd
(1992) published in 37 A.C.W.S.(3d) 141;
(e) [1997] G.S.T.C., Topical Index; and
(f) (i) the textbook,
Economic Negli-			gence
;
(ii) the monograph entitled 'Dental Evidence' published as chapter 13 in the textbook,
Forensic Evidence in Canada
.
"II. a declaration that copyright is owned by the respective plaintiffs in the following works:
(a) (i) the reported judicial decision of
Meyer v
. Bright
(1992) published in 94 D.L.R.(4th) 648 by Canada Law Book;
(ii) the reported judicial decision of
R.
v
. CIP Inc.
(1992) published in 71 C.C.C.(3d) 129 by Canada Law Book;
(iii) the reported judicial decision of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> v
. Etobicoke
(1993) published in 93 C.L.L.C. § 14,042 by CCH Canadian Limited;
(b) (i) the headnote in the reported 			judicial decision of
Meyer v
. Bright
(1992) published in 94 D.L.R.(4th) 648 by Canada Law Book;
(ii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision of
R. v
. CIP Inc.
(1992) published in 71 C.C.C.(3d) 129 by Canada Law Book;
(iii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> v
. Etobicoke
(1993) published in 93 C.L.L.C. § 14,042 by CCH Canadian Limited;
(c) the annotated
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
published by Canada Law Book;
(d) the case summary of
Confederation Life
v
. Shepherd
(1992) published in 37 A.C.W.S.(3d) 141 by Canada Law Book;
(e) [1997] G.S.T.C., Topical Index pub­lished by Carswell Thomson Professional Publishing; and
(f) (i) the textbook,
Economic Negli­-			gence
published by Carswell Thomson Pro­fessional Publishing;
(ii) the monograph entitled 'Dental Evidence' published as chapter 13 in the textbook,
Forensic Evidence in Canada
by Canada Law Book.
"III. a declaration that the defendant has infringed copyright by:
(a) making a photocopy of the works referred to in paragraphs I(a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) above;
(b) making a copy of the works in para­graphs I(d) and (f)(ii) above for storage in the memory of a facsimile machine;
(c) transmitting a copy of the works in paragraphs I(d) and (f)(ii) above, using a facsimile machine;
(d) distributing a copy of the works referred to in paragraphs I(a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) above by hand, mail, courier or facsimile machine; or
(e) selling a copy of the works referred to in paragraphs I(a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) above.
"IV. a declaration that the defendant, in carrying out its custom photocopying service, infringes the plaintiffs' copyright by:
(a) making a photocopy;
(b) making a copy for storage in the memory of a facsimile machine;
(c) transmitting a copy using a facsimile machine;
(d) distributing a copy by hand, courier or facsimile machine;
(e) selling a copy;
of reported judicial decisions, headnotes in reported judicial decisions, annotated statutes, case summaries, topical indexes and textbooks in which the copyright is owned by any one of the plaintiffs; and
"V. a permanent injunction restraining the defendant, its agents, employees and ser­vants, in carrying out its custom photo­copying service, from:
(a) making a photocopy;
(b) making a copy for storage in the memory of a facsimile machine;
(c) transmitting a copy using a facsimile machine;
(d) distributing a copy by hand, courier or facsimile machine;
(e) selling a copy;
without the consent of the plaintiffs, of the works referred to in paragraph I above and any other reported judicial decisions, head­notes in reported judicial decisions, annotated statutes, case summaries, topical indexes and textbooks in which copyright subsists and is owned by any one of the plaintiffs; and
"VI. costs."
2) By The Defendant
[10]
In its Amended Statements of Defence, filed the 2nd of March, 1998, to which counterclaims were added, the defendant seeks, as against each plaintiff and in addition to its costs on a solicitor and client basis, "including GST", a declaration that:
(A) the making of a single copy of
(i) a judicial decision, case report, statute or regulation, whether or not it includes editorial matter added thereto by the plaintiff Publisher,
or
(ii) a limited selection of text (not more than 10% of the work) in a legal treatise, digest or other review or summary of the law,
from legal materials purchased by the defendant from the plaintiff,
(iii) for the purpose of research, private study or review by a member or em­ployee of the defendant or a member of the judiciary,
or
(iv) for the purpose of submission to a court, tribunal or in government pro­ceedings, and to other interested parties or their counsel,
where the copy is made
(v) by a member or employee of the defendant or his/her representative using a photocopy machine maintained by the defendant,
or
(vi) by the defendant at the request of such member or employee of the defen­dant and delivered to such member or employee or his/her representative by hand or facsimile transmission,
for a charge which is intended to ap­proximate the defendant's cost in providing this service, does not constitute in­fringement of the plaintiff's copyright, if any, in the materials so copied;
"(B) the defendant's conduct and the ser­vice that it provides to its members and employees and to the judiciary referred to in subparagraph (A) above,
(i) constitute fair dealing under s. 29 or 29.1 of the
Copyright Act
,
(ii) do not involve copying a substantial part of any work belonging to the plain­tiff, and
(iii) is exempt from copyright in­fringement as a matter of public policy;
"(C) the plaintiff cannot assert a monopoly, in copyright or otherwise, to control access to or use of primary or secondary sources of law or any editorial additions which the plaintiff may include with them;
"(D) by reason of its conduct, the plaintiff has afforded an implied licence to the defendant and its members to carry on and participate in the activities referred to in subparagraph (A) above; and
"(E) the plaintiff has delayed and ac­quiesced in the defendant's activities re­ferred to in subparagraph (A) above and is now estopped and barred from asserting that these activities constitute an in­fringement of the works purchased by the defendant from the plaintiff."
The Issues
[11]
In keeping with the revised reliefs claimed by the plaintiffs, counsel for the plaintiffs defined the issues in these actions in the following terms:
"
Plaintiffs' Ownership Of Copyright
"1. Is copyright, other than any copyright owned by the Crown or a judge, capable of subsisting in whole or in part in any of the following publications which involve additions to statutory instruments and judicial decisions:
(a) a reported judicial decision (with headnote, running heads and other matter added by a publisher) published in a volume containing other reported judicial decisions,
e.g.
Meyer v
. Bright
(1992) published in 94 D.L.R.(4th) 648;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,042;
(b) a headnote (with catchwords, state­ment of the case and conclusion) in a reported judicial decision,
e.g. the headnote in the reported judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
the headnote in the reported judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
the headnote in the reported judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,402;
(c) an annotated statutory instrument (containing commentary, citations and summaries of relevant case law),
e.g.
Martin's Ontario Criminal Prac­tice 1999
;
(d) a case summary (comprised of a citation together with a brief synopsis of a judicial decision),
e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(e) a topical case index,
e.g. [1997] G.S.T.C., Topical Index; and
(f) a textbook or monograph on legal issues,
e.g.
Economic Negligence
;
Forensic Evidence in Canada.
"2. Who is the respective author of each of the following works:
(a) (i) the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(ii) the reported judicial decision of
R.
v
. CIP Inc.
(1992) published in 71 C.C.C.(3d) 129;
(iii) the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,042;
(b) (i) the headnote in the reported 			judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(ii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(iii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,042;
(c) the annotated
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
;
(d) the case summary of the judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(e) [1997] G.S.T.C., Topical Index; and
(f) (i) the textbook,
Economic Negli-			gence
;
(ii) the monograph entitled 'Dental Evidence' published as chapter 13 in the textbook,
Forensic Evidence in Canada
.
"3. Do the respective plaintiffs own copy­right in the works listed in paragraph 2 above?
"
Infringement Of Copyright
"4. Apart from any defence, has the defen­dant infringed the plaintiffs' copyright by making a photocopy of the works listed in paragraphs 2(a), (b), (d) and (e) above?
"5. Apart from any defence, has the defen­dant infringed the plaintiffs' copyright by making a copy of the work listed in para­graphs 2(d) and (f)(ii) above for storage in the memory of a facsimile machine?
"6. Is the transmission of a copy of a work by the defendant to a recipient using a facsimile machine pursuant to the defen­dant's custom photocopying service a communication of the work 'to the pub­lic'?
"7. Apart from any defence, has the defen­dant infringed the plaintiffs' copyright by transmitting a copy of the work listed in paragraph 2(d) above to a recipient using a facsimile machine?
"8. Is the photocopying or reproduction of pages 19 through 82 of the textbook,
Economic Negligence
, a reproduction of a substantial part of the work?
"9. Apart from any defence, has the defen­dant infringed the plaintiffs' copyright in the textbook listed in paragraphs 2(f)(i) above by making a photocopy of pages 19 through 82 of the textbook?
"10. Is the reproduction of chapter 13 of the textbook
Forensic Evidence in Canada
, a reproduction of a substantial part of the work?
"11. Apart from any defence, has the defendant infringed the plaintiffs' copy­right in the monograph published as chapter 13 of the textbook listed in para­graphs 2(f)(ii) above by making a photo­copy of chapter 13 of the textbook?
"12. Apart from any defence, has the defendant infringed the respective plain­tiffs' copyright by selling and distributing copies of the works listed in paragraphs 2(a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) above?"
As can be seen from the way the issue ques­tions surrounding infringement of copyright are framed, the plaintiffs anticipated that defences with regard to infringement would be raised. The defences against infringement raised on behalf of the defendant may be briefly summarized as follows:
a) did the photocopying by the defendant of the works or portions of works referred to in the plaintiffs' statement of issues constitute an infringement of the plaintiffs' copyright, if any, particularly having re­gard to:
i) the requirement in s. 3(1) of the
Copy­right Act
that a "substantial part" of a work be taken;
ii) a defence of "overriding public in­terest" given the role and mandate of the defendant; and
iii) the exemption for "fair dealing" provided by ss. 29 and 29.1 of the
Copy­right Act
. [see footnote 6]
[12]
More broadly, the defendant raised the issue of whether the plaintiffs had, by the time these actions were instituted, granted to the defendant, as well as perhaps to lawyers and judges generally, although that issue was not before the court, an implied license to make copies, at least of judicial decisions published in their case reports.
[13]
Finally, assuming without admitting the ownership of copyright by the plaintiffs and infringement of the plaintiffs copyright in some manner, the defendant raised the issue of the exercise of this court's discretion to refrain from granting permanent injunctive relief having regard to what the defendant describes as "numerous equitable defences and considerations that militate against awarding the injunctive relief requested by the [plaintiffs] and ... the
Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms
[see footnote 7], in particular, principles supporting the Rule of Law and the rights and freedoms contained in paragraph 2(d), and ss. 7 and 15."
The Evidence
1) An Overview
a) On Behalf Of The Plaintiffs
[14]
The plaintiffs called nine (9) witnesses and filed sixty-five (65) exhibits. The plain­tiffs evidence included extracts from the examination for discovery by the plaintiffs of Ms. Mary Eberts who was produced by the defendant. At the relevant time, Ms. Eberts was a Bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada and Chair of the Libraries and Re­porting Committee of the defendant. The plaintiffs' evidence also included the stipulated evidence of Mr. Robert Freeman, vice-president, publishing at the plaintiff Carswell Thomson Professional Publishing and of Mr. John Pineo, president of CCH Canadian Limited until the 1st of August, 1998. The stipulated evidence clearly established the interest of Carswell Thomson Professional Publishing and CCH Canadian Limited in this litigation.
[15]
The extracts from the examination for discovery of Ms. Eberts highlight the in­volvement of the defendant in the provision of a custom photocopy service for members of the law profession from at least as early as the 6th of April, 1960 at a charge per page of 25 cents to "... help cover the cost". [see footnote 8]
[16]
The extracts also highlight a portion of a position paper of the defendant on "Crown Copyright and Judicial Decisions", a docu­ment dated the 28th of January, 1992 to the following effect:
"The Law Society accepts ... that to the extent that any commercial service adds value to the judgments issued by the courts, such as that by publishing a selec­tion of judgments and adding headnotes and other editorial enhancements, that material is protected by a separate copy­right in favour of the commercial entity." [see footnote 9]
[17]
The witnesses called on behalf of the plaintiffs were the following, listed in the order in which they were called:
- Professor Bruce Dunlop. Professor Dun­lop is a Professor Emeritus of Law at the University of Toronto. He taught law at the levels of assistant professor, associate professor and full professor from 1957 to at least 1995. He was actively involved with legal publishing having served as an editor of the Ontario reports and as an editor and then editor-in-chief of the Dominion Law Reports. His editorial responsibilities spanned a period of some 33 years.
- Ms. Geralyn Christmas. At the time Ms. Christmas testified, she was vice-president of publishing at Canada Law Book Inc. and in that capacity managed the Editorial Department which was responsible for the creation and production of the Law Pub­lishing Program of Canada Law Book Inc.
- Ms. Margaret Thompson. Ms. Thompson was, at the time she testified, Production Editor of the Dominion Law Reports Series and Editorial Manager, Law Re­ports, for Canada Law Book Inc.
- The Honourable Douglas H. Carruthers, Q.C. Mr. Carruthers was admitted to the Bar of the Province of Ontario in 1955, practised law for many years and was appointed to the Supreme Court of Ontario, Trial Division, on the 8th of August, 1977. He retired from the Ontario Bench some 20 years later.
- Ms. Roslyn J. Levine, Q.C. Ms. Levine was, at the time of her testimony, Deputy Regional Director, Ontario for the Federal Department of Justice. She testified under subpoena.
- Mr. Andrew Martin. Mr. Martin was, at the time of his testimony, Executive Di­rector, the Canadian Copyright Licensing Agency ("CANCOPY").
- Professor Bruce Feldthusen. Professor Feldthusen was, at the time of his testimony, Professor, Faculty of Law, University of Western Ontario, where he had been employed at the levels of as­sistant professor, associate professor and full professor since 1977. Professor Feldthusen had been an associate editor of the Dominion Law Reports since 1997. He is author of the text "Economic Negli­gence", one of the publications specifically in issue at the trial of these actions.
- Mr. Maurice Coombs. Mr. Coombs was a senior partner at the law firm, Osler, Hoskin and Harcourt and, until January of 1998, was chair of that firm's research group, a post he held for more than 15 years.
- Ms. Brenda Hurst. Since August of 1995, Ms. Hurst had been director, Information Resources Management, Canada Institute for Scientific and Technical Information ("CISTI") which, she testified, began its life in the 1920's as the library for the National Research Council of Canada. CISTI remains an institute of that Council.
b) On Behalf Of The Defendant
[18]
The defendant called twelve (12) wit­nesses and filed forty (40) exhibits. The defendant's evidence included further ex­tracts from the examination for discovery of Ms. Mary Eberts who, as noted earlier, was produced by the defendant for examination by the plaintiffs. The exhibits also included extracts from the examination for discovery of Mr. John Pineo and Mr. John Edmiston who were produced on behalf of CCH Canadian Limited and Thomson Canada Limited for examination by the defendant.
[19]
The witnesses called on behalf of the defendant were the following, listed in the order in which they were called:
- Mr. Brendan O'Brien, Q.C. Mr. O'Brien was called to the Ontario Bar in 1932 and, from that year until the date of his tes­timony, he carried on an active litigation practice in Toronto. Mr. O'Brien was elected a bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada in 1959 and served as Treasurer of the Law Society from 1966 to 1968. Since 1968, he had been a life-bencher. In the course of his years as a bencher, Mr. O'Brien served on a number of committees including the County Libraries Committee and the Reporting Committee.
- The Honourable Sydney Lewis Robins. Mr. Robins was admitted to the bar of the Province of Ontario in 1947. He served as a bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada for many years and as Treasurer from 1971 to 1974. In 1976 he was ap­pointed a judge of the Supreme Court of Ontario, High Court of Justice. In 1981, he was appointed to the Ontario Court of Appeal where he served until his retire­ment in May of 1998.
- Ms. Susan Elliott. Ms. Elliott was called to the Ontario Bar in 1981 and practised in the Kingston area since that time. She was elected a bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada in 1991. In 1995, she was elected Treasurer of the Law Society, a position that she held for two years. Ms. Elliott continued to serve as a life-bencher. From 1991 to 1995, Ms. Elliot was a member of the Law Societies' Library and Reporting Committee. She was chair of that committee from 1993 to 1995. From 1997 to the date of her testimony, she served as chair of a task force of the Law Society that was charged with examining the issue:
"Beyond 2000, the future delivery of county library services to Ontario lawyers."
- Ms. Janine Miller. In 1982, Ms. Miller co-founded a business that provided advice and services to small law firms and other small commercial enterprises regarding the establishment of in-house libraries, library acquisitions, library staff training and, generally, with regard to the management of small libraries. In November of 1996, Ms. Miller became the Director of Libraries at the Law Society of Upper Canada. At the date of her testimony, she was an active member of the Canadian Association of Law Libraries and of the equivalent association for Toronto.
- Ms. Teresa Roth. Ms. Roth had been Head of Reference at the Great Library of the Law Society of Upper Canada since 1975. Prior to 1975, she was for a time an editorial assistant at Thomson Canada Limited and then, from 1973, held other positions on the staff of the Great Library.
- Ms. Jacinthe Boudreau. Ms. Boudreau was called to the Ontario Bar in 1989 and since that time had been employed, first at the Ministry of the Attorney General of Ontario, later at the Ontario Medical As­sociation where for a time she was in-house counsel, and most recently as a litigator with a major Toronto-based law firm.
- Mr. Stephen Cole. Mr. Cole, whose expert affidavit was filed in these pro­ceedings, was a founding partner of a business specializing in business valuations and related matters. He attested that the principal business activity of the business was:
"... to provide financial analysis, business valuations and damages quantification in the context of litigation and other dispute resolution activities and for a diversity of other purposes including open market transactions, financing decisions, estate and income tax purposes, shareholder, partner and securities purposes."
Mr. Cole attested that he had acted as an expert business valuator in numerous litigation matters. He was a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Ontario. In the context of this litigation, he was asked by counsel for the defendant to provide an opinion as to the profitability of the custom photocopy service provided by the Great Library of the Law Society of Upper Canada during the years ended December 31, 1993 to 1997.
- Mr. Silvano Carlesso. Mr. Carlesso was called to the Bar of Ontario in 1978. Since 1984 he had practised as a sole practitioner in Timmins, Ontario with an emphasis in his practice on litigation.
- Mr. Simon Chester. Mr. Chester was a partner in a major Toronto-based law firm with extensive experience in legal research. At the time he testified, he was currently Director of Research Activities, including student training and specialized research services, for the firm with which he prac­ticed.
- Ms. Leslie Cameron. Ms. Cameron was called to the Ontario Bar in 1987. She joined a major Toronto-based law firm in its commercial litigation group. She later was employed as an in-house litigator for a major Ontario crown corporation. Since February, 1995, Ms. Cameron had been Senior Discipline Counsel at the Law Society of Upper Canada.
- The Honourable John D. Arnup. Mr. Arnup was called to the Ontario Bar in 1935. He was first elected a bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada in 1952 and served in that capacity until 1970. From 1963 to 1966, he was Treasurer of the Law Society. In 1970, Mr. Arnup was appointed to the Ontario Court of Appeal where he served until his retirement. Since his retire­ment from the Ontario Court of Appeal, Mr. Arnup had returned to service with the Law Society of Upper Canada as a life-bencher.
- Mr. Hugh Pattison. Mr. Pattison was called to the Ontario Bar in 1983. He practiced in the field of civil litigation with a relatively small firm of lawyers in Toronto.
[20]
Among the exhibits filed on behalf of the defendant is the expert affidavit of Pro­fessor H. Patrick Glenn. Professor Glenn was a member of the Bars of British Columbia and Québec. He was, at the time he swore his affidavit, a Professor of Law at McGill University, the director of McGill University's Institute of Comparative Law, a Titular Member of the International Academy of Comparative Law, the President since 1987 of the Canadian Comparative Law Association, and a member since 1989 of the Board of Directors of the American Association for the Comparative Study of Law. Professor Glenn attested:
"The focus of my 30-year academic career has been the comparative study of various systems of law. I have particular expertise with respect to the foundations, traditions, development and content of the common law in Canada."
While Professor Glenn could have been produced for cross-examination on his af­fidavit in accordance with the
Federal Court Rules
,
1998
[see footnote 10], coun­sel agreed to the filing of his affidavit as an exhibit without Professor Glenn being called as a witness. That being said, counsel for the plaintiffs urged that I should give no weight to the affidavit of Professor Glenn. Counsel urged that the burden of the affidavit goes to the evolution of the juris­prudential process in Canada with references to the evolution of the common law and as such, is proper subject matter for argument before the court and not proper subject matter for expert opinion evidence. I agree with the sub­missions of counsel for the plaintiffs in this regard and have given no weight to Pro­fessor Glenn's affidavit in my analysis and conclusions that follow.
c) Joint Exhibits
[21]
Four (4) exhibits were filed during the trial on behalf of both the plaintiffs and the defendant. Foremost among these was the Agreed Statement of Facts, originally pro­duced in two parts and later consolidated, which is reproduced verbatim earlier in these reasons.
2) A Brief Summary Of The Testimony
[22]
In general terms, the testimony and exhibits before me affirmed the agreed statement of facts.
[23]
In addition, the testimony before me on behalf of the plaintiffs dealt extensively with the process by which judicial decisions are selected for publication, edited and pub­lished. Emphasis was placed on the writing of headnotes, the addition of catchlines, parallel citations, lists of statutes, regulations and cases judicially considered or applied and the like. Equivalent testimony, albeit not in as great detail, related to the development and publication of annotated volumes such as
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
, case summaries, topical indexes, textbooks and monographs.
[24]
Mr. Andrew Martin, the Executive Director of CANCOPY, testified to the establishment of CANCOPY, its objectives and its progress towards achieving those objectives. He testified:
"The principal stakeholders [in CANCOPY] were representatives of writers and publishers in Canada who were looking for a mechanism similar to those that existed in many other countries to licence photocopying and related activities on their behalf. The early mandate ob­viously was directed towards trying to derive revenue from photocopying licensing.
. . . . .
"Cancopy's basic role was to find a simple mechanism for licensing second re-uses [sic] of published materials and principally photocopying, which was in the views of those who set up the organization, very pervasive, very extensive in public and private sector environments. The rights that were assigned Cancopy and the mandate that it has is to licence photocopying activities to collect fees for that photo­copying and to distribute that money to the people whose works were copied." [see footnote 11]
Mr. Martin testified that CANCOPY has membership agreements with approximately 3,500 to 4,000 individual writers and 250 to 300 publishing companies in Canada. The plaintiffs, since 1996, have been among the publishing companies represented by CAN­COPY. Mr. Martin testified that CANCOPY had blanket licence agreements with the governments of Canada, Ontario, Alberta and Saskatchewan which cover judgments of the Supreme Court of Canada, the Federal Court of Canada and the Tax Court of Canada, as well as the courts of those provinces. Fur­ther, CANCOPY had educational licences with all of the colleges and universities in all of the provinces and territories except Québec where a separate licensing regime exists.
[25]
A significant portion of the testimony provided an insight into various perspectives on the custom photocopy service operated by the defendant through the Great Library at Osgoode Hall. Those perspectives included that of the defendant itself, of senior library staff at the Great Library and what I would generally describe as the perspectives of various categories of users. Those categories of users include judges who, according to the testimony, are rarely direct users but often beneficiaries of the use of the service by others, representatives of large law firms based in Toronto, small law firms both within Toronto and remote from Toronto, in-house lawyers and government lawyers. The perspectives of lawyers vary from those who have access to large and sophisticated in­ternal library services with dedicated staff, to those who have distinctly limited in-house library resources and limited supplementary facilities through County law libraries or other law libraries.
[26]
Ms. Brenda Hurst, the Director of CISTI referred to earlier, testified from her perspective as Acting Manager of Document Delivery and the Manager of Acquisitions at CISTI, an organization that, in the scientific field, provides extensive services on an international basis equivalent to those pro­vided through the custom photocopy services of the Great Library. The services of CISTI are covered by the blanket licence agreement between CANCOPY and the Government of Canada.
[27]
Finally, Mr. Stephen Cole provided expert testimony as to whether the custom photocopy service is a "cost recovery" operation or a profit centre for the defendant. His summary conclusion was in the fol­lowing terms:
"The custom photocopying service pro­vided by The Great Library has operated at a loss during each of the years ended December 31, 1993 to 1997. These losses have been conservatively computed ... ."
[28]
As noted in the Agreed Statement of Facts, the Great Library at Osgoode Hall has been the primary library for members of the Law Society of Upper Canada since 1845. It is a reference library, not a lending library. While its materials are accessible to all members of the Law Society of Upper Canada, the materials cannot be taken out of the library. It is not accessible to all. There are about 150,000 print volumes in the Great Library. These are supplemented by materials available through exchange agree­ments and by reels of microfilm as well as materials on CD ROM, on the Internet, and in a number of databases all of which are accessible to the Library. [see footnote 12]
[29]
The custom photocopy service of the Great Library is extensively used. A statistical table filed as an exhibit [see foot­note 13] provides summary statistics on an annual basis for the years 1988 to 1997. In those years, the number of requests made to the custom photocopy service ranged from 3,146 to 4,477 with the average number of requests in a year being 3,813. The average is just slightly less than the number of re­quests received in the latest year for which statistics were provided. There was some suggestion before me that an inference could be drawn that this litigation has had a "chilling effect" on the service since the highest number of requests was received in 1993, the year this litigation was com­menced. Impliedly, use since 1993 might have been more extensive in the absence of this litigation and the concerns it has raised. The total number of pages photocopied in response to requests has ranged in the same period from 89,951 to 123,300 per year. The average number of pages copied over the years for which statistics were provided is 105,833 which, once again, is only marginally lower than the total number of pages copied for 1997, that number being 107,286. On average, the number of requests received from outside the Metropolitan Toronto area is about one fifth of the num­ber of requests received from within the Metropolitan Toronto area.
Relevant Provisions Of The Copyright Act
[30]
The provisions of the
Copyright Act
[see footnote 14] that were referred to by counsel during argument on this matter appear as Schedule A to these reasons. Certain provisions of the
Act
enacted by S.C. 1997, c. 24, namely, ss. 30.1 to 30.3, were not in force at the time of trial of this matter but nonetheless were referred to in argument and will be referred to in these reasons. Those provisions of the
Act
appear as Schedule B to these reasons.
Positions Of The Parties
1) The Plaintiffs' Submissions
a) Introduction
[31]
Counsel for the plaintiffs acknowledged that, in order to succeed in these actions, the plaintiffs must establish, first, the subsistence of copyright in the various works earlier identified in these reasons as being the works in issue, second, that copyright in those works is owned by the plaintiffs, and third, that the activities of the defendant com­plained of constitute infringement of those copyrights. Counsel urged that, if subsistence of copyright and ownership of copyright by the plaintiffs is established, the evidence adduced during the trial establishes un­equivocally that such copyrights were breached through the making of a copy, through the storage of a copy in the memory of a facsimile machine for later transmission by facsimile, through the transmission by facsimile of a copy and through distribution of a copy or selling a copy, all without the consent of the plaintiffs. From such con­clusions in relation to the publications in issue, counsel urged that the court should extrapolate to provide a declaration generally in respect of the works of the plaintiffs and a related generalized injunction.
[32]
Counsel for the plaintiffs further urged that no basis should be found for exercise of the court's discretion not to grant an in­junction in the circumstances of this case.
b) Subsistence And Ownership Of Copyright
[33]
Counsel urged that the evidence clearly demonstrated that each reported judicial decision published by the plaintiffs is a literary work protected by copyright. This position represents an extrapolation from the evidence before the court regarding the particular decisions highlighted in the evi­dence. Counsel urged that the evidence before the court demonstrates that an editor-in-chief of a law report series may receive as many as 10,000 sets of reasons for judgment per year for review and may select from that number as few as 500 for publication. In respect of each set of reasons selected for publication, an editor external to the pub­lisher would create a headnote, catchlines, lists of cases judicially noted, a statement of proceedings and a conclusion. Further, the evidence established that in editing raw reasons for judgment, that is to say the reasons in the form in which they are re­ceived by the publisher from the court, an editor within the publisher would or might "take those reasons to pieces" in order to make them better before approving the reasons for publication. [see footnote 15] That process would involve some indepen­dent judgment and might, as well, involve consultation with the judge who prepared the reasons.
[34]
Counsel further urged that, on the evidence, copyright exists in the following elements of a reported judicial decision: the style of cause; the case name; the running heads; the parallel citations; the catchlines; the headnotes; the list of cases judicially noted; the list of statutory instruments re­ferred to; the list of non-judicial authorities referred to; information related to status of any appeal; counsel information; other en­hancements such as layout, formatting, line markers, paragraph numbers and pagination; edited text of the reasons for judgment; and re-rendered tables and other graphics forming part of the reasons for judgment.
[35]
Counsel submitted that the evidence clearly established that the case name chosen by the editor might be quite different from the standard Canadian Law Information Council style of cause, or from the case name assigned by the judge or court issuing the decision; that running heads are created to convey all of the relevant information within strict space limitations but without being cryptic; and that insertion of parallel citations is not a simple mechanical process but rather a procedure which requires the editor to consider which citation or citations, potentially of many, is or are the most ap­propriate to include. Counsel also noted that the evidence established that, in some cir­cumstances, citations will be added where none appear in the original judicial text and supplementary information, such as the status of any appeal, may also be added to citations.
[36]
Counsel argued that reported judicial decisions as published in a law report and the reasons for judgment as issued by a court are two different works in that a decision published in a law report contains "value-added" materials and other enhancements not found in the reasons for judgment as issued by the court. The addition of catchlines and headnotes were cited as examples of added value. References were provided to the evidence to support the utility of such added-value elements.
[37]
Counsel pointed out that the defendant acknowledged that legal publishers have a right to use reasons for judgment issued by a court, without payment of any royalty or licence fee, to create reported judicial de­cisions and urged that, on that ground alone, copyright should be found to subsist in reported judicial decisions in favour of the publisher. [see footnote 16] In fact, it was pointed out, the defendant itself had claimed ownership of copyright in the reported judicial decisions it published in the
Ontario Reports
and had obtained an assignment of copyright in respect of those works from Canada Law Book Inc. when it was the publisher of the
Ontario Reports
on behalf of the defendant. [see footnote 17]
[38]
Finally, counsel referred me to the certificates of registration of copyright in the specific judicial decisions before the court, namely
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  decision is a literary work protected in itself by copyright. He argued that the evidence established that the creation of a headnote requires skill and knowledge; that it is not simply a contraction or precis of the reasons for judgment. [see footnote 19]
[40]
Counsel noted that the defendant acknowledged that copyright subsists in the headnote to a reported judicial decision. [see footnote 20]
[41]
Once again, and more specifically, counsel urged by reference to the certificates of registration of copyright earlier referred to that copyright subsists in the headnotes to the reported judicial decisions
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  decision requires skill and knowledge. He urged that "catchlines" in­volve much more than the application by rote of a "classification scheme" created by a publisher. [see footnote 21]
[43]
Counsel urged that creation of an annotated statutory instrument, a case sum­mary, an index of reported judicial decisions, a classification scheme used to index re­ported judicial decisions and a topical index each constitute the creation of a literary work protected by copyright as each is a product of skill, judgment and labour. In support, counsel cited contractual agreements for the production of certain of these works, assignment of copyright to one or another of the plaintiffs in respect of specific works in each of these categories and certificates of registration of copyright, also in respect of certain of the works in issue. Both the certificates of copyright and assignments of copyright were cited as evidence that the ownership of copyright in each of the works in issue is with one or another of the plain­tiffs.
[44]
More specifically in respect of indices of reported judicial decisions published in the
Ontario Reports
, counsel submitted that the evidence clearly indicated that the defen­dant has sought and obtained assignments of copyright therein from Canada Law Book Inc. to the extent that those indices were created by that corporation. [see footnote 22]
[45]
Counsel also urged that a textbook on legal issues or a monograph published within a textbook is a literary work protected by copyright by reason of the skill, judgment and labour required in its creation. Counsel cited the evidence of Professor Bruce Feldthusen, the author of the textbook
Economic Negligence,
for the proposition that writing a scholarly work requires a great deal of time and research. [see footnote 23] Professor Feldthusen acknowledged in evi­dence the assignment of copyright in his textbook to the plaintiff Thomson Canada Limited.
c) Infringement Of Copyright
[46]
Counsel for the plaintiffs submitted that admissions and evidence before the court clearly establish that the defendant acknowledges copying material published by the plaintiffs in carrying on its custom photocopy service and, more particularly, to copying portions of law reports, law text­books and other legal materials published by the plaintiffs. For ease of reference, para­graphs 31 and 32 from the Agreed Statement of Facts are repeated here:
"31. The materials copied by the Great Library include materials published by all three plaintiffs.
"32. About 19 percent of the items re­quested and filled by the Great Library are for materials published by the three plain­tiffs."
Counsel urged that the defendant recognizes that the making and selling of copies of copyrighted material "... is a technical breach of copyright laws". In minutes of a meeting of the Library Committee of the defendant on the 6th of April, 1960, the following appears above the signature of the then chairman of the Committee, Mr. W.D. Com­mon:
"
PHOTO-COPY
"For several years the library staff has made photo-copies of pages of library books for members of the profession charging .25 cents per page to help cover the cost. Librarians are becoming in­creasingly anxious about the possibility of claims being made by publishers for dam­ages for breach of copyright. There seems to be little doubt that photo-copying of copyrighted material is a technical breach of copyright law but publishers have been reluctant to take actions against libraries. Should we protect ourselves by asking those receiving photo-copies to assume liability?"
No answer to the question posed appears in the minutes. [see footnote 24]
[47]
Counsel urged that it is not in dispute that the defendant has not paid royalties to the plaintiffs in respect of copies of legal materials copied through its custom photo­copy service.
[48]
Counsel urged that, more specifically, the evidence clearly shows that the defendant has made a copy of the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  evidence clearly demonstrates that the defendant, through its custom photo­copying service, has made a photocopy of the case summary of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B13, of pages 19 to 82 of the textbook
Economic Negligence
and of chapter 13 of
Forensic Evidence in Canada
.
[49]
Counsel submitted that, in each case, the photocopying clearly established by the evidence or by admission constitutes an infringement of copyright owned by one of the plaintiffs.
[50]
Counsel further submitted that the defendant has infringed the plaintiffs' copy­right by making a copy of the case summary of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  facsimile machine, and then, again, by transmitting a copy of those works or portions of works through the use of the facsimile machine. Counsel submitted that, in each case of established copying of a work or portion of a work in issue, the photocopying or other reproduction, storage or transmission was of all or a substantial portion of the work. In support of this sub­mission, counsel for the plaintiffs provided the following table:
Ex­hibit No
Work in issue
Published in
Size of work
Pages copied
Percentage of work copied
P-7
the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> th) pp. 648-678
31 pages
all 31 pages pp. 648-678
100%
of the reported judicial de­cision
P-9
the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> d) pp. 129-145
17 pages
all 17 pages pp. 129-145
100%
of the reported judicial de­cision
P-11
the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 1-1
2 pages
all 2 pages pp. 12261-2
100%
of the reported judicial de­cision
P-13
Chapter 13 of the textbook
Forensic Evidence in Canada
a 713-page textbook
32-page mono-graph
all 32 pages pp. 359-390
100%
of chapter or
13%
of the textbook
D-8
Part of chapter 2 of the textbook
Economic Negli­gence
a 306-page textbook
60-page chapter
64 pages pp. 19-82
93%
of chapter 2, or
21%
of the textbook
P-17
the case summary of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> d) pp. 50-52
3 pages
all 3 pages pp. 50-52
100%
of the case summary
P-21
the topical index of
[1997] G.S.T. Cases
[1997] GSTC pp. B1-B13
13 pages
all 13 pages pp. B1-B13
100%
of the topical index
[51]
Finally, counsel urged that the defen­dant infringed copyright of the plaintiffs by selling and distributing copies of the works in issue. In support of this submission, counsel provided the following summary table with appropriate citations to the evi­dence before the court:
Exhibit No.
Work in issue
Invoice No.
Handling charges
Photo­copy/Fax Charges
Rate
Delivere
d by
P-6
Tab 3
the reported judicial de­cision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Evi­dence in Canada
GLX930­471 -­ item 1
$5.00
$32.00
$1.00
/page <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> D-14
Tab 3
Part of chap­ter 2 of the text­book
Economic Negligence
dated Jan. 20, 1992 - item 1
$10.00
$19.20
$0.30
/page
Hand
P-16
Tab 3
the case sum­mary of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Cases
GLX980­046 - item 11
$5.00
$3.50
$0.25
/page
Courier
2) The Defendant's Submissions
a) Introduction
[52]
Counsel for the defendant urged that the nature and mandate of the defendant and, through it, its Great Library, were special considerations to be borne in mind in reaching decisions in these actions. He noted that neither the defendant itself nor its Great Library is a business enterprise and that both are mandated to operate in the public interest and, in furtherance of the administration of justice and the rule of law. This reality, he urged, underlies the defendant's counterclaim for declaratory relief seeking guidance in an area which he described as "... yet to receive any judicial determination in Canada".
[53]
The mandate of the defendant is described in its "Role Statement", which provides as follows:
"The Law Society of Upper Canada exists to govern the legal profession in the public interest by
- ensuring that the people of Ontario are served by lawyers who meet high standards of learning, competence and professional conduct; and
- upholding the independence, integrity and honour of the legal profession,
for the purposes of advancing the cause of justice and the rule of law." [see footnote 25]
[54]
Although the Role Statement, like the defendant's Access to the Law Policy, is of relatively recent date, and more particularly, post-dates the commencement of these actions, counsel urged that the Role State­ment did not articulate new purposes for the defendant but rather codified the defendant's view of its role as reflected in its governing legislation.
[55]
In accordance with its Role Statement, counsel submitted that the following state­ment from the New York State District Court is appropriate to the Ontario context and is inherent in the role of the defendant:
"In a system of law based on stare decisis it is not enough that opinions of the court be available only to litigants and their counsel. It is essential that such opinions be readily accessible to the legal profession generally and to the courts for purposes of research, citation and general information as to the state and development of the law, as well as to others who may wish to refer to them." [see footnote 26]
[56]
Based on the foregoing, counsel urged that these actions must be evaluated within the appropriate context, namely the proper administration of justice in the province of Ontario, and not in the context of litigation between commercial parties where the exis­tence of copyright, its ownership, and its infringement are at issue.
[57]
Counsel acknowledged that the defen­dant does not contest the ownership of copy­right by the plaintiffs in entire volumes and series of case reports, and copyright in legal texts where an appropriate assignment is in evidence. He urged that that is not what is at issue here but rather, the making by the Great Library of a copy of an individual decision contained in a case report volume, as well as "small" portions of legal texts and other legal resources, a practice which, he urged, is in the public interest and serves the purposes of advancing the cause of justice and the rule of law.
b) Subsistence And Ownership Of Copyright
[58]
Counsel submitted that copyright in reasons for judgment vests in the Crown pursuant to a Crown prerogative, or under s. 12 of the
Copyright Act
. He noted that the defendant has consistently taken the position that, by virtue of its constating enactments, it owns copyright in the judicial decisions promulgated by Ontario courts, by reason of Crown prerogative. [see footnote 27] Thus, it was urged, the defendant has the sole publication right for judicial decisions of Ontario courts and the copyright waived by the Reproduction of Federal Law Order, reproduced in paragraph 35 of the Agreed Statement of Facts above, extends only to decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada, the Federal Court of Canada and the Tax Court of Canada and not to decisions of Ontario courts. Thus, it was further urged, in the face of Crown copyright in reasons for judgment of the Ontario courts, and given "... the limited nature of the additions that they [the plaintiffs] make to reasons for judgment", no separate copyright exists in the versions of reasons for judgment pub­lished by the plaintiffs and the plaintiffs own no copyright in the individual case reports that they publish. Counsel referred to such reports as "derivative works", which is to say, works that are substantially derived from pre-existing works that are protected by copyright. In the result, it was urged that reproduction by the plaintiffs of Ontario judicial decisions is illicit or "parroted" reproduction of a work and that such illicit or "parroted" reproduction is not protected under the
Copyright Act
.
[59]
Counsel urged that only "original" works are protected under the
Copyright Act
and that the evidence before the court simply fails to demonstrate that the version of a court decision published by the plain­tiffs is "original", nor does it display the minimal degree of skill, judgment and labour that exhibits sufficient creativity to give rise to a separate copyright.
[60]
Counsel urged that none of: the editorial changes to the text of reasons for decision; the development of a title or citation; the addition of running heads; the development of indexing for case notes; the preparation of headnotes; or the development of a classification scheme and the use of "catch phrases" to interrelate with that classification scheme is, and all of those things taken together are, sufficient to create a separate copyright from the copyright existing in the original reasons for decision. That being said, counsel acknowledged that certain headnotes could have sufficient originality to amount to a fair abridgment at law and as such, copyright could exist therein. But such determination would have to be made on a case by case basis and a blanket declaration that all headnotes attract copyright protection would be inappropriate.
c) Infringement Of Copyright
[61]
Counsel for the defendant commenced his submissions on this aspect of these matters with the following cautionary quotation from
Intellectual Property Law
[see footnote 28]:
"Even if a work meets the bare threshold of originality for copyright, ... courts should exercise great care in delineating protection suitable for that type of product. As suggested earlier, a lottery ticket may not merit the same extent and intensity of protection as a book or a computer pro­gram. These distinctions must be borne in mind when one interprets whether a user has a formal justification and whether an activity falls under the copyright owner's control in the first place: 'the too rigorous application of legal logic' should not re­place 'common sense' as one court chose to put it."
[62]
Counsel argued that none of the copy­ing acknowledged to have been done by the Great Library under the custom photocopy service amounted to the taking of a "work" or a "substantial part" of a "work" since the evidence on behalf of the plaintiffs showed that the plaintiffs identified the "work" consisting of reported judicial decisions to be either the report series or, at its lowest, an individual volume within a report series.
[63]
Counsel referred to factors discussed by Professor David Vaver that should be con­sidered in determining whether a "substantial part" has been taken. Professor Vaver wrote:
"- Is the part taken distinctive - some­thing on which the first author spent much skill, effort, or ingenuity? The simpler a work, and the closer the line between its idea and its expression, the less need there is to grant broad control -indeed the greater the care that must be taken that ideas do not end up being protected.
- Does the author merit the degree of protection sought to her and others, to produce works of that sort? Would takings like this significantly impair the incentive to create for other similarly placed authors?
- Has the claimant's present or future ability to exploit her work been sub­stantially affected?
- Is the user unfairly enriching himself at the author's expense? Has he saved himself much time, trouble, or expense by taking the features that make the claimant's work what it is?
- Do the two works compete for much of the same market? Is the market for the user's work one that ought fairly to belong to the author?
"The more one answers these questions in the affirmative, the more likely one should	find infringement. Since the variables differ from case to case, decisions on ostensibly similar facts may also - perhaps frustratingly - differ. The overall goal is to ensure that any decision furthers copyright as a means to encourage the production and dissemination of valuable creative work. At the same time, public access to and use of a work for socially desirable ends should not be unduly fettered. A balance must be struck between the two objectives." [see footnote 29]
[64]
Counsel provided the following table to demonstrate the "substantiality" or "insubstantiality" of the copying directly at issue in this action:
Part
Total Number Cases/
Chapters
Cases/  Chapters
Copied
Number <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. Gen. Div.)
62
1
31
785
3.9%
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (SCC)
71
1
17
598
2.8%
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (OCA)
183
1
2
1,426
0.1%
Forensic Evidence in Canada
, Chapter 13
24
1
32
713
4.5%
Feldthusen,
Economic Negligence: The Re­covery of Pure Economic Loss
(1984)
5
1
64
306
20.9%
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
1,309
1
3
781
0.4%
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
NA
NONE
NONE
NA
NA
Topical Index of
Canada G.S.T. Cases
, 1997
109
1
13
759
1.7%
[65]
While Counsel submitted that the evi­dence before the court, taken as a whole, demonstrated no taking of a copyrighted work, even if it were to be found that it did, the selected examples of copying chosen by the plaintiffs were not representative of the practices of the defendant, as represented by the Reference Department of the Great Library, which were generally much more restrictive. Counsel noted that the defen­dant's witness, Ms. Roth, had conceded only that the copying from Professor Feldthusen's text,
Economic Negligence
, constituted a copying of "too much" of the text. [see footnote 30] A similar breach of policy was acknowledged with regard to the copying of several G.S.T.C. cases which, while not acknowledged to be a copying of an in­ordinate percentage of a volume of cases, was acknowledged to be a copying of more cases from a single volume than would be consistent with the Reference Department's policy. [see footnote 31]
d) Defences
i) Overriding Public Interest And Public Policy
[66]
Counsel for the defendant submitted that "public interest" is a defence, indepen­dent of statute, based upon general principles of common law. He argued that it operates to override the rights of the individual or corporation, including copyright rights, which would otherwise prevail. For the proposition that the defence of public interest does not depend on any "inequity" on the part of a plaintiff, counsel cited
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  defence of public interest is now well established in actions for breach of confidence and, although there is less authority on the point, that it also extends to breach of copyright ... .
"I can see no sensible reason why this defence should be limited to cases in which there has been wrongdoing on the part of the plaintiffs." (citations omitted)
[67]
Counsel urged that rather than "in­equity" or "wrong doing" on the part of a plaintiff, it must be shown that the alleged infringement of copyright relates to a work the copying of which is of sufficiently im­portant interest to the public that it out­weighs the plaintiff's interest. For this prop­osition, counsel cited the reasons of Lord Justice Stephenson in
Lion Laboratories
(supra), where at pages 538-539 he wrote:
"... But to see if there is a serious defence of public interest which may succeed at the trial, we have to look at the evidence and if we decide that there is such a defence, to perform a balancing exercise, as in­dicated for instance in the judgment of Lord Denning, M.R., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  which is so apt that I follow the judge in quoting it. Lord Fraser said, at p. 1202:
'The answer to the question therefore seems to me to involve weighing up the public interest for and against publica­tion. ...'"
[68]
Counsel cited the overriding public interest on the facts of this matter that weighs in favour of the defendant to be the interest in due administration of justice, in maintenance of the rule of law, and in the enhancement of basic constitutional values. Counsel urged that that overriding public interest, particularly buttressed through equal, unrestricted access to the law, would be threatened if the plaintiffs were allowed to successfully assert monopoly rights in the individual reports of cases appearing in their case reports.
[69]
By reference to the following statement extracted from the decision of the United States Supreme Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  monopoly excludes from it all that is not embraced in the invention. It equally forbids the use of the patent to secure an exclusive right or limited monopoly not granted by the Patent Office and which is contrary to public policy to grant."
Counsel urged that this court should not permit the plaintiffs, by inextricably linking reasons for judgment with allegedly copy­rightable enhancements, to engage in a monopoly extending practice, that is, the practice of extending the copyright in those enhancements to cover the reasons for judg­ment themselves. No authority from a Canadian court for such a proposition was cited, but U.S. authority extending the prop­osition from
Morten Salt
to copyright law was cited.
ii) No Standing
[70]
Counsel for the defendant submitted that the plaintiffs have no standing to claim relief in this action as they have failed to establish either that they owned copyright in the subject legal materials at the relevant time or that they were assigned copyright interests in the subject legal materials, at the time of the purported infringements, in accordance with ss. 13(4) and 36(1) of the
Copyright Act
. Further, counsel argued, the plaintiffs lack standing to succeed in this action because they have failed to join the legal owners of the copyrights in question as parties as required by s. 36(2) of the
Copy­right Act
.
(iii) Fair Dealing
[71]
Assuming, without admitting, copyright in the works in issue and ownership of those copyrights by the plaintiffs, if the copying established in the course of the custom photocopy service of the defendant would otherwise constitute infringement, counsel for the defendant submitted that it falls within the exception of "fair dealing". Coun­sel referred me to an article by Nicholas L. Henry for the proposition that:
"The fair use doctrine, to explain it very briefly, is a safety valve evolved by the courts to assure that information may be disseminated without unreasonable de­mands being made by copyright owners for royalty payments when a portion of their intellectual property is used." [see footnote 34]
That "safety valve" is now incorporated in statutory form as ss. 29, 29.1 and 29.2. of the
Copyright Act
.
[72]
Counsel submitted that the test for fair dealing is essentially purposive and that, under a purposive interpretation, the custom photocopy service of the Great Library is a fair dealing with the works in issue. Counsel urged that the purpose underlying the custom photocopy service is private study or re­search, with the emphasis on research, or criticism or review in circumstances where the source and the author's name, if given in the source, are mentioned. In support of this proposition, counsel provided the following table illustrating the purposes identified by requesters since 1996 when requesters were first required to identify the purpose for which their requests for photo­copies were made:
Publisher/Purpose Breakdown
1995
1996
1997
1998*
Avg**
Total Cites Copied
6,638
7,067
7,820
6,384
7,232
Publisher Cites Copied
1,308
1,303
1,374
1,234
1,361
% Publishers↨
20%
18%
18%
19%
19%
Purpose
:♦
Research, etc.
41%
38%
37%
39%
Use in Court
45%
55%
61%
54%
Both
13%
7%
2%
7%
↨ % of Publishers' (Carswell, Canada Law Book & CCH) Cites/Total Cites
♦ Purpose stated for use of Publishers' materials
* Jan 1 - Nov. 18, 1998
** Using annualized numbers for 1998
[73]
Counsel urged that what constitutes "fair" dealing is a question of fact and first impression. Counsel cited
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  whether a dealing is "fair" include: first, the nature of the work copied; second, the amount and significance of the portions of the work copied; third, the use made of the copied work; fourth, the degree to which the copied work competes with the original or the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the original work; and fifth, other factors of significance in the particular circumstances. Against these factors, counsel urged that the "dealing" of the defendant constituted by the photocopy­ing of the works in issue in the course of the custom photocopy service was "fair".
[74]
Counsel cited the decision of Mr. Jus­tice Teitelbaum of this court in
Compagnie Générale des Établissements Michelin -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  footnote 36] for the prop­ositions that "fair" means to "treat the copy­right in a good faith manner" and "whether the treatment of the original is in good faith is a question of degree and impression look­ing at the quality and quantity of the original work used ...". Once again, on the facts of this matter, counsel urged that the "dealing" of the de­fendant constituted by copying of the works in issue was "fair" on this test.
[75]
Counsel referred me for purposes of comparison to evidence before the court regarding the copying practices followed in other countries by law societies or their equivalent and their libraries, which operate under comparable "fair dealing" copyright legislation. That evidence related to the practices of the Law Society Library for England and Wales, of the Lincoln's Inn Library  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and of the Australian Law Library.
[76]
Finally, counsel urged that the custom photocopy service is a "not for profit" ser­vice and that the evidence before me clearly establishes that fact. I was urged to conclude that this factor alone is sufficient to justify a finding that the custom photocopy service is a "fair dealing" that is not competitive with the business activities of the plaintiffs.
[77]
I was urged to disregard any evidence relating to offers of licences to the defendant from CANCOPY that might have been made following the institution of this litigation, both by reason that any such offers were clearly made in the context of the litigation and, further, on the basis that they should have no bearing on the determination of "fair dealing".
[78]
Finally, I was urged to adopt the view that the storing of requested copies in a fax machine and communication of copies by fax or other forms of telecommunication should have no bearing on a "fair dealing" defence, and further, should not be regarded as an infringement of copyright even in the absence of such a defence because any subsequent delivery by telecommunication did not involve a communication "to the public" which is a factor of the "sole right" described in s. 3(1)(f) of the
Copyright Act
. [see footnote 37]
(iv) The Discretionary Nature Of Injunctive Relief - Estoppel, Laches, Acquiescence, Etc.
[79]
Assuming copyright in the works in issue, ownership of those copyrights by the plaintiffs, and, further, infringement of those copyrights by the defendant through the operation of the custom photocopy service, none of which is admitted, counsel for the defendant submitted that the court should exercise its discretion to refuse the plaintiffs' request for a permanent injunction on the basis of equitable defences and con­siderations militating against granting the relief. Counsel for the defendant cited the following passage from
The Principles of Equitable Remedies
[see footnote 38]:
"An injunction may ... be refused, as a matter of discretion, should it appear to be unjust or 'highly unreasonable' to grant it, by reference to established equitable con­siderations such as laches, hardship, ac­quiescence, the absence of clean hands or other such matters."
[80]
Counsel cited evidence before the court demonstrating that the plaintiffs have known for many years about the custom photocopy service of the Great Library and urged that they have "unconscionably delayed" in pur­suing any rights that they might have to the detriment of the defendant and its members and, indeed, of the general public. With regard to the prejudice to the defendant, counsel cited the following passage from the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  circumstances, to grant it would be unjust; and the disparity between the advantage to the plaintiff to be gained by the granting of that remedy and the inconvenience and disadvantage which the defendant and others would suffer in consequence thereof may be a sufficient ground for refusing it."
[81]
Quite apart from whatever other equitable defences exist against the issuance of a permanent injunction, counsel urged that a permanent injunction should not be issued against the defendant's custom photocopy service simply because the plaintiffs do not come before this court with "clean hands".
(v) Implied Licence
[82]
Counsel for the defendant cited au­thority for the proposition that a licence constituting permission to do an act that would otherwise be an infringement of copyright may be implied and without con­sideration. He noted that the evidence before the court establishes that the Great Library operated its custom photocopy service for the greater part of the period from 1954 to 1993, when these actions were commenced, with the knowledge of the plaintiffs, without objection by them, and notwithstanding that the plaintiffs' publications carried a notice during all or part of that period indicating in part that:
"No part of this publication may be repro­duced ... by any ... means without the written permission of the publisher."
Counsel noted that the plaintiffs concede the existence of limited implied licences during the pre-1993 period but urged that the scope of the photocopying carried on under the custom photocopy service during the period, with the knowledge of the plaintiffs, implies a broader licence than the plaintiffs are prepared to concede. Further, counsel urged, there is no evidence before the court to indicate that any of the plaintiffs ever brought to the defendant's attention, in specific terms, any limitations on an implied licence. In fact, it was only two years after the commencement of the actions that an explicit limited licence began to be published in the law reports of two of the plaintiffs.
[83]
Counsel urged that when, in 1993, counsel for the plaintiffs purported to revoke implied licences, it was not open to them to do so, given that the defendants had lawfully acted or detrimentally relied upon the im­plied licences.
e) The Canadian Charter
Of Rights And Freedoms
[84]
Counsel urged that this court is ob­ligated to apply
Charter
principles and values in the exercise of its discretion. Coun­sel submitted that "[t]he transcendent constitutional value at the heart of the pre­sent case is access to justice." Counsel urged that access to justice is delineated and pro­moted by the rule of law, together with s. 2(b) and ss. 7 and 15 of the
Charter
, as well as in the way the rights and freedoms expressed in that paragraph and those sec­tions depend in turn on access to justice.
[85]
Counsel contended that, on the evidence before the court, recognition of monopoly rights in legal resources in favour of the plaintiffs would directly contravene the rule of law imperative of unhindered access to justice, including access to legal resources. He urged that such unhindered access is essential to ensure that the right of access to courts and the legal system generally is not an empty right, and that individuals can fully and equally function within the legal system.
[86]
Against these general principles, once again, it was urged that this court should refrain from issuing the injunction requested on behalf of the plaintiffs and should grant the declaratory relief sought on behalf of the defendant.
f) Free-Standing Photocopiers - The Self-Copying Service
[87]
Finally, counsel for the defendant sub­mitted that the self-copying service facilitated by stand-alone copiers at the Great Library, that are coin or pre-paid-access card-operated, does not give rise to liability on behalf of the defendant if a person using the service infringes copyright without the authorization of the infringement by the defendant. Put another way, it was urged that simply making the free-standing copiers available for use, the library's most often used service according to the defendant, for legitimate purposes, does not involve liability on behalf of the defendant because the de­fendant does not "authorize" any act of infringement in which a user chooses to engage. Counsel urged that a range of "legitimate" uses of the self-copying service exists, including the copying of material in the public domain and uses that constitute "fair dealing".
[88]
In the result, counsel urged this court to grant the declaratory relief in respect of the self-copying service that is sought by the defendant.
3) The Plaintiffs' Reply Submissions
a) Overriding Public Interest And Public Policy
[89]
Counsel for the plaintiffs submitted that there is no overriding public interest or public policy which prevents the plaintiffs from enforcing their copyright in the works at issue against the defendant. He urged that the plaintiffs have no monopoly on the provision of legal information in Canada against which the defendant provides a unique countervailing service. Counsel pointed to the existence of a number of law publishers in Canada, in addition to the plaintiffs, and to other sources of legal information in Ontario and throughout Canada including a range of libraries that, though not holding the breadth of materials available in the Great Library, nonetheless hold broad but varying ranges of legal materials, certainly including the plaintiffs' materials, that are most commonly sought by lawyers qualified to practice in Ontario.
[90]
Counsel urged that members of the defendant and the public generally need not and do not rely on the defendant's custom photocopy service, and certainly do not rely on it exclusively, to access the law. Rather, it was urged that, if the plaintiffs' copyrights are enforced against the defendant, members of the defendant would continue to have access to the law, and the administration of justice and the rule of law would not be undermined. The plaintiffs' reply memoran­dum of law concludes in part with the fol­lowing paragraph and sentence:
"In essence, these actions are not about access to the law. The evidence shows that the members of the defendant and others have ready access to law reports and other legal publications through numerous sources other than the defendant. These sources include document delivery services that are licensed to reproduce reported judicial decisions and extracts of other legal materials published by the plaintiffs.
"In essence, these actions are about the payment of a licence fee. ..."
[91]
Equally, it was submitted that, if the plaintiffs are successful, members of the defendant and others will not be prevented from using legal materials published by the plaintiffs within the context of the ad­ministration of justice, such as for research and for use in court. At worst, they might be forced to rely on alternative sources at greater cost.
[92]
Further, counsel asserted that it is clear from the evidence before the court that the Great Library is administered and directly or indirectly controlled by members of the defendant for their use and benefit and, only indirectly at best, for the benefit of the public or in the public interest. The evi­dence, it was submitted, is clear that the Great Library is not "a library open to the public or to researchers" at large, but rather only to a limited class of the public and of researchers. It was urged that a witness on behalf of the defendant acknowledged that lawyers may maintain their competence through a variety of ways, such as by at­tending continuing legal education programs offered by the defendant and by others, and are not wholly, or even primarily, dependent on the custom photocopy service for such a purpose. [see footnote 40]
b) No Standing
[93]
No reply submissions particularly di­rected to the issue of standing were pro­vided.
c) Fair Dealing
[94]
Counsel asserted that the defendant cannot rely on the fair dealing defences in ss. 29 to 29.2 of the
Copyright Act
in making, electronically storing, com­municating, selling and distributing copies of the plaintiffs' works through its custom photocopy service. Given that those activities are to fulfil the requests or orders made by members of the defendant and not for one of the purposes of "research, private study, criticism and review". Counsel urged that it is rather the purpose of the individual or organization making, electronically storing, communicating, selling and distributing the copies that is relevant to a test of fair deal­ing and not that of the person or persons for whom the copies are made, communicated, sold and distributed.
[95]
Counsel submitted that it is clear on the evidence before the court that, prior to 1996, the defendant did not know or seek to know the purpose for which requesters made their requests for photocopies. [see footnote 41] Even today, it was urged, the evidence establishes that requesters are required to advise whether the copies are for research, review, criticism, private study or court, tribunal or government proceedings, and are given no option to indicate that the copies might be required for some other purpose.
[96]
Counsel urged that the evidence before the court clearly established that copies of the works in issue were ordered from the custom photocopy service for purposes other than research, private study, criticism or review, for example, to determine if any legal action by the plaintiffs was warranted against the defendant or against some other person or entity. Further, counsel noted that a witness on behalf of the defendant was "not surprised" that a corporation providing commercial library services to law firms was among the most frequent users of the custom photocopy service. [see footnote 42] Other non-members of the defendant were also noted to be among the most frequent re­questers for the services of the custom photocopy service. Further, it was urged that the evidence before the court clearly established that members of the defendant made repeated requests over relatively short periods of time that, if accumulated, would have contravened the defendant's Access to the Law Policy, and that no "policing" mechanism to prevent this was in place. [see footnote 43]
[97]
Counsel urged that the sheer volume of materials copied within the framework of the defendant's custom photocopy service in the period for which statistics were before the court simply could not be regarded as "fair" within the concept of "fair dealing", par­ticularly in light of alternatives available to fulfil the objectives of the defendant, in­cluding a licence or licences, through CANCOPY, with respect to the materials published by the plaintiffs. Counsel sub­mitted that the practices of the defendant in making, storing, communicating, selling and distributing the plaintiffs' works was not "fair" whether or not a fee was charged and whether or not that fee amounted to merely cost recovery or resulted in a profit.
[98]
Finally on this issue, counsel for the plaintiffs urged that the defendant's own expert witness acknowledged under cross-examination that the defendant made a "dif­ferential profit" in operating the custom photocopy service in each year since 1993 that he considered in his expert report. [see footnote 44]
d) Estoppel, Laches, Acquiescence, Etc.
[99]
Counsel for the plaintiffs urged that I should find on the evidence before the court that the plaintiffs were not aware of the defendant's custom photocopy service until shortly before the commencement of these actions, which is to say in early July of 1993. It was acknowledged that Canada Law Book Inc. was aware of the existence of the free-standing photocopying machines in the Great Library from at least as early as 1974. [see footnote 45] On cross-examination, Ms. Christmas testified that the plaintiff Canada Law Book Inc. was not aware of what materials were photocopied at the Great Library until about the time these actions were commenced. It was noted that the evidence before the court discloses that the defendant's facsimile service, whereby photocopies of materials are delivered via facsimile transmission, has only been in operation since 1988. That at least Canada Law Book Inc. was not aware earlier of the custom photocopy service of the Great Library was reasonable, it was argued, based on the evidence that, the defendant did not publicize, in any extensive way, its custom photocopy service until at least 1990. It was urged that those lawyers who testified in this matter indicated that they learned of the custom photocopy service by attending at the Great Library itself or through direct en­quiries.
[100]
Further, it was submitted that photo­copying of library materials in the Great Library was minimal until shortly before these actions were commenced. Brenda Hurst testified that the volume of documents de­livered by CISTI, one of the largest custom photocopying services in Canada, was not significant before the 1990's. [see footnote 46] More particularly, the evidence disclosed that the defendant received only 65 requests to the custom photocopy service, and copied less than 1,000 pages, in the year in which the service first commenced, that is to say 1955, 18 years before these actions were commenced. [see footnote 47]
[101]
As the defendant did not widely pub­licize its custom photocopy service in the early years, it did not publish the extent of copying provided by the service in those years. This is reflected in the only revenue figures that were before the court for the 1970's. Those figures disclosed revenues incompatible with large-volume copying. No evidence is before the court as to the extent of copying of the plaintiffs' materials in the early years.
[102]
Counsel urged that the only evidence of substantial copying relates to the years from 1988 to the present, 1988 being the year when facsimile transmission was intro­duced. The evidence disclosed that the num­ber of facsimile orders processed by the defendant increased by about 440 percent between 1988 and 1992, the year before the commencement of these actions, while the total number of orders increased in the same period by about 33 percent. [see footnote 48] In the same time frame, charges for photo­copying services under the custom photocopy service increased by about 59 percent from $57,660.80 to $91,513.13. [see footnote 49]
[103]
Counsel asserted that the plaintiffs brought these actions in 1993, in a timely manner, when the technology consisting of high speed photocopiers and facsimile machines had advanced to a point where it made large scale copying and delivery practicable, reliable and fast. Counsel urged the evidence discloses that it was about the same time that libraries developed concerns about possible copyright infringement.
[104]
Counsel noted that the plaintiffs never gave their assent or consent to the copying of their materials by the defendant's custom photocopy service and that, for many decades, the plaintiffs' publications carried a copyright notification. In the same vein, counsel noted that the evidence discloses that the defendant never assumed that it had a licence to infringe, and recognized from the beginning that its activities, at least arguably, amounted to a breach of the plaintiffs' copy­right. Counsel noted that the evidence dis­closes no reliance on anything that the plain­tiffs did or did not do in continuing to operate the custom photocopy service.
[105]
Counsel urged that it was the institu­tion of these actions which prompted the defendant to review its procedures and ul­timately to adopt its "Access to Law Policy" reproduced earlier in these reasons. Counsel submitted that the evidence clearly discloses a "chilling effect" on the custom photocopy service following the initiation of these actions, as referred to earlier in these rea­sons. [see footnote 50]
[106]
Counsel urged that, in view of the fact that the plaintiffs have dropped any claim for damages or profits, this court should exercise its discretion to grant the injunction sought. It is urged that the grant of an injunction, given the availability of a licence or licenses through CANCOPY, would cause little detriment or prejudice to the defendant or to its members.
e) Implied Licence
[107]
Counsel noted that, since the establish­ment of CANCOPY and the adherence to that organization by the plaintiffs as mem­bers in 1996, the plaintiffs have, through CANCOPY, granted licenses with respect to legal materials published by them and that, pursuant to those licenses, photocopies of reported judicial decisions for use in court and other judicial proceedings have been available. Earlier implied licenses were made express by the plaintiffs Canada Law Book Inc. and Carswell Thomson Professional Publishing in their law reports in late 1995.
[108]
These situations, counsel urged, are to be distinguished from the situation of the defendant which has never accepted a licence through CANCOPY and whose custom photocopy service, it is submitted, never fell within the ambit of earlier implied licenses or the licences made express by Canada Law Book Inc. and Carswell Thomson Pro­fessional Publishing.
f) The Canadian Charter
of Rights And Freedoms
[109]
Counsel urged that the defendant does not have standing to advance the
Charter
arguments put forward by it as it is not entitled to rely on the alleged violation of the rights of others whom it does not have standing to represent. Further, it was urged, the evidence before the court in this matter is simply insufficient to form a foundation for any finding based upon alleged in­fringement of
Charter
rights.
[110]
Finally on this issue, and in the alter­native, counsel urged that recognition and enforcement of the plaintiffs' copyright in the works in issue would not, either in law or in fact, be inconsistent with the
Charter
.
g) Free-standing Photocopiers
[111]
As noted earlier in these reasons, the defendant counterclaims for a declaration that the making of a single copy of a judicial decision, case report, statute or regulation, whether or not it includes editorial matter added thereto by a plaintiff publisher, or a limited selection of text (not more than 10 percent of the work) in a legal treatise, digest or other review or summary of the law, from the legal materials purchased by the defendant from a plaintiff does not constitute infringement of the plaintiff's copyright, if any, in the materials so copied. The declaration would apply only in cir­cumstances where the copy was made for the purpose of research, private study or review by a member or employee of the defendant or a member of the judiciary, or of submis­sion to a court, tribunal or in government proceedings, or to other interested parties or their counsel, and where the copy is made by a member or employee of the defendant or his/her representative using a photocopy machine, maintained by the defendant, for a charge that is intended to approximate the defendant's costs in providing the service.
[112]
Counsel for the plaintiffs acknowledged that the evidence establishes that the defendant has maintained a posted sign above the free-standing photocopiers which states that:
"The copyright law of Canada governs the making of photocopies or other repro­ductions of copyright material. Certain copying may be an infringement of the copyright law. This library is not responsible for infringing copies made by users of these machines." [see footnote 51]
[113]
Counsel for the plaintiffs noted that the evidence discloses the defendant does not monitor the use made by others of its free-standing photocopiers. Thus, the defendant does not know the purpose for which its library patrons use its free-standing copiers to make photocopies of the plaintiffs' works, nor does it know the extent of photocopying by its patrons of the plaintiffs' works. None­theless, the defendant expects its library patrons to use the free-standing copiers to make photocopies of, among things, the plaintiffs' works and directs its library patrons to use its free-standing copiers for such purposes. The defendant charges a fee per exposure or page for the use of its free-standing copiers and, counsel submitted, makes a profit from their use.
[114]
Counsel urged that the overall use of the copies of the plaintiffs' works obtained using the defendant's free-standing copiers is not "fair" for all of the reasons alleged by the plaintiffs in respect of photocopies pro­duced by the custom photocopy service.
Analysis And Conclusions
1) Subsistence Of Copyright
[115]
Copyright is statutory law. In
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  neither tort law nor property law in classification, but is statutory law. It neither cuts across existing rights in property or conduct nor falls in between rights and obligations heretofore existing in the common law. Copyright legislation simply creates rights and ob­ligations upon the terms and in the cir­cumstances set out in the statute. This creature of statute has been known to the law of England at least since the days of Queen Anne when the first copyright statute was passed. It does not assist the interpretative analysis to import tort con­cepts. The legislation speaks for itself and the actions of the appellant must be measured according to the terms of the statute."
[116]
The object and purpose of the
Copy­right Act
is to benefit authors, albeit that in benefiting authors, it is capable of having a substantially broader-based public benefit through the encouragement of disclosure of works for the advancement of learning or, as in this case, the wider dissemination of law.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Maugham, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  with a single object, namely, the benefit of authors of all kinds, whether the works were literary, dramatic or musical ...': see also art. 1 of the
Re­vised Berne Convention
, ... ."
[117]
Madame Justice Reed of this court wrote in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  grant a monopoly. No distinction is made therein as to the purpose of the work created -- for enter­tainment, instruction or other purposes. The legislation historically, in my view had two purposes: to encourage disclosure of works for the 'advancement of learning', and to protect and reward the intellectual effort of the author (for a limited period of time) in the work."
[118]
The Federal Court of Appeal has recently held that the
Copyright Act
should be interpreted in light of its object and pur­pose. [see footnote 55]
[119]
Copyright is said to comprise a "bundle" of incorporeal or intangible economic rights of authors of works and certain "neighbouring" rights of performers, makers of sound recordings and broadcasters. [see footnote 56]
[120]
As indicated in an earlier quotation from the reasons of Mr. Justice Estey in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  law of England at least since the days of Queen Anne and many of the principles underlying even the current United Kingdom statute remain applicable in Canada. Thus, United Kingdom case law and that of other nations whose copyright laws are derived from the United Kingdom tradition can generally be relied on with impunity. By contrast, copy­right legislation of the United States has developed through a different tradition and therefore American case law must be care­fully scrutinized. Once again, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and earlier forms, has, of course, many similarities to the Canadian
Act
, as well as to the pre-existing Imperial
Copyright Act
. However, United States Court decisions, even where the factual situations are similar, must be scrutinized very carefully because of some funda­mental differences in copyright concepts which have been adopted in the legislation of that country."
That this caveat may recently have been diluted by legislative change, as commented on by the Federal Court of Appeal in
Tele-Direct
[see footnote 58], will be discussed later in these reasons.
[121]
Copyright subsists in every original literary work, subject to the terms of the
Copyright Act
. [see footnote 59] For the purposes of this action, I place particular emphasis on the word "original" in the foregoing statement of general principle, a word that is an integral element of the definition "every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work" in s. 2 of the
Copyright Act
.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  wrote:
"The sole distinguishing characteristic of a literary work is not its quality as literature or art but simply that it be in print or writing."
[122]
The
Berne Convention
, 1971
[see footnote 61] provides that alterations to literary works are to be protected as original works. Article 2(3) provides:
"Translations, adaptations, arrangements of music and other alterations of the literary or artistic work shall be protected as original works without prejudice to the copyright in the original works."
[123]
Against the foregoing general back­ground, counsel for the plaintiffs urged that copyright is capable of subsisting in Canada in the following classes of literary works:
- textbooks [see footnote 62];
- abridgments [see footnote 63];
- headnotes and other abstracts [see foot­note 64];
- captions, to which "catchlines" are urged on behalf of the plaintiffs to be analogous [see footnote 65];
- indexes and, by analogy, it is urged, classification systems [see footnote 66];
- translations [see footnote 67];
- editions of literary works as separate works [see footnote 68];
- layout and type sizes, styles and positioning [see footnote 69];
- the edited text of a literary work [see footnote 70]; and
- compilations primarily of literary works [see footnote 71].
[124]
I turn to the issue of "originality" which is at the heart of copyright. As Madame Justice McLachlin wrote in
Slum­ber-Magic
in the quotation that appears in footnote 71:
"The basis of copyright is the originality of the work in question. So long as work, taste and discretion have entered into the composition, that originality is established."
Thus, at least at the time Madame Justice McLachlin, then of the British Columbia Supreme Court, was writing originality did not require that the work be an expression of original or inventive thought. However, at least in respect of compilations, Madame Justice McLachlin went on to note, "... the originality requisite to copyright is a matter of degree depending on the amount of skill, judgment or [and] labour that has been involved ...".  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  'original' does not in this con­nection mean that the work must be the expression of original or inventive thought. Copyright Acts are not concerned with the originality of ideas, but with the expression of thought, and, in the case of 'literary work', with the expression of thought in print or writing. The originality which is required relates to the expression of the thought. But the
Act
does not require that the expression must be in an original or novel form, but that the work must not be copied from another work - that it should originate from the author."
[125]
Professor David Vaver wrote in
Copy­right in Legal Documents
[see footnote 73]:
"Quantitative and qualitative tests for originality are notoriously unpredictable and to avoid them wherever possible is a good idea. As a legal technique, it might be better instead to accept all legal docu­ments a person produces, without slavishly copying a prior form, as original to that person. judges could then concentrate more on the real questions at stake: not how high the copyright threshold should be, but rather when, by whom, and how far copy­right should be asserted."
[126]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  context of literary copy­right has been said in several well known cases to depend upon the degree of skill, labour and judgment involved in preparing a compilation. ... Similarly in the speeches of Lord Reid and Lord Hodson ... it is stressed that the amount of skill, judgment or labour is likely to be decisive in the case of compilations. To apply that, how­ever, as a universal test of originality in all copyright cases is not only unwarranted by the context in which the observations were made but palpably erroneous. Take the simplest case of artistic copyright, a paint­ing or a photograph. It takes great skill, judgment and labour to produce a good copy by painting or to produce an enlarged photograph from a positive print, but no one would reasonably contend that the copy painting or enlargement was an 'original' artistic work in which the copier is entitled to claim copyright. Skill, labour or judgment merely in the process of copy­ing cannot confer originality." (citations omitted)
[127]
I detect a difference of view between the words of Lord Oliver of Aylmerton just quoted and the advice of Professor Vaver to accept all legal documents a person pro­duces, without slavishly copying a prior form, as original and to then concentrate, not on how high the copyright threshold should be, but rather when, by whom, and how far copyright should be asserted. That being said, I recognize that Lord Oliver uses an example of what Professor Vaver would most likely describe as "slavish copying", while Professor Vaver's advice is related to circumstances where there has not been a "slavish copying". Neither Lord Oliver nor Professor Vaver provide much guidance as to how far one should go in following their reasoning where the copying is somewhat less than "slavish".
[128]
Not surprisingly, counsel for the de­fendant urged that the proximity to "slavish copying" exhibited in the evidence before the court, at least in respect of reasons for judg­ment, is very close. Furthermore, in the face of the alleged existence of Crown copyright, counsel for the defendant urged that the plaintiffs own no copyright in individual case reports, including enhancements that they publish, and notwithstanding the
Reproduction of Federal Law Order
that is reproduced in paragraph 35 of the Agreed Statement of Facts that appears earlier in these reasons. Counsel for the defendant urged that the individual case reports pub­lished by the plaintiffs are "derivative works", that is to say, they are works sub­stantially derived from pre-existing works that are protected by copyright such that no copyright exists in the "derivative works" themselves. It seems to me that this is simply a different way of urging that the plaintiffs' published reasons for judgment simply lack originality.
[129]
Certainly there is no evidence before the court that the plaintiffs have been au­thorized, formally or informally, by anyone claiming copyright in reasons for judicial decisions, to reproduce those decisions with or without modification. The
Reproduction of Federal Law Order
does not explicitly assert copyright although it could be argued that an assertion of copyright is implicit in it. The directive issued by the Management Board Secretariat of the Ontario Cabinet, which is cited in footnote 5 to these reasons, indicates that the Queen's Printer for Ontario claims copyright in Ontario judicial de­cisions. Apparently the Queen's Printer for Ontario requires that a copyright acknowledgement be published in republica­tions of Ontario legal materials. But none of the foregoing is determinative on the issue of Crown copyright.
[130]
I am satisfied that, for the purposes of this action, I am not required to reach a determination on the question of Crown copyright in reasons for decision from On­tario courts.
[131]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  amendments to the
Copyright Act
and to Article 1705 of the
NAFTA
Agreement to which the 1993 amendments were related, wrote at pages 31 and 32:
"Clearly, what the parties to the Agreement wanted to protect were compilations of data that 'embody
original
expression within the meaning of [the
Berne
]
Con­ven­tion
' and that constitute '
intellectual creations
'. The use of these last two words is most revealing: compilations of data are to be measured by standards of intellect and creativity. As these standards were already present in Anglo-Canadian juris­prudence - ... I can only assume that the Canadian Government in signing the Agreement and the Canadian Parliament in adopting the 1993 amendments to the
Copyright Act
expected the court to fol­low the 'creativity' school of cases rather than the 'industrious collection' school." (emphasis added) (citations omitted])
Mr. Justice Décary continued at pages 37 and 38:
"It is doubtful that considerable labour combined with a negligible degree of skill and judgment will be sufficient in most situations to make a compilation of data original. One should always keep in mind that one of the purposes of the copyright legislation, historically, has been 'to pro­tect and reward the
intellectual
effort of the
author
(for a limited period of time) in the work' (my emphasis). The use of the word 'copyright' in the English version of the
Act
has obscured the fact that what the
Act
fundamentally seeks to protect is 'le droit d'auteur'. While not defined in the
Act
, the word 'author' conveys a sense of creativity and ingenuity." (citations omitted)
While Justice Décary was dealing with the issue of copyright in a compilation in the
Tele-Direct
case, I am satisfied that much the same could be said with equal force in respect of a claim of copyright in edited reasons for judgment, both alone and in conjunction with "enhancements" such as a unique style of cause, catchlines, running heads, headnotes, lists of cases and other authorities cited and parallel citations.
[132]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  again in the context of a compilation, cited
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  tests for determining whether a work is original? Quite ob­viously, it must above all else be the result of a creative effort and must not be a copy. The creative aspect requires a certain personal effort on the author's part to­gether with knowledge, skill, time, reflec­tion, judgment and
imagination
. The author must expend his or her intellectual energy to the extent required by the nature and anticipated content of the work." (emphasis added)
This expansion of the traditional criteria of judgment, skill and labour, is, in my view, an admirable expression of the creativity aspect inherent in the concept of originality.
[133]
Finally, and with some trepidation given the concerns earlier acknowledged in these reasons regarding reliance on American jurisprudence in the field of copyright law, I wish to turn to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  court.
West
, like the plaintiffs, is a law publisher. Circuit judge Jacobs wrote:
"According to West, the required originality and creativity inhere in four elements of the case reports that HyperLaw intends to copy:
i) the arrangement of information specifying the parties, court, and date of decision;
ii) the selection and arrangement of the attorney information;
iii) the arrangement of information re­lated to subsequent procedural develop­ments such as amendments and denials of rehearing; and
iv) the selection of parallel and alter­native citations.
"Each element either adds or rearranges pre-existing facts, in themselves unpro­tectable, and so West is not entitled to protection for these elements of its case reports unless it demonstrates creativity in the selection or arrangement of those facts. ...
. . . . .
"The creative spark is missing where:
(i) industry conventions or other external factors so dictate selection that any per­son composing a compilation of the type at issue would necessarily select the same categories of information, ... or (ii) the author made obvious, garden-variety, or routine selections, ...
. . . . .
"Thus, when it comes to the selection or arrangement of information, creativity inheres in making non-obvious choices from among more than a few options. ... However, selection from among two or three options, or of options that have been selected countless times before and have become typical, is insufficient. Protection of such choices would enable a copyright holder to monopolize widely-used expres­sion and upset the balance of copyright law.
"In sum, creativity in selection and ar­rangement therefore is a function of (i) the total number of options available, (ii) external factors that limit the viability of certain options and render others non-creative, and (iii) prior uses that render certain selections 'garden variety.'
. . . . .
"West's editorial work entails considerable scholarly labor and care, and is of distinct usefulness to legal practitioners. Un­fortunately for West, however, creativity in the task of creating a useful case report can only proceed in a narrow groove. Doubt­less, that is because for West or any other editor of judicial opinions for legal re­search, faithfulness to the public-domain original is the dominant editorial value, so that the creative is the enemy of the true."
[134]
I am satisfied that the last quoted paragraph is particularly apt on much of the evidence before me.
[135]
A further cautionary note: in at least three places in the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  before the United States Congress ... to overrule the decision of the United States Supreme Court in
Feist
..., a decision in that country that had a result similar to
Tele-Direct
in this. There is debate among both United States and Canadian authors as to whether the
Feist
decision is limited to database type cases or will have wider ramifications ... ." (citations omitted)
[136]
Madame Justice Reed in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> also casts doubt on the impact of the
Tele-Direct
decision on the elements of creativity and originality. Madame Justice Reed writes at pages 310 and 311  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"Counsel argues that even if the words of an interviewee were previously copyright­able by the interviewer, as set out in the
Express Newspapers
and
Gould Estate
cases, the recent decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
Tele-Direct
has over­ruled that jurisprudence. As noted above, it is argued that the elements of creativity and originality that are now required for copyright protection cannot exist in the quoted words of another. In addition, as I understand the argument, it is that the
Tele-Direct
decision has turned Canadian copyright law, at least insofar as it is relevant for present purposes, from its previous alignment with the law of the United Kingdom towards an alignment with that of the United States.
"I do not interpret the
Tele-Direct
decision as having such a broad effect. In both the United States and Canada, jurisprudence has defined the requirement that copyright be granted in an 'original' work, as mean­ing that the work originate from the author and that it not be copied from another. In the United States this was initially the result of case law; the statutory re­quirement of 'originality' was only added in 1976. The requirement that a work be 'original' has been a statutory requirement in Canada since 1924 when the
Copyright Act
... enacted in 1921 ... came into force. That
Act
was largely copied from the United Kingdom
Copyright Act, 1911
. I am not persuaded that the Federal Court of Appeal intended a significant departure from the pre-existing law. In the absence of an express decision from the Court of Appeal to the contrary, I think the law as set out in
Express Newspapers
and
Gould Estate
is still the law.
"One reason for being cautious about not over-extending the
Tele-Direct
decision is that it deals with an entirely different type of work from those in issue in this case. It deals with a compilation of data ... . The appropriate test to be applied when copy­right is claimed for works that consists of compilations of data has been a difficult area. This is because such works are not likely to exhibit, on their face, indicia of the author's personal style or manner of expression." (citations omitted)
[137]
I am satisfied that the types of works here at issue, particularly edited and en­hanced versions of reasons for judgment, are more akin to the works at issue in
Tele-Direct
than they are to those at issue before Madame Justice Reed in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . That being said, they are not as akin to the works at issue in
Tele-Direct
as were the works that were before me in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  preferred by Madame Justice Reed in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . I rely en­tirely upon the evidence before me and on the extensive and sophisticated nature of the argument before me, both in writing and orally, in this matter, in adopting for the purpose of this matter a broader inter­pretation of "originality" than I did  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -Press
.
[138]
Against the foregoing, and taking into account all of the evidence before the court in this matter, I reach the following con­clusions regarding the subsistence of copy­right based on the statement of issues that appears earlier in these reasons. I will repeat the relevant elements of the issue statement here for ease of reference:
"Is copyright, other than any copyright owned by the Crown or a judge, capable of subsisting in whole or in part in any of the following publications which involve additions to statutory instruments and judicial decisions:
(a) a reported judicial decision (with headnote, running heads and other matter added by a publisher) published in a volume containing other reported judicial decisions,
e.g. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> v
. Bright
(1992) published in 94 D.L.R.(4th) 648;
R
.
v.
CIP Inc.
(1992) published in 71 C.C.C.(3d) 129;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,042; ..."
[139]
To the extent that the question relates to the three decisions cited, not merely as examples but as the subject matter of the question, my answer is "no". While the evidence before the court demonstrates, beyond a doubt, that the preparation of the reported judicial decisions, including the headnote, catchlines, parallel citations, running heads and other matter added by the publisher, in respect of the three decisions in question, involved extensive labour, skill and judgment, I am satisfied that the whole process, particularly those elements involving skill and judgment, lacked the "imagination" or "creative spark" that I determine to now be essential to a finding of originality. I am satisfied that editorially enhanced judicial decisions should be measured by a standard of intellect and creativity in determining whether they give rise to copyright, in the same way as compilations of data might be said to be measured following the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
Tele-Direct
. Article 2 of The
Berne Convention, 1971
, I am satisfied, clearly reaches to the form of alterations of literary works repre­sented by the case reports here at issue, but those case reports simply lack the "original expression" and fail to constitute the "in­tellectual creations" contemplated by that Article and, more particularly, Article 1705 of
NAFTA
as reproduced in the
Tele-Direct
decision. To revert, once again with some trepidation, to the words of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  editorial work entails considerable scholarly labor and care, and is of distinct usefulness to legal practitioners. Un­fortunately for West, however, creativity in the task of creating a useful case report can only proceed in a narrow groove. Doubt­less, that is because
for West or any other editor of judicial opinions for legal re­search, faithfulness to the public-domain original is the dominant editorial value, so that creativity is the enemy of the true.
" [see footnote 82] (emphasis added)
[140]
Here, whether or not the reasons for judgment in issue can be described as opinions for legal research, faithfulness to the original, whether or not in the public domain, is the dominant editorial value and thus, the creative "is the enemy of the true".
"Is copyright, other than any copyright owned by the Crown or a judge, capable of subsisting in whole or in part in any of the following publications which involve additions to statutory instruments and judicial decisions:
. . . . .
(b) a headnote (with catchwords, state­ment of the case and conclusion) in a reported judicial decision,
e.g. the headnote in the reported judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
the headnote in the reported judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
the headnote in the reported judicial decision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,402;"
[141]
Once again, subject to the limitations expressed in my answer to the first issue question, my conclusion is "no" and I reach that conclusion for the same reasons I reached a negative answer in respect of the reported judicial decisions of the same three cases.
"Is copyright, other than any copyright owned by the Crown or a judge, capable of subsisting in whole or in part in any of the following publications which involve additions to statutory instruments and judicial decisions:
. . . . .
(d) a case summary (comprised of a citation together with a brief synopsis of a judicial decision),
e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(e) a topical case index,
e.g. [1997] G.S.T.C., Topical Index; and ..."
[142]
Once again, subject to the limitations expressed in my answer to the first issue question, my conclusion is "no" and I reach that conclusion for the same reasons I reached a negative answer in respect of the reported judicial decisions referred to in the first issue question.
"Is copyright, other than any copyright owned by the Crown or a judge, capable of subsisting in whole or in part in any of the following publications which involve additions to statutory instruments and judicial decisions:
. . . . .
(c) an annotated statutory instrument (containing commentary, citations and summaries of relevant case law),
e.g.
Martin's Ontario Criminal Prac­tice 1999
; ...
. . . . .
(f) a textbook or monograph on legal issues,
e.g.
Economic Negligence
;
Forensic Evidence in Canada
."
[143]
I reach an opposite conclusion with respect to the annotated statutory instrument containing commentary, citations and sum­maries of relevant case law, that is
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
, and with respect to the textbooks or monographs of legal issues, that are
Economic Negligence
and
Forensic Evidence in Canada
. I am satisfied on the evidence before me that these publications reflect the degree of originality, creativity and ingenuity ap­propriate to the existence of copyright.
[144]
I decline any invitation to generalize on the basis of the foregoing answers and conclusions.
[145]
While the foregoing answers and conclusions are determinative in respect of many of the remaining issues as they relate to a number of the works in issue, I will nonetheless deal with each of the remaining issues on the assumption of the subsistence of copyright, other than copyright owned by the Crown or a judge, in the works in issue.
2) Ownership Of Copyright
[146]
It was not in dispute before me that, as a general rule, the author of a work is the first owner of copyright and no assignment of copyright is valid unless it is in writing and signed by the copyright owner or his duly authorized agent. [see footnote 83] The
Copyright Act
provides for one general exception: if the author created the work during the course of his or her employment, the employer is the first owner of copyright. [see footnote 84] The evidence before the court clearly establishes that editorial en­hancements to the reported judicial decisions in issue, other than headnotes and catchlines, were authored by employees of the plaintiffs who "made the work" in the course of their employment.
[147]
The testimony of Ms. Geralyn Christmas was to the effect that the plaintiffs obtain assignments of copyright from the editors who write headnotes and catchlines and that standard contractual arrangements between the plaintiffs and authors involved an assignment of copyright with rare excep­tions, wherein "gentlemen's agreements" are relied upon. No "gentlemen's agreement" arrangement was here relied on. A number of written assignments of copyright and confirmations of assignments of copyright with respect to works at issue were in evi­dence before me. [see footnote 85] Similarly, copies of certificates of registration of copy­right entitled:
"Edited  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ";
"Edited  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ";
"Compilation of the reported judicial de­cisions in Volume 94 of the Dominion Law Reports, Fourth Edition";
"Civil Law Classification Scheme";
"Compilation of reported judicial decisions in Volume 24 of the Canadian Labour Law Cases cited as 93 C.L.L.C.";
"
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ";
"
Economic Negligence, The Recovery of Pure Economic Loss,
(Second Edition)";
"Chapter 13 of '
Forensic Evidence in Canada
'";
"
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
"; and
"
Topical Index of Canada GST Cases
(1997 bound)"
were also in evidence before me [see foot­note 86], each indicating that one or another of the plaintiffs is the owner of copyright. Interestingly enough, except with respect to the certificate for "Civil Law Classification Scheme", all registrations were obtained within the few months preceding the trial of this matter.
[148]
Section 53 of the
Copyright Act
provides that a certificate of registration of copyright in a work is prima facie evidence that copyright subsists and that the registrant is the owner of the copyright.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  there is evidence to con­tradict the certificate [of copyright], then its weight may be affected, but in the absence of any such evidence, its weight is not to be minimized because no proof of title is required in the application for regis­tration and because the Copyright Office assumes no responsibility for the truth of the facts asserted in the application and conducts no independent examination. A plaintiff who produces this certificate has adduced some evidence in support of his case, sufficient to compel the tribunal of fact to act in his favour in the absence of any evidence to contradict it."
As to belated registrations of copyright, Mr. Justice Strayer wrote in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of regis­tration of the copyright dated August 19, 1982, well after the pre-recording incidents  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -Métropole
. It appears to me that by virtue of s. 36(2) [now 53(2)] of the
Copyright Act
this certificate of regis­tration is nevertheless evidence that the person registered is the owner of the copy­right. It is also evidence of the particulars entered therein ... . The date of registration is relevant only, it appears to me, for purposes of the application of s. 22 [now 39] of the
Copyright Act
which provides that where at the time of an alleged in­fringement the copyright was duly regis­tered the defendant shall be deemed to have had reasonable ground for suspecting that copyright subsisted in the work."
In the circumstances of this matter, of course, the alleged infringements of copy­right predated the dates of registration. That being said, as previously noted, the defen­dant was, at all times relevant to these actions, conscious of the potential in­fringement of copyright through the operation of the custom photocopy service.
[149]
Where I have found copyright other than Crown copyright or copyright in a judge to exist in the works in issue, I am satisfied that the relevant plaintiff is the owner of the copyright. I reach this con­clusion primarily based on the certificates of copyright and evidence of assignments that are before the court. Where I have found copyright other than copyright in the Crown or a judge not to exist, if I were found to be wrong in this, I would find the relevant plaintiff to be the owner of the copyright based on the totality of the evidence before the court and, in particular, the testimony of Professor Dunlop and Ms. Geralyn Christmas and the exhibits comprising assignments of copyright, confirmations of assignments of copyright and registrations of copyright.
3) Infringement Of Copyright
[150]
For ease of reference, I repeat here the text of s. 27(1) and the relevant portions of s. 27(2) of the
Copyright Act
:
"27(1) It is an infringement of copyright for any person to do, without the consent of the owner of the copyright, anything that by this Act only the owner of the copyright has the right to do.
"27(2) It is an infringement of copyright for any person to
(a) sell or rent out,
(b) distribute to such an extent as to affect prejudicially the owner of the copyright;
. . . . .
(d) possess for the purpose of doing anything referred to in paragraphs (a) to (c), or
. . . . .
a copy of a work, ... of a communication signal that the person knows or should have known infringes copyright;"
"27(1) Constitue une violation du droit d'auteur l'accomplissement, sans le con­sentement du titulaire de ce droit, d'un acte qu'en vertu de la présente loi seul ce titulaire a la faculté d'accomplir.
"27(2) Constitue une violation du droit d'auteur l'accomplissement de tout acte ci-après en ce qui a trait à l'exemplaire d'une oeuvre, ... ou d'une fixation d'un signal de com­munication alors que la personne qui accomplit l'acte sait ou devrait savoir que la production de l'exemplaire constitue une violation de ce droit, ...:
a) la vente ou la location;
b) la mise en circulation de façon à porter préjudice au titulaire du droit d'auteur;
. . . . .
d) la possession en vue de l'un ou l'autre des actes visés aux alinéas a) à c);"
[151]
By virtue of s. 3(1) of the
Copyright Act
, "copyright" in relation to a work, means the sole right to produce or reproduce the work or any substantial part of the work, in any material form whatever and, in the case of literary works such as those here in issue, includes the sole right to communicate the work to the public by telecommunication. Thus, the limits of the "sole rights" of the owner of copyright in works such as those here in issue is defined by that which constitutes "infringement" of those sole rights.
[152]
With the exception of
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
, that the works in issue or parts thereof were copied and distributed is illustrated by the table set out in paragraph 50 of these reasons. Only in the cases of the textbooks
Forensic Evi­dence in Canada
and
Economic Negli­gence
was the reproduction of less than 100% of the work in issue.
[153]
That there was a fee or charge levied for such reproduction and for delivery of the reproduced copy, and that in two cases the delivery was by "fax" or "tele­communication", is illustrated by the table in paragraph 51 of these reasons.
[154]
The issues for determination are, then, in relation to infringement, leaving aside for the moment the range of defences raised by the defendant and assuming ownership of copyright in the plaintiffs, whether, in re­spect of the textbooks
Forensic Evidence in Canada
and
Economic Negligence
, the reproduction was of "any substantial part thereof", whether the reproduced material was "sold", whether the distribution was to such an extent as to affect prejudicially the owner of the copyright, whether storage of copies in the memory of a facsimile machine constituted possession for the purpose of sale or distribution, and whether the distribution by facsimile was a communication of the work to the public. For the purposes of the discussion that follows, I assume ownership of copyright by the plaintiffs in the works in issue and that the defendant knew or should have known that its actions would infringe copyright if copyright subsisted.
[155]
The claim to copyright asserted by the plaintiffs in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  not in the case reports and headnotes as part of the volumes in which they were published or, even more broadly, in the series of volumes of which the volumes in which they were published formed a part. On the assumption that I have made for the purposes of this analysis, I am satisfied that the evidence before the court demonstrates beyond doubt that there was a substantial copying. The same applies with respect to the copying of the case summary of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  paragraph [50] of these reasons, the copying from
Forensic Evidence in Canada
amounted to the copying of the whole of a 32-page monograph within a 713-page text­book, which amounted to 13 percent of the whole of the textbook. In the case of the textbook
Economic Negligence
, which is 306 pages in length, 69 pages were copied amounting to 93 percent of one chapter and 21 percent of the pages of the textbook.
[157]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Simmonds, J., from
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  a substantial part of this compilation made by the plaintiff at a great deal of cost and trouble to himself has been taken by the defendants for the pur­pose of their own magazine and in­corporated in this article."
[158]
In
Copinger and Skone James on Copyright
[see footnote 91], the learned authors wrote at page 175:
"It has repeatedly been held that 'substantial' in this connection relates much more to the quality of what has been taken than to the quantity. The quality, or importance, of the part taken is frequently more significant than the proportion which the borrowed part bears to the whole work. Thus if so much is taken that the value of the original is sensibly diminished, or that the labours of the original author are substantially, and to an injurious extent, appropriated by another, that is sufficient, in law, to constitute a piracy 'pro tanto'.
"In deciding questions of this sort, regard must be had to the nature and objects of the selection made, the quantity and value of the materials used, and the degree to which the use may prejudice the sale, or diminish the profits, direct or indirect, or supersede the objects of the original work. It may be relevant to consider whether there has been an 'animus furandi' on the part of the defendant in the sense of an intention on the part of the defendant to take for the purpose of saving himself labour. Many mixed ingredients enter into the consideration of such questions. In short, the question of substantiality is a matter of degree in each case and will be considered having regard to all the cir­cumstances. Generally, it is not useful to refer to particular decisions as to the quan­tity taken." (citations omitted)
[159]
To the same effect, Mr. Justice Richard, as he then was, wrote in
U & R Tax Services Ltd.
v.
H & R Block Canada Inc
. [see footnote 92]:
"In this instance, the defendant has ad­mitted to copying a portion of U & R's form and the inquiry is therefore directed to whether the copying was 'substantial' within the meaning given to that term by the courts: '[w]hat constitutes a 'substantial part' is a question of fact and, in this respect, the courts have given more em­phasis on the quality of what was taken from the original work rather than the quantity'. (Huges G. Richard,
Concept of Infringement in the Copyright Act
in G. F. Henderson, ed.,
Copyright and Con­fidential Information Law of Canada
(Toronto: Carswell, 1994) 201 at p. 208.) Some of the matters that have been con­sidered by courts in the past include:
(a) the quality and quantity of the material taken;
(b) the extent to which the defendant's use adversely affects the plaintiff's activities and diminishes the value of the plaintiff's copyright;
(c) whether the material taken is the proper subject-matter of a copyright;
(d) whether the defendant intentionally appropriated the plaintiff's work to save time and effort; and
(e) whether the material taken is used in the same or similar fashion as the plain­tiff's."
[160]
Against the foregoing authorities, I am satisfied that the copying established in the evidence before me from the textbooks
Forensic Evidence in Canada
and
Economic Negligence
was "substantial".
[161]
The expert evidence of Mr. Stephen Cole was the only evidence before the court on the issue of profitability of the custom photocopy service. In summary, his brief conclusion was in the following terms:
"The custom photocopying service pro­vided by The Great Library has operated at a loss during each of the years ended December 31, 1993 to 1997. These losses have been conservatively computed ... ."
Despite the able cross-examination of Mr. Cole conducted on behalf of the plaintiffs, I am satisfied that the copies of works in issue that were made in the course of the custom photocopy service were not "sold".
[162]
As indicated above in the discussion of "substantial taking", Mr. Justice Richard of this court, as he then was, included the factor of prejudicial effect on the copyright owner of the copying in question. Treated as a separate factor, on the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the copying of the works in issue in the course of its custom photo­copy service and the distribution of the photocopies to the requesters constituted a distribution and was "... to such an extent as to affect prejudicially the owner of the copyright" within the meaning of s. 27(2)(b) of the
Copyright Act
.
[163]
I am satisfied that storage of copies in the memory of a facsimile machine for subsequent distribution, whether by trans­mission by facsimile or otherwise, constitutes possession for the purpose of sale or dis­tribution. There was some evidence before the court that such storage took place in the operation of the custom photocopy service with respect to some of the works in issue. This point was not extensively argued before me.
[164]
As indicated earlier in these reasons, copyright in a literary work includes the sole right to communicate the work to the public by telecommunication. It was not in dispute before me that transmission of copies by facsimile constituted communication of a literary work by telecommunication. What was in dispute was whether such com­munication was "to the public" within the meaning of s. 3(1)(f) of the
Copyright Act
.
[165]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  public" in the s. 3(1)(f) of the
Copyright Act
"... are broader than 'in public'".
[166]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in the context of copy­right:
"If anything, the use of the words 'to the public' conveys a broader concept than the use of the words 'in public' since it makes clear that the place where the relevant communication occurs is irrelevant. That is to say, there can be a communication to individual members of the public in a private or domestic setting which is never­theless a communication to the public."
[167]
Both of the foregoing authorities arise from factual situations where the person transmitting the telecommunication could reasonably be expected to have intended the communication to be received by multiple persons at diverse locations. They involved telecommunications directed to a relatively broad public, albeit not the public at large. They could be described to be tele­communications that were from a single point, intended as in the case for example of subscription or pay-per-view television, to be received and capable of being received at multiple points. That is not the situation before me. Here, the telecommunications, by facsimile, emanated from a single point and were each intended to be received at a single point. Indeed, as I understand the technology, each would only have been receivable at a single point barring a mal­function or some form of unanticipated interception. I am satisfied that the tele­communications here in question were not telecommunications "to the public".
4) Defences
i) Overriding Public Interest And Public Policy
[168]
While the defendant is undoubtedly unique, at least in Ontario, both historically and in current practice, in its role in the administration of justice and in terms of the nature and contribution of its Great Library to the administration of justice, I am not satisfied that the role of the defendant, let alone of its Great Library, is such as to entitle it to override any copyright interests that the plaintiffs have or might have in the works in issue. Put another way, I am not satisfied that the public interest in the due administration of justice, the maintenance of the rule of law and the enhancement of basic constitutional values through relatively equal, unrestricted access to the law would be significantly impaired through recognition and enforcement of any copyright interests that the plaintiffs might have in the works in issue. Further, to find copyright in the plain­tiffs in respect of reasons for judgment as published by them, particularly the reasons for judgment that are works here in issue, would not be tantamount to vesting in the plaintiffs an exclusive copyright in those reasons for judgment simply through en­hancements of the reasons for judgment, whether by way of additions such as head­notes, catchlines and the like, or through editorial modifications, or both. Any copy­right in the original reasons for judgment and in other enhanced versions of those reasons for judgment would not somehow be overridden or expunged through recognition of copyright rights of the plaintiffs.
[169]
In sum, I am in agreement with a conclusion contained in the plaintiffs' reply memorandum of law, quoted earlier in these reasons, which I repeat here for ease of reference:
"In essence, these actions are not about access to the law. The evidence shows that the members of the defendant and others have ready access to law reports and other legal publications through numerous sources other than the defendant. These sources include document delivery services that are licensed to reproduce reported judicial decisions and extracts of other legal materials published by the plaintiffs.
"In essence, these actions are about the payment of a license fee. ..."
[170]
Assuming copyright in the plaintiffs in the works here in issue, there was absolutely no evidence before the court to the effect, first, that licences to carry on the custom photocopy service would not be reasonably available to the defendant from the plaintiffs, and second, that licence fees in respect of any such licences would be so prohibitive as to impinge on the public interest or be con­trary to public policy. Indeed, a mechanism exists to ensure that copyright licence fees are just and reasonable.
ii) No Standing
[171]
As indicated earlier in these reasons, the defendant submits that the plaintiffs have no standing to bring these actions because they are not the owners of copyright in the works in issue, either because they are not the authors or because they have not satis­factorily established that they have received assignments from the authors, and, not being the owners, they have failed to join the legal owners of copyright in the works in issue in these proceedings. [see footnote 95]
[172]
I have commented on issues of existence of copyright and ownership earlier in these reasons. Very briefly, if the plain­tiffs were owners of copyright in all the works in issue, they are the owners thereof to the extent that the copyright derives from the work of their employees and, to the extent that it does not, by reason of as­signments of copyright in evidence before me, albeit that not all of the assignments might withstand minute examination and analysis, a process to which they were not subjected in argument before me.
iii) Fair Dealing
[173]
For ease of reference, the relevant provisions of the
Copyright Act
in force at the time of the hearing before me are repro­duced here:
"29. Fair dealing for the purpose of re­search or private study does not infringe copyright.
"29.1 Fair dealing for the purpose of criticism or review does not infringe copy­right if the following are mentioned:
(a) the source; and
(b) if given in the source, the name of the
(i) author, in the case of a work,"
"29. L'utilisation équitable d'une oeuvre ou de tout autre objet du droit d'auteur aux fins d'étude privée ou de recherche ne constitue pas une violation du droit d'auteur.
"29.1 L'utilisation équitable d'une oeuvre ou de tout autre objet du droit d'auteur aux fins de critique ou de compte rendu ne constitue pas une violation du droit d'auteur à la condition que soient men­tionnés:
a) d'une part, la source;
b) d'autre part, si ces renseignements figurent dans la source:
(i) dans le cas d'une oeuvre, le nom de l'auteur,"
The "library exception", not in force at the time of the hearing before me but pro­claimed in force the 1st of September, 1999, [see footnote 96] will be briefly commented on below.
[174]
The copying by the defendant in the course of its custom photocopy service was done in response to requests received, di­rectly or indirectly, from members of the defendant; it was not done for the defen­dant's own use in research, private study, criticism or review. Prior to 1996, the defen­dant neither asked for, nor maintained a record of, the use to which the requesters proposed to put the copies. Commencing in 1996, requesters were required to identify the use to which they proposed to put the copies from among a list of possible uses, all of which were within the scope of "fair dealing". No alternative use, beyond the scope of "fair dealing", was identified and a requester was provided no special op­portunity to identify a use beyond the limits of "fair dealing".
[175]
As noted earlier in these reasons, the Supreme Court of Canada has put beyond doubt the proposition that there is no re­quirement to show knowledge or mens rea to establish direct infringement of copyright; if the actions of the defendant are not them­selves within the ambit of fair dealing, or if the actions of the requesters of copies from the custom photocopy service were not in fact within the ambit of fair dealing, then lack of knowledge on the part of the defen­dant of the ultimate use is not itself a de­fence. [see footnote 97]  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  exception applies is on the defendants. Mr. Jeffs contended that s. 6(1) is widely drawn and not limited to the actual student, so that if a dealing is fair and for the purposes of private study the subsection applies whether the private study in mind is one's own or that of somebody else. Here, he said, the dealing was for the purpose of private study by the examinees who would acquire the notes. I do not accept that argument. To my mind s. 6(1) authorises what would otherwise be an infringement if one is engaged in private study or re­search. The authors of the Notes, when writing the Notes and thus 'dealing' with the original work, were not engaged in private study or research."
I am satisfied that the same might be said on the facts of this matter. The copying by the defendant in the course of its custom photo­copy service was not for a purpose within the ambit of fair dealing notwithstanding that the ultimate use by the requester of the photocopying might itself be within the ambit of fair dealing. The conclusion in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> quoted above has been followed in both Australia and New Zealand. [see foot­note 99] I am satisfied that the fair dealing exception should be strictly construed.
[176]
While counsel for the defendant urged that the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision can be distinguished on its facts and that neither the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision itself nor the Australian and New Zealand decisions adopting its reasoning have been applied in Canada and should not be applied in Canada as they are contrary to the plain meaning of the fair dealing pro­visions of the
Copyright Act
, I am satisfied that those decisions are apt to the facts of this matter which, I acknowledge, are not identical to those of the cited decisions. I am satisfied that my conclusion in this regard is consistent with the "library exception" amendment to the fair dealing sections re­cently adopted by Parliament and now pro­claimed in force.
[177]
The "library exception" provisions of the
Copyright Act
are set out in Schedule B to these reasons. They must be read together with the definition "library, archive or museum" in s. 2 of the
Act
, which is set out in Schedule A to these reasons. Whether or not those provisions would constitute a complete defence for the activities of the custom photocopy service here at issue was not argued before me, though it was alluded to, and is not for me to determine. Suffice it to say, the "library exception" provisions demonstrate that photocopy services operated by libraries such as the defendant's Great Library at Osgoode Hall were a matter of public policy concern that warranted special attention by Parliament. Legislative proposals attracted broad public debate. Repre­sentations were made to parliamentary com­mittees, and undoubtedly to others, on behalf of law publishers such as the plaintiffs and organizations such as the defendant. The resulting provisions of law could have been addressed to the issues before this court. If they were not addressed to the issues before this court, then that policy option was adopted with full knowledge of those issues. Suffice it further to say that the nature of the "library exception" issue, the nature of the response to that issue by Parliament and the extent of the public debate engendered by the amendments augurs in favour of an inter­pretation of the "fair dealing" exception in force at the time this case was argued that does not encompass the activities of the custom photocopy service of the Great Library here at issue.
[178]
I will return to the question of the "library exception", albeit briefly, in the context of my analysis regarding the declara­tion sought by the defendants in relation to the operation of the free-standing photo­copiers in the Great Library. Clearly, s. 30.3 within the "library amendments" relates to this issue.
iv) Estoppel, Laches, Acquiescence, Etc.
[179]
Once again assuming subsistence of copyright in the works in issue, ownership of copyright by the plaintiffs in those works and infringement of the plaintiffs' copyrights by the defendant, none of which was ad­mitted, the defendant submitted that, for a range of reasons related primarily to delay, both in bringing these actions and in prosecuting these actions, the court's dis­cretion should not be exercised in favour of the plaintiffs. That the court has a discretion as to whether or not to grant a permanent injunction was not in dispute. Also not seriously disputed was the assertion on behalf of the plaintiffs that these actions were commenced at or about the time when the technology relating to photocopying evolved to a point where the making of high quality photocopies in large numbers became both technically and economically practical with the result that the impact of the custom photocopy service on the business of the plaintiffs became a potential economic threat to the plaintiffs that warranted all of the implications for the plaintiffs in undertaking these actions.
[180]
To the extent that I have found copy­right in the works in issue to subsist in the plaintiffs or any of them and that such copy­right has been infringed by the defendant, I find no equitable basis on the totality of the evidence before the court to conclude that a permanent injunction should not be granted. Similarly, to the same extent, I find no basis to conclude that an implied licence or licences existed that would justify the actions of the defendant in the conduct of its custom photocopy service. That is not to say that I conclude in favour of granting a permanent injunction to the plaintiffs. I will have more to say about that later in these reasons.
[181]
Similarly, if copyright were found to subsist in favour of the plaintiffs in a broader range of the works in issue and it were found that the defendant had breached such copyrights in the operation of its cus­tom photocopy service, I would nonetheless conclude that no bar exists, on equitable grounds or on the basis of an implied licence, to the grant of a permanent in­junction to the plaintiffs.
5) The Canadian Charter Of Rights And Freedoms
[182]
As indicated earlier in these reasons, counsel for the defendant urged that this court is obligated to apply
Charter
prin­ciples and values in the exercise of its dis­cretion in determining appropriate remedies in these actions. Counsel urged that "[t]he transcendent constitutional value at the heart of [these matters] is access to justice." Coun­sel submitted that access to justice is delineated and promoted by the rule of law, together with s. 2(b) and ss. 7 and 15 of the
Charter
as well as in the way in which the rights and freedoms expressed in that para­graph and those sections depend in turn on access to justice.
[183]
I am satisfied that the response to the position of the defendant in this regard, albeit that it was not extensively argued before me, lies in the standing, or rather the lack thereof, of the defendant to advance the
Charter
arguments made on its behalf. In
Hy and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>   <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"A party's ability to attack a legislation's constitutional validity on
Charter
grounds is more difficult to establish in a civil suit than in a criminal prosecution. The appel­lants bear the burden to establish their standing to raise
Charter
issues."
I am satisfied that the same can be said where the attack is not upon the constitu­tional validity of legislation by reason of
Charter
grounds, but rather on the ap­propriateness of legislation and a course of action in support of rights conferred by that legislation to obtain a particular remedy such as a permanent injunction.
[184]
Mr. Justice Major continued at page 690  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"Following this court's earlier decisions, in order that the court may exercise its dis­cretion to grant standing in a civil case, where, as in the present case, the party does not claim a breach of its own rights under the
Charter
but those of others, (1) there must be a serious issue as to the
Act
's validity, (2) the appellants must be directly affected by the
Act
or have a genuine interest in its validity, and (3) there must be no other reasonable and effective way to bring the
Act
's validity before the court."
[185]
Madame Justice L'Heureux-Dubé, writing in dissent on behalf of herself and Madame Justice McLachlin, wrote at pages 706-707  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"The test for standing in cases which raise issues of public interest, crystallized in
Borowski
, was recently applied by this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  legislation under the
Charter
. Cory, J., speaking for the court, elaborated on the diverse considerations which will affect the decision as to whether or not to grant standing. First, legislation should not be immunized from attack. Second, public interest standing is not required when, on the balance of prob­abilities, it can be shown that the measure will be subject to attack by a private litigant. Finally, as a consequence of the entrenchment of the
Charter
, the granting of standing remains discretionary, but discretion should be exercised in a liberal and generous manner. Standing was not granted in that case on the basis that there was another more effective means of ad­dressing the issue." (citation omitted)
[186]
As can be seen from the foregoing quotations, the position on standing of the majority and the minority in
Hy and
Zels
was largely congruent, albeit that in the circumstances of that case the issue was standing to attack the constitutional validity of legislation. The attack here is of a less tangible nature. Counsel for the defendant did not seek to impugn the
Copyright Act
or any provisions of it. Rather, as I under­stood his arguments, he sought to invoke the
Charter
, or its principles, to convince this court not to grant a relief in the nature of a permanent injunction against the activities of the defendant in the conduct of its custom photocopy service.
[187]
As noted by Madame Justice L'Heureux-Dubé in the closing lines of the paragraph quoted above from her reasons in
Hy
and
Zels
, the granting of standing to make a
Charter
argument "remains discre­tionary". Madame Justice L'Heureux-Dubé
qualified the discretion by indicating that it should be exercised "in a liberal and generous manner". She noted that in
Canadian Council of Churches
, standing was not granted on the basis that there was another more effective means of addressing the issue.
[188]
I am satisfied that there is another more effective means of addressing the
Charter
issues raised on behalf of the defen­dant; that is to say, in the context of a pro­ceeding where a litigant asserts infringement of his or her
Charter
rights or freedoms by virtue of:
- a failure for that litigant to have available to him or her effective representation by reason of the differential availability of library resources available to counsel throughout Ontario; and
- the inability of his or her counsel to overcome that differential availability through access to legal resources by means of the custom photocopy service of the defendant or an equivalent service of some other service provider.
Further, by reason of the conclusion that I propose to reach regarding issuance of a permanent injunction in favour of the plain­tiffs for entirely separate reasons, I am satisfied that it simply would not constitute an effective and efficient use of judicial resources to entertain the defendant's
Charter
submissions in the context of this matter, particularly in circumstances where the "library exception" added to the
Copy­right Act
by Parliament was not before me.
6) Free-Standing Photocopiers
[189]
As indicated earlier in these reasons, the defendant seeks a declaration that the self-copying service in its Great Library, which is facilitated by stand-alone copiers therein that are coin or prepaid-access-card operated, does not give rise to liability on behalf of the defendant for breach of the plaintiffs' copyrights, if found to exist, if a person using the service infringes the copy­right of a plaintiff without the authorization by the defendant of the infringement. Put another way, it was urged that simply making the free-standing copiers available for use, and which, it was urged, un­doubtedly are most often used, for legitimate purposes, does not invoke liability of the defendant because the defendant does not "authorize" any act of infringement in which a user chooses to engage. Counsel urged the existence of a range of "legitimate" uses of the self-copying service, including for the copying of material in the public domain and uses that constitute "fair dealing". The evi­dence before the court established that the free-standing photocopiers stood in close proximity to a notice, quoted earlier in these reasons, but repeated here for ease of reference, to the following effect:
"The copyright law of Canada governs the making of photocopies or other reproduc­tions of copyright material. Certain copy­ing may be an infringement of the copy­right law. This library is not responsible for infringing copies made by users of these machines."
[190]
Counsel for the plaintiffs noted that the evidence before the court discloses that the defendant does not monitor the use made by others of its free-standing copiers and therefore has no capacity to protect copyright holders from infringement of their rights where the infringement might be said to be "facilitated" by the provision of photo­copying capacity by the defendant, in the premises of the defendant and in close proximity to copyrighted works and works in respect of which copyright, as here, could reasonably be claimed whether or not it exists.
[191]
Once again, as noted earlier in these reasons, the issues raised by the defendant's request for a declaration are significantly impacted by the "library exception" to the
Copyright Act
enacted by Parliament and recently proclaimed. Further, the evidence before me with regard to actual use of the free-standing copiers in the Great Library was remarkably limited by comparison with the evidence before this court relating to the custom photocopy service of the defendant.
[192]
Based upon the foregoing con­siderations, particularly those related to the "library exception" recently enacted and elaborated on above in relation to the de­fence of "fair dealing", and on the con­clusions that I have already reached in these reasons, I decline to consider this issue further.
Reliefs
1) By The Plaintiffs
[193]
The plaintiffs seek a declaration that copyright subsists in the following works:
"(a) (i) the reported judicial decision of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> v
. Bright
(1992) published in 94 D.L.R.(4th) 648;
(ii) the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(iii) the reported judicial decision of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> v
. Etobicoke
(1993) published in 93 C.L.L.C. § 14,042;
"(b) (i) the headnote in the reported 			judicial decision of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> v
. Bright
(1992) pub­lished in 94 D.L.R.(4th) 648;
(ii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision of
R.
v
. CIP Inc.
(1992) pub­lished in 71 C.C.C.(3d) 129;
(iii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> v
. Etobicoke
(1993) published in 93 C.L.L.C. § 14,042;
"(c) the annotated
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
;
"(d) the case summary of
Confederation Life
v
. Shepherd
(1992) published in 37 A.C.W.S.(3d) 141;
"(e) [1997] G.S.T.C., Topical Index; and
"(f) (i) the textbook,
Economic Negli-			gence;
(ii) the monograph entitled
Dental Evi­dence
published as chapter 13 in the textbook,
Forensic Evidence in Canada.
"
[194]
Based on my analysis and conclusions appearing earlier in these reasons, a declaration that copyright subsists will issue in respect of the works described in para­graph (c), that is to say, in the annotated
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
, in subparagraph (f)(i), the textbook
Economic Negligence
and in subparagraph (f)(ii), the monograph entitled
Dental Evi­dence
published as chapter 13 in the text­book,
Forensic Evidence in Canada
. The declaration will also signify my conclusion that the owner of the copyright in
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
is the plaintiff Canada Law Book Inc., that the owner of the copyright in the textbook
Economic Negligence
is the plaintiff Cars­well Thomson Professional Publishing and that the owner of the copyright in the mono­graph entitled
Dental Evidence
published as chapter 13 in the textbook,
Forensic Evi­dence in Canada
is Canada Law Book Inc.
[195]
The plaintiffs also seek a declaration that the defendant has infringed copyright by:
"a) making a photocopy of the works referred to in paragraphs 1(a), (b), (e) and (f) above;
"(b) making a copy of the works in para­graphs 1(d) and (f)(ii) above for storage in the memory of a facsimile machine;
"(c) transmitting a copy of the works in paragraph 1(d) and (f)(ii) above, using a facsimile machine;
"(d) distributing a copy of the works re­ferred to in paragraphs 1(a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) above by hand, mail, courier or facsimile machine; or
"(e) selling a copy of the works referred to in paragraphs 1(a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) above."
[196]
A declaration will issue that the defen­dant has infringed copyright of the plaintiff Carswell Thomson Professional Publishing in the textbook
Economic Negligence
by making a photocopy of a substantial portion of that textbook and by distributing the copy by hand, mail or courier. A similar declara­tion will issue that the defendant has in­fringed copyright of Canada Law Book Inc. in the monograph entitled
Dental Evidence
published as chapter 13 in the textbook
Forensic Evidence in Canada
, by making a photocopy thereof and by distributing the copy by facsimile, mail or courier.
[197]
The plaintiffs further claim a declara­tion that the defendant, in carrying out its custom photocopy service, infringes the plaintiffs' copyright by:
"(a) making a photocopy;
"(b) making a copy for storage in the memory of a facsimile machine;
"(c) transmitting a copy using a facsimile machine;
"(d) distributing a copy by hand, courier or facsimile machine; or
"(e) selling a copy,
of reported judicial decisions, headnotes in reported judicial decisions, annotated statutes, case summaries, topical indexes and textbooks in which the copyright is owned by any one of the plaintiffs."
[198]
No declaration will issue in accordance with this claim for relief. I simply am not satisfied that the evidence before me justifies a generalized declaration of the nature con­templated in this claim.
[199]
The plaintiffs claim a permanent injunction restraining the defendant, its agents, employees and servants, in carrying out its custom photocopy service, from:
"(a) making a photocopy;
"(b) making a copy for storage in the memory of a facsimile machine;
"(c) transmitting a copy using a facsimile machine;
"(d) distributing a copy by hand, courier or facsimile machine; or
"(e) selling a copy,
without the consent of the plaintiffs, of the works referred to in paragraph 1 above and any other reported judicial decisions, head­notes in reported judicial decisions, an­notated statutes, case summaries, topical indexes and textbooks in which copyright subsists and is owned by any one of the plaintiffs."
[200]
As can be seen from the foregoing, the greater part of the plaintiffs' claim against the defendant for copyright infringement has not been successful. Further, the success that the plaintiffs have achieved is of such a limited nature that I am simply not satisfied that it would be appropriate for me to exer­cise my discretion to grant any form of injunction to the plaintiffs as against the custom photocopy service of the defendant.
2) By The Defendant
[201]
By counterclaim, the defendant seeks a sweeping declaration finding its conduct that has been under review in these actions to be in accordance with law, condemning the actions of the plaintiffs leading up to the commencement of these actions and in the conduct of these actions, and finding that the plaintiffs have afforded the defendant a broad implied licence and essentially re­straining the plaintiffs from ever again as­serting a monopoly, in copyright or other­wise, "... to control access to or use of primary or secondary sources of law or any editorial additions which the plaintiff[s] may include with them."
[202]
The declaration sought by the defen­dant is a paradigm of overreaching, par­ticularly in the light of the "library excep­tion" to the
Copyright Act
adopted by Parliament, only recently in force, and not argued in any substantive way before this court. No declaration will issue in favour of the defendant.
A Postscript
[203]
In a report published in
The Lawyers Weekly
[see footnote 101], Elisabeth Raymer wrote:
"Quebec legal publishing firm Wilson & Lafleur Ltée has lost its bid to obtain copies of court cases from the Société Québécoise d'Information Juridique (SOQUIJ), the repository for copies of all court decisions in Quebec.
"The case is the first in Canada over access to court judgments. But Quebec is also unique in having a government agency such as SOQUIJ whose mandate has given it a virtual monopoly on publication of cases."
I find the foregoing to be a concise summary of the outcome and context of the
Wilson & Lafleur
case, of its importance and of its focus on the unique institutional ar­rangements in Québec regarding publication of court judgments. While it was included in the authorities provided by counsel to the court in this matter, it was not cited before me. I am satisfied that it had no application on the issues and the evidence in this matter. That being said, I wish to acknowledge it because of its importance in the field of copyright law in respect of judicial decisions. [see footnote 102]
Costs
[204]
On Friday, the 5th of November, 1999, the court instructed the Registry to distribute to counsel an unsigned judgment and unsigned reasons in these actions. The instruction included a request that the material distributed be covered by a memorandum in the following terms:
"Attached are unsigned reasons and an unsigned judgment in the three law pub­lishers versus the Law Society of Upper Canada actions. They are distributed in this form in response to the understanding drawn from comments at the last line of page 104 of volume 13 of the transcript of the hearing in these matters, continuing on at page 105, and at page 117 of the same volume of the transcript.
"On the issue of costs, counsel's attention is drawn particularly to paragraph 204 of the reasons.
"The Registry has been requested to at­tempt to arrange a teleconference on these matters for Monday the 22nd of Novem­ber. Hopefully a time convenient to coun­sel as well as to the court can be found on that day. The objectives of the tele­conference would be to finalize the form of the judgment and to reach agreement on how to proceed on the issue of costs.
"While the court's analysis and conclusions reflected in the reasons, and the substance of the judgment, are firm, the court would appreciate receiving, in writing, before November 22, any technical comments or corrections identified by counsel.
"It is the court's objective to finalize and distribute reasons and a judgment in the week of November 22.
"Thank you for your cooperation."
[205]
The exchanges recorded in volume 13 of the transcript and referred to in the quoted memorandum read as follows:
"MR. DIMOCK: Yes. And as appears to be the practice that's growing in this court, I would ask that the parties be given an opportunity to speak to costs, after Your Lordship reaches a decision and has reason for that decision given to both sides to consider costs. And there is a whole range of factors that have to be considered, offers, and the like, and so on, and I would ask that we be able to speak to costs at some later time.
THE COURT: On the basis of draft rea­sons?
MR. DIMOCK: Yes.
. . . . .
THE COURT: On the issue of costs?
MR. JOLLIFFE: I'm certainly happy to deal with this on the basis that my friend has suggested. And I also should say, My Lord, it might be helpful to Your Lordship if the parties got together with you, prior to the Order, and any Order being issued, so that terms might be discussed.
THE COURT: I'm prepared to consider that. It seems to me that a precondition of reaching any decision on that is for me to settle the form of reasons, and then I would be prepared to distribute those draft reasons and to consider representations regarding costs, and/or reconvening, or engaging in a joint drafting exercise with regard to the form of an Order.
I certainly have no difficulty, once I have settled my reasons, in receiving an agreed form of Order to implement those reasons. I would certainly give consideration to that, if that's what counsel felt was in the best interests of all sides, given where I have gone."
[206]
Paragraph 204 of the reasons as dis­tributed, also referred to in the memoran­dum, read as follows:
"At the close of the hearing of this matter, counsel requested an opportunity to make submissions regarding costs on the basis of distributed draft reasons for judgment. These draft reasons for judgment will be distributed in accordance with that request. I would propose to arrange a brief tele­conference with counsel to discuss the issue of costs shortly after the draft reasons have been distributed. If there is agreement to a conclusion that both sides should bear their own costs in light of the importance of the issues dealt with in this litigation, the lack of Canadian jurisprudential guidance in the area and the lack of full success on either side, I will so provide in my judgment. If further time is requested to make written submissions of a detailed nature or if a request to reconvene on the issue of costs is received, I will consider the request. If it is granted, I would pro­pose to finalize these reasons and my judgment without further delay, given the amount of time that I have taken in pro­ducing these reasons. I sincerely regret that delay. Costs would then be dealt with by a supplementary judgment."
[207]
As early as Monday, the 8th of November, it came to the court's attention that a number of interested parties, not simply counsel and their clients, were aware that some form of reasons and judgment were in the "public domain". Copies were being requested from the Distribution Centre of the Court Registry.
[208]
In light of the public interest, the court convened a teleconference with counsel. During the course of the teleconference, it was confirmed that persons other than coun­sel and their clients were aware of the dis­tribution of some form of reasons and judg­ment. In the result, I advised counsel that I would hasten the schedule for finalization and signature of reasons and the judgment herein and that I would record in the reasons the circumstances that have resulted in the release of the court's reasons and judgment in what the court regards as a less orderly manner than might have been preferred given the length of these reasons and the complexity of these actions. The court re­grets that a more orderly process was, in its view, effectively preempted.
[209]
A supplementary judgment as to costs will issue following receipt of written sub­missions.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kaw
Footnotes
1.	R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7.
2.	See s. 57(1) of the
Federal Court Act
.
3.	This agreed statement of the parties would most likely more accurately refer to "... major
English language
law book publishers ...". Even then, some might question its accuracy.
4.	The following footnote is an element of the revised agreed statement of facts: On February 1, 1999, after the conclusion of the trial, the
Law Society Act
was amended by
An Act to amend the Law Society Act
, S.O. 1998, c. 21. The
Law Society Act
, as amended, provides that the defendant may, through Convocation, "make bylaws ... respecting the reporting and publication of the decisions of the courts".
5.	Only the English language version ap­pears in the revised agreed statement of facts.
The following footnote is an element of the revised agreed statement of facts: there is no Order-in-Council in evidence emanating from any provincial govern­ments similar to the Reproduction of Federal Law Order. Subsequent to the trial, I was advised by counsel of the existence of a directive issued by the Management Board Secretariat of the Ontario Cabinet which includes the fol­lowing paragraph:
"Legal Materials
"Although the Queen's Printer claims copyright in Ontario statutes, regula­tions and judicial decisions, the Queen's Printer permits any person to reproduce the text and images con­tained in the statutes, regulations and judicial decisions without seeking per­mission and without charge. The materials must be reproduced ac­curately and the reproduction must not be represented as an official version.'
See 'Ontario Government, Corporate Management Directive: Managing, Distributing and Pricing Government Information (Intellectual Property)', dated August 11, 1998 (the 'Ontario Directive')."
Although not provided in the Ontario Directive, the Queen's Printer for Ontario requires that Crown copyright in Ontario legal materials continue to be acknowledged in the following way:
"Queen's Printer for Ontario, 199 *. This is an unofficial version of Government of Ontario legal materials.
* The year of publication of the legal materials is to be completed."
As the Ontario Directive was brought to my attention after the trial, it was not made an exhibit and no submissions were made with respect to it.
6.	R.S.C. 1985, c. C-42.
7.	Part I of the
Constitution Act
, 1982 (R.S.C. 1985, Appendix A II, No. 44), being Schedule B to the
Canada Act
1982
(U.K.), 1982, c. 11.
8.	See the reference to Minutes of the Libraries and Reporting Committee for the 6th of April, 1960 at pages 20 and 21 of exhibit P-2.
9.	See exhibit P-2, page 22.
10.	SOR/98-106.
11.	Transcript, Volume 4, November 26, 1998, pages 8 and 9.
12.	Testimony of Ms. Teresa Roth, Tran­script, Volume 6, November 30, 1998, page 191.
13.	Exhibit D-24.
14.	Supra, note 6.
15.	Evidence of Margaret Thomson, Tran­script volume 3, page 133.
16.	See exhibit P-42.
17.	Evidence of Geralyn Christmas. Tran­script, Volume 2, page 70 and exhibit P-5, tab 3.
18.	Exhibits P-29, P-31 and P-35.
19.	Evidence of Bruce Dunlop. Transcript, Volume 1, pages 17 and 18.
20.	Exhibit P-60, page 2.
21.	Evidence of Bruce Feldthusen, Tran­script, Volume 4, page 75 and of Bruce Dunlop, Transcript, pages 13 to 15.
22.	Supra, note 17.
23.	Bruce Feldthusen. Transcript, Volume 4, pages 62 to 65.
24.	Exhibit D-11(f).
25.	Exhibit D-16 adopted by Convocation, October 27, 1994.
26.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 550 (C.A.).
33.	(1942), 314 U.S. 488 at 492 (U.S.S.C.).
34.
Copyright, Public Policy, and In­formation Technology
(1974), 15 C.P.R.(2d) 260, at 261.
35.	[1972] 2 Q.B. 84 at 94 (C.A.).
36.	(1996), 124 F.T.R. 192; 71 C.P.R.(3d) 348, at 384 (T.D.).
37.	David Vaver, in
Intellectual Property Law
, supra, footnote 28, writes at p. 76:
"Sending works by radio, television, cable, fax, modem, satellite, or micro­wave involves telecom­munication. But to attract liability, the communication must be 'to the public'. Such com­munication should exclude point-to-point mail and faxes, and transmissions between a net­work and its affiliate television stations." (citations omitted)
38.	I.C.F. Spry (Toronto: The Carswell Company Ltd., 1997) at p. 393.
39.	(1921), 63 S.C.R. 243 at 252, per Duff, J.
40.	Testimony of Jacinthe Boudreau on cross-examination. Transcript, Volume 7, pages 78-79.
41.	See Exhibit P-2, excerpts from the Examination for Discovery of Mary Eberts, question 103.
42.	Testimony of Jeanine Miller, cross-examination. Transcript, Volume 6, page 159, and exhibit P-44.
43.	Exhibits P-45, 56, 61, 62, 63 and 64.
44.	Testimony of Stephen Cole, cross-examination, Transcript, Volume 8, page 74 to 77.
45.
Testimony of Geralyn Christmas
, cross-examination. Transcript, Volume 2, page 106.
46.	Transcript, Volume 5, pages 15 and 16.
47.	Exhibit D-11(f).
48.	Exhibit D-23.
49.	Exhibit P-56.
50.	Paragraph 29.
51.	Agreed Statement of Facts, para. 58.
52.	(1979), 29 N.R. 296; 45 C.P.R.(2d) 1, at 13 (S.C.C.).
53.	(1990), 111 N.R. 376; 31 C.P.R.(3d) 394, at 403 [C.P.R.] (S.C.C.).
54.	(1986), 3 F.T.R. 118; 10 C.P.R.(3d) 1, at 35 [C.P.R.] (F.C.T.D.).; affd. 81 N.R. 3; 18 C.P.R.(3d) 129 (F.C.A.); affd. 110 N.R. 66; 30 C.P.R.(3d) 257 (S.C.C.).
55.	 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 38  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
56.	See s. 3(1) of the
Copyright Act
, Schedule "A" hereto.
57.	Supra, note 52.
58.	Supra, note 55
59.	See the definitions "every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work", "literary work" and "work" in s. 2 and s. 5(1) of the
Copyright Act
in Schedule "A" to these reasons.
60.	Supra, note 54.
61.	The
Berne Convention for the Pro­tection of Literary and Artistic Works
, Paris
Act
of 2 July 1971 as amended 28 September 1979, Can. T.S. 1998/18 (accession of Canada 28 March 1998, entered into force in Canada, 26 June 1998), [hereinafter The "
Berne Convention, 1971
"].
62.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  1915
where the following passage appears at page 118:
"To constitute a proper abridgment, the arrangement of the book abridged must be preserved, the ideas must also be taken and expressed in language not copied but condensed. To copy certain passages and omit others so as to reduce the volume in bulk is not such an abridg­ment as the court would recognize as sufficiently original to protect the author.
"The foregoing passage was quoted with approval in
MacMillan and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (P.C.), at 187, per Lord Atkinson."
64.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.) at pages 270-1 where Parrett, J., wrote:
"Mr. Trueit examined the list of more than 10,000 codes and truncated more than half of the literal descrip­tions in order to fit them within the 59-charac­ter field provided for them. The ele­ment of originality emerges from the act of truncation while leaving the remaining portion suf­ficiently dis­tinctive to be identifiable. Of the more than 5,000 codes truncated by Prism, HMRI in their review of Prism's work changed ap­proximately 200 before Prism in­corporated them within their soft­ware.
"In my view, the resulting list of truncated ICD-9 codes utilized by Prism by the creative process de­scribed were afforded the necessary 'originality' to justify the extension of copyright protec­tion. This does not, in any way give Prism the right to control the use of ICD-9 codes generally, but it does afford them protection for the truncated codes that they produced through the process described for use in their software."
In addition, in
Abridgements and Ab­stracts: Copyright Implications
, [1995] 5 E.I.P.R. 225 at 233, Professor David Vaver wrote at page 233:
"Shorter abstracts like the headnotes a legal reporter produces of a judicial decision also generally involve enough time and skill for each to be an original literary work." (citations omitted)
65.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Man. C.A.) at 550, per Fullerton J A. and Article 2(3) of The
Berne Convention
, 1971
, supra, note 61.
68.
Copinger and Skone James on Copy­right
, (14th Ed.) (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1991), para. 3-100, where the learned authors wrote:
"The important question with regard to new editions of existing works is whether any original work was done by the editor. Such work may consist of additions to, or alterations of, the text which, if they are not merely trivial, but are material so as to make the totality of the work original, will be protected in the same way as any original literary work, whether they form a substantial part of the com­plete work or not. ...
"It follows, therefore, that where a work not out of copyright is edited, there may be two copyrights, that in the original text and that in the new edition." (citations and some text omitted)
69.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 115 (Div. Ct.), at 120 and 121, per Sedgwick, J.
70.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  pro­ceedings of the trials was sub­stantially copied from the account in
Three Times Tried
, he himself did a good deal of editing. Certain por­tions of his account printed in square brackets were his own contribu­tion, and he added material, omitted material, made verbal alterations, rear­ranged material, transposed material and abbreviated material. ... Again, I take the view, after reading it, that the book as a whole is a literary work entitled to copy­right in its own right."
71.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  wrote:
"It is well established that com­pilations of material produced by others may be protected by copy­right, provided that the arrangement of the elements taken from other sources is the product of the plain­tiff's thought, selection and work. It is not the several components that are the subject of the copyright, but the over-all arrangement of them which the plaintiff through his industry has pro­duced. The basis of copyright is the originality of the work in ques­tion. So long as work, taste and dis­cretion have entered into the com­position, that originality is es­tablished. In the case of a com­pilation, the originality requisite to copyright is a matter of degree de­pending on the amount of skill, judg­ment or labour that has been in­volved in making the com­pilation: ..." (citation omitted)
While the foregoing was cited with ap­proval in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  labour" was deter­mined by the Federal Court of Appeal to be incor­rect. The reference should, in its view, have been to "skill, judgment
and
labour"."
72.	Supra, note 62.
73.	(1993), 31 Osgoode Hall L.J. 661 at 675.
74.	[1989] 1 A.C. 217; 87 N.R. 346 (P.C.), at 262-263.
75.	Supra, note 55.
76.	(1997), 143 F.T.R. 210; 81 C.P.R.(3d) 338 (T.D.).
77.	[1989] R.J.Q. 1003 (S.C.).
78.	2nd Cir. C.A., docket Nos. 97-7910 and 97-7430, released November 3, 1998 and unreported at the time it was cited in this matter.
79.	(1991), 111 S.Ct. 1282 (U.S. Sup. Ct.).
80.	[1999] 2 F.C. 287; 158 F.T.R. 44, at 311 (T.D.).
81.	(1999), 170 F.T.R. 66; (1999), 86 C.P.R.(3d) 129 (T.D.), Notice of Ap­peal filed the 17th of June, 1999 (not cited before me ).
82.	Supra, note 78.
83.
Copyright Act
, ss. 13(1) and (4).
84.
Copyright Act
, s. 13(3).
85.	See Exhibits P-6, P-8, P-10, P-12, P-14, P-16, P-18 and P-20.
86.	Exhibits P-29 to P-40.
87.	(1959), 31 C.P.R. 57 (S.C.C.).
88.	(1985), 4 C.P.R.(3d) 349 at 357-358 (T.D.); affd. 80 N.R. 302; 18 C.P.R.(3d) 257 (F.C.A.), affd. (1990), 111 N.R. 376; 31 C.P.R.(3d) 394 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .	Supra, note 68.
92.	(1995), 97 F.T.R. 259; 62 C.P.R.(3d) 257, at 268 (T.D.).
93.	(1993), 149 N.R. 363; 46 C.P.R.(3d) 344 (F.C.A.).
94.	(1997), 38 I.P.R. 294 (Aust. H.C.).
95.	See ss. 13(4) and 36(1) and 36(2) of the
Copyright Act
.
96.	SI/99-86, 18 August, 1999. Related regulations entitled
Exceptions for Educational Institutions, Libraries, Archives and Museums Regulations
were enacted by P.C. 1999-1351, 28 July, 1999.
97.	 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Q.L.).
SCHEDULE "A"
Provisions of the
Copyright Act
referred to by counsel during argument:
"2. In this Act,
'collective society' means a society, as­sociation or corporation that carries on the business of collective administration of copyright or of the remuneration right conferred by s. 19 or 81 for the benefit of those who, by assignment, grant of licence, appointment of it as their agent or other­wise, authorize it to act on their behalf in relation to that collective administration, and
(a) operates a licensing scheme, ap­plicable in relation to a repertoire of works, performer's performances, sound recordings or communication signals of more than one author, performer, sound recording maker or broadcaster, pursuant to which the society, association or corporation sets out classes of uses that it agrees to authorize under this Act, and the royalties and terms and conditions on which it agrees to authorize those classes of uses, or
(b) carries on the business of collecting and distributing royalties or levies pay­able pursuant to this Act;
'compilation' means
(a) a work resulting from the selection or arrangement of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works or of parts thereof, or
(b) a work resulting from the selection or arrangement of data;
'every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work' includes every original production in the literary, scientific or artistic domain, whatever may be the mode or form of its expression, such as com­pilations, books, pamphlets and other writings, lectures, dramatic or dramatico-musical works, musical works, translations, illustrations, sketches and plastic works relative to geography, topography, architecture or science;
'infringing' means
(a) in relation to a work in which copy­right subsists, any copy, including any colourable imitation, made or dealt with in contravention of this Act,
(b) in relation to a performer's per­formance in respect of which copyright subsists, any fixation or copy of a fixation of it made or dealt with in con­travention of this Act,
(c) in relation to a sound recording in respect of which copyright subsists, any copy of it made or dealt with in contra­vention of this Act, or
(d) in relation to a communication signal in respect of which copyright subsists, any fixation or copy of a fixation of it made or dealt with in contravention of this Act.
The definition includes a copy that is imported in the circumstances set out in paragraph 27(2)(e) and s. 27.1 but does not otherwise include a copy made with the consent of the owner of the copyright in the country where the copy was made;
'library, archive or museum' means
(a) an institution, whether or not in­corporated, that is not established or conducted for profit or that does not form a part of, or is not administered or directly or indirectly controlled by, a body that is established or conducted for profit, in which is held and maintained a collection of documents and other materials that is open to the public or to researchers, or
(b) any other non-profit institution pre­scribed by regulation;
'literary work' includes tables, computer programs, and compilations of literary works;
'telecommunication' means any trans­mission of signs, signals, writing, images or sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire, radio, visual, optical or other electro­magnetic system;
'work' includes the title there­of when such title is original and dis­tinctive;
'collective work' means
(a) an encyclopaedia, dictionary, year book or similar work,
(b) a newspaper, review, magazine or similar periodical, and
(c) any work written in distinct parts by different authors, or in which works or parts of works of different authors are incorporated;
. . . . .
"2.1(2) The mere fact that a work is in­cluded in a compilation does not increase, decrease or otherwise affect the protection conferred by this Act in respect of the copyright in the work or the moral rights in respect of the work.
. . . . .
"3(1) For the purposes of this Act, 'copy­right', in relation to a work, means the sole right to produce or reproduce the work or any substantial part thereof in any material form whatever, to perform the work or any substantial part thereof in public or, if the work is unpublished, to publish the work or any substantial part thereof, and in­cludes the sole right
(a) to produce, reproduce, perform or publish any translation of the work,
(b) in the case of a dramatic work, to convert it into a novel or other non-dramatic work,
(c) in the case of a novel or other non-dramatic work, or of an artistic work, to convert it into a dramatic work, by way of performance in public or otherwise,
(d) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, to make any sound re­cording, cinematograph film or other contrivance by means of which the work may be mechanically reproduced or performed,
(e) in the case of any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, to reproduce, adapt and publicly present the work as a cinematographic work,
(f) in the case of any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, to communicate the work to the public by tele­communication,
(g) to present at a public exhibition, for a purpose other than sale or hire, an artistic work created after June 7, 1988, other than a map, chart or plan,
(h) in the case of a computer program that can be reproduced in the ordinary course of its use, other than by a repro­duction during its execution in con­junction with a machine, device or com­puter, to rent out the computer program, and
(i) in the case of a musical work, to rent out a sound recording in which the work is embodied, and to authorize any such acts.
"3(1.1) A work that is communicated in the manner described in paragraph (1)(f) is fixed even if it is fixed simultaneously with its communication.
. . . . .
"5(1) Subject to this Act, copyright shall subsist in Canada, for the term hereinafter mentioned, in every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work if any one of the following conditions is met:
(a) in the case of any work, whether published or unpublished, including a cinemato­graphic work, the author was, at the date of the making of the work, a citizen or subject of, or a person or­dinarily resident in, a treaty country;
(b) in the case of a cinematographic work, whether published or unpublished, the maker, at the date of the making of the cinematographic work,
(i) if a corporation, had its head­quarters in a treaty country, or
(ii) if a natural person, was a citizen or subject of, or a person ordinarily resident in, a treaty country; or
(c) in the case of a published work, including a cinematographic work,
(i) in relation to subparagraph 2.2(1)(a)(i), the first publication in such a quantity as to satisfy the rea­sonable demands of the public, having regard to the nature of the work, oc­curred in a treaty country, or
(ii) in relation to subparagraph 2.2(1)(a)(ii) or (iii), the first publica­tion occurred in a treaty country.
. . . . .
"12. Without prejudice to any rights or privileges of the Crown, where any work is, or has been, prepared or published by or under the direction or control of Her Majesty or any government department, the copyright in the work shall, subject to any agreement with the author, belong to Her Majesty and in that case shall continue for the remainder of the calendar year of the first publication of the work and for a period of fifty years following the end of that calendar year.
. . . . .
"13(1) Subject to this Act, the author of a work shall be the first owner of the copy­right therein.
. . . . .
"13(3) Where the author of a work was in the employment of some other person under a contract of service or apprenticeship and the work was made in the course of his employment by that person, the person by whom the author was employed shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be the first owner of the copyright, but where the work is an article or other contribution to a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical, there shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be deemed to be reserved to the author a right to restrain the publication of the work, other­wise than as part of a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical.
"13(4) The owner of the copyright in any work may assign the right, either wholly or partially, and either generally or subject to limitations relating to territory, medium or sector of the market or other limitations relating to the scope of the assignment, and either for the whole term of the copyright or for any other part thereof, and may grant any interest in the right by licence, but no assignment or grant is valid unless it is in writing signed by the owner of the right in respect of which the assignment or grant is made, or by the owner's duly authorized agent.
. . . . .
"13(7) For greater certainty, it is deemed always to have been the law that a grant of an exclusive licence in a copyright constitutes the grant of an interest in the copyright by licence.
. . . . .
"27(1) It is an infringement of copyright for any person to do, without the consent of the owner of the copyright, anything that by this Act only the owner of the copyright has the right to do.
"27(2) It is an infringement of copyright for any person to
(a) sell or rent out,
(b) distribute to such an extent as to affect prejudicially the owner of the copyright,
(c) by way of trade distribute, expose or offer for sale or rental, or exhibit in public,
(d) possess for the purpose of doing anything referred to in paragraphs (a) to (c), or
(e) import into Canada for the purpose of doing anything referred to in paragraphs (a) to (c),
a copy of a work, sound recording or fixation of a performer's performance or of a communication signal that the per­son knows or should have known in­fringes copyright or would infringe copy­right if it had been made in Canada by the person who made it.
. . . . .
"29. Fair dealing for the purpose of re­search or private study does not infringe copyright.
"29.1 Fair dealing for the purpose of criticism or review does not infringe copy­right if the following are mentioned:
(a) the source; and
(b) if given in the source, the name of the
(i) author, in the case of a work,
(ii) performer, in the case of a per­former's performance,
(iii) maker, in the case of a sound recording, or
(iv) broadcaster, in the case of a com­munication signal.
"29.2 Fair dealing for the purpose of news reporting does not infringe copyright if the following are mentioned:
(a) the source; and
(b) if given in the source, the name of the
(i) author, in the case of a work,
(ii) performer, in the case of a per­former's performance,
(iii) maker, in the case of a sound recording, or
(iv) broadcaster, in the case of a com­munication signal.
. . . . .
"34.1(1) In any proceedings for in­fringement of copyright in which the de­fendant puts in issue either the existence of the copyright or the title of the plaintiff thereto,
(a) copyright shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, to subsist in the work, performer's performance, sound recording or communication signal, as the case may be; and
(b) the author, performer, maker or broadcaster, as the case may be, shall, unless the contrary is proved, be pre­sumed to be the owner of the copyright.
"34.1(2) Where any matter referred to in subs. (1) is at issue and no assignment of the copyright, or licence granting an in­terest in the copyright, has been registered under this Act,
(a) if a name purporting to be that of
(i) the author of the work,
(ii) the performer of the performer's performance,
(iii) the maker of the sound recording, or
(iv) the broadcaster of the com­munication signal
is printed or otherwise indicated thereon in the usual manner, the person whose name is so printed or indicated shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to be the author, performer, maker or broadcaster;
(b) if
(i) no name is so printed or indicated, or if the name so printed or indicated is not the true name of the author, performer, maker or broadcaster or the name by which that person is com­monly known, and
(ii) a name purporting to be that of the publisher or owner of the work, per­former's performance, sound recording or communication signal is printed or otherwise indicated thereon in the usual manner,
the person whose name is printed or in­dicated as described in subparagraph (ii) shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to be the owner of the copyright in question; and
(c) if, on a cinematographic work, a name purporting to be that of the maker of the cinematographic work appears in the usual manner, the person so named shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to be the maker of the cinema­tographic work.
. . . . .
"36(1) Subject to this section, the owner of any copyright, or any person or persons deriving any right, title or interest by assignment or grant in writing from the owner, may individually for himself or herself, as a party to the proceedings in his or her own name, protect and enforce any right that he or she holds, and, to the extent of that right, title and interest, is entitled to the remedies provided by this Act.
"36(2) Where proceedings referred to in subs. (1) are taken by a person other than the copyright owner, the copyright owner must be made a party to those proceedings, except
(a) in respect of proceedings taken under s. 44.1, 44.2 or 44.4;
(b) in respect of interlocutory pro­ceedings unless the court is of the opinion that the interests of justice re­quire the copyright owner to be a party; and
(c) in any other case, if the court is of the opinion that the interests of justice do not require the copyright owner to be a party.
. . . . .
"39(1) Subject to subs. (2), in any pro­ceedings for infringement of copyright, the plaintiff is not entitled to any remedy other than an injunction in respect of the in­fringement if the defendant proves that, at the date of the infringement, the defendant was not aware and had no reasonable ground for suspecting that copyright sub­sisted in the work or other subject-matter in question.
. . . . .
"41(1) Subject to subs. (2), a court may not award a remedy in relation to an in­fringement unless
(a) in the case where the plaintiff knew, or could reasonably have been expected to know, of the infringement at the time it occurred, the proceedings for in­fringement are commenced within three years after the infringement occurred; or
(b) in the case where the plaintiff did not know, and could not reasonably have been expected to know, of the in­fringement at the time it occurred, the proceedings for infringement are com­menced within three years after the time when the plaintiff first knew, or could reasonably have been expected to know, of the infringement.
. . . . .
"53(1) The Register of Copyrights is evi­dence of the particulars entered in it, and a copy of an entry in the Register is evi­dence of the particulars of the entry if it is certified by the Commissioner of Patents, the Registrar of Copyrights or an officer, clerk or employee of the Copyright Office as a true copy.
"53(2) A certificate of registration of copy­right is evidence that the copyright subsists and that the person registered is the owner of the copyright.
"53(3) A certified copy or certificate ap­pearing to have been issued under this section is admissible in all courts without proof of the signature or official character of the person appearing to have signed it.
. . . . .
"70.1 Sections 70.11 to 70.6 apply in respect of a collective society that operates
(a) a licensing scheme, applicable in relation to a repertoire of works of more than one author, pursuant to which the society sets out the classes of uses for which and the royalties and terms and conditions on which it agrees to au­thorize the doing of an act mentioned in s. 3 in respect of those works;
(a.1) a licensing scheme, applicable in relation to a repertoire of performer's performances of more than one per­former, pursuant to which the society sets out the classes of uses for which and the royalties and terms and conditions on which it agrees to authorize the doing of an act mentioned in s. 15 in respect of those performer's performances;
(b) a licensing scheme, applicable in relation to a repertoire of sound re­cordings of more than one maker, pur­suant to which the society sets out the classes of uses for which and the royalties and terms and conditions on which it agrees to authorize the doing of an act mentioned in s. 18 in respect of those sound recordings; or
(c) a licensing scheme, applicable in relation to a repertoire of communication signals of more than one broadcaster, pursuant to which the society sets out the classes of uses for which and the royalties and terms and conditions on which it agrees to authorize the doing of an act mentioned in s. 21 in respect of those communication signals.
"70.2(1) Where a collective society and any person not otherwise authorized to do an act mentioned in s. 3, 15, 18 or 21, as the case may be, in respect of the works, sound recordings or communication signals included in the collective society's repertoire are unable to agree on the royalties to be paid for the right to do the act or on their related terms and con­ditions, either of them or a representative of either may, after giving notice to the other, apply to the Board to fix the royalties and their related terms and con­ditions.
"70.2(2) The Board may fix the royalties and their related terms and conditions in respect of a licence during such period of not less than one year as the Board may specify and, as soon as practicable after rendering its decision, the Board shall send a copy thereof, together with the reasons therefor, to the collective society and the person concerned or that person's repre­sentative.
"70.3(1) The Board shall not proceed with an application under s. 70.2 where a notice is filed with the Board that an agreement touching the matters in issue has been reached.
"70.3(2) An agreement referred to in subs. (1) is effective during the year following the expiration of the previous agreement, if any, or of the last period specified under s. 70.2(2).
"70.4 Where any royalties are fixed for a period pursuant to s. 70.2(2), the person concerned may, during the period, subject to the related terms and conditions fixed by the Board and to the terms and con­ditions set out in the scheme and on paying or offering to pay the royalties, do the act with respect to which the royalties and their related terms and conditions are fixed and the collective society may, without prejudice to any other remedies available to it, collect the royalties or, in default of their payment, recover them in a court of competent jurisdiction.
"70.5(1) For the purposes of this section and s. 70.6, 'Director' means the Director of Investigation and Research appointed under the Competition Act.
"70.5(2) Where a collective society con­cludes an agreement to grant a licence authorizing a person to do an act men­tioned in s. 3, 15, 18 or 21, as the case may be, the collective society or the person may file a copy of the agreement with the Board within fifteen days after it is con­cluded
"70.5(3) Section 45 of the Competition Act does not apply in respect of any royalties or related terms and conditions arising under an agreement filed in ac­cordance with subs. (2).
"70.5(4) The Director may have access to the copy of an agreement filed in ac­cordance with subs. (2).
"70.5(5) Where the Director considers that an agreement filed in accordance with subs. (2) is contrary to the public interest, the Director may, after advising the parties concerned, request the Board to examine the agreement.
"70.6(1) The Board shall, as soon as prac­ticable, consider a request by the Director to examine an agreement and the Board may, after giving the Director and the parties concerned an opportunity to present their arguments, alter the royalties and any related terms and conditions arising under the agreement, in which case s. 70.4 ap­plies with such modifications as the cir­cumstances require.
"70.6(2) As soon as practicable after ren­dering its decision, the Board shall send a copy thereof, together with the reasons therefor, to the parties concerned and to the Director."
"2. Les définitions qui suivent s'appliquent à la présente loi.
'société de gestion' Association, société ou personne morale autorisée — notamment par voie de cession, licence ou mandat — à se livrer à la gestion collective du droit d'auteur ou du droit à rémunération con­féré par les articles 19 ou 81 pour l'exer­cice des activités suivantes:
a) l'administration d'un système d'octroi de licences portant sur un répertoire d'oeuvres, de prestations, d'enregistre­ments sonores ou de signaux de com­munication de plusieurs auteurs, artistes-interprètes, producteurs d'enregistrements sonores ou radiodiffuseurs et en vertu duquel elle établit les catégories d'utilisa­tion qu'elle autorise au titre de la pré­sente loi ainsi que les redevances et modalités afférentes;
b) la perception et la répartition des redevances payables aux termes de la présente loi.
'compilation' Les oeuvres résultant du choix ou de l'arrangement de tout ou partie d'oeuvres littéraires, dramatiques, musicales ou artistiques ou de données.
'toute oeuvre littéraire, dramatique, musicale ou artistique originale' S'entend de toute production originale du domaine littéraire, scientifique ou artistique quels qu'en soient le mode ou la forme d'expres­sion, tels les compilations, livres, brochures et autres écrits, les conférences, les oeuvres dramatiques ou dramatico-musicales, les oeuvres musicales, les traductions, les illustrations, les croquis et les ouvrages plastiques relatifs à la géographie, à la topographie, à l'architecture ou aux sciences.
'contrefaçon'
a) À l'égard d'une oeuvre sur laquelle existe un droit d'auteur, toute reproduc­tion, y compris l'imitation déguisée, qui a été faite contrairement à la présente loi ou qui a fait l'objet d'un acte contraire à la présente loi;
b) à l'égard d'une prestation sur laquelle existe un droit d'auteur, toute fixation ou reproduction de celle-ci qui a été faite contrairement à la présente loi ou qui a fait l'objet d'un acte contraire à la pré­sente loi;
c) à l'égard d'un enregistrement sonore sur lequel existe un droit d'auteur, toute reproduction de celle-ci qui a été faite contrairement à la présente loi ou qui a fait l'objet d'un acte contraire à la pré­sente loi;
d) à l'égard d'un signal de com­munication sur lequel existe un droit d'auteur, toute fixation ou reproduction de la fixation qui a été faite contraire­ment à la présente loi ou qui a fait l'ob­jet d'un acte contraire à la présente loi.
La présente définition exclut la reproduc­tion — autre que celle visée par l'alinéa 27(2)
'bibliothèque, musée ou service d'archives' S'entend:
a) d'un établissement doté ou non de la personnalité morale qui:
(i) d'une part, n'est pas constitué ou administré pour réaliser des profits, ni ne fait partie d'un organisme constitué ou administré pour réaliser des profits, ni n'est administré ou contrôlé di­rectement ou indirectement par un tel organisme,
(ii) d'autre part, rassemble et gère des collections de documents ou d'objets qui sont accessibles au public ou aux chercheurs;
b) de tout autre établissement à but non lucratif visé par règlement.
'oeuvre littéraire' Y sont assimilés les tableaux, les programmes d'ordinateur et les compilations d'oeuvres littéraires.
'télécommunication' Vise toute trans­mission de signes, signaux, écrits, images, sons ou renseignements de toute nature par fil, radio, procédé visuel ou optique, ou autre système électro­magnétique.
'oeuvre' Est assimilé à une oeuvre le titre de l'oeuvre lorsque celui-ci est original et distinctif.
'recueil'
a) Les encyclopédies, dictionnaires, an­nuaires ou oeuvres analogues;
b) les journaux, revues, magazines ou autres publications périodiques;
c) toute oeuvre composée, en parties distinctes, par différents auteurs ou dans laquelle sont incorporées des oeuvres ou parties d'oeuvres d'auteurs différents.
. . . . .
"2.1(2) L'incorporation d'une oeuvre dans une compilation ne modifie pas la protec­tion conférée par la présente loi à l'oeuvre au titre du droit d'auteur ou des droits moraux.
. . . . .
"3(1) Le droit d'auteur sur l'oeuvre com­porte le droit exclusif de produire ou reproduire la totalité ou une partie im­portante de l'oeuvre, sous une forme matérielle quelconque, d'en exécuter ou d'en représenter la totalité ou une partie importante en public et, si l'oeuvre n'est pas publiée, d'en publier la totalité ou une partie importante; ce droit comporte, en outre, le droit exclusif:
a) de produire, reproduire, représenter ou publier une traduction de l'oeuvre;
b) s'il s'agit d'une oeuvre dramatique, de la transformer en un roman ou en une autre oeuvre non dramatique;
c) s'il s'agit d'un roman ou d'une autre oeuvre non dramatique, ou d'une oeuvre artistique, de transformer cette oeuvre en une oeuvre dramatique, par voie de représentation publique ou autrement;
d) s'il s'agit d'une oeuvre littéraire, dramatique ou musicale, d'en faire un enregistrement sonore, film cinéma­tographique ou autre support, à l'aide desquels l'oeuvre peut être reproduite, représentée ou exécutée mécaniquement;
e) s'il s'agit d'une oeuvre littéraire, dramatique, musicale ou artistique, de reproduire, d'adapter et de présenter publiquement l'oeuvre en tant qu'oeuvre cinématographique;
f) de communiquer au public, par télé­communication, une oeuvre littéraire, dramatique, musicale ou artistique;
g) de présenter au public lors d'une exposition, à des fins autres que la vente ou la location, une oeuvre artistique — autre qu'une carte géographique ou marine, un plan ou un graphique — créée après le 7 juin 1988;
h) de louer un programme d'ordinateur qui peut être reproduit dans le cadre normal de son utilisation, sauf la reproduction effectuée pendant son exécution avec un ordinateur ou autre machine ou appareil;
i) s'il s'agit d'une oeuvre musicale, d'en louer tout enregistrement sonore.
Est inclus dans la présente définition le droit exclusif d'autoriser ces actes.
"3(1.1) Dans le cadre d'une com­munication effectuée au titre de l'alinéa (1)f), une oeuvre est fixée même si sa fixation se fait au moment de sa com­munication.
. . . . .
"5(1) Sous réserve des autres dispositions de la présente loi, le droit d'auteur existe au Canada, pendant la durée mentionnée ci-après, sur toute oeuvre littéraire, dramatique, musicale ou artistique originale si l'une des conditions suivantes est réalisée:
a) pour toute oeuvre publiée ou non, y compris une oeuvre cinématographique, l'auteur était, à la date de sa création, citoyen, sujet ou résident habituel d'un pays signataire;
b) dans le cas d'une oeuvre cinéma­tographique — publiée ou non —, à la date de sa création, le producteur était citoyen, sujet ou résident habituel d'un pays signataire ou avait son siège social dans un tel pays;
c) s'il s'agit d'une oeuvre publiée, y compris une oeuvre cinématographique, selon le cas:
(i) la mise à la disposition du public d'exemplaires de l'oeuvre en quantité suffisante pour satisfaire la demande raisonnable du public, compte tenu de la nature de l'oeuvre, a eu lieu pour la première fois dans un pays signataire,
(ii) l'édification d'une oeuvre architecturale ou l'incorporation d'une oeuvre artistique à celle-ci, a eu lieu pour la première fois dans un pays signataire.
. . . . .
"12. Sous réserve de tous les droits ou privilèges de la Couronne, le droit d'auteur sur les oeuvres préparées ou publiées par l'entremise, sous la direction ou la surveil­lance de Sa Majesté ou d'un ministère du gouvernement, appartient, sauf stipulation conclue avec l'auteur, à Sa Majesté et, dans ce cas, il subsiste jusqu'à la fin de la cinquantième année suivant celle de la première publication de l'oeuvre.
"13(1) Sous réserve des autres dispositions de la présente loi, l'auteur d'une oeuvre est le premier titulaire du droit d'auteur sur cette oeuvre.
. . . . .
"13(3) Lorsque l'auteur est employé par une autre personne en vertu d'un contrat de louage de service ou d'apprentissage, et que l'oeuvre est exécutée dans l'exercice de cet emploi, l'employeur est, à moins de stipulation contraire, le premier titulaire du droit d'auteur; mais lorsque l'oeuvre est un article ou une autre contribution, à un journal, à une revue ou à un périodique du même genre, l'auteur, en l'absence de convention contraire, est réputé posséder le droit d'interdire la publication de cette oeuvre ailleurs que dans un journal, une revue ou un périodique semblable.
"13(4) Le titulaire du droit d'auteur sur une oeuvre peut céder ce droit, en totalité ou en partie, d'une façon générale ou avec des restrictions relatives au territoire, au support matériel, au secteur du marché ou à la portée de la cession, pour la durée complète ou partielle de la protection; il peut également concéder, par une licence, un intérêt quelconque dans ce droit; mais la cession ou la concession n'est valable que si elle est rédigée par écrit et signée par le titulaire du droit qui en fait l'objet, ou par son agent dûment autorisé.
. . . . .
"13(7) Il est entendu que la concession d'une licence exclusive sur un droit d'auteur est réputée toujours avoir valu concession par licence d'un intérêt dans ce droit d'auteur.
. . . . .
"27(1) Constitue une violation du droit d'auteur l'accomplissement, sans le con­sentement du titulaire de ce droit, d'un acte qu'en vertu de la présente loi seul ce titulaire a la faculté d'accomplir.
"27(2) Constitue une violation du droit d'auteur l'accomplissement de tout acte ci-après en ce qui a trait à l'exemplaire d'une oeuvre, d'une fixation d'une prestation, d'un en­registrement sonore ou d'une fixation d'un signal de communication alors que la personne qui accomplit l'acte sait ou devrait savoir que la production de l'exemplaire constitue une violation de ce droit, ou en constituerait une si l'exemplaire avait été produit au Canada par la personne qui l'a produit:
a) la vente ou la location;
b) la mise en circulation de façon à porter préjudice au titulaire du droit d'auteur;
c) la mise en circulation, la mise ou l'offre en vente ou en location, ou l'ex­position en public, dans un but commer­cial;
d) la possession en vue de l'un ou l'autre des actes visés aux alinéas a) à c);
e) l'importation au Canada en vue de l'un ou l'autre des actes visés aux alinéas a) à c).
. . . . .
"29. L'utilisation équitable d'une oeuvre ou de tout autre objet du droit d'auteur aux fins d'étude privée ou de recherche ne constitue pas une violation du droit d'auteur.
"29.1 L'utilisation équitable d'une oeuvre ou de tout autre objet du droit d'auteur aux fins de critique ou de compte rendu ne constitue pas une violation du droit d'auteur à la condition que soient men­tionnés:
a) d'une part, la source;
b) d'autre part, si ces renseignements figurent dans la source:
(i) dans le cas d'une oeuvre, le nom de l'auteur,
(ii) dans le cas d'une prestation, le nom de l'artiste-interprète,
(iii) dans le cas d'un enregistrement sonore, le nom du producteur,
(iv) dans le cas d'un signal de com­munication, le nom du radiodiffuseur.
"29.2 L'utilisation équitable d'une oeuvre ou de tout autre objet du droit d'auteur pour la communication des nouvelles ne constitue pas une violation du droit d'auteur à la condition que soient men­tionnés:
a) d'une part, la source;
b) d'autre part, si ces renseignements figurent dans la source:
(i) dans le cas d'une oeuvre, le nom de l'auteur,
(ii) dans le cas d'une prestation, le nom de l'artiste-interprète,
(iii) dans le cas d'un enregistrement sonore, le nom du producteur,
(iv) dans le cas d'un signal de com­munication, le nom du radiodiffuseur.
. . . . .
"34.1(1) Dans toute procédure pour violation du droit d'auteur, si le défendeur conteste l'existence du droit d'auteur ou la qualité du demandeur:
a) l'oeuvre, la prestation, l'enregistre­ment sonore ou le signal de com­munication, selon le cas, est, jusqu'à preuve contraire, présumé être protégé par le droit d'auteur;
b) l'auteur, l'artiste-interprète, le produc­teur ou le radiodiffuseur, selon le cas, est, jusqu'à preuve contraire, réputé être titulaire de ce droit d'auteur.
"34.1(2) Dans toute contestation de cette nature, lorsque aucun acte de cession du droit d'auteur ni aucune licence concédant un intérêt dans le droit d'auteur n'a été enregistré sous l'autorité de la présente loi:
a) si un nom paraissant être celui de l'auteur de l'oeuvre, de l'artiste-inter­prète de la prestation, du producteur de l'enregistrement sonore ou du radio­diffuseur du signal de communication y est imprimé ou autrement indiqué, de la manière habituelle, la personne don't le nom est ainsi imprimé ou indiqué est, jusqu'à preuve contraire, présumée être l'auteur, l'artiste-interprète, le producteur ou le radiodiffuseur;
b) si aucun nom n'est imprimé ou in­diqué de cette façon, ou si le nom ainsi imprimé ou indiqué n'est pas le véritable nom de l'auteur, de l'artiste-interprète, du producteur ou du radiodiffuseur, selon le cas, ou le nom sous lequel il est généralement connu, et si un nom paraissant être celui de l'éditeur ou du titulaire du droit d'auteur y est imprimé ou autrement indiqué de la manière habituelle, la personne don't le nom est ainsi imprimé ou indiqué est, jusqu'à preuve contraire, présumée être le titulaire du droit d'auteur en question;
c) si un nom paraissant être celui du producteur d'une oeuvre cinéma­tographique y est indiqué de la manière habituelle, cette personne est présumée, jusqu'à preuve contraire, être le pro­ducteur de l'oeuvre.
. . . . .
"36(1) Sous réserve des autres dispositions du présent article, le titulaire d'un droit d'auteur, ou quiconque possède un droit, un titre ou un intérêt acquis par cession ou concession consentie par écrit par le titulaire peut, individuellement pour son propre compte, en son propre nom comme partie à une procédure, soutenir et faire valoir les droits qu'il détient, et il peut exercer les recours prévus par la présente loi dans toute l'étendue de son droit, de son titre et de son intérêt.
"36(2) Lorsque des procédures sont en­gagées en vertu du paragraphe (1) par une personne autre que le titulaire du droit d'auteur, ce dernier doit être constitué partie à ces procédures sauf:
a) dans le cas de procédures engagées en vertu des articles 44.1, 44.2 et 44.4;
b) dans le cas de procédures inter­locutoires, à moins que le tribunal estime qu'il est dans l'intérêt de la justice de constituer le titulaire du droit d'auteur partie aux procédures;
c) dans tous les autres cas où le tribunal estime que l'intérêt de la justice ne l'exige pas.
. . . . .
"39(1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (2), dans le cas de procédures engagées pour violation du droit d'auteur, le demandeur ne peut obtenir qu'une injonction à l'égard de cette violation si le défendeur prouve que, au moment de la commettre, il ne savait pas et n'avait aucun motif raison­nable de soupçonner que l'oeuvre ou tout autre objet du droit d'auteur était protégé par la présente loi.
. . . . .
"41(1) Sous réserve du paragraphe (2), le tribunal saisi d'un recours en violation ne peut accorder de réparations que si:
a) le demandeur engage des procédures dans les trois ans qui suivent le moment où la violation a eu lieu, s'il avait con­naissance de la violation au moment où elle a eu lieu ou s'il est raisonnable de s'attendre à ce qu'il en ait eu con­naissance à ce moment;
b) le demandeur engage des procédures dans les trois ans qui suivent le moment où il a pris connaissance de la violation ou le moment où il est raisonnable de s'attendre à ce qu'il en ait pris connais­sance, s'il n'en avait pas connaissance au moment où elle a eu lieu ou s'il n'est pas raisonnable de s'attendre à ce qu'il en ait eu connaissance à ce moment.
. . . . .
"53(1) Le registre des droits d'auteur, de même que la copie d'inscriptions faites dans ce registre, certifiée conforme par le commissaire aux brevets, le registraire des droits d'auteur ou tout membre du per­sonnel du Bureau du droit d'auteur, fait foi de son contenu.
"53(2) Le certificat d'enregistrement du droit d'auteur constitue la preuve de l'existence du droit d'auteur et du fait que la personne figurant à l'enregistrement en est le titulaire.
"53(3) Les copies certifiées conformes et les certificats censés être délivrés selon les paragraphes (1) ou (2) sont admissibles en preuve sans qu'il soit nécessaire de prouver l'authenticité de la signature qui y est apposée ou la qualité officielle du signataire.
. . . . .
"70.1 Les articles 70.11 à 70.6 s'appliquent dans le cas des sociétés de gestion chargées d'octroyer des licences établissant:
a) à l'égard d'un répertoire d'oeuvres de plusieurs auteurs, les catégories d'utilisa­tion à l'égard desquelles l'accomplisse­ment de tout acte mentionné à l'article 3 est autorisé ainsi que les redevances à verser et les modalités à respecter pour obtenir une licence;
a.1) à l'égard d'un répertoire de prestations de plusieurs artistes-inter­prètes, les catégories d'utilisation à l'égard desquelles l'accomplissement de tout acte mentionné à l'article 15 est autorisé ainsi que les redevances à verser et les modalités à respecter pour obtenir une licence;
b) à l'égard d'un répertoire d'en­registrements sonores de plusieurs producteurs d'en­registrements sonores, les catégories d'utilisation à l'égard desquelles l'accomplissement de tout acte mentionné à l'article 18 est autorisé ainsi que les redevances à verser et les modalités à respecter pour obtenir une licence;
c) à l'égard d'un répertoire de signaux de communication de plusieurs radio­diffuseurs, les catégories d'utilisa­tion à l'égard desquelles l'ac­complisse­ment de tout acte mentionné à l'article 21 est autorisé ainsi que les redevances à verser et les modalités à respecter pour obtenir une licence.
"70.2(1) À défaut d'une entente sur les redevances, ou les modalités afférentes, relatives à une licence autorisant l'intéressé à accomplir tel des actes mentionnés aux articles 3, 15, 18 ou 21, selon le cas, la société de gestion ou l'intéressé, ou leurs représentants, peuvent, après en avoir avisé l'autre partie, demander à la Commission de fixer ces redevances ou modalités.
"70.2(2) La Commission peut, selon les modalités, mais pour une période minimale d'un an, qu'elle arrête, fixer les redevances et les modalités afférentes relatives à la licence. Dès que possible après la fixation, elle en communique un double, accompagné des motifs de sa décision, à la société de gestion et à l'intéressé, ou au représentant de celui-ci.
"70.3(1) Le dépôt auprès de la Commis­sion d'un avis faisant état d'une entente conclue avant la fixation opère des­saisissement.
"70.3(2) L'entente visée au paragraphe (1) vaut, sauf stipulation d'une durée plus longue, pour un an à compter de la date d'expiration de l'entente précédente ou de la période visée au paragraphe 70.2(2).
"70.4 L'intéressé peut, pour la période arrêtée par la Commission, accomplir les actes à l'égard desquels des redevances ont été fixées, moyennant paiement ou offre de paiement de ces redevances et con­formément aux modalités afférentes fixées par la Commission et à celles établies par la société de gestion au titre de son système d'octroi de licences. La société de gestion peut, pour la même période, per­cevoir les redevances ainsi fixées et, in­dépendamment de tout autre recours, en poursuivre le recouvrement en justice.
"70.5(1) Pour l'application du présent article et de l'article 70.6, 'directeur' dé­signe le directeur des enquêtes et recherches nommé au titre de la Loi sur la concurrence.
"70.5(2) Dans les quinze jours suivant la conclusion d'une entente en vue de l'octroi d'une licence autorisant l'utilisateur à accomplir tel des actes mentionnés aux articles 3, 15, 18 ou 21, selon le cas, la société de gestion ou l'utilisateur peuvent en déposer un double auprès de la Com­mission.
"70.5(3) L'article 45 de la Loi sur la con­currence ne s'applique pas aux redevances et aux modalités afférentes objet de toute entente déposée conformément au para­graphe (2).
"70.5(4) Le directeur peut avoir accès au double de l'entente.
"70.5(5) S'il estime qu'une telle entente est contraire à l'intérêt public, le directeur peut, après avoir avisé les parties, de­mander à la Commission d'examiner l'en­tente.
"70.6(1) Dès que possible, la Commission procède à l'examen de la demande et, après avoir donné au directeur et aux parties la possibilité de faire valoir leurs arguments, elle peut modifier les redevances et les modalités afférentes objet de l'entente, et en fixer de nouvelles; l'article 70.4 s'applique, compte tenu des adaptations nécessaires, à cette fixation.
"70.6(2) Dès que possible après la fixation, la Commission en communique un double, accompagné des motifs de sa décision, à la société de gestion, à l'utilisateur et au directeur."
SCHEDULE "B"
Provisions of the
Copyright Act
referred to by counsel during argument that were not in force at the time these actions were argued:
"30.1(1) It is not an infringement of copy­right for a library, archive or museum of a person acting under the authority of a library, archive or museum to make, in accordance with the regulations made under subs. (4), for the maintenance or management of its permanent collection of the permanent collection of another library, archive or museum, a copy of a work or other subject-matter, whether published or unpublished, in its permanent collection
(a) if the original is rare or unpublished and is
(i) deteriorating, damaged or lost, or
(ii) at risk of deterioration or becoming damaged or lost;
(b) for the purposes of on-site con­sultation if the original cannot be viewed, handled or listened to because of its condition or because of the atmospheric conditions in which it must be kept;
(c) in an alternative format if the original is currently in an obsolete format or the technology required to use the original is unavailable;
(d) for the purposes of internal record-keeping and cataloguing;
(e) for insurance purposes or police investigations; or
(f) if necessary for restoration.
"30.1(2) Paragraphs (1)(a) to (c) do not apply where an appropriate copy is com­mercially available in a medium and of a quality that is appropriate for the purposes of subs. (1).
"30.1(3) If a person must make an inter­mediate copy in order to make a copy under subs. (1), the person must destroy the intermediate copy as soon as it is no longer needed.
"30.1(4) The Governor-in-Council may make regulations with respect to the pro­cedure for making copies under subs. (1).
"30.2(1) It is not an infringement of copy­right for a library, archive or museum or a person acting under its authority to do anything on behalf of any person that the person may do personally under s. 29 or 29.1.
"30.2(2) It is not an infringement of copy­right for a library, archive or museum or a person acting under the authority of a library, archive or museum to make, by reprographic reproduction, for any person requesting to use the copy for research or private study, a copy of a work that is, or that is contained in, an article published in
(a) a scholarly, scientific or technical periodical; or
(b) a newspaper or periodical, other than a scholarly, scientific or technical periodical, if the newspaper or periodical was published more than one year before the copy is made.
"30.2(3) Paragraph 2(b) does not apply in respect of a work of fiction or poetry or a dramatic or musical work.
"30.2(4) A library, archive or museum may make a copy under subs. (2) only on con­dition that
(a) the person for whom the copy will be made has satisfied the library, archive or museum that the person will not use the copy for a purpose other than research or private study; and
(b) the person is provided with a single copy of the work.
"30.2(5) A library, archive or museum or a person acting under the authority of a library, archive or museum may do, on behalf of a person who is a patron of another library, archive or museum, any­thing under subs. (1) or (2) in relation to printed matter that it is authorized by this section to do on behalf of a person who is one of its patrons, but the copy given to the patron must not be in digital form.
"30.2(5.1) Where an intermediate copy is made in order to copy a work referred to in subs. (5), once the copy is given to the patron, the intermediate copy must be destroyed.
"30.2(6) The Governor-in-Council may, for the purposes of this section, make regulations
(a) defining 'newspaper' and 'periodical';
(b) defining scholarly, scientific and technical periodicals
(c) prescribing the information to be recorded about any action taken under subs. (1) or (5) and the manner and form in which the information is to be kept; and
(d) prescribing the manner and form in which the conditions set out in subs. (4) are to be met.
"30.21(1) It is not an infringement of copyright for an archive to make a copy, in accordance with subs. (3), of an un­published work that is deposited in the archive after the coming into force of this section.
"30.21(2) When a person deposits a work in an archive, the archive must give the person notice that it may copy the work in accordance with this section
"30.21(3) The archive may only copy the work if
(a) the person who deposited the work, if a copyright owner, does not prohibit copying;
(b) copying has not been prohibited by any other owner of copyright in the work; and
(c) the archive is satisfied that the person for whom it is made will use the copy only for purposes of research or private study and makes only one copy for that person.
"30.21(4) The Governor-in-Council may prescribe the manner and form in which the conditions in subs. (3) may be met.
"30.21(5) Where an archive requires the consent of the copyright owner to copy an unpublished work deposited in the archive before the coming into force of this section but is unable to locate the owner, the archive may copy the work in accordance with subs. (3).
"30.21(6) The archive must make a record of any copy made under subs. (5) and keep it available for public inspection, as pre­scribed.
"30.21(7) It is not an infringement of copyright for an archive to make a copy, in accordance with subs. (3), of any work to which subs. 7(4) applies if it was in the archive on the date of coming into force of this section.
"30.3(1) An educational institution or library, archive or museum does not in­fringe copyright where
(a) a copy of a work is made using a machine for the making, by reprographic reproduction, of copies of works in printed form;
(b) the machine is installed by or with the approval of the educational institu­tion, library, archive or museum on its premises for use by students, instructors or staff at the educational institution or by persons using the library, archive or museum; and
(c) there is affixed in the prescribed manner and location a notice warning of infringement of copyright.
"30.3(2) Subsection (1) only applies if, in respect of a reprographic reproduction,
(a) the educational institution, library, archive or museum has entered into an agreement with a collective society that is authorized by copyright owners to grant licences on their behalf;
(b) the Board has, in accordance with s. 70.2, fixed the royalties and related terms and conditions in respect of a licence;
(c) a tariff has been approved in ac­cordance with s. 70.15; or
(d) a collective society has filed a pro­posed tariff in accordance with s. 70.13.
"30.3(3) Where a collective society offers to negotiate or has begun to negotiate an agreement referred to in paragraph (2)(a), the Board may, at the request of either party, order that the educational institution, library, archive or museum be treated as an institution to which subs. (1) applies, during the period specified in the order.
"30.3(4) Where an educational institution, library, archive or museum has entered into an agreement with a copyright owner other than a collective society respecting reprographic reproduction, subs. (1) applies only in respect of the works of the copy­right owner that are covered by the agree­ment.
"30.3(5) The Governor-in-Council may, for the purposes of paragraph 1(c), prescribe by regulation the manner of affixing and location of notices and the dimensions, from and contents of notices."
"30.1(1) Ne constituent pas des violations du droit d'auteur les cas ci-après de reproduction, par une bibliothèque, un musée ou un service d'archives ou une personne agissant sous l'autorité de ceux-ci, d'une oeuvre ou de tout autre objet du droit d'auteur, publiés ou non, en vue de la gestion ou de la conservation de leurs collections permanentes ou des collections permanentes d'autres bibliothèques, musées ou services d'archives:
(a) reproduction dans les cas où l'original, qui est rare ou non publié, se détériore, s'est abîmé ou a été perdu ou risque de se détériorer, de s'abîmer ou d'être perdu;
(b) reproduction, pour consultation sur place, dans les cas où l'original ne peut être regardé, écouté ou manipulé en raison de son état, ou doit être conservé dans des conditions atmosphériques particulières;
(c) reproduction sur un autre support, le support original étant désuet ou faisant appel à une technique non disponible;
(d) reproduction à des fins internes liées à la tenue de dossier ou au catalogue;
(e) reproduction aux fins d'assurance ou d'enquêtes policières;
(f) reproduction nécessaire à la restauration.
"30.1(2) Les alinéas (1)a) à c) ne s'appliquent pas si des exemplaires de l'oeuvre ou de l'autre objet du droit d'auteur sont accessibles sur le marché et sont sur un support et d'une qualité appropriés aux fins visées au paragraphe (1)
"30.1(3) Si, dans les cas visés au paragraphe (1), il est nécessaire de faire des copies intermédiaires, celles-ci doivent être détruites dès qu'elles ne sont plus nécessaires.
"30.1(4) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement, préciser la procédure à suivre pour les cas de reproduction visés au paragraphe (1).
"30.2(1) Ne constituent pas des violations du droit d'auteur les actes accomplis par une bibliothèque, un musée ou un service d'archives ou une personne agissant sous l'autorité de ceux-ci pour une personne qui peut elle-même les accomplir dans le cadre des articles 29 et 29.1.
"30.2(2) Ne constitue pas une violation du droit d'auteur le fait pour une bibliothèque, une musée ou un service d'archives ou une personne agissant sous l'autorité de ceux-ci, de reproduire par reprographie, à des fins d'étude privée ou de recherche, une oeuvre qui a la forme d'un article -- ou qui est contenue dans un article -- si, selon le cas:
(a) celui-ci a été publié dans une revue savante ou un périodique de nature scientitifique ou technique;
(b) le journal ou le périodique -- autre qu'une revue savante ou le périodique visé à l'alinéa a) -- dans lequel il paraît a été publié plus d'un an avant la reproduction.
"30.2(3) Le paragraphe (2)b) ne s'applique pas dans le cas où l'oeuvre est une oeuvre de fiction ou de poésie ou une oeuvre musicale ou dramatique.
"30.2(4) La copie visée au paragraphe (2) ne peut être fournie que si la personne à qui elle est destinée:
(a) convainc la bibliothèque, le musée ou le service d'archives qu'elle ne l'utilisera qu'à des fins d'étude privée ou de recherche;
(b) ne reçoit qu'une seule copy de l'oeuvre.
"30.2(5) Une bibliothèque, un musée ou un service d'archives, ou une personne agissant sous l'autorité de ceux-ci, peuvent, pour ce qui est du matériel imprimé, accomplir pour les usagers d'une autre bibliothèque, d'un autre musée ou d'un autre service d'archives, pourvu que la copie qui leur est remise ne soit pas sous une forme numérique, les actes qu'ils peuvent accomplir, en vertu des paragraphes (1) ou (2), pour les propres usagers.
"30.2(5.1) Dès qu'une copie est remise au titre du paragraphe (5), toute copie intermédiaire faite en vue de sa réalisation doit être détruite.
"30.2(6) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement et pour l'application du présent article:
(a) définir 'journal' et 'périodique';
(b) définir ce qui constitue une revue savante ou un périodique de nature scientifique ou technique;
(c) préciser les renseignements à obtenir concernant les actes accomplis dans le cadre des paragraphes (1) et (5), ainsi que leur mode de conservation;
(d) déterminer la façon don't les conditions visées au paragraphe (4) peuvent être remplies.
"30.21(1) Ne constitut pas une violation du droit d'auteur le fait, pour un service d'archives, de reproduire, en conformité avec le paragraphe (3), une oeuvre non publiée déposée auprès de lui après l'entrée en vigueur du présent article.
"30.21(2) Au moment du dépôt, le service d'archives doit toutefois aviser le déposant qu'une reproduction de l'oeuvre pourrait être faite en vertu du présent article.
"30.21(3) Il doit, avant de faire la reproduction, s'assurer que:
(a) le titulaire du droit d'auteur ne l'a pas interdite au moment où il déposait l'oeuvre;
(b) aucun autre titulaire du droit d'auteur ne l'a par ailleurs interdite;
(c) la personne à qui elle est destinée la recevra en un seul exemplaire et ne l'utilisera qu'à des fins d'étude privée ou de recherche.
"30.21(4) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement, préciser la façon don't le service doit s'acquitter des obligations visées au paragraphe (3).
"30.21(5) Dans le cas où il est tenu d'obtenir l'autorisation du titulaire du droit d'auteur pour faire la reproduction d'une oeuvre non publiée déposée avant l'entrée en vigueur du présent article, le service d'archives peut, s'il ne réussit pas à trouver le titulaire du droit d'auteur, faire reproductions en conformité avec le paragraphe (3).
"30.21(6) Le service d'archives doit, conformément aux réglements, tenir un registre des reproductions visées au paragraphe (5) et le mettre à la disposition du public.
"30.21(7) Ne constitue pas une violation du droit d'auteur le fait, pour un service d'archives, de reproduire, en conformité avec le paragraphe (3), les oeuvres visées au paragraphe 7(4) qui sont déposées avant l'entrée en vigueur du présent article.
"30.3(1) Un établissement d'enseignement, une bibliothèque, un musée ou un service d'archives ne viole pas le droit d'auteur dans le cas où:
(a) une oeuvre imprimée est reproduite au moyen d'une machine à reprographier;
(b) la machine a été installée dans leurs locaux par eux ou avec leur autorisation à l'usage des enseignants ou élèves ou du personnel des établissements d'enseignement ou des usagers des bibliothèques, musées ou services d'archives;
(c) l'avertissement réglementaire a été affiché selon les modalités réglementaires.
"30.3(2) Le paragraphe (1) ne s'applique que si, selon le cas, en ce qui touche la reprographie:
(a) ils ont conclu une entente avec une société de gestion habilitée par le titulaire du droit d'auteur à octroyer des licences;
(b) la Commission a fixé, conformément à l'article 70.2, les redevances et les modalités afférentes à une licence;
(c) il existe déjà un tarif pertinent homologué en vertu de l'article 70.15;
(d) une société de gestion a déposé, conformément à l'article 70.13, un projet de tarif.
"30.3(3) Toutefois, lorsque l'entente mentionnée à l'alinéa 2(a) est en cours de négociation ou que la société de gestion offre de négocier une telle entente, la Commission peut, à la demande de l'une des parties, rendre une ordonnance déclarant que le paragraphe (1) s'applique, pour une période donnée, à l'établissement d'enseignement, à la bibliothèque, au musée ou au service d'archives, selon le cas.
"30.3(4) Si l'établissement d'enseignement, la bibliothèque, le musée ou le service d'archives a conclu une entente relative à la reprographie avec un titulaire du droit d'auteur -- autre qu'une société de gestion –, le paragraphe (1) ne s'applique qu'aux oeuvres de ce titulaire visées par cette entente.
"30.3(5) Le gouverneur en conseil peut, par règlement, préciser l'information que doit contenir l'avertissement et la forme qu'il doit prendre, les dimensions de l'affiche où il doit figurer ainsi que le lieu où doit être installée l'affiche."
SCHEDULE "C"
Whereas by actions commenced by Statements of Claim, each filed the 2nd of July, 1993, the plaintiffs seek the following reliefs, as amended to the time of trial of the three actions which, by orders of the Associate Chief Justice dated the 6th of July, 1998, were heard together:
I. a declaration that copyright subsists in the following works:
(a) (i) the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(ii) the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(iii) the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(ii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(iii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,042;
(c) the annotated
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
;
(d) the case summary of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ;
(e) [1997] G.S.T.C., Topical Index; and
(f) (i) the textbook,
Economic Negli-			gence
;
(ii) the monograph entitled
Dental Evidence
published as chapter 13 in the textbook,
Forensic Evidence in Canada
.
II. a declaration that copyright is owned by the respective plaintiffs in the following works:
(a) (i) the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by Canada Law Book;
(ii) the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by Canada Law Book;
(iii) the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,042 by CCH Canadian Limited;
(b) (i) the headnote in the reported 			judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by Canada Law Book;
(ii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by Canada Law Book;
(iii) the headnote in the reported judicial decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,042 by CCH Canadian Limited;
(c) the annotated
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
published by Canada Law Book;
(d) the case summary of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by Canada Law Book;
(e) [1997] G.S.T.C., Topical Index published by Carswell Thomson Professional Publishing; and
(f) (i) the textbook,
Economic Negli-			gence
published by Carswell Thomson Professional Publishing;
(ii) the monograph entitled
Dental Evidence
published as chapter 13 in the textbook,
Forensic Evidence in Canada
by Canada Law Book.
III. a declaration that the defendant has infringed copyright by:
(a) making a photocopy of the works referred to in paragraphs 1(a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) above;
(b) making a copy of the works in paragraphs I(d) and (f)(ii) above for storage in the memory of a facsimile machine;
(c) transmitting a copy of the works in paragraphs I(d) and (f)(ii) above, using a facsimile machine;
(d) distributing a copy of the works referred to in paragraphs I(a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) above by hand, mail, courier or facsimile machine; or
(e) selling a copy of the works referred to in paragraphs I(a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) above.
IV. a declaration that the defendant, in carrying out its custom photocopying service, infringes the plaintiffs' copyright by:
(a) making a photocopy
(b) making a copy for storage in the memory of a facsimile machine
(c) transmitting a copy using a facsimile machine
(d) distributing a copy by hand, courier or facsimile machine
(e) selling a copy,
of reported judicial decisions, headnotes in reported judicial decisions, annotated statutes, case summaries, topical indexes and textbooks in which the copyright is owned by any one of the plaintiffs; and
V. a permanent injunction restraining the defendant, its agents, employees and servants, in carrying out its custom photocopying service, from:
(a) making a photocopy
(b) making a copy for storage in the memory of a facsimile machine
(c) transmitting a copy using a facsimile machine
(d) distributing a copy by hand, courier or facsimile machine
(e) selling a copy,
without the consent of the plaintiffs, of the works referred to in paragraph I above and any other reported judicial decisions, headnotes in reported judicial decisions, annotated statutes, case summaries, topical indexes and textbooks in which copyright subsists and is owned by any one of the plaintiffs; and
VI. costs.
And Whereas by Amended Statements of Defence and counterclaim filed the 2nd of March, 1998, the defendant seeks the following reliefs as against each plaintiff:
A Declaration that:
(A) the making of a single copy of
(i) a judicial decision, case report, statute or regulation, whether or not it includes editorial matter added thereto by the plaintiff Publisher,
or
(ii) a limited selection of text (not more than 10% of the work) in a legal treatise, digest or other review or summary of the law,
from legal material purchased by the defendant from the plaintiff
(iii) for the purpose of research, private study or review by a member or employee of the defendant or a member of the judiciary,
or
(iv) for the purpose of submission to a court, tribunal or in government proceedings, and to other interested parties or their counsel,
where the copy is made
(v) by a member or employee of the defendant or his/her representative using a photocopy machine maintained by the defendant,
or
(vi) by the defendant at the request of such member or employee of the defendant and delivered to such member or employee or his/her representative by hand or facsimile transmission,
for a charge which is intended to approximate the defendant's cost in providing this service, does not constitute infringement of the plaintiff's copyright, if any, in the materials so copied:
(B) the defendant's conduct and the service that it provides to its members and employees and to the judiciary referred to in subparagraph (A) above,
(i) constitute fair dealing under s. 29 or 29.1 of the
Copyright Act
,
(ii) do not involve copying a substantial part of any work belonging to the plaintiff, and
(iii) is exempt from copyright infringement as a matter of public policy;
(C) the plaintiff cannot assert a monopoly, in copyright or otherwise, to control access to or use of primary or secondary sources of law or any editorial additions which the plaintiff may include with them;
(D) by reason of its conduct, the plaintiff has afforded an implied licence to the defendant and its members to carry on and participate in the activities referred to in subparagraph (A) above; and
(E) the plaintiff has delayed and acquiesced in the defendant's activities referred to in subparagraph (A) above and is now estopped and barred from asserting that these activities constitute an infringement of the works purchased by the defendant from the plaintiff.
Its costs of this action on a solicitor and client basis, including GST.
Such further and other relief that this Honourable Court may seem just.
Now Therefore It Is Adjudged And Declared:
1. Copyright subsists in the following works:
(a) the annotated
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
;
(b) the textbook,
Economic Negligence
; and
(c) the monograph entitled
Dental Evidence
published as chapter 13 in the textbook,
Forensic Evidence in Canada
.
2. The copyright declared to exist:
(a) in the case of
Martin's Ontario Criminal Practice 1999
, is owned by Canada Law Book Inc.;
(b) in the case of the textbook,
Economic Negligence
, is owned by Thomson Canada Ltd. c.o.b. as Carswell Thomson Professional Publishing; and
(c) in the case of the monograph entitled
Dental Evidence
published as chapter 13 in the textbook,
Forensic Evidence in Canada
, is owned by Canada Law Book Inc.
3. The defendant has infringed copyright in:
(a) the textbook,
Economic Negligence
by making a photocopy of a substantial portion thereof and by distributing the copy by hand, mail, or courier;
(b) the monograph entitled
Dental Evidence
published as chapter 13 in the textbook
Forensic Evidence in Canada
by making a photocopy thereof and by distributing the copy by facsimile, mail or courier.
4. In all other respects, save as hereinafter provided with respect to costs, the plaintiffs' actions are dismissed.
5. Same as hereinafter provided with respect to costs, the defendant's counterclaims are dismissed.
6. Costs will be the subject of a supplementary judgment.
[End of document]