[1] Rothstein, J.
: This is a judicial review of a decision of a credible basis panel rendered on August 13, 1992, finding that the applicant did not have a credible basis for his refugee claim. The issues in this judicial review are:
1. Did the credible basis panel err by coming to its conclusion without expressly finding that it did not believe the applicant's story?
2. Did the credible basis panel err by ignoring some evidence upon which the applicant could be considered to be a Convention refugee?
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Turkey. In 1975, he joined a leftist political party. He was active until 1979 when he was drafted into the Armed Forces of Turkey and was required to relinquish his political activity. He remained in the army for some fifteen months and was discharged in July of 1980, some two months earlier than his tour of duty should have ended. During his tour of duty he alleged that he was denied holidays and suffered adverse treatment because of his past political activity. Upon being discharged, he did not rejoin the leftist party that he had belonged to and had no further involvement with leftist political groups in Turkey.
[3]
The applicant testified that he had been subjected to harassment as a result of his political activity until he left Turkey for the United Kingdom in 1983. He returned to Turkey in 1985 after his visa for the United Kingdom expired. He remained in Turkey for approximately three months and then returned to the United Kingdom. Again, his visa expired and he returned to Turkey in 1986. At the end of 1986, the applicant came to Canada and claimed refugee status.
[4]
In assessing the applicant's evidence, the panel made no express statement that it disbelieved the applicant. Counsel for the applicant submits that this failure constitutes a legal error by the panel. He relies upon
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 199 (F.C.A.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 150 (F.C.A.), at p 157. These decisions stand for the proposition that a panel cannot reject an applicant's claim for Convention refugee status on the grounds of credibility unless it states reasons in clear and unmistakeable terms any inconsistencies within evidence upon which the panel relies are clearly set out.
[5]
In my opinion, the decision of the panel in this case meets these requirements. The reasons why the panel found the applicant not to have a credibile basis for his claim were:
(1) That he did not seek Convention refugee status in England although he went there twice in total for a period of over two years. The panel found that the failure to seek refugee status was not consistent with a person fleeing for his life. It rejected the applicant's explanation that he thought the U.K. would not treat his claim favourably because the U.K. was sympathetic to the Turkish regime. The panel stated at p. 89:
And in all of these circumstances, your inactivity in this particular ... in not making a claim, we find as an indicia or lack of indicia of a person or the reaction of a person fleeing for his life from his country. These are not the actions or inactions of a person in your circumstances, we feel, fleeing for his life from his country, as you are, if not for your life, serious imprisonment, which you are alleging before us in these proceedings.
(2) That he re-availed himself of the protection of Turkey on three occasions (counsel agreed that the facts are that he had only returned to Turkey twice) and that this reflects negatively on his alleged fears. The panel stated at p. 89:
In addition, the panel must take note that you did re-avail yourself, and there's no - there appears to be no conflict in your testimony in this area - of the protection of Turkey on no less than three occasions. You went back on three occasions. And this action itself must reflect negatively upon the voracity[sic] of your alleged fears, in our opinion, of returning now to Turkey.
In my opinion, it was open to the panel to assess the evidence and conclude that the applicant did not have a credible basis for his claim by reason of his actions or inactions that were inconsistent with having a subjective and objective fear of persecution in Turkey. Such findings are clear and unambiguous. It is true they do not include express words such as "we do not believe the applicant". But the words that are used "reflect negatively upon the voracity[sic] of your alleged fears" and "[t]hese are not the actions or inactions of a person in your circumstances", together with the reasons given, demonstrate beyond doubt, that the panel did not believe that the applicant had a subjective and objective fear of persecution in Turkey and therefore did not have a credible basis for his refugee claim.
[6]
In addition, the panel made other findings of a more general nature - that the applicant's assertion that he was discharged early from the army by reasons of his civilian background and his evidence that the authorities would consider him to be a dangerous person was speculative, that much of the applicant's testimony was vague and difficult to follow and some statements such as "[p]eople like me are the number one enemy" were difficult to understand. Standing alone, these general findings may not meet the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> test for clear and unmistakable reasons when a refugee claim is rejected on the ground of credibility. However, taken together with the well explained inconsistencies which form the central basis of the panel's reasons, the panel's decision expresses quite clearly the reasons why it rejected the applicant's credible basis claim.
[7]
Counsel for the applicant then pointed out that the panel, in considering current circumstances, concluded that, while there was some Turkish government activity against Kurds, the applicant was not a Kurd and therefore had nothing to fear. In the opinion of the applicant's counsel, the panel erred by ignoring documentary evidence indicating that other groups, including leftist groups, were also subject to persecution. It was his submission that the applicant need only demonstrate possible persecution against groups of which he is a member in order to satisfy the credible basis test.
[8]
Counsel for the respondent argued that the panel's reference to the Kurds was limited to certain anti-terrorist laws.
[9]
Applicant's counsel has satisfied me that the documentary evidence does suggest detention, beatings, and prosecution of students, trade unionists, writers and perhaps other groups in addition to the Kurds. Certain leftist politicians were detained for twenty-four hours for attempting to post a United States flag as a protest to the President. However, it is not actions at large by a government that can be relied upon by applicants attempting to demonstrate a credible basis for their refugee claims. There must be some nexus between an applicant and a particular group in order to show such credible basis. The closest the documentary evidence comes (at least those portions pointed out to me) to showing that people of the applicant's political persuasion might be subjected to persecution is a reference in an Amnesty International document entitled
Turkey: Still Waiting for Change
, published in February 1991:
"On 23 January 1991 three Socialist Party members were detained for 24 hours after attempting to post a US flag to the President as a protest against his support for the coalition in the Gulf war."
The panel, however, had already determined that the applicant himself, by reason of his previous leftist activity, did not have a credible basis for his claim. That conclusion was reached without regard to changed circumstances. I infer from the panel's reasons that it was satisfied from the applicant's failure to seek refugee status in the United Kingdom and his voluntary returns to Turkey, as well as the speculative and vague aspects of his evidence that it did not accept, that he had not credible basis for his refugee claim. Having come to that conclusion, changed circumstances were, for all intents and purposes, irrelevant.
[10]
For these reasons, I am of the opinion that this application for judicial review must be dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/saf
[End of document]