[1]
Wetston, J.
: I have decided that the court is without jurisdiction in this matter and does not have the statutory grant of jurisdiction to hear this case, nor to grant the relief requested by the plaintiff. In that regard, my decision is that the plaintiff's case is dismissed. The Counterclaim brought by way of the defendant is also dismissed.
[2]
At this stage my view as to costs is that they be borne by each party and that there be no Order as to costs against the plaintiff. The reason is because the defendant, in his Counterclaim, could have raised the matter of jurisdiction and did not. I do not hold the defendant responsible in that sense, but, I believe that it should bear on the issue of costs. If there had been no Counterclaim, I might have viewed it otherwise, but in that situation costs should be borne by each party. I will give counsel an opportunity to further speak to the matter.
[3]
This is an action by which the plaintiff seeks to enforce an Agreement for Purchase and Sale made on or about July 15th, 1987. It would appear that, based on the Statement of Defence and Counterclaim, that the land in question, Lot 19-6, in the Village of Ohsweken, in the Township of Tuscarora, in the County of Brant, is located on a reserve by reason of the defendant, Mrs. Sandy, holding a Certificate of Possession, and because the defendant pleads various provisions of
the
Indian Act
.
[4]
I would note that neither the Statement of Claim nor the Statement of Defence indicate whether the parties are indeed aboriginal people, or are band members, nor do the pleadings establish that the land in question is located on an Indian reserve. Given Counsels' comments this morning, however, I am satisfied that indeed both parties are aboriginal people and that the land in question is on an Indian reserve.
[5]
As I understand it, the plaintiff claims that he entered into an agreement with the defendant for the purchase and sale of Lot 19-6. The terms of the agreement, which were not reduced to writing, provided for the purchase price of $20,000.00, payable by a $5,000.00 down payment with the balance of $15,000.00 to be paid to the defendant as mortgagee. The plaintiff was to pay the defendant, starting September 1st, 1987, $290.02 per month for a period of five years. No deed or mortgage or documents were signed in respect of the land or the house on the land.
[6]
The plaintiff seeks a number of forms of relief, varying from declarations as to ownership through to an accounting on the property. I would note that the defendant did, as part of the jurisdictional question, argue that this form of relief would be inappropriate.
[7]
Accordingly, the plaintiff seeks the recovery of payments made, which apparently were in the amount of $11,500.00, plus the cost of improvements, as alleged, in the amount of $14,000, and both pre- and post-judgment interest.
[8]
I will summarize, basically, the Counterclaim and Defence. The defendant was, at that time, an 84-year-old retired school teacher. Apparently, she does hold a Certificate of Possession, dated the 1st of September, 1987, in respect of Lot 19-6, which, of course, is the property in question.
[9]
The defendant does admit certain aspects of the transaction as outlined by the plaintiff, but emphasizes that nothing was reduced to writing. Apparently, she does admit to having taken possession of the property in August, 1990, but pleads no knowledge of any improvements made or knowledge of the plaintiff's alleged lease, whereby he was allegedly collecting some $450.00 per month. I emphasize that the defendant counterclaims for any rent received by the plaintiff with respect to an alleged lease, over and above certain monthly mortgage payments and, if necessary, an accounting to determine the difference.
[10]
The plaintiff did file a Defence to the Counterclaim, denying any obligation to pay the difference in rent over the amount of mortgage payments, to the defendant.
[11]
I emphasize once again, these facts emanate entirely from the pleadings, since no evidence has been filed in this matter. All of my comments regarding the facts are not to be interpreted as findings of fact in this matter.
[12]
I want to make some brief comments regarding the framework of this Decision. There is, as I indicated previously, nothing in the Statement of Claim, or Statement of Defence or Counterclaim, which firmly establishes that the plaintiff and defendant are natives registered under
the
Indian Act
and, consequently, subject to
the
Indian Act
, or that they are members of a particular band. However, because the defendant does hold a Certificate of Possession, and given my comments previously, my analysis in this case is based upon the assumption that it is a reserve and that the parties are indeed native Indians. Both counsel concurred with this approach.
[13]
It would appear to me that the significant provisions of
the
Indian Act
are subs. 20(1), which states:
"20(1) No Indian is lawfully in possession of land in a reserve unless, with the approval of the Minister, possession of the land has been alloted to him by the council of the band."
And in subsection 20(2):
"(2) The Minister may issue to an Indian who is lawfully in possession of land in a reserve a certificate, to be called a Certificate of Possession, as evidence of his right to possession of the land described therein."
I also want to make reference to section 24:
"24. An Indian who is lawfully in possession of land in a reserve may transfer to the band or another member of the band the right to possession of the land, but no transfer or agreement for the transfer of the right to possession of lands in a reserve is effective until it is approved by the Minister."
[14]
Now, moving directly to the issue of jurisdiction, the defendant's counsel, Mr. Millward, had given some thought to Federal Court jurisdiction initially, but did not, as I understand it, view paragraph 17(2)(a) in quite the same way then as he does now. He argues that the Federal Court's jurisdiction is statutory, jurisdiction cannot be presumed, it cannot be assumed, and it cannot be obtained by consent. It must be conferred by statute and it must be demonstrated.
[15]
I asked Counsel to review, in advance of argument this morning, the decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 641, at page 766  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , wherein the Supreme Court of Canada discussed the jurisdiction of the Federal Court:
"1. There must be a statutory grant of jurisdiction by the federal Parliament.
"2. There must be an existing body of federal law which is essential to the disposition of the case and which nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction.
"3. The law on which the case is based must be 'a law of Canada' as the phrase is used in s. 101 of the
Constitution Act
, 1867."
[16]
Jurisdiction, in a given case, will depend on a number of factors including the general nature of the issues raised, the particular issues arising from the facts of the case, and on the form of the relief sought. In addition, jurisdiction may be affected by the parties who initiate the proceedings and who are named as defendants.
[17]
The parties agree that the Crown has not been named in any way whatsoever in this proceeding, and the parties also agree that there is no need for the court to look at the specific facts in issue to determine the jurisdiction.
[18]
As a general rule, the
Federal Court Act
or another federal statute must confer the jurisdiction over a particular matter. In order to satisfy the first branch of the
ITO
, supra, test, absent a specific statutory grant of jurisdiction in
the
Indian Act
, I must look to the
Federal Court Act
, s. 17, which governs this Court's jurisdiction in such matters.
[19]
Paragraph 17(2)(a) of the
Federal Court Act
states that:
"17(2) Without restricting the generality of subs. (1), the Trial Division has concurrent original jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided, in all cases in which
(a) the land, goods or money of any person is in the possession of the Crown;"
[20]
The parties to this litigation are individuals. There is no involvement of a particular band, nor has the Crown, in any capacity whatsoever, been named as a party herein.
[21]
The only possibility, therefore, of affording the required statutory grant of jurisdiction would be found in paragraph 17(2)(a). Is the land in question properly considered land, goods or money in the possession of the Crown
? If the property in question is in possession of the Crown, the Federal Court may have the requisite statutory grant of jurisdiction.
[22]
I say "may", because that is also not conclusive, but it would go some distance towards conferring jurisdiction.
[23]
In referring to subs. 20(1) of the
Indian Act
, I emphasize that no Indian is lawfully in possession of the land on the reserve unless the Chief and band council have allotted the land to the individual and the Minister has given approval by issuance of the Certificate of Possession.
[24]
It is my understanding that the band council resolution as to the rights of an individual with respect to land is somewhat determinative, but where the Certificate of Possession is issued to an individual, that individual can be said to own property in that the land cannot be reassigned by the band council. It is also my understanding that such individuals, in aboriginal law terms, are referred to as "locatees". A native person can transfer use and possession of reserve land in accordance with the scheme outlined in
the
Indian Act
. Under subs. 2(a) of
the
Indian Act
, it is clear that "reserve" means a tract of land, the legal title to which is vested in Her Majesty, that has been set apart by Her Majesty for the use and benefit of a band.
I asked Counsel in advance of this morning's proceedings to examine a 1978 decision of Mr. Justice Berger of the British Columbia Supreme Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.); a case dealing with trespass to reserve land. Counsel for the plaintiff indicates this case, is different than the case before the court.
[25]
What is instructive for this case, however, is the construction of s. 20(1) of the
Indian Act
by Justice Berger. He defines a reserve in the manner referred to above and notes this implies that possession is in the band. He also notes that if the band can allot possession to an Indian, then the band must have possession in the first instance. Possession is in the band and not the Crown. The band can sue in the Supreme Court of B.C. and the provisions of the
Federal Court Act
do not apply.
[26]
Justice Berger does go on to say, at page 658  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"It is said that the Crown as legal owner should have been joined. The Crown was not
prepared to intervene, because it did not wish to become involved in a dispute between the band council and a member of the band."
[27]
Both Counsel indicated that, while not specifically in these terms, what appears to be at issue here is fundamentally a matter of a contract between the parties regarding the transfer of land. There is no doubt that reserves represent a unique form of land tenure, which for the most part defies classification under traditional property law. However, it's the Court's opinion that natives do have a common law right to bring an action for possession, but this Court is a statutory court and there must be a specific grant of jurisdiction in order for the Court to hear this matter.
[28]
As I indicated previously, what the plaintiff would require is for the Court to determine that the meaning of "possession" under paragraph 17(2)(a) of the
Federal Court Act
means that the Crown has legal title or legal possession.
[29]
The defendant argues that the Crown does not have legal or physical possession. I agree with the defendant. The Court is of the opinion that what the Crown has is a vested legal title, as indicated previously in s. 2(a) of
the
Indian Act
. The Crown does not have legal or physical possession within the meaning of paragraph 17(2)(a) of the
Federal Court Act
.
[30]
Counsel for the plaintiff has referred the court to a decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). In that case the court determined that the Federal Court had jurisdiction to hear the matter, in that an Indian Band Council who acts pursuant to provisions of the
Indian Act
, constitutes a federal board, commission or other tribunal as defined in s. 2 of the
Federal Court Act
.
[31]
That does not answer the question that the court has had to deal with this morning. Indeed, in that case there was a specific
Act
, the
Cowessess Indian Reserve Elections Act
, under which the band is given specific responsibilities and authority in certain matters. Those responsibilities and the specific grant of authority constitute, within the meaning of s. 2, matters reviewable by the Federal Court under s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
.
[32]
I indicated previously that in the court's opinion, therefore, since the Crown does not have legal or physical possession, this court is without authority to hear this matter.
[33]
I indicated at the opening of these remarks that costs should be borne by each party, and indicated that I would give Counsel a further opportunity to comment on that decision. The parties agreed that there be no Order as to costs. The Order dismissing the action and the Counterclaim was issued in Brantford, Ontario, on April 12, 1995.
Action and counterclaim dismissed.
Editor: Jean Merlini/dmh
[End of document]