Introduction
[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
: The present action is a claim for damages to cargo arising out of a collision between the vessel "Beograd", which was carrying the shipment in question, and the vessel "Federal Danube". The plaintiff, who is the insurer of the cargo, seeks to recover from the defendants, who are owners or parties otherwise interested in the "Federal Danube", the indemnity it paid to the cargo owner as well as the costs incurred in the salvage of the damaged cargo.
Issues
[2]
Since this action was initiated in 1984 numerous pretrial conferences have been held for the purpose of simplifying the action. Consequently, the following issues require resolution by this court:
1. Is Cotra S.A. Empresa Exportadora, which was indemnified by the plaintiff under a policy of marine insurance, the legal owner of the damaged cargo aboard the "Beograd"?
2. Is the plaintiff, Porto Seguro Companhia de Seguros, authorized to sue in its own name or must the action be brought by the cargo owner? Is the subrogation of the plaintiff to the rights of the cargo owner a function of the law of Brazil, of Canadian common law or of Quebec civil law?
3. Is Porto Seguro Companhia de Seguros the proper plaintiff given the fact that 98.6% of the indemnity payment to Cotra was made by the Institute of Reinsurance of Brazil?
4. Is the "Federal Danube" in whole or in part responsible for the collision which damaged the cargo aboard the "Beograd"? If so, what is the extent of that responsibility?
Facts
[3]
The plaintiff, Porto Seguro Companhia de Seguros (hereinafter "Porto Seguro") is an insurance company whose place of business is Sao Paolo, Brazil. The defendant, Belcan S.A. of Antwerp, Belgium, is the registered owner of the vessel "Federal Danube" which is registered at the Port of Antwerp. The vessel is managed by the defendant Ubem S.A. of Antwerp, Belgium. It was timechartered to the defendant Fednav Limited which is the owner of the vessel through Belcan S.A., its wholly-owned subsidiary. The vessel "Beograd" is registered in Bar, Yugoslavia (At the time of the collision in 1984, Bar was located in what is now known as the former Yugoslavia.) and owned by Prekookeanska Plovidba. On April 20, 1983, J. Lauritzen A/S of Copenhagen, Denmark, became the time-charterer of the vessel. On July 27, 1984, Netubulk International Inc. became its subcharterer (By order of Joyal, J., dated August 11, 1993, the plaintiff's action against Netubulk was dismissed. As well, a notice of discontinuance was filed concerning Prekookeanska Plovidba and the "Beograd" on February 28, 1994.).
[4]
On or about November 11, 1984, and November 17, 1984, pursuant to a Voyage Charter Party agreement dated October 12, 1984, between Cotra S.A., Empresa Comercial Exportadora (hereinafter "Cotra") of Sao Paolo, Brazil, and the carriers Netubulk and Companhia de Navegacao Maritima Netumar (By order of Joyal, J., dated August 11, 1993, the plaintiff's action against Netumar was dismissed.), the cargo consisting of 14,678.48 metric tons of pinto beans purchased from various suppliers in the United States was loaded aboard the "Beograd" at the ports of Superior, Wisconsin and Duluth, Minnesota, for carriage to the port of Santos, Brazil, the whole pursuant to bills of lading numbered 1 through 7 issued by the Master of the "Beograd" in Congenbill Form. These bills of lading indicate that the shipments were consigned to the order of Bank of Brazil.
The Collision
[5]
At approximately 16:28 hours on December 11, 1984, the "Federal Danube" anchored close to the southern limit of the demarcation line between the authorized anchorage zone, called Pointe Fortier, and the designated navigable area below the Lower Beauharnois Lock (Lock number three) in the Lac St-Louis region of Montreal. At the time of collision, a total of five (5) vessels were anchored below the Lock awaiting their turn for transit.
[6]
The parties are essentially in agreement concerning the following environmental conditions at the time of collision: wind forces were negligible; the water surface was calm and wave action small; the air temperature was between +2
o
C and +4
o
C and visibility was high though the collision took place in the hours of darkness.
[7]
By its statement of claim, the plaintiff alleges that the "Beograd" was exiting Lock number three at Beauharnois, Quebec, and was proceeding on a course which would have had it pass to the south of the "Federal Danube". Several minutes prior to the collision, the "Federal Danube" commenced heaving anchor which caused it to veer uncontrollably to port and eventually brought it into contact with the "Beograd". This single action, which caused the vessel to be "under way", was the principal cause of the collision. Furthermore, it was compounded by the following violations of the
Seaway and Collision Regulations
as well as the general rules of good seamanship: 1) failure to report its exact location when it anchored in the Pointe Fortier anchorage area; 2) proceeding with the heaving of its anchor before letting the "Beograd" pass; 3) failure to call the "Beograd" to discover its intentions and to inform it of its readiness to heave anchor; 4) failure to take appropriate evasive action; 5) failure to use its bow thruster; and 6) failure to maintain a proper lookout.
[8]
The defendants argue that at the time of the collision, the process of weighing the anchor was only partially complete since the "Federal Danube" still had two shackles of its chain in the water. Consequently, the vessel was still at anchor. In the defendants' submission, fault for the collision lay exclusively with the "Beograd" which chose to navigate outside the established navigation channel and did not anticipate the effect of the northeasterly current originating from the Beauharnois Dam. As a result of this current, the "Beograd" deviated laterally from its intended course to such an extent that by the time it had reached the location of the "Federal Danube", it was in a situation of imminent collision which it could not avoid. The defendants allege that the crew of the "Beograd" should have checked the position of the anchored vessels by radar, that it had a duty to notify the defendants of its intentions and that it had a duty to avoid a collision. Further, any
movement of
the "Federal Danube" that might have been observed by the crew of the "Beograd" was the result, first, of the natural and inevitable rotation of a vessel at anchor, and, second, of the lateral movement across the water of the "Beograd" itself.
[9]
At the time of the collision, 3.768.57 metric tons of cargo stowed in the number 6 and 7 holds of the "Beograd" were severely damaged by the entry of water into the holds. In the common interest, General Average was declared and a salvage contract was entered into with McAllister Towing and Salvage Inc.
[10]
In the course of the salvage operation and subsequently, the cargo was discharged from the number six and seven holds, separated into two tenders and sold on the salvage market in Montreal. These proceeds, representing a substantial loss to the cargo owner, were deposited with the General Average Adjuster for the eventual benefit of those concerned.
[11]
As a result of the damage to the cargo, the plaintiff alleges that it indemnified Cotra in the amount equivalent to CDN$2,942,083.61 on March 1, 1985. In addition, pursuant to an Arbitration Award established by the Committee of Lloyd's, the plaintiff paid McAllister Towing and Salvage Inc. the sum of CDN$1,458,784.23. The plaintiff in its statement of claim seeks recovery of these amounts as well [as] the cost of survey fees, investigator expenses and reports, the costs of this action and the applicable interest.
[12]
Pursuant to rule 492 of the
Federal Court Rules
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 663, the court was assisted during the trial of this action by two assessors, Mr. Pierre Boisseau, a naval architect and marine engineer, and Mr. Patrick R.M. Toomey, a retired Canadian Coast Guard commander.
Admissions
[13]
At the outset of trial, the parties agreed to the following admissions:
1. That interest at the Canadian prime rate for the period of March 1, 1985 to April 1, 1994, is agreed to be those rates that appear in the Bank of Canada's Chartered Bank Prime Business Loan Rate chart, that the exact exchange rate between the Brazilian cruzeiro and the Canadian dollar on March 1, 1985, was .000354 and that on March 1, 1985, 8,310,970,659 cruzeiros was equivalent to CDN$2,942,083.61.
2. That Hayes Stuart Inc., Marine Surveyors, in their capacity as General Average Surveyors, properly and duly prepared two tenders for approximately 3762 metric tons of mixed damaged grades one, two and three U.S. pinto beans that had been discharged from holds 6 and 7 of the "Beograd". That pursuant to the said tenders, the lots were both sold on or about January 9, 1985, the first for CDN$11,010.00 and the second for CDN$74.444.44.
3. That on or about December 13, 1984, a Salvage Agreement was entered into between Captain Miroslav Janicic for and on behalf of the owners of the "Beograd", her cargo freight and stores and Mr. Keith A. Rusby for and on behalf of McAllister Towing and Salvage Inc. under the Lloyd's No Cure-No Pay Standard Form Salvage Agreement. The remuneration of McAllister Towing and Salvage was decided by arbitration before the Committee of Lloyd's. The Arbitration Award inclusive interest amounted to CDN$1,972,641.00. Of that amount, the proportion payable by cargo interests amounted to CDN$1,441,867.49 together with some additional interest and expenses.
4. That pursuant to the Bank Guarantee, the Institute of Reinsurance of Brazil through its London branch, made first payment on account to McAllister Towing and Salvage Inc. in the amount of CDN$824,509.32 on August 1st, 1986, and a further payment of CDN$633,630.49 on September 29th, 1986, together with an additional payment in the amount of CDN$644.42 on or about October 14th, 1986, for a total of CDN$1,458,784.23 in payment of the award, interest and expenses.
5. That the limit of liability (
Shipping Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-9, ss. 574-582.) of the "Federal Danube" given its tonnage on the 11th of December, 1984, amounts to CDN$1,680,818.50 excluding interest.
Analysis
1. The Insurance Contract
[14]
The plaintiff called as a witness Mr. Mauricio Accioly Neves, an insurance consultant, in order to explain how the Brazilian insurance industry is structured and to demonstrate that Porto Seguro had the requisite standing to bring this action. Mr. Neves has worked in the Brazilian insurance industry since 1968. In 1984-85, he was the director of the Sao Paolo office of the Institute of Reinsurance of Brazil (hereinafter "IRB"), the governing body which establishes the rules and guidelines for the assumption of risk by which all insurance companies in that country must abide and, ultimately, controls the payment of claims.
[15]
Before a policy is issued, a proposal of reinsurance must be submitted to the IRB which either accepts or rejects the proposal based on its assessment of the risk. In the present case, such a proposal was submitted by Porto Seguro and accepted by the IRB (Exhibit P-2). A certificate of insurance, dated November 1, 1984, at Sao Paolo, was issued by Porto Seguro to Cotra naming the Bank of Brazil as beneficiary (Exhibit P-6).
[16]
When a claim is made to an insurance company, it will be paid out by the company itself unless the amount involved is significant, in which case it will be referred to the IRB for consideration. With respect to the claim submitted by Cotra to Porto Seguro arising out of the damage to the cargo stored in holds 6 and 7 of the "Beograd", Mr. Neves testified that it was referred to the IRB and that he was responsible for adjusting the claim and paying the indemnity. Payment was made to the Bank of Brazil as beneficiary of the Insurance Certificate which it then waived in favour of Cotra (Exhibit P-19).
2. Ownership Of The Cargo
[17]
In order to establish that Cotra had a proprietary interest in the damaged cargo, the plaintiff introduced into evidence three commercial invoices dated November 11, 1984, which is prior to the collision (Exhibit P-30). These invoices indicate that Cogemi S.A. of Geneva, Switzerland, was the exporter of the cargo loaded aboard the "Beograd" and that Cotra was the importer. They also contain the purchase price to be paid by Cotra.
[18]
The plaintiff also called Mr. Antonio Monteiro, who works in the letters of credit section of the Bank of Brazil in New York. He testified that at the request of Cotra, the bank made payments to Cogemi in the amounts that appear in the commercial invoices described above. He also introduced into evidence a letter of credit pursuant to which this payment was made that clearly identifies Cotra as the debtor and Cogemi as the beneficiary of the amounts in question (Exhibit P-103).
[19]
On the basis of this and other evidence submitted by the plaintiff, I conclude that Cotra was the owner of the cargo at the time that it was damaged (Exhibits P-30, P-31, P-101, P-102, P-103, P-127). I am also satisfied that the cargo was in good condition when it was loaded (Exhibit P-22) and that the collision was the cause of the damage.
3. Subrogation
[20]
The plaintiff maintains that since the insurance policy was issued in Brazil, the law of that country should govern the question of subrogation and therefore it is entitled to bring this action in its own name. The defendants submit that it is Canadian common law which must apply and therefore that Porto Seguro should have commenced this action in Cotra's name as the insured.
[21]
The plaintiff called Mr. Jose Flavio Bastos as its expert witness. Mr. Bastos is a lawyer specializing in Brazilian insurance law, including matters pertaining to marine insurance. He has acted as counsel for the IRB since 1983. In an opinion submitted to the solicitors for the plaintiff in August 1993, and later in his testimony at trial, Mr. Bastos concluded, on the basis of a review of Brazilian jurisprudence and academic authorities, that an insurer who pays an indemnity to an insured becomes subrogated to the rights of the insured and may institute recovery proceedings in its own name against a third party who has caused a loss. This right of recovery is limited to the amount which the insurer is obliged to indemnify the insured by virtue of the risks assumed under the policy.
[22]
With respect to the state of the law in Canada, Teitelbaum, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  substantive maritime law as such and therefore is a matter under provincial jurisdiction. He stated at p. 212:
"Although it has been established that in matters dealing with maritime law, the common law applies (
ITO -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), the question of subrogation is not, in my view a matter of maritime law nor, therefore, part of the common law.
"The question of subrogation, in this case, is only incidental to and not part of maritime law and thus remains within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Province of Quebec.
"
Thus, plaintiffs have the right to pursue the present claim in their own name for the maximum amount that they have paid to their insured.
" (Emphasis added)
[23]
As in the
Switzerland General Insurance
case, the cause of action in the case at bar arose in the Province of Quebec. Therefore, it is the law of that province which applies. Article 2576 of the
Civil Code of Lower Canada
, Art. 2576 C.C.L.C., contains the following:
"2576. To the extent of the indemnities he has paid, the insurer is subrogated in the rights of the insured against third persons who are responsible for the loss except in the case of persons who form part of the household of the insured.
"The insurer may be released, in whole or in part, from his obligations towards the insured when, because of the act of the latter, he cannot be so subrogated."
(This section has been interpreted as enabling the insurer to bring the action against third parties who cause a loss in its own name.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 62.)
[24]
From the above, I conclude that whether I apply the law of Brazil or the law of Quebec, the result is the same: to the extent of the indemnity that it has paid, the insurer is subrogated to the rights of the insured against third persons who have caused harm and can institute proceedings in its own name.
[25]
On March 1, 1985, at Sao Paolo, Cotra signed a document declaring that Porto Seguro had indemnified it for the loss of cargo arising out of the collision and conferring upon Porto Seguro a "full, complete, general and irrevocable release and discharge" from any future claim with respect to that cargo as well as subrogating Porto Seguro to all its rights in action against the parties responsible for the accident (Exhibit P-35). Porto Seguro is therefore entitled to bring this action in its own name.
[26]
Counsel for the defendants submits that even if this is the case, it is the IRB, and not Porto Seguro, which is the proper plaintiff since 98.6% of the indemnity payment was actually made by it. I do not agree with this assertion. The contract of reinsurance is strictly between the IRB and Porto Seguro and does not confer upon the IRB any right of recovery against the third party defendants.
[27]
I would add that I do not accept the suggestion made by counsel for the defendants that this case involves a question of maintenance and champerty. There is no arrangement between the IRB and Porto Seguro by which the latter has agreed to undertake this litigation for the benefit of the former.
4. Liability
[28]
On the night of December 11, 1994, Mr. Noël Daneau was the pilot aboard the "Beograd". He has been a licensed pilot since June 1, 1976, and has navigated the route between St-Lambert, Quebec and Lock number four on the Lower Beauharnois Canal since 1975.
[29]
At 20:45 hours Mr. Daneau boarded the vessel at Lock number four and joined the Captain and three crew members on the bridge. After clearing Lock number three located at the mouth of the Canal, Seaway authorities informed him that the "Federal Danube" was preparing to heave its anchor. Mr. Daneau stated that all of the vessels at anchor were visible to him when the "Beograd" was in the Lock and that he was aware of which one was the "Federal Danube" by its particular lighting equipment. At that time, the vessel's lights indicated that it was at anchor.
[30]
The "Beograd" proceeded at reduced speed (approximately four to five knots) past a ship that was secured to the tie-up wall of the Beauharnois Pier. Mr. Daneau testified that when he reached the end of the pier, it appeared to him that the ships which were anchored to the north and south of the designated navigation channel were obstructing it. In cross-examination, Mr. Daneau admitted that he did not confirm this observation by radar. After some discussion with the captain of the vessel, Mr. Daneau decided to pass the ships lying south of the shipping channel on their south side.
[31]
The "Beograd" then manoeuvred to starboard, intending to take a true course of 56
o
but immediately going to 58
o
, and increased its speed to "full ahead". Mr. Daneau was asked about the current flowing from the Beauharnois Dam. He stated that it did not have any effect on a ship proceeding at full speed.
[32]
When the "Beograd" was still some distance from the "Federal Danube", Mr. Daneau altered its course to 63
o
as a safety precaution. He estimated that the vessels would pass each other at approximately 600 feet and testified that he never expected that the "Beograd" would find itself in any close proximity to the "Federal Danube".
[33]
A few minutes later, he noticed that the "Federal Danube" was, in his words, "swinging" towards the "Beograd" without having signalled its intention to do so in any way. Also, it appeared to be moving forward. With the collision imminent, Mr. Daneau gave the order "hard-a-port" so as to protect the engine room located in the aft section of the "Beograd". A few seconds later, the vessel was pierced at its last cargo holds located on the port side.
[34]
In cross-examination, Mr. Daneau stated that he navigated Lower Beauharnois area on average a hundred times a year. Asked whether he had ever passed through the anchorage area instead of the designated navigation channel, he answered that he had not. Mr. Daneau testified that upon boarding the "Beograd" he had no discussion with the captain regarding compass error, the vessel's stopping distance, its turning circle, the direction of rotation of its propeller or its steering system. He also confirmed that, as pilot, it was he who determined the course taken by the "Beograd". He did not use a map to navigate.
[35]
In my opinion, Mr. Daneau demonstrated poor seamanship in the following ways:
1. by passing through a designated anchorage area at "full ahead" in breach of rule 6 of the
Collision Regulations
(C.R.C. 1978, c. 1416), concerning safe speed;
2. by passing close ahead of an anchored vessel which was stemming a current when he could quite safely have passed astern;
3. by undertaking insufficient course corrections in light of the northeasterly current from the Beauharnois Dam whose effect was not calculated but whose existence was obviously detectable by the location of the dim and observation of the heading of the anchored ship. This current of 0.6 knots to 1.6 knots would be sufficient to displace the "Beograd" almost two cables (1,200 ft.) northward in the ten minutes it took to cross the anchorage area;
4. by interfering with a vessel in the process of weighing anchor whose manoeuvring capability was reduced.
[36]
Mr. Daneau's contention that he thought the ships at anchor might be partially blocking the main navigation channel downbound from Lock number three is not plausible, in my opinion. The three ships anchored to the north of the channel would be bound by the current, and as the wind speed was negligible (three - five knots generally southeast) they would be lying parallel to it. Although none of the anchored vessels had given precise anchorage positions to Seaway authorities, none had reported that they were anchored in the navigation channel. The two ships anchored to the south of the channel were also bound by the current, heading generally southwards or southwestwards. In the unlikely event that either of their sterns were in fact impinging on the channel, it would still be safer to pass north of them because the Melocheville ranges and the channel buoys A-51 and A-52 (Chart #1410 - Exhibits D-54, D-83, P-72, D-109 and P-108.) would clearly indicate how far a ship could safely deviate from the centre of the channel to avoid them. This was clearly the preferable route to take.
[37]
Captain Janicic, who was Master of the "Beograd", gave evidence which demonstrated that he was not fully aware, until just prior to the collision, of the magnitude of the risk which Mr. Daneau had created by passing through the anchorage area while ships were anchored there.
[38]
Captain Derenne, who was Master of the "Federal Danube", testified that his pilot, Mr. Duchesne, boarded the vessel in StLambert at 15:45 hours and that at 16:28 hours the vessel dropped anchor in the Pointe Fortier anchorage area off the Lower Beauharnois Lock in anticipation of proceeding upbound through it when clearance was received from Seaway authorities. The Bridge Bell Book (Exhibit D-100) and the Bridge Log Book (Exhibit D-97) indicate that the port anchor was used and three shackles of chain (270 feet) were let out into the water.
[39]
Captain Derenne explained the functioning of various navigation instruments located aboard the "Federal Danube". He discussed, specifically, the Engine Movement Recorder and how to decipher its printout (Exhibit D-78) as well as the Gyro Course Recorder (Exhibit D-82) and its recording of the ship's bearings. The Engine Movement Recorder printout indicates that the engines were not moved from the time of anchoring at 16:27 hours (11/2127 GMT(Z) on the printout) until 21:47.8 hours (12/0247.8 GMT(Z)) when their speed was increased to 70 rpm astern and then reduced to 21 rpm and further to 1 rpm astern at 21:48.3 hours (12/0248.3 GMT(Z)). This was the only movement of the engine following the anchoring of the "Federal Danube".
[40]
The Gyro Course Recorder printout indicates that from the moment the vessel had brought up to the chain at 16:30 hours, it began to swing back and forth about the anchor between a heading of 145
o
(T) and 250
o
(T), with each full swing taking approximately 20 minutes (The Azimuth Book, which indicates the deviation of the gyrocompass and assists in adjusting it, indicates that on December 8, 1984, the average deviation was -2.2
o
. Captain Derenne testified that the deviation is checked against the known heading of the lock.). In view of the fact that the effect of the wind was negligible, these gyrations were almost entirely due to the current from the Beauharnois Dam whose direction in the Pointe Fortier anchorage area is variable but generally heading north to northeast.
[41]
When asked what the position of the "Federal Danube" was at the time of the collision, Captain Derenne explained that this was calculated by radar ranges and bearings of different points in western Lac St. Louis which were checked by radar range and bearing of the eastern extremity of the tie-up wall below Lock number three. The distance from the tie-up wall was entered in the Anchorage Bearings Booklet (Exhibit D-80) and the position itself was entered in the Abstract of the Log Book (Exhibit D-79) (The position was also entered in the Captain's Report of a Shipping Casualty (Exhibit D-98).). While the Captain was not present when every entry was made, a routine procedure was in place and the whole process was supervised by the Chief Officer and checked by the officer of the watch at half-hour intervals.
[42]
The actual entry corresponding to 16:30 hours on the day of the collision was made by Mr. Christian Dubit, the Junior Officer (This includes the entry made on chart #1410 located aboard the "Federal Danube" (Exhibit D-83).). Mr. Dubit corroborated the testimony given by Captain Derenne, explaining how, using radar ranges and bearings of three reference points, he plotted the position of the "Federal Danube". He also confirmed that the position was calculated and recorded at regular intervals.
[43]
At approximately 21:30 hours, Seaway authorities indicated that the "Federal Danube" could begin weighing anchor. Captain Derenne testified that he was aware that the "Beograd" was exiting the Lock and that after some discussion with his pilot Mr. Duchesne, the order was given to the Chief Officer by "walkie talkie" at 21:40 hours to weigh anchor. The Chief Officer then repeated the order, engaged the winch and indicated the force on the anchor (He stated that the "chain comes easily".) and its direction (Eight points to port which is almost 90
o
to the vessel.).
[44]
At 21:45 hours, the Chief Officer reported to the bridge that a vessel was approaching off the bow of the "Federal Danube" and the order was given to stop weighing anchor. At that point, two (2) shackles of chain remained in the water (Exhibit D-98.).
[45]
Captain Derenne was asked about the movement of the vessel prior to and after the collision. He consulted the Gyro Course Recorder printout which indicates that the vessel was swinging to port between 240
o
at 21:20 hours and 180
o
at 21:48 hours.
[46]
Some time after the collision, at 22:40 hours, one shackle of the anchor chain was redeployed. Captain Derenne was asked to estimate the position of the "Federal Danube" at that time given the reading in the Anchorage Bearings Booklet of 0.88 miles from the tie-up wall at 16:30 hours and subsequent readings of 0.925 miles at 21:00 hours and 0.985 miles at 22:40 hours. He explained that as the anchor is lowered, the vessel moves backward; but as the anchor touches bottom, the tension on the chain and its weight causes the vessel to recoil forward and thus change position relative to the shore. Given the length of the vessel at 180 meters (approximately 590 feet), as well as that of the chain at some 85 meters (approximately 280 feet), Captain Derenne stated that a movement over the ground of 10 or 20 meters (approximately 30 to 60 feet) is not significant. The important thing to note, in his opinion, is that the distances recorded at 21:00 and 22:40 hours are relatively close despite the fact that the "Federal Danube" had begun weighing anchor. The increase in distance was caused mostly by the impact of the vessels as well as the action of the engine when it was engaged at half-speed astern. These figures, as well as the data from the Gyro Course Recorder, led Captain Derenne to conclude that the "Federal Danube" did not move significantly between the time it anchored and the moment it collided with the "Beograd".
[47]
Mr. Wim De Deken, who was the Chief Officer on board the "Federal Danube", corroborated the evidence of Captain Derenne concerning the discrepancy in the distances appearing in the Anchorage Bearings Booklet. He also explained how a ship at anchor necessarily moves and that, if anything, the variations in the measurements indicates that they are correct.
[48]
The conclusion which I draw from this evidence is that the position of the "Federal Danube" may have changed over the ground to a limited extent between 16:28 hours and due to the shortening of the chain by approximately one shackle (90 feet). As well, its orientation was certainly altered by the swing to port. However, this slight change of position would not, in my opinion, have been perceptible from the "Beograd", which was being navigated by eye. Further, it is unlikely that it would have been detected by radar.
[49]
The fact that the "Federal Danube" was stemming the current and swinging to port due to the heaving of its anchor may have given the Pilot Mr. Daneau and Captain Janicic the impression that it was moving. However, this was movement through the water rather [than] over the ground. Ultimately, their misperception stems from the movement of the "Beograd" itself at approximately 10 knots in a northeasterly direction under power and laterally (northwards) due to the current from the Beauharnois Dam.
[50]
Captain Derenne was also asked about any evasive manoeuvres taken to avoid the impact. He testified that the engines on the "Federal Danube" were engaged half-speed astern, explaining that it was not effective to set the engine to full speed from a standing position as the turbulence created around the propeller would sap some of the torque needed to move the vessel. This was not contradicted by any evidence presented by the plaintiffs.
[51]
The plaintiff maintains that the bow thruster on the "Federal Danube" could have been used to avoid the collision. Captain Derenne confirmed that it was out of order owing to the breakdown of one of three generators required to start it. He then explained how use of the bow-thruster was limited to correcting the position of a vessel transiting through locks, approaching tie-up walls and turning short-round in restricted areas. He also stated that because the extra generating capacity required to operate it put a great strain on its generators and consumed a great deal of fuel, the bow-thruster was rarely used.
[52]
In the circumstances surrounding the collision, I conclude that the operational status of the bow-thruster is not an issue, first, because it would not have been used in any event, and second, because the eight minutes it took the "Beograd" to clear Lock number three and approach the "Federal Danube" would not have sufficed to start the apparatus for use in an evasive manoeuvre.
[53]
Counsel for the plaintiff also claims that a vigil should have been used on board the "Federal Danube" on the night of the collision. Captain Derenne responded that they are used only during ocean navigation and not in the Great Lakes system. On the night in question, therefore, a vigil would have been, in his opinion, completely useless. This conclusion is supported by the testimony of Captain Janicic who stated that a lookout is impossible to maintain in the Seaway as there is too much to report. I accept these views on this point.
[54]
The evidence given by Captain Derenne was on the whole convincing. He showed a high degree of professionalism and was able to fully explain and justify his actions in the hours leading up to the collision. I can find no inconsistencies between his testimony and the documentary evidence. I find him to be a very credible witness and accept his evidence in its entirety.
[55]
Mr. De Deken testified that he was on navigation watch between 16:00 and 20:00 hours the night of the collision. He was responsible for all anchoring operations including going forward with the Boatswain to drop and heave the anchor. On the day in question, Mr. De Deken testified that he paid out three shackles of chain (Under crossexamination, Mr. De Deken explained that the length of a shackle of anchor cable is standard the world over and equivalent to 15 fathoms (27 meters or 90 feet) and that each shackle is identified and marked with paint and seizing-wire.) and satisfied himself that the anchor was holding by observing the manner in which the chain tightened when the anchor was first dropped and then slackened as the vessel recoiled. After lowering the anchor, Mr. De Deken stated that he returned to his quarters to change his clothes and then proceeded to the bridge in order to make the necessary entries in the Anchorage Bearings Booklet. The time was 17:40 hours. The other entries were made by the Junior Officer, Mr. Dubit.
[56]
Mr. De Deken finished his watch duty at 20:00 hours but was called again shortly before 21:40 hours to go forward with the Boatswain and prepare for the weighing of the anchor. At 21:40 hours, the order to put the windlass into gear was received. The chain was leading to port and not under any strain when heaving began. After one shackle had been retrieved, Mr. De Deken noticed a ship on the starboard side which was apparently going to pass very close to the "Federal Danube" and reported this fact to the bridge. Though reporting on passing traffic was not within the usual sphere of his anchorage duties, he thought it necessary to do so on this occasion in the event that the bridge was not aware of how close the vessel would pass. He then received orders to stop heaving and did so. Mr. De Deken continued to report the closing distances between ships to the bridge, all the time confident that a collision would be avoided. At the very last minute, after realizing that a collision was inevitable, he ran aft on the forecastle for his personal safety.
[57]
After the collision, when the "Beograd" had passed clear, orders came from the bridge to pay the chain back out to three shackles in the water. Mr. De Deken did this and inspected the damage sustained by the "Federal Danube".
[58]
The evidence given by Mr. De Deken was in my opinion also very convincing. It is obvious that he was fully aware of the duties of a Chief Officer and has been well trained in seamanship and the operation of a freighter such as the "Federal Danube". From his evidence I conclude as a finding of fact, given that the anchor was in approximately 60 feet of water, that the "Federal Danube"
was anchored
at the time of the collision.
[59]
Mr. Bilodeau, a representative for the Seaway authority, gave testimony regarding the strength and direction of the current flowing from the Beauharnois Dam and confirmed the contents of the transcript of communications between the Seaway authorities and the vessels and between the vessels themselves.
[60]
At the request of the solicitor for the plaintiff, Mr. Bilodeau played the tape recording from which those transcripts were produced. At 16:28.21 hours, the "Federal Danube" reported that it had anchored south of the navigation channel in the Pointe Fortier anchorage area. This was repeated on three separate occasions but the precise location of the vessel was not given. Counsel for the plaintiff argued that the "Federal Danube" was under an obligation to provide Seaway authorities with more than just its general whereabouts. I disagree. Section 83 of the
Seaway Regulations
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 1397, requires that a vessel anchoring in a designated anchorage area report its position but does not specify that it must call in exact coordinates of latitude and longitude. It should be noted that Captain A. MacKenzie, Master of the "Canadoc" - another ship anchored in the Pointe Fortier anchorage area - also did not report his precise position to Seaway authorities (Exhibit D-115), confirming that this is not standard practice.
Disposition
[61]
After a careful review of the evidence, I conclude that sole liability for the accident rests upon the "Beograd". The decision by the Pilot Mr. Daneau to pass through the anchorage area at full speed and the failure to compensate for the current flowing from the Beauharnois Dam are the sole causes for the collision.
[62]
I find that the "Federal Danube" was anchored in a designated anchorage area and in its passive state was entitled to assume that passing vessels would regard it as unable to move and give it a wide berth. It cannot be blamed for not taking evasive action as it was still immobilized. Also, it in no way interfered with the "Beograd"'s choice of route.
[63]
The "Federal Danube" was proceeding to weigh anchor in a seamanlike manner and had not yet reached the stage where the
Collision Regulations
for a vessel under way would apply. It was not obliged to notify the "Beograd" that it was weighing its anchor as Seaway authorities had already given it permission to do so and had informed the "Beograd" of this fact when it was clearing Lock number three.
[64]
Further, I find that "Federal Danube" reported its position to the authorities in a manner that satisfied the requirements of s. 83 of the
Seaway Regulations
. Ultimately, I find that the master and crew of the "Federal Danube" committed no error which attracts liability.
[65]
With respect to the plaintiff's contention that the "Federal Danube" was duty-bound to take action to avoid a risk of collision, I disagree. As in the cases of
Batavier
(
Batavier, The
(1845), 2 Wm. Rob. 407.) and
Admiralty  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  safe route and avoid the ship at anchor.
[66]
In
"Argon II"
, which is factually similar to the case at bar, Mr. Justice Hill stated at p. 371:
"It is said that the 'Argon II' ought to have appreciated that the 'Porthcawl' was approaching so as to bring about a collision, and ought to have acted earlier. The 'Argon II' is still at anchor. The 'Porthcawl' is a free ship. It is not for the 'Argon II' to suppose that the 'Porthcawl' will be so carelessly manoeuvred that she will come into collision with the trawler until it becomes apparent that that is going to happen. Up to that time she has a right to assume that the 'Porthcawl' will keep clear. When danger does become apparent the 'Argon II' stops her winch and puts her engines astern, but it is too late. Is she negligent for not doing that an instant earlier? I cannot say she is."
[67]
The collision in my view was brought about solely by the negligence of the "Beograd".
[68]
The action is dismissed with costs (I ruled that the question of additional costs would be dealt with at a further hearing following the issuance of these reasons.).
Action dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/gas
[End of document]