[1]
MacKay, J.
: By this application for judicial review the applicant seeks an order to set aside the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division dated January 5, 1993, that the applicant is not a Convention refugee.
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Somalia. He was born in Ethiopia, the son of Somali parents; he has never lived in Somalia and does not have family living there. Though he lived in Ethiopia from his birth in 1969 until September 1991, when he left and travelled by land to Djibouti and then to Canada, he has no civil status in Ethiopia.
[3]
The applicant is a member of the Issa clan. Fighting between rival groups in Ethiopia resulted in shelling of the family house. He and his sister were injured. Later, armed men came to the family shop, beat the applicant and his father and robbed them. The following day his father was taken away and subsequently the family was told he had been killed. Further fighting in September 1991 caused the applicant to flee Ethiopia for Djibouti and in December he left there, travelled by air to Egypt, France and the United States and arrived in Canada early in January 1992, where he claimed refugee status. He claimed to fear persecution if he were to return to Ethiopia, and by subsequent amendment to his P.I.F. he claimed he would risk being killed if he were to go to Somalia because as a member of the Issa clan he was not safe in any part of the country. He feared he would be killed by other specified clans, or as a result of inter-clan rivalry, because he was a member of the Issa clan.
[4]
The C.R.D.D. panel considered the applicant as a national of Somalia, a matter not in dispute. The tribunal's decision found there is not more than a mere possibility that he would be persecuted for any of the grounds set out in the definition of Convention refugee under s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
if he were to be sent to Somalia.
[5]
The decision of the tribunal, after reviewing the facts of the applicant's claim, make no comment on the applicant's credibility, and it then sets out the analysis and conclusions of the panel quite briefly, as follows:
"... With respect to the claimant's fear of persecution due to being an Issa in Somalia, documentary evidence states that the Issas are one of the main Somali clans.* The Dir clan is subdivided into three sub-clans: the Issa, the Gadabursi, and the Bimale.* Most Dir live in northern Somalia. In May 1991, under the leadership of the Isaak dominated Somalia National Movement (SNM), it declared itself the independent Republic of Somaliland.* Of the major political forces in the country, two relatively small groups - the Somalia Democratic Association (SDA) and the United States Front (USF) - are controlled by the Gadabursi and the Issa respectively.* The 105-member constituent committee, formed in April 1991 to work on a draft constitution and timetable for free elections to be held sometime in 1993, contains 20 Gadabursi and five Issa.* The SDA and the USF took part in the 'national reconciliation conference' in Djibouti in July 1991, which was boycotted by the SNM. They reached an accord on an interim government in southern Somalia. They continue to play a role in southern Somalia politics.* But the claimant before us, as a member of the Issa clan, benefits from his membership because of their control of the USF. Therefore, there is no reasonable chance of persecution by reason of his race.
"With respect to his fear that should he return to Somalia, he would be killed by the other clans, unfortunate as the situation may be of the fighting between the clans, there is no provision in the definition of the Convention refugee set out in the
Immigration Act
that pertains to the protection of members of factions in tribal conflicts of a generalized nature in which the participants are exposed to the same degree of risk. This is a basic civil war situation indiscriminately encountered by all Somalis in general. [
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)].
"The panel determines that the claimant is not targeted individually or collectively in some way different from the general victims of the civil war. In
Salibian
[now reported, (1990) 113 N.R. 123 (F.C.A.)] it states:
'[A] situation of civil war in a given country is not an obstacle to a claim provided the fear felt is not that felt indiscriminately by all citizens as a consequence of the civil war, but that felt by the applicant himself, by a group with which he is associated, or if necessary by all citizens on account of a risk of persecution based on one of the reasons stated in the definition.'
"It is true that Somalia is in a state of chaos and raging with civil war, as clan fights clan. The claimant's fear is one felt by all citizens of Somalia and is not felt exclusively by the claimant because of his membership in his clan. This, therefore, does not form the basis of a well-founded fear of persecution for one of the Convention reasons.
"After consideration of all the evidence, the panel concludes that there is nothing more than a mere possibility [
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.)] that the claimant would be persecuted for any of the grounds set out in the Convention refugee definition, if returned to Somalia.
"Accordingly, the Refugee Division determines the claimant Hassan Isse Ali not to be a Convention refugee." (*Footnotes omitted - Where footnotes refer to judicial decisions those are included by citations in square brackets)
[6]
That decision is challenged on several grounds. The initial ground, raised as a separate ground for the first time when this matter was heard, is that the tribunal failed to meet the obligation to provide reasons for its conclusion in accord with ss. 69.1(11) of the
Immigration Act
. That section provides as follows:
"(11) The Refugee Division may give written reasons for its decision on a claim, except that
(a) if the decision is against the person making the claim, the Division shall, with the written notice of the decision referred to in subsection (9), give written reasons with the decision ..."
This ground for questioning the tribunal's decision was urged in reliance upon decisions of the Court of Appeal, in particular
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where Mr. Justice Marceau for the Court, set aside a decision which erred in that the conclusion was not validly supported by the reasons given, since the reasons of the tribunal did not demonstrate that the inferences drawn from the evidence were made in accord with the legal principles involved.
[7]
This ground was included, but not as a separate ground, in written submissions of the applicant filed in support of the application for leave and in written submissions subsequently filed in advance of the hearing. I propose to deal with this issue, since it is a challenge to the very basis of the decision, after consideration of the other issues raised by the applicant.
[8]
The second ground urged on behalf of the applicant is that the decision ignores significant evidence supportive of the applicant's claim in several respects.
1. It is urged that the tribunal inappropriately made selective use of the primary item of documentary evidence upon which it relied. In the first of the paragraphs from the decision reproduced above, except for the first sentence, and the last two which state a conclusion of the tribunal, the rest of the text is reproduced verbatim from one item of documentary evidence, a Response to Information Request dated October 17, 1991, from the I.R.B. documentation centre, excluding three sentences of the original document. Those sentences are:
"... In March 1991, there were heavy clashes reported between the SDA and the USF on the one side, and SNM on the other.
"Although the SDA and USF oppose an independent Somaliland, the current 19 member Somaliland government includes two Gadabursi and one Issa ... It is unclear whether any of these representatives are members of the SDA or the USF ..."
I am persuaded that the sentences omitted do provide a somewhat different perspective than does the portion included in the tribunal's decision, at least in relation to the situation in northern Somalia. The sentences omitted indicate that there have been clashes involving the USF, an Issa political group, and the SNM, the Issaq political group dominating northern Somalia at the time. Moreover, the two groups appear to have opposing views on the independence of northern Somalia. Finally, the last sentence omitted makes it clear that Issa representatives in the Somaliland government and on the constituent committee to draft a constitution for northern Somalia, may or may not have been representatives of the USF, the Issa political movement.
Provided it fairly represents the documentary evidence, selective use of portions of it is not objectionable. Where that use excludes portions supportive of the applicant's claim and further, where there is no reference to evidence contradicting that of which selective use is made, there are grounds for seriously questioning the tribunal's consideration of documentary evidence.
2. Here the applicant urges that the tribunal also ignored the bulk of documentary evidence concerning the situation in northern Somalia. While it is acknowledged that the tribunal need not refer to all of the evidence before it, the decision here refers to documentary evidence selectively, ignoring other documentary evidence supportive of the applicant's claim, especially more recent evidence than that referred to by the tribunal.
I am persuaded that the tribunal erred by so doing. Documents in the record dated later than the one principally referred to in the decision indicate deterioration in the rather fragile arrangements for northern Somalia as a self-proclaimed independent country, with continuing inter-clan differences, particularly between the Issaq and other clans, including the Issa. Moreover, it indicates that by mid-1992 all but SNM supporters had been excluded from agencies seeking to govern in northern Somalia. For the respondent, it is urged that there is other documentary evidence that was before the tribunal which is supportive of its general conclusions. While that may be, from the tribunal's decision it is clear that it made selective use of documentary evidence in a manner that excludes reference to other documentary evidence, supportive of the applicant's claim, which is contradictory and later in time to the evidence referred to in the decision. I am persuaded that the tribunal's decision must be read as one made without reference to, and which indeed ignores, documentary evidence supportive of the applicant's claim.
3. It is further urged that in considering the applicant's claim only in relation to northern Somalia the tribunal ignored the evidence from his amended P.I.F. statement and from his oral testimony that his fear of persecution related to the whole of Somalia and was not limited to northern Somalia. Clearly the decision makes no direct reference to the applicant's claim other than in relation to northern Somalia. The decision implicitly deals with his claim in relation to the whole of Somalia in its treatment of that claim as relating only to fear of the effects of the generalized situation of civil war, with fighting between clans, throughout Somalia. I turn to consider that aspect of the decision in connection with the claim that the tribunal did not appropriately interpret the definition of Convention refugee.
[9]
The third main ground raised by the applicant is that it is said the tribunal erred in its interpretation and application of the definition of Convention refugee in the circumstances of a civil war situation. The decision quotes from
Salibian
[113 N.R. 123] after referring to a civil war circumstances in Somalia, and stating a conclusion: "this is a basic civil war situation indiscriminately encountered by all Somalis in general". For that conclusion it cites as authority
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] a decision of the Federal Court of Appeal. That decision is not authority for concluding that the civil war situation in Somalia faces all Somalias indiscriminately. Rather, in that brief decision the Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal from the Refugee Division because the appellant in that case was not able to establish that he, or the group he claimed to be associated with, were persecuted in the sense that they were targeted in some way different from the victims of civil war generally in Lebanon.
[10]
Referring to the applicant's fear of persecution, the tribunal notes the fighting between clans in Somalia, refers to the lack of provision in the definition of Convention refugee for protection of members of factions in tribal conflicts of a generalized nature, and states two conclusions: that the situation in Somalia is basically one of civil war, and that the claimant is not targeted, individually or collectively, in some way different from the general victims of civil war. These conclusions are set out without explanation relating to the evidence before the tribunal and without reference to the particulars of the applicant's claim to fear persecution.
[11]
In my opinion, the tribunal's decision in this case erred in not assessing the applicant's claim to fear persecution because of his membership in the Issa clan, and in not referring to particulars of the applicant's own situation, that is, that while a Somali by nationality he had never lived in the country, had no family or friends there and, though he was a member of the Issa clan by familial ties, he spoke with an accent different from that of clan members growing up in Somalia. In somewhat similar cases failure to take the particular factors of the applicant's claim into account has been held to be grounds for setting aside the decision of the tribunal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] (F.C.T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] (F.C.T.D.)).
[12]
I return to the initial ground raised at the hearing of this matter, that is that the tribunal set out conclusions not adequately supported by reasons. In my view, that may be said of its conclusion, made without referring to the particulars of the applicant's claim, that he was not targeted individually or collectively in some way different from the general victims of the civil war. This ground, however, was argued at the hearing mainly with regard to the conclusion stated at the end of the first paragraph quoted, that is, that "the claimant ... as a member of the Issa clan, benefits from his membership because of their control of the USF. Therefore there is no reasonable chance of persecution by reason of his race". The applicant's claim was expressed in terms, not of race, but in relation to his membership in the Issa clan, a claim based on his familial ties to a particular social group. After its selective reference to part of one document before it, the tribunal's conclusion is set out without an explanation or analysis. It is not said how he benefitted from his membership in the clan or how the clan's control of the USF could benefit him, particularly where the USF was not in control of government in the north and, from the weight of evidence would appear to have been in conflict with the controlling party, the SNM.
[13]
I am persuaded that the tribunal did err in so doing. The reasons for its conclusion are not set out and I am not persuaded that that conclusion is supported on the basis of the evidence before it and inferences properly drawn from that evidence. As Marceau, J.A., said in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), "... even if the conclusions of the tribunal were correct, we do not accept that they can be advanced without more explanation to establish that the appropriate legal principles were applied".
[14]
For these reasons, an order goes allowing the application for judicial review, setting aside the decision of the tribunal and referring the matter back to the Refugee Division for reconsideration by a different panel.
[15]
At the conclusion of the hearing counsel were invited to propose questions for consideration of the Court as serious issues of importance to be certified for consideration by the Court of Appeal in accord with s. 83(1) of the
Immigration Act
. Counsel for the applicant proposed four questions. Counsel for the respondent submitted that all of the questions proposed related to factual issues arising in this case or to general issues raised only indirectly by this case. In the circumstances, I conclude that no question is to be certified.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sg
[End of document]