[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
[Translation]: The court has before it an application for judicial review from a decision by the Refugee Division ("the panel") which found that the applicants were not Convention refugees.
Facts
[2]
The applicants Boris Fedosov, his mother Ninal Kadenko, his wife Mila Fedosov and their son Alexander Fedosov are all citizens of Israel.
[3]
As appears from the personal information form, the applicants were born in Kiev in the Ukraine and are Christians. Mila Fedosov's father was a Jew and her mother Ukrainian. On account of the terror and chaos caused in the U.S.S.R. by nationalism and discrimination, the applicants immigrated to Israel on November 6, 1990.
[4]
Once they were in Israel, the applicants alleged that the situation was no better. They related the following incidents.
[5]
Around January 1991, religious fanatics burst into their home several times to control the food which they ate. When the neighbours found out that the applicants were Ukrainians, they called them "goys" and threatened to kill them.
[6]
In February 1991, four persons armed with guns burst into the applicants' apartment. Since Israel was under bombardment and the alarm was ringing, these men were very excited. Seeing the mother-in-law make the sign of the cross, one of the malefactors ran around the apartment pointing his gun at her and then smashed a Christian cross on the floor. The applicant Boris Fedosov then tried to drive the men out of the apartment but one of them shot him and injured his elbow. The men threatened to kill him if he reported the matter to the police.
[7]
After this incident the applicants moved to another part of the city but their problems continued. The son was harassed at school because he was wearing a Christian cross around his neck. On October 21, 1991 he came home with a head injury and bruises on his face and body. His father then laid a complaint with the police, who questioned him about it and about his Ukrainian nationality. The police officer promised to look into the matter and telephone him. When the applicant went back to the police station, the same officer denied ever having talked to him. No investigation was made.
[8]
The applicant subsequently moved his son to another school where he was again the victim of harassment. He was attacked and threatened with knives when he was preparing to go and celebrate Christmas with his friends. After this accident he ceased going to school.
[9]
The applicant's wife was the subject of sexual harassment when she went to look for work. In a store the owner told her that he would employ her on condition that she became his mistress.
[10]
Later, when she was again looking for employment, she was the victim of a sexual assault. In November 1992, the owner of a store threw himself on her and tried to rape her. He tore her clothes, scratched her neck and arms and injured her face. The applicants again filed a complaint with the police following this accident. A police officer listened to them politely and made notes in his notebook. When the applicant went back to the police station, the police officer accused him of raping his wife and told him he could be punished for attempting to blackmail an honest merchant. He advised him to keep better control of his wife, to keep her at home so she would not seduce decent people.
[11]
In view of all these incidents and the fact that the son had to do his military service in the occupied territories or go to prison, the applicants decided to leave Israel. They arrived in Canada on May 26, 1993. They claimed refugee status the following day on account of their race, nationality, religion, political opinion and membership in a particular social group.
Refugee Division's Decision
[12]
While it recognized that the applicants had given honest testimony devoid of exaggeration, the panel concluded that there was no serious possibility of persecution if they returned to Israel.
[13]
In the panel's view the evidence showed that the applicants had been the subject of "isolated" acts of discrimination due to a lack of tolerance by a religious population facing serious economic, political and social problems. It acknowledged that the documentation indicated problems of discrimination, integration and intolerance but that this evidence did not show that there were problems of persecution. Even taking the discriminatory acts involving the applicants as a whole, the panel felt it was impossible for it to conclude that there could be an objectively valid fear.
[14]
Further, the panel indicated that the State of Israel was in a position to protect the applicants. In its view the fact that their complaint at the police station had not borne fruit is not a sufficient basis for concluding that protection was not available to them. The documentary evidence disclosed that all returnees, whether Jewish or not, receive financial assistance, special provisions for housing and language courses to help them adjust. It explained that in view of the unemployment rate the State was trying to recycle immigrants so that they would have a new area of specialization better suited to the economic situation. According to the panel, agencies helping returnees had suggested that the female applicant take recycling courses. It was thus hard to see why a country which had offered returnees considerable help would then want to persecute them and refuse to protect them. Finally, it indicated that the applicants had not presented any clear and convincing rebuttal evidence.
[15]
The panel further noted that the State of Israel guarantees freedom of religion. There are also Orthodox churches in Israel, especially in the larger cities. As to the son's military service in the occupied territories, the panel mentioned that he had never asked to do his service in any other part of the country. Finally, the mere fact of not returning to Israel during the required deadline does not justify a fear of persecution. Consequently, on the basis of all these facts the panel concluded that there was no serious risk of persecution if the applicants returned to Israel.
Analysis
Military Service
[16]
The applicant alleged that he is not against military service but refused to do it in the occupied territories because the civilian population was being fired on. He maintained that he had avoided military service so he would not be associated with actions condemned by the international community. He argued that a country has no legitimate right to imprison someone who refuses to serve in a war in which the type of military action under way is condemned internationally. On this point, the panel concluded that the documentary evidence was that a person not wishing to serve in the occupied territories on religious or moral grounds could apply to serve somewhere other than those territories.
[17]
The applicant argued that another document from the documentation centre of the immigration panel, prepared before the hearing of the case at bar took place, indicates that on the contrary there is no alternative military service in Israel and the exemptions allowed are the following: medical exemptions, exemptions for mental disorders and exemptions for married women, none of which would apply to the applicant. Counsel for the applicant argued that this document forms part of the ex officio knowledge of a specialized tribunal since it originates with its own documentation centre. The respondent contended that since this document was not in evidence before the panel it could not be used in the instant application for judicial review.
[18]
In my opinion, since the document was available at the time of the hearing it could have been submitted by the applicant. I do not think there is any need to impose on a specialized tribunal a duty to be familiar with all the documents originating in its documentation centre.
[19]
In view of the evidence that it had in the record, the panel's conclusion regarding military service in my opinion was not unreasonable.
Distinction Between Discrimination And
Persecution
[20]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Marceau, J.A., summarized the rules that should guide us in making the distinction between discrimination and persecution.
"The incidents recited by the appellant in her testimony were no doubt unfortunate as they constituted in all appearances incidents of discrimination or even possibly harassment; but both members, in their respective reasons, make it clear that for them they were not serious or systematic enough to be characterized as persecution, or to lead to a conclusion that there was a serious possibility of persecution in the future.
"It is true that the dividing line between persecution and discrimination or harassment is difficult to establish, the more so since, in the refugee law context, it has been found that discrimination may very well be seen as amounting to persecution. It is true also that the identification of persecution behind incidents of discrimination or harassment is not purely a question of fact but a mixed question of law and fact, legal concepts being involved. It remains, however, that in all cases, it is for the Board to draw the conclusion in a particular factual context by proceeding with a careful analysis of the evidence adduced and a proper balancing of the various elements contained therein, and the intervention of this court is not warranted unless the conclusion reached appears to be capricious or unreasonable."
[21]
It is worth recalling that in general the courts have recognized in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at 133;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at 69 and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), that discriminatory acts which in some circumstances may constitute persecution must be sufficiently serious and occur over such a long period of time that it can be said that the claimants' physical or moral integrity is threatened.
[22]
An applicant will have to do more than recount various discriminatory incidents such as insults, jostling and problems in finding work for a panel to be able to conclude, even taking such incidents together as a whole, that there has been persecution.
[23]
The factual situations which the courts have found to constitute persecution generally involve acts of violence which are often accompanied by death threats. A series of such hostile acts over a long period of time, often affecting the claimant's physical safety, clearly cannot be described simply as discriminatory.
[24]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> at p. 134, cited by the panel the applicant, a Tamil, a member of a minority race and religion in Sri Lanka, was accosted several times by members of the racial and religious majority, beaten on three occasions and threatened with death if he associated with Tamils. The incidents took place from January to August of the same year. Heald, J.A., held that the incidents were serious enough to establish that he had been persecuted in Sri Lanka;
"Based on the evidence of this case, it is clear to me that this applicant was persecuted over a lengthy period of time in Sri Lanka because of his religious beliefs as well as his race."
[25]
In view of the rules stated by the Court of Appeal in that case and a factual situation involving incidents even more serious than those described above, I held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), that sexual assault, repeated attacks and harassment over a five year period constituted incidents of sufficient seriousness to be regarded as persecution.
[26]
The court must now analyse the incidents related by the applicants to determine whether the panel's conclusion, namely that they were isolated incidents, was unreasonable or capricious.
[27]
It is worth noting that the panel acknowledged that the applicants had given honest testimony devoid of exaggeration. This court's function is not to assess the applicants' credibility. I must therefore accept the factual situation described by them as the truth.
[28]
Petit Robert
defines "isolé" [isolated] as follows:
"Separated from things of the same type. Not in contact with leader. Remote from human habitation. Separated from other men. Lonely, solitary. Taken out of context, having no context. Unique."
[29]
It is clear that a person could not claim to be persecuted because he was the victim of an unfortunate incident resulting from intolerance or discrimination. For example, the incident related by the applicant during the war might be so described. It is understandable that in wartime tension is high and may lead to reprehensible acts. However, when the incidents of harassment and the physical attacks are repeated over a period of a year and a half, in my opinion it is not reasonable to describe them as "isolated" acts.
[30]
The panel concluded that it was impossible to find that the acts of discrimination directed against the applicants taken as a whole could give rise to a valid fear of persecution, and it relied in this on <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , which suggested that the incidents complained of must have taken place over a long period or that their seriousness must be such as to indicate that the physical and/or moral integrity of the claimants was threatened.
[31]
In the case at bar the incidents of harassment and threats mentioned took place from February 1991 to November 1992, and thus over a much longer period than in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and including several incidents of physical attacks as in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Moreover, and this was not the case in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the applicant was the victim of a sexual assault. This incident surely meets the standard of seriousness discussed in that case.
[32]
With all the deference which a judge must exercise in a case of judicial review, I cannot find that the panel's conclusion was reasonable. In my opinion, the standard applicable in one country cannot be different from that in another, so that a panel may conclude that incidents which are serious enough to create a fear of persecution in one country are not that serious in another.
[33]
The factual situation experienced by the applicants establishes their fear of being persecuted. That fear is clearly justified if there is no protection by the State. This leads us to the second part of the analysis.
State's Ability To Protect Its Citizens
[34]
In this connection, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 725 S.C.R., that if there is no complete breakdown of the State apparatus or express admission of incapacity by the State, its ability to protect the claimant should be assumed. Consequently, it is for the claimant to adduce clear and convincing evidence that the State is unable to provide such protection.
[35]
La Forest, J., suggested that in such a case the evidence might consist of:
"... testimony of similarly situated individuals let down by the state protection arrangement or
the claimant's testimony of past personal incidents in which state protection did not materialize
." (my emphasis)
[36]
The applicant's testimony in the case at bar was as follows.
[37]
First, regarding the attack on his son, it appeared that the police officer made no investigation after the complaint and even denied having seen the applicant about it:
"On October 21, 1991 our son came home with a head injury and bruises on his face and body. In the afternoon I went with him to the police station because I wanted the police to see the condition he was in. The police officer checked my documents at length and asked questions about my Ukrainian nationality. He promised us he would look into the case and telephone us. I later learned that he did not make any record: he was pretending to write something. When I went back to the police station this officer said he was seeing me for the first time and that possibly I was crazy. I understood from these actions that I would never be able to prove anything in that country."
[38]
This lack of action occurred again when the female applicant made a deposition regarding the sexual assault: the police officer made no record of the injuries and once again conducted no investigation. He even accused the male applicant of raping his wife and told him he could be punished for blackmailing an honest merchant. He concluded that it would be better for him to keep his wife at home so she would not seduce decent people.
"Before my birthday, which was on November 25, 1992, my wife went shopping to buy me a present. In one of the stores the owner offered her a job and invited her into a back room of the store to discuss working conditions. He threw himself on her and tried to rape her, tore her clothing, scratched her neck and arms and injured her face.
"After this incident I went to the police with my wife. The police officer listened to us politely. He took down the man's address and made some notes in his notebook. I told the officer that an expert opinion on my wife's injuries should perhaps be obtained and to this he replied that the matter would be taken care of and sent us home.
"When I went back to the police station on the day indicated, there was once again the same situation as with my son. He said there was no statement and that perhaps I had beaten my wife and torn her clothes, and also that I could be punished for attempting to blackmail this honest merchant.
"In view of this turn of events I did not even know what to say to the officer, who was a representative of authority. The police officer advised me to look after my wife better and keep her at home so she would not walk about the city and would not be able to seduce decent people."
[39]
These prior personal incidents in which the protection of the State did not materialize could not be ignored by the panel, which concluded that there was no clear and convincing evidence. In my opinion, the evidence presented by the applicants was sufficient.
[40]
I recognize that the State cannot guarantee protection of all its citizens at all times. A strict obligation to perform cannot be required of a State: it is impossible to achieve in any country.
[41]
The burden of proof on the applicant, as required by
Ward
, at p. 724 S.C.R., is to show that such protection did not materialize in past incidents. The testimony of the father in the case at bar clearly indicates that the police twice
refused to act
.
[42]
As Teitelbaum, J., indicated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at page 71:
"The police may have the ability to offer protection but when it [sic] chooses not to, this is equivalent to saying it is unable to provide protection to the applicants."
[43]
Further, in my opinion the consequence of this lack of action was not only to justify an applicant's reluctance to seek protection from the State, since he had seen it was pointless, but as no corrective and/or punitive action was taken it encouraged the recurrence of such incidents.
[44]
Counsel for the respondent argued that in situations where the police refused to do their duty the individual should go to a higher tribunal or approach a different organization, such as the Human Rights Commission.
[45]
I cannot accept such a suggestion. The issue here is not merely discriminatory acts, which could be the subject of a complaint to a Human Rights Commission. Some of the acts alleged are criminal in nature (sexual and other forms of assault) and so are not within the jurisdiction of a Human Rights Commission. When they are victims of criminal offences the applicants are entitled, as in any country where the governmental system breaks down, to go to the police and to expect that at the very least there will be an investigation. I know of no legal system which imposes a greater burden than that on the individual. I refuse to accept that the State of Israel has any special status which places a greater burden on the individual than what he would encounter in any other democratic country.
[46]
As Dubé, J., pointed out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at page 70:
"Thus, in the case at bar, the question is whether or not it was objectively reasonable to expect the applicant to have further sought the protection from the army and the police in Israel after having been so brutally rebuffed by the very authorities from whom citizens expect protection.
There is nothing in our jurisprudence to the effect that in such situations the applicant has the further burden to seek assistance from human rights organizations or, ultimately, to launch an action in court against the government
." (my emphasis)
[47]
The application for judicial review is allowed. The panel's decision is quashed and the matter is referred back to be heard by a panel of different members.
[48]
Counsel for the respondent asked that the following question be certified under s. 83.1 of the
Immigration Act
.
[49]
This question reads as follows:
"Where there has not been a complete breakdown of the governmental apparatus and where a State has political and judicial institutions capable of protecting its citizens, does the refusal by certain police officers to take action suffice to establish that the State in question in unable or unwilling to protect its nationals?"
[50]
In view of the differences of opinion in this court on the point (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slm