 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FC 1354)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Montigny, J.
December 5, 2008.
Counsel:
Lucrèce M Joseph, for the applicant;
Lisa Maziade, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Lucrèce M. Joseph, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicant;
John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montreal, Quebec, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. This case was originally cited as [2009] F.T.R. TBEd. JA.001.
[1]
de Montigny, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration Appeal Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (Appeal Division) dated March 25, 2008, wherein it was determined that the applicant had abandoned his appeal by reason of his failure to appear at the hearing and provide his contact information.
FACTS
[2]
The applicant, a citizen of Yemen who was born in Kuwait on July 4, 1976, came to Canada in May 2002 as a permanent resident with a conditional residence visa in the entrepreneur class.
[3]
On April 5, 2005, the Immigration Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board found that the applicant was inadmissible pursuant to paragraph 41(
b
) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection
Act (IRPA) because he had not complied with the conditions for an entrepreneur. The applicant appealed from that decision.
[4]
On August 3, 2006, the applicant obtained a stay of the removal order issued against him by the Immigration Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board, with conditions. One of the conditions set by the Appeal Division is explicitly set out in paragraph 251(
a
) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations
:
251.
Conditions
- If the Immigration Appeal Division stays a removal order under paragraph 66(
b
) of the Act, that Division shall impose the following conditions on the person against whom the order was made:
(a) to inform the Department and the Immigration Appeal Division in writing in advance of any change in the person's address;
[5]
The Appeal Division was even more explicit when it added the following condition:
10. The appellant will report any change of address in writing to the CIC and to the Immigration and Refugee Board, Appeal Division located at 1010, Saint-Antoine Street West, 2nd floor, Montreal (Quebec) H3C 1B2, within 5 days of making such a change of address.
[6]
This decision dated August 3, 2006, provided that an interim review of the stay was to be scheduled by the Appeal Division on or around August 30, 2007. However, on September 12, 2007, the applicant received a notice to appear at a hearing to be held on October 16, 2007, in order to review the stay. This notice to appear set out the warning contained in subsection 168(1) of the IRPA, which provided that an Appeal Division member may determine that a proceeding has been abandoned if the Appeal Division is of the opinion that the applicant is in default in the proceedings, including by failing to appear for a hearing, to provide information required by the Appeal Division or to communicate with the Appeal Division on being requested to do so.
[7]
At the hearing of October 16, 2007, counsel for the applicant requested an adjournment because he wanted to call the Minister's counsel as a witness.
[8]
On December 4, 2007, counsel for the applicant was advised that the date of the hearing had been set for March 4, 2008.
[9]
On December 19, 2007, the applicant submitted an application to renew his permanent resident card, which expired on January 21, 2008. This application was received by the Case Processing Centre in Sydney on December 24, 2007.
[10]
On December 20, 2007, the date of the hearing before the Appeal Division was again postponed to March 25, 2007, with the consent of counsel for the applicant.
[11]
On January 28, 2008, the Appeal Division sent the applicant a notice to appear confirming the date of the hearing previously scheduled for March 25, 2008. The notice informed the applicant that he was to provide the Appeal Division and the Minister with a written statement of whether he had complied with the conditions of the stay in accordance with section 26 of the
Immigration Appeal Division Rules
. Like the notice dated September 12, 2007, the notice to appear also included the following warning based on subsection 168(1) of the IRPA:
IMPORTANT
Under section 168(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, if you fail to appear for a hearing, or fail to communicate with the IAD when requested, or fail to provide information required by the IAD (such as your most recent address), the IAD may determine that you have abandoned the appeal.
[12]
On January 31, 2008, the Case Processing Centre in Sydney advised the applicant that the application to renew his permanent resident card was incomplete, and required additional information. However, it was not until the end of February that this letter was allegedly brought to the attention of counsel for the applicant. Despite this letter, no notice was sent to the Appeal Division.
[13]
On March 4, 2008, the applicant sought a postponement of the hearing scheduled for March 25 in order to allow enough time for his permanent resident card to be renewed and so that he could thus attend the hearing. This application was dismissed by the Appeal Division on March 17, 2008, on the ground that the hearing date had been set since December 20, 2007, with the consent of counsel for the applicant. It was therefore decided that the matter would proceed as planned on March 25, 2008, and that the applicant could be heard by teleconference.
[14]
Counsel for the applicant was informed of this decision on March 18, 2008. He was also asked to forward to the Appeal Division the applicant's telephone number and calling cards. No application for leave and judicial review of this decision was filed.
[15]
On March 20, 2008, counsel for the applicant informed the Appeal Division that he had only the applicant's e-mail address, and that he had informed his client that the request for postponement had been denied.
[16]
On March 25, 2008, the applicant did not appear before the Appeal Division, either in person or by telephone, although his counsel was present. The latter repeated his request for a postponement, given that the applicant could not be reached and could not appear in Canada as long as his permanent resident card had not been renewed. The Minister's counsel argued that the applicant's behaviour warranted a determination of abandonment.
THE IMPUGNED DECISION
[17]
The Appeal Division determined that the applicant's appeal was abandoned under subsection 168(1) of the IRPA because of his failure to appear at the hearing and provide his contact information as required. The Appeal Division noted that it was up to the applicant to ensure that the documents necessary for his application for renewal of permanent residence had been submitted in due form, and that, in addition, it had not been informed of the fact that his file was considered incomplete.
[18]
The Appeal Division also mentioned that the applicant could have been heard by telephone. If the applicant had not received the notice to appear, he had only himself to blame. It was up to him to notify the Appeal Division of any change of address. Even though he had submitted a request to have the hearing postponed, he could not presume what the outcome of this request would be, and he was responsible for finding out what the decision was. For all of these reasons, the Appeal Division dismissed the new request for postponement made by counsel for the applicant and determined that the appeal had been abandoned.
ANALYSIS
[19]
The only issue in this matter is whether the determination by the Appeal Division that the applicant had abandoned his appeal is reasonable. Only the decision dated March 25, 2008, is at issue here; the applicant could not indirectly challenge the decision not to grant the postponement made on March 17, 2008, and he did not attempt to do so.
[20]
Counsel for the parties did not make any submissions concerning the appropriate standard of review. They seemed to take for granted that the decision was to be reviewed according to the standard of reasonableness, and they were correct to do so. The decision made by the Appeal Division relies on the application of subsection 168(1) of the IRPA to the facts in evidence. It is therefore a question of mixed fact and law. Consequently, this Court will intervene only if the decision of the Appeal Division does not fall within a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 49).
[21]
The respondent was correct to point out that neither the IRPA nor the
Immigration Appeal Division Rules
provide that the respondent has the obligation to hold a show cause hearing when deciding on the advisability of determining whether a claim has been abandoned, contrary to the situation in the Refugee Protection Division (see Rule 58 of the
Refugee Protection Division Rules
). In that regard, this Court stated the following:
Furthermore, giving the person who fails to appear the opportunity to explain the reasons for his default in all cases would render subsection 168(1) IRPA meaningless.
(. . . . .)
If the applicant's reasoning were followed, it would imply that each time a person is absent, lacks diligence or acts in such a way that clearly suggests that the appeal has been abandoned, the IAD would be bound to investigate to find those persons, to remind them of their obligations and to summon them to a new hearing before deciding that the proceedings are abandoned. I cannot accept such an interpretation, especially because in this case the applicant did not advise the IAD of the change in his contact information, so that in any event the IAD would not have been able to contact him to summon him to a new hearing if it had had such an obligation. The IAD was not bound to act as the applicant's legal counsel, or to remind him of the seriousness of the proceedings in which he was involved, or to ensure that he properly understood that he had to show up at his scheduling conference or that he was bound to advise the IAD of his change of address ....
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  paras. 10, 12; see also
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[22]
In this case, the applicant was advised on September 12, 2007, that he should appear before the Appeal Division on October 16, 2007, for a review of the stay that was granted to him on August 3, 2006. During that hearing, he sought an initial adjournment in order to call a witness. This adjournment was granted; it is interesting to note that this witness was never subsequently called.
[23]
On December 4, 2007, counsel for the applicant was advised that the date of the hearing had been set for March 4, 2008; it was subsequently postponed to March 25, with the consent of counsel for the applicant. However, it was not until December 19 that the applicant initiated proceedings to have his permanent resident card renewed, three months after the first notice to appear. What is more, the record shows that his renewal application was incomplete in many respects. Since the applicant had not informed the Case Processing Centre in Sydney of his new contact information, it was counsel for the applicant who finally received the letter requesting additional information at the end of February 2008.
[24]
It is true that counsel for the applicant submitted a request for postponement on March 4, 2008, when he realized that his client would probably not have his permanent resident card renewed in time for the hearing set for March 25. However, this request was submitted late because of the applicant's negligence. The applicant could not presume that this request would be granted, and it was up to him to be diligent in finding out what decision had been made. The applicant gave his counsel his e-mail address only, and went to China for business reasons. He cannot now blame the Appeal Division for not having given him the opportunity to be heard.
[25]
The applicant is now arguing that the determination that he had abandoned his appeal has caused him irreparable harm. However, he has only himself to blame. Not only was the hearing scheduled several months in advance, but the Appeal Division also gave him the opportunity to make submissions through a telephone call. If he was unable to take this opportunity, it is only because he did not take the most basic steps to ensure that he could be reached by the Appeal Division itself or by his counsel.
[26]
Given all of these circumstances, the Appeal Division was correct to determine that the applicant had abandoned his appeal. The applicant had every opportunity to be heard, but he did not take this opportunity because of his own negligence. It was up to him to be diligent; he cannot now blame the Appeal Division, arguing that the principles of procedural fairness have been breached. The panel had discharged its responsibilities, postponing the hearing more than once to accommodate the applicant, and even gave him the opportunity to make his arguments by telephone. The situation in which the applicant now finds himself is entirely his own fault, and he must therefore suffer the consequences.
[27]
For all these reasons, the application for judicial review of the decision made by the Immigration Appeal Division dated March 25, 2007, is dismissed. The parties did not propose any question to be certified, and none was certified.
ORDER
[28]
THE COURT ORDERS that
the application for judicial review is dismissed. No question is certified.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire à l'encontre d'une décision de la Section d'appel de l'immigration de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié (la Section d'appel), rendue le 25 mars 2008, dans le cadre de laquelle on a conclu que le demandeur s'était désisté de son appel en raison de son défaut de comparaître à l'audience et de fournir ses coordonnées.
FAITS
[2]
Le demandeur, un citoyen du Yémen né au Koweït le 4 juillet 1976, est venu au Canada en mai 2002 à titre de résident permanent avec un visa de résidence conditionnel dans la catégorie des entrepreneurs.
[3]
Le 5 avril 2005, la Section de l'immigration de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié a conclu que le demandeur était une personne interdite de territoire en vertu du paragraphe 41(b) de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
(la Loi), parce qu'il ne s'était pas conformé aux conditions imposées à titre d'entrepreneur. Le demandeur a déposé un appel de cette décision.
[4]
Le 3 août 2006, le demandeur a obtenu un sursis à l'exécution de la mesure d'expulsion émise contre lui par la Section de l'immigration de la Commission de l'immigration et du statut de réfugié, assorti de conditions. L'une des conditions fixées par la Section d'appel est prévue explicitement à l'alinéa 251a) du
Règlement sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
:
251.
Conditions
- Si la Section d'appel de l'immigration sursoit à une mesure de renvoi au titre de l'alinéa 66b) de la Loi, elle impose les conditions suivantes à l'intéressé:
a) informer le ministère et la Section d'appel de l'immigration par écrit et au préalable de tout changement d'adresse.
[5]
La Section d'appel s'est montrée encore plus explicite en ajoutant la condition suivante:
10. The appellant will report any change of address in writing to the CIC and to the Immigration and REfugee Board, Appeal Division located at 1010, Saint-Antoine Street West, 2nd floor, Montreal (Quebec) H3C 1B2, within 5 days of making such a change of address.
[6]
Cette décision du 3 août 2006 prévoyait que le réexamen intérimaire du sursis devait être fixé devant la Section d'appel le ou vers le 30 août 2007. Or, le 12 septembre 2007, le demandeur a reçu un avis de convocation à une audience devant se tenir le 16 octobre 2007 en vue de réexaminer le sursis. Cet avis de convocation énonçait l'avertissement contenu au paragraphe 168(1) de la Loi, lequel prévoit qu'un commissaire de la Section d'appel peut prononcer le désistement dans l'affaire dont il est saisi s'il estime que l'intéressé omet de poursuivre l'affaire, notamment par défaut de comparution, ou s'il omet de fournir des renseignements que la Section d'appel peut requérir, ou de donner suite à ses demandes de communication.
[7]
À l'audience du 16 octobre 2007, l'avocat du demandeur a demandé un ajournement parce qu'il voulait assigner comme témoin le conseil du ministre.
[8]
Le 4 décembre 2007, le procureur du demandeur fut avisé que la date de l'audience avait été fixée au 4 mars 2008.
[9]
Le 19 décembre 2007, le demandeur a présenté une demande de renouvellement de sa carte de résident permanent, qui expirait le 21 janvier 2008. Cette demande a été reçue par le Centre de traitement des demandes de Sydney le 24 décembre 2007.
[10]
Le 20 décembre 2007, la date d'audience devant la Section d'appel fut de nouveau reportée au 25 mars 2007, de concert avec le procureur du demandeur.
[11]
Le 28 janvier 2008, la Section d'appel a envoyé au demandeur un avis de convocation confirmant la date de l'audience préalablement fixée au 25 mars 2008. L'avis informait le demandeur qu'il devait fournir à la Section d'appel et au ministre une déclaration écrite sur le respect des conditions du sursis, conformément à l'article 26 des
Règles de la Section d'appel de l'immigration
. L'avis de convocation énonçait également, à l'instar de l'avis daté du 12 septembre 2007, l'avertissement suivant tiré du paragraphe 168(1) de la Loi:
IMPORTANT
Under section 168(1) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, if you fail to appear for a hearing, or fail to communicate with the IAD when requested, or fail to provide information required by the IAD (such as your most recent address), the IAD may determine that you have abandoned the appeal.
[12]
Le 31 janvier 2008, le Centre de traitement de Sydney a avisé le demandeur que la demande de renouvellement pour sa carte de résident permanent était incomplète, et a requis des informations additionnelles. Ce n'est cependant qu'à la fin du mos de février que cette lettre aurait été portée à la connaissance du procureur du demandeur. Malgré cette lettre, aucun avis ne fut envoyé à la Section d'appel.
[13]
Le 4 mars 2008, le demandeur a sollicité une remise de l'audience prévue pour le 25 mars, afin de lui allouer suffisamment de temps pour que sa carte de résident permanent soit renouvelée et pour qu'il puisse ainsi assister à l'audience. Cette demande a été rejetée par la Section d'appel le 17 mars 2008, au motif que la date d'audience était fixée depuis le 20 décembre 2007, de consentement avec le procureur du demandeur. Il a donc été décidé que l'affaire procéderait tel que prévu le 25 mars 2008, et que le demandeur pourrait être entendu par téléconférence.
[14]
Le procureur du demandeur a été avisé de cette décision le 18 mars 2008. On lui a également demandé de transmettre à la Section d'appel le numéro de téléphone du demandeur ainsi que des cartes d'appel. Aucune demande d'autorisation et de contrôle judiciaire de cette décision n'a été déposée à l'encontre de cette décision.
[15]
Le 20 mars 2008, le procureur du demandeur a informé la Section d'appel qu'il n'avait que l'adresse courriel du demandeur, et qu'il avait avisé son client que la demande de remise avait été refusée.
[16]
Le 25 mars 2008, le demandeur n'a pas comparu devant la Section d'appel, que ce soit en personne ou par téléphone, bien que son procureur ait été présent. Ce dernier a réitéré sa demande de remise, compte tenu du fait que le demandeur n'avait pu être rejoint et ne pouvait se présenter au Canada tant et aussi longtemps que sa carte de résident permanent n'aurait pas été renouvelée. De son côté, le conseil du ministre a soutenu que le comportement du demandeur justifiait une conclusion de désistement.
LA DÉCISION CONTESTÉE
[17]
La Section d'appel a prononcé le désistement de l'appel du demandeur en vertu du paragraphe 168(1) de la Loi, en raison de son défaut de comparaître à l'audience et de fournir ses coordonnées tel que requis. La Section d'appel a noté qu'il appartenait au demandeur de s'assurer que les documents nécessaires à se demande de renouvellement de résidence permanente soient soumis en bonne et due forme, et qu'au surplus elle n'avait pas été informée du fait que son dossier avait été jugé incomplet.
[18]
La Section d'appel a également mentionné que l'appelant aurait pu être entendu par téléphone. Si le demandeur n'a pas reçu l'avis de convocation, il n'avait que lui à s'en prendre. Il lui incombait d'aviser la Section d'appel de tout changement d'adresse. Même s'il avait soumis une demande pour faire remettre l'audience, il ne pouvait présumer du sort de cette demande et il avait la responsabilité de se renseigner sur la décision prise. Pour tous ces motifs, la Section d'appel a rejeté la nouvelle demande de remise du procureur du demandeur et a conclu au désistement de l'appel.
ANALYSE
[19]
La seule question en litige dans la présente affaire est celle de savoir si la conclusion de la Section d'appel à l'effet que le demandeur s'était désisté de son appel est raisonnable. Seule la décision rendue le 25 mars 2008 est en cause ici; le demandeur ne saurait attaquer par la bande la décision de ne pas accorder de remise prise le 17 mars 2008, et il n'a pas tenté de le faire.
[20]
Les procureurs des parties n'ont pas fait de représentation en ce qui concerne la norme de contrôle applicable. Ils ont semblé prendre pour acquis que la décision devait être révisée selon la norme de raisonnabilité, et ils ont eu raison de le faire. La décision prise par la Section d'appel repose sur l'application du paragraphe 168(1) de la Loi aux faits qui ont été mis en preuve. Il s'agit donc d'une question mixte de droit et de fait. Par voie de conséquence, cette Cour n'interviendra que dans l'hypothèse où la solution retenue par la Section d'appel ne fait pas partie des issues possibles acceptables au regard des faits et du droit (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  au par. 49).
[21]
Le défendeur a souligné, avec raison, que ni la Loi ni les Règles de la Section d'appel ne prévoient l'obligation pour cette dernière de tenir une audience de justification pour décider de l'opportunité de prononcer un désistement, contrairement à la situation qui prévaut devant la Section de la protection des réfugiés (voir Règle 58 des
Règles de la Section de la protection des réfugiés
). À cet égard, cette Cour s'est exprimée dans les termes suivants:
Par ailleurs, donner dans tous les cas l'opportunité de se faire entendre à une personne qui fait défaut de comparaître l'opportunité d'expliquer les raisons de son défaut reviendrait à vider de son sens le para. 168(1) LIPR.
(. . . . .)
S'il fallait suivre le raisonnement du demandeur, cela impliquerait qu'à chaque fois qu'une personne omettrait de se présenter, manquerait de diligence ou aurait un comportement pouvant clairement laisser croire à un désistement d'appel, la SAI serait tenue de faire enquête pour retrouver cette personne, de lui rappeler ses obligations et de la convoquer pour tenir une nouvelle audience avant de prononcer le désistement. Je ne peux retenir pareille interprétation, d'autant plus qu'en l'espèce, le demandeur n'a pas communiqué ses changements d'adresse à la SAI, de sorte que celle-ci n'aurait de toute façon pas pu le joindre pour convoquer une nouvelle audience si elle avait eu pareille obligation. La SAI n'était pas tenue d'agir comme conseiller juridique pour le demandeur, ni de lui rappeler le sérieux des procédures auxquelles il est partie, ni de s'assurer que celui-ci avait bien compris qu'il devait se présenter à sa conférence de mise au rôle ou encore qu'il était tenu d'aviser la SAI de ses changements d'adresse ...
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  par. 10, 12; voir aussi
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l'Immigration)
, 2007 CF 212.
[22]
Dans le cas présent, le demandeur a été avisé le 12 septembre 2007 qu'il devrait se présenter devant la Section d'appel le 16 octobre 2007 pour que soit réexaminé le sursis auquel il avait eu droit le 3 août 2006. Lors de cette audition, il demanda un premier ajournement afin d'assigner un témoin. Cet ajournement lui a été accordé; il est intéressant de noter que ce témoin n'a jamais été assigné par la suite.
[23]
Le 4 décembre 2007, le procureur du demandeur fut avisé que la date de l'audience avait été fixée au 4 mars 2008; elle fut ensuite reportée au 25 mars, avec l'accord du procureur du demandeur. Pourtant, ce n'est que le 19 décembre que le demandeur a entamé des procédures pour obtenir le renouvellement de sa carte de résidence permanente, soit trois mois après le premier avis de convocation. Qui plus est, le dossier révèle que sa demande de renouvellement était incomplète à plusieurs égards. N'ayant pas informé le Centre de traitement des demandes de Sydney de ses nouvelles coordonnées, c'est le procureur du demandeur qui prendra finalement connaissance de la lettre lui réclamant des informations additionnelles à la fin du mois de février 2008.
[24]
Il est vrai que le procureur du demandeur a présenté une demande de remise le 4 mars 2008 lorsqu'il a constaté que son client n'obtiendrait probablement le renouvellement de sa carte de résidence permanente avant l'audition fixée pour le 25 mars. Cette demande a cependant été présentée bien tardivement, et ce à cause de la négligence du demandeur. Ce dernier ne pouvait d'autre part présumer que cette demande serait accueillie, et il lui incombait de faire diligence pour être informé de la décision qui serait prise. Or, le demandeur n'a communiqué à son procureur que son adresse courriel et s'est rendu en Chine pour des raisons d'affaires. Il ne peut maintenant reprocher à la Section d'appel de ne pas lui avoir permis de se faire entendre.
[25]
Le demandeur plaide maintenant que la conclusion à l'effet qu'il s'était désisté de son appel lui cause un préjudice irréparable. Il n'a pourtant que lui seul à blâmer. Non seulement l'audience était-elle fixée depuis plusieurs mois, mais la Section d'appel lui a également donné la possibilité de faire des représentations par voie d'appel téléphonique. S'il n'a pu se prévaloir de cette possibilité, c'est uniquement parce qu'il n'a pas pris les mesures les plus élémentaires pour pouvoir être rejoint par la Section d'appel elle-même ou par son procureur.
[26]
Compte tenu de toutes ces circonstances, la Section d'appel était en droit de conclure que le demandeur s'était désisté de son appel. Le demandeur a eu toutes les chances de se faire entendre, mais il ne les a pas saisies à cause de sa propre négligence. Il lui incombait de faire preuve de diligence; il ne saurait maintenant reporter le blâme sur la Section d'appel en invoquant un manquement aux principes d'équité procédurale. Le tribunal s'est acquitté de ses responsabilités, a reporté l'audience à plus d'une reprise pour accommoder le demandeur, et lui a même permis de faire valoir ses arguments par téléphone. La situation dans laquelle se trouve le demandeur lui est totalement imputable, et il doit par conséquent en subir les conséquences.
[27]
Pour tous ces motifs, la demande de contrôle judiciaire de la décision rendue par la Section d'appel de l'immigration le 25 mars 2007 est rejetée. Les parties n'ont proposé aucune question pour fins de certification, et aucune n'est certifiée.
ORDONNANCE
[28]
LA COUR ORDONNE que
la demande de contrôle judiciaire soit rejetée. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]