[1]
Rothstein, J.:
The issue in this judicial review is whether information on country conditions that was not in the applicants' immigration files, but is considered in a PDRCC risk assessment, constitutes extrinsic evidence requiring the Post-claim Determination Officer to inform the applicants that such information would be considered, and provide them with an opportunity to respond.
[2]
In the November 8th, 1995, decision of the Post-claim Determination Officer, in which it was determined that the applicants would not likely be subject to risk to life, sanction or inhumane treatment if required to leave Canada, reference is made to the documents considered by the Officer. Included were three 1995 documents pertaining to country conditions in Sri Lanka that postdated the IRB decision which determined that the applicants were not Convention refugees. These documents were not in the applicants' immigration files. The applicants say that had they known that the Post-claim Determination Officer was considering such documents, they would have filed specific documents in response, some of which are in evidence before me.
[3]
The applicants say that unless they are told what documentary information the Post-claim Determination Officer is considering, they are obliged to anticipate an infinite number of documents to which to respond. Therefore, they say the Post-claim Determination Officer has an obligation to inform applicants of the documents to be considered so that they have the opportunity to know what requires a response.
[4]
The applicants rely on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) decision of Campbell, J. In that case, evidence of country conditions of which the applicants had not been notified was considered in a humanitarian and compassionate application under s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
. Campbell, J., found this to be extrinsic evidence and found that the applicants should have been notified of it and should have been given the opportunity to respond to it.
[5]
The respondent relies on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) a decision of Rouleau, J. In that case, documentary evidence of country conditions in Guatemala was considered in a PDRCC assessment which had not previously been disclosed to the applicants. Rouleau, J., found that the material was publicly available and that the applicants were well aware that documentary evidence of country conditions is considered at the PDRCC stage. He found there is no obligation to inform the applicants of the specific country conditions information being considered.
[6]
In the case at bar, the applicants included in their PDRCC representations, a large volume of country conditions material. The information post dated the IRB decision. They therefore knew that up-to-date documentary evidence of country conditions is relevant in a PDRCC risk assessment. The information considered by the Post-claim Determination Officer was, as far as I can tell from the record, public information available to the applicants.
[7]
Generally, extrinsic evidence is evidence of which the applicants are unaware because it comes from an outside source. But the scope of extrinsic evidence for purposes of determinations under s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
or in PDRCC risk assessments is not without limitation.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  a decision of the Federal Court of Appeal, Strayer, J., found that the evidence given by a spouse in a separate spousal interview in a humanitarian and companionate case under s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
, was not extrinsic evidence. In the context of information on country conditions, if the information relied upon by the Post-claim Determination Officer is information to which the applicants could not have had access, and it is material to the decision made, I think the information might well constitute extrinsic evidence. Here, however, the country conditions information was within the ambit of the subject matter the applicants knew would be considered, and there is no indication in the record that it was not available to the applicants had they taken steps to obtain it. I do not think it is extrinsic evidence as that term is used in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[8]
Applicants' counsel argues that unless the applicants are told what is being considered, they have a virtually impossible task to try to address every piece of information on country conditions that might be used in a PDRCC risk assessment. However, that is an argument that could be made even when the information is in the file but is voluminous. There is no obligation on a Post-claim Determination Officer to identify the precise information to be relied upon in a PDRCC risk assessment in order to provide the applicants an opportunity for specific response.
[9]
Counsel indicated that the current practice of Post-claim Determination Officers is to inform applicants of the documentary evidence of country conditions that is being considered. That appears to be a reasonable approach to take in such cases. However, given the minimal standard of fairness applicable to such proceedings according to
Shah
, the failure to do so, unless the country conditions information is not public and is material to the decision, does not, in my opinion, amount to a breach of the rules of procedural fairness applicable to these cases.
[10]
The application for judicial review is dismissed.
[11]
On the application of the applicants, and in view of the conflicting decisions of the Trial Division on the issue, the following question, submitted by counsel for the applicants, is certified as one of general importance for determination by the Federal Court of Appeal.
"Does an Immigration Officer conducting a review pursuant to the PDRCC regulations violate the principle of fairness as enunciated by the Federal Court of Appeal in
Shah
, when he or she considers documentary evidence about general country conditions not contained in the applicant's immigration file without advising the applicant of his or her intention to do so, and without providing the applicant an opportunity to respond to same."
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/sms
[End of document]