[1]
Rouleau, J.
: The applicant, a twenty-nine year old citizen of Iraq, seeks judicial review of the decision of Derek L. White, a visa officer of the Canadian Embassy in Italy, rendered on August 24, 1995. He determined that the applicant, a Convention refugee seeking resettlement, be refused for permanent residence in Canada pursuant to regulation 7 of the
Immigration Act.
[2]
The applicant is asking the court for the following relief:
1. That the decision be quashed.
2. A declaration that the applicant's refugee claim should be determined by:
- a decision-maker who is sufficiently independent of the respondent;
- that he is entitled to a hearing similar to these granted Refugee claimants within Canada; and
- by a decision-maker who actually hears the applicant give evidence (the initial decision having been confirmed by his superior).
3. A declaration that written reasons be provided to the applicant when Convention refugee determination is negative.
4. A declaration that, pursuant to ss. 24(1) and 52(1) of the
Constitution Act
, 1982, the portion of section 7 of the
Immigration Regulations
empowering visa officers to make Convention refugee determinations is of no force and effect, as it violates the
Charter
rights of the applicant.
5. A declaration that the impugned section 7 of the
Charter
is in violation of ss. 1(a) and 2(e) of the
Canadian Bill of Rights
, S.C. 1960, c. 44, as well as in violation of the common law.
6. Any other relief that this Honourable Court deems just.
[3]
The applicant lives in Rabat in the Republic of Malta; he left his homeland, Iraq, in 1992. At the time, his application was based upon the allegations that he had suffered persecution and had a well-founded fear of persecution if he returned to Iraq because he is an Assyrian Christian; he is not a member of the Baath party and that he and his family are considered disloyal by the Iraqi regime due to past political activities.
[4]
His application for permanent residence in Canada as a Convention refugee seeking resettlement in Canada was received by the Canadian authorities in Italy on September 2, 1993. He is sponsored by the Langley Christian Reformed Church, a member of the Canadian Council of Reformed Churches. He explained his personal and family situation and his fear of persecution in a twelve page letter submitted with his application.
[5]
On December 23, 1993, the applicant was advised by the visa office at the Canadian Embassy that his application for permanent admission to Canada as a Convention refugee could not be considered because all available places under the Convention refugee Programme for 1993 had already been filled and that there was an overabundance of applications for 1994. The visa office also advised him that his application had been examined under the programme for the selection of independent immigrants. He wrote:
"In so doing, the Embassy has considered all factors, including the present market situation in Canada and how it would affect your prospects for successful employment. Regretfully, it is concluded that you would have difficulty in establishing yourself successfully. It is therefore not possible to approve your application as an independent immigrant or to recognize any special circumstances that might bear upon your case."
[6]
Subsequently, in October of 1994, the First Secretary for Immigration of the Canadian Embassy received a copy of an Undertaking of Support form by the First Langley Christian Reformed Church which had been forwarded to him by the refugee coordinator's Immigration Office in British Columbia. In his letter, the coordinator requested the Immigration officer to interview Mr. Jallow, since the latter had complained that he had not yet received results.
[7]
Following an initial paper screening, the applicant was invited for an interview which was held in November of 1994. The visa officer assessed the application in accordance with the criteria established under Schedule 1 of the
Immigration Regulations
. The visa officer took into account the information provided by the applicant's IMM 8 form, as well the following additional information provided by the applicant: a letter received on September 2, 1993, certificates of birth and nationality, driver's license, high school certificates; extracts from his military service, passport and a letter from one Dr. Camilleri describing the applicant's scars from cigarette burns (in support of his claim of brutality at the hands of Iraqis).
[8]
During the interview, the visa officer, Derek L. White, questioned the applicant on a number of issues: his education, family, his army career and involvement, his work, his father's death, application for visas to other countries, scars from cigarette burns, his arrest in Iraq and his history of persecution.
[9]
By letter dated August 24, 1995 the visa officer, Derek L. White, informed the applicant that, after assessing all factors relative to his application, he did not meet the requirements for immigration to Canada. The Officer added that a senior immigration officer had concurred in this decision. He was also informed that he did not meet the criteria for Independent applicants since he had not obtained the required number of units of assessment; and finally there were insufficient reason to warrant special consideration on humanitarian and compassionate grounds.
[10]
The applicant's affidavit in support states at pages 24 and 25:
"I wish to correct false information that was given as part of my application. I am in fact married. Because I feared, and still fear, that the Iraqi officials may harm my wife as a result of my application for refugee status in Canada, I gave incorrect information. I still do not wish to reveal the name of my wife because this affidavit will be a publicly accessible document.
"Despite having the letter that refused my application as a Convention refugee seeking resettlement in Canada, I was not given the basic information of the reasons for the refusal. No one informed me that they had any concerns regarding my application until my application was refused. It was not until my counsel informed me of the reasons for the refusal on December 8 [sic], 1995 that I am able to reply to the reasons as he related them to me. These comments are contained in the following 4 paragraphs in reply to the quoted reasons."
[11]
In his affidavit, visa officer, Derek L. White, explained in detail the reasons for the assessment, making frequent references to the evidence and the interview with the applicant. At paragraph 9, he specified several factors that cast doubt on the applicant's credibility. The following are the observations and conclusions of the visa officer:
"9a) While the applicant initially attempted to have us believe that he was a member of an 'elite' or 'commando' unit he now suggests that he was not.
b) While the applicant suggested that the Iraqi Baath establishment so distrusted him and his family that they poison [sic] his father to death over a long period, the applicant admitted that the medical explanation for his father's death was toxicity of the liver.
c) While the applicant alleged that members of the Iraqi Army and the Baath party arranged near-fatal training accidents for him, there is no plausible explanation as to why they were singularly unsuccessful in killing him over a period of 16 years, if this indeed was their intent.
d) While the applicant was able to recall the details of his alleged persecution without fail and in much detail at the interview, he had to consult his written notes when asked about the personal details of his sisters. When this was remarked upon at the interview, the subject advised that his odd lapse of memory was due to his injuries from repeated beatings over many years. I do not find his explanation to be plausible.
e) While the applicant suggested that he and his family suffered repeated acts of persecution in Iraq, the applicant's father chose in 1979 to become a naturalized Iraq citizen.
f) While the applicant now advises that he has a wife, he had made a previous statutory declaration to the contrary.
[...]
"10. Given the points set out above, all of which were outlined to the subject at his interview (except the latter point at clause 10 [sic] (f) above regarding his wife), I found the applicant's statements in general, and in particular with respect to his subjective fear of persecution, to lack credibility. I believe that the subject has, at most, suffered no more than the general pattern of discrimination to which all Iraqis who are non-Baath party members are subject and which is not of an all-encompassing measure that it would or could form the basis for a well-founded fear of persecution. It is a notorious fact in Iraq that Christians such as the applicant may hold very high level positions in the Iraqi regime and may obtain state protection from the government of Iraqi [sic]. Consequently, even if the applicant had satisfied me that he had a subjective fear of persecution, I do not believe the applicant has established a 'well-founded' fear of persecution should he return in Iraq."
[12]
Counsel for the applicant suggests that the procedure followed by the visa officer is a violation of the principles of natural justice since the final decision-maker did not hear nor interview the applicant. He further argues that the law governing Convention refugee determinations requires that it be made by independent persons, not officers hired by the Ministry; that overseas applicants should be entitled to refugee panels, as those who apply from within Canada; that reasons are to be given in Convention refugee determinations. He further submits that the decision-maker took into consideration evidence that the applicant did not have knowledge of nor any opportunity to reply to, that he ignored relevant evidence and erred in assessing credibility.
[13]
Of all of the submissions made to the court, the more forceful relied upon by the applicant's counsel centered around the decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 422. He suggested that the Supreme Court of Canada imposed a new set of guidelines for the hearing of refugee claims; that subsequently and in light of the decision amendments to the procedure were adopted providing among other remedies that Refugee Boards be established, and that these same new guidelines should apply to claimants outside the country.
[14]
I am satisfied that the visa officer did not violate a principle of natural justice by having a senior immigration officer concur with his decision. The evidence reveals that the visa officer made the decision to refuse the application on the grounds that he did not comply with the definition of a Convention refugee. The fact that a senior immigration officer concurred in the decision in no way affected the applicant's rights to a hearing pursuant to s. 2(e) of the
Canadian Bill of Rights
as argued.
[15]
The
Immigration Act
does not require that a decision regarding Convention refugee status, made overseas, be made by anyone other than a visa officer. For greater certainty, the definition of visa officer in s. 2 of the
Immigration Act
specifies that such an officer is posted outside Canada with powers to make such determinations.
[16]
I have not found any reviewable error in the decision. The visa officer's conclusion rested primarily on findings of implausibility and lack of credibility. He had complete jurisdiction to determine the plausibility of the testimony.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the inferences the visa officer drew were not unreasonable and, in the present case, I see no grounds to vitiate the decision. It was open to the visa officer to make a negative assessment regarding credibility; he outlined his reasons which cannot be said to be inconsistent with the facts. It was known to the visa officer at the time of rendering the decision that the applicant previously failed to disclose his marriage; this further supports the reasonableness of the visa officer's conclusion as to credibility and the requirement of the applicant to provide truthful, complete and correct information.
[17]
In reviewing
Singh
, supra, it is clear to me that the process which was eventually put in place in Canada is not applicable to claimants outside the country. Wilson, J., makes numerous references in her reasons wherein she emphasizes the duty of fairness on decision-makers but it is very clear to me that other consequences which flowed from the decision are only applicable to Refugee claimants within Canada. In her opening paragraph at p. 442 [D.L.R.], she wrote:
"The issue raised by these appeals is whether the procedures set out in the
Immigration Act, 1976
, 1976-77 (Can.), c. 52, as amended, for
the adjudication of the claims of persons claiming refugee status in Canada
deny such claimants rights they are entitled to assert under s. 7 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
" (emphasis added)
And she continues:
"First, the court should decide whether refugee claimants
physically present in Canada are entitled to the protection of s. 7 of the
Charter
"... The
Act
envisages the assertion of a refugee claim under s. 45 in the context of an inquiry, which
presupposes that the refugee claimant is physically present in Canada and within the jurisdiction of the Canadian authorities
. The
Act
and the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978, SOR/78-172, do envisage the resettlement in Canada of refugees who are outside the country but the following observations are not made with reference to these individuals.
"... I am prepared to accept that the term includes every human being who is physically present in Canada and by virtue of such presence amenable to Canadian law." (emphasis added)
[18]
A potential immigrant must answer truthfully to a visa officer. The officer's decision is purely administrative; he is afforded considerable latitude in exercising his authority and he enjoys extensive discretion. Though not unlimited, he has the duty to follow the
Immigration Act
and a duty to act fairly. He must provide the applicant with an opportunity to be heard when possible and to provide material in support. All of these requirements were adhered to in the present case.
[19]
No further
Charter
or
Bill of Rights
arguments were pursued.
[20]
A review of the present file satisfies me that the visa officer did comply and I am satisfied that there is no merit to this application. Accordingly, it is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/slm
[End of document]