Nature Of This Proceeding
[1]
Richard, J.
: This is an appeal by the Intervenor, Province of Alberta Treasury Branches (Treasury Branches) from the order of the Prothonotary, Mr. John A. Hargrave, dated March 13, 1996 (111 F.T.R. 81), which set the priorities to the $800,000 proceeds of sale of the "Edmonton Queen". The plaintiff, Scott Steel Ltd. (Scott Steel), argued that the appeal should be dismissed. The defendants did not appear.
Background
[2]
The "Alarissa", a shallow draft, four hundred passenger riverboat, was built to be a tour vessel on the North Saskatchewan River at Edmonton, Alberta. It is commonly referred to as the "Edmonton Queen", and is now registered in that name. It began to take shape in 1992 in the yard of the plaintiff, Scott Steel. Scott Steel had been hired by the defendant North Saskatchewan River Boat Ltd. (NSRB) to construct the "Edmonton Queen" according to specifications provided by NSRB. By statement of claim filed June 15, 1993, Scott Steel brought this action for payment of certain monies it saw as outstanding for the construction of the ship, and exercised a possessory lien on the vessel. By statement of defence and counterclaim, the defendant NSRB asserted that it had paid the balance agreed upon for the ship, and demanded that the ship be delivered per the contract. The ship was almost completed at this time, but was not yet seaworthy.
[3]
The vessel was arrested pursuant to a warrant issued in this court on June 15, 1993. On September 3, 1993, J.C. Damar Developments Ltd. (Damar), a defendant by virtue of the fact that it claimed an interest in the ship, filed a notice to caveat release, to prevent release of the ship. Jerome, A.C.J., by order dated October 15, 1993, ordered that on payment of $1,000,000 security, the ship would be released from arrest to the defendants. In August of 1994, the Province of Alberta Treasury Branches, mortgagee of the "Edmonton Queen", attempted to intervene. As holder of a builder's mortgage on the vessel granted by NSRB pursuant to the
Canada Shipping Act
, Treasury Branches had rejected a proposal made by NSRB to its creditors under the
Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act
, and thereafter sought to have the vessel sold, since NSRB would no longer be in the position to ready the vessel for use. At their request, the vessel, which at that time lay in the builder's yard, substantially completed, was ordered appraised to determine its worth and saleability, by order of the Prothonotary, Mr. Hargrave, dated August 25, 1994. The order also added Treasury Branches as an intervenor. Two others, not parties to the action but who have claims arising from the design of the vessel, are Peter S. Hatfield Ltd. and W.B. Brown & Associates Ltd.
[4]
Treasury Branches moved for a sale of the vessel, which motion was supported by the plaintiff Scott Steel. On December 14, 1994, a Federal Court Marshal was ordered by Mr. Hargrave to sell the vessel despite the fact that it was pendente lite.
[5]
By order dated February 17, 1995, the Associate Chief Justice approved the sale of the vessel to two purchasers, 573475 Alberta Ltd. and 617587 Alberta Ltd. He ordered the plaintiff Scott Steel to provide and install certain equipment in the ship according to certain terms in the agreement of purchase and sale, which were listed as conditions precedent to the sale being completed. The ship was sold for $800,000 and the funds were paid into court.
[6]
An application was made pursuant to rule 1008 to establish the priorities between the respective claimants to the funds paid into court from the sale of the vessel. On September 29, 1995, the Associate Chief Justice, by consent, ordered that the issues of fact and law arising from the application be decided by the Prothonotary.
[7]
A hearing to determine the priority on the proceeds of sale was set down for November 10, 1995. On that day, Damar was granted intervenor status, and the priorities question was adjourned, only to be further adjourned a number of times. After the hearing for priorities was completed on January 11 and 12, 1996, by order dated March 13, 1996, Mr. Hargrave determined the priorities on the proceeds of the sale of the ship.
[8]
Mr. Hargrave later extended the time within which the parties could appeal this order. On April 4, 1996, a notice of appeal was filed.
[9]
Treasury Branches claim arises out of a loan agreement.
[10]
By a loan agreement dated September 29, 1992 (Loan Agreement) Treasury Branches was to provide mortgage financing for construction of the Riverboat on certain terms and conditions including:
"2.01 Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, ATB confirms that it has approved the provision of financial assistance by it to the Borrower as follows:
(a) a $947,000 loan (the 'Specific Loan') to be utilized to assist in financing the construction of the river boat;
. . . . .
"4.02 Except to the extent waived by ATB, no advances on the loan shall be available unless all of the following conditions precedent have been satisfied:
(c) ATB shall have received, reviewed and approved, in its absolute discretion, such financial statements, appraisals, credit reports, plans, specifications, budgets and other information concerning the Borrower, the Guarantors, the project and the mortgaged property and such other persons as ATB may require;"
[11]
By a commitment letter dated July 13, 1992, the Federal Government Department of Western Economic Diversification (WED) was to provide financing for the construction of the Riverboat to match the Treasury Branches financing (the WED Commitment Letter). WED agreed to loan NSRB $880,000 which would be advanced with matching advances from Treasury Branches to finance the construction of the Riverboat.
[12]
An arrangement was entered into between WED, Treasury Branches and NSRB with respect to the sharing of information and the procedure to be followed for coordinated advances of the two loans. Consulting and Audit Canada conducted an audit of the advance request.
[13]
Four advances were made by Treasury Branches to NSRB. The dates and amounts of Treasury Branches' advances to NSRB are as follows:
(a) December 3, 1992: - $179,520
(b) January 22, 1993: - $260,000
(c) January 29, 1993: - $126,000
(d) April 6, 1993: 	  -
$140,788
TOTAL
-
$706,308
(I was told that (b) and (c) were two instalments of one advance and that the balance of the funds was never advanced.)
[14]
Scott Steel was not a party to either of these loan agreements.
Order Under Appeal
[15]
The Prothonotary determined the priorities to be as follows:
(a) The Marshall for fees and the costs of the appraisal, study of the ship and sale, and Treasury Branches to the extent they have funded these fees and costs, as already provided for or may be agreed or by taxation;
(b) Scott Steel Ltd., after quantum of their claim for work properly done, with reference to items not appearing on the ship as designed by William Brown, but added since, including those required by the Peter S. Hatfield Designs, by implication from those designs, and as authorized orally or in writing by NSRB's naval architects or by NSRB, its officers, directors and employees and which shall include the bow thruster, all to be established by a reference;
(c) Treasury Branches, after the amount of their claim is established by reference;
(d) If any funds remain in Court after the prior three claims are satisfied following the reference, to J.C. Damar Developments Ltd. ("Damar"), Peter hatfield and William R. Brown pari passu.
Reasons For Order Of
The Prothonotary
[16]
In his reasons, the Prothonotary dealt with priorities generally, assigned the usual ranking to the four claimants, considered whether the usual ranking ought to be changed by reason of special circumstances and finally, whether the equitable doctrine of marshalling ought to apply. He stressed that the ranking of the priorities of the claimants do not provide, in this instance, approval of the amounts of the claims themselves. He stated that the aim of the application before him was to set out a framework of priorities by which to determine division of the ship sale proceeds at a later date. The Prothonotary stated that any change in the usual ranking of maritime priorities must be accomplished by the application of equitable principles. On his analysis of
Ship Autlatean I, Re
, [1979] 2 F.C. 661, at 668 (T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 423  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), he concluded that the usual priorities ought not to be departed from except in very special circumstances and that the powers in equity to upset the long established orders of priority should be exercised only where necessary to prevent an obvious injustice. He also considered the judgment of Mr. Justice Brandon in
Ship Lyrana (No. 2), Re
, [1978] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 30 (Q.B.D. Admiralty Ct.), where the test used was that of a plainly unjust result. He was of the view that the phrasing of the test pointed to a heavy onus on the part of Treasury Branches to upset the usual long-established priorities. In establishing the priority of Scott Steel, the Prothonotary considered two main issues raised by Treasury Branches, first, that Scott Steel did not have a possessory lien, and, second, that even if it did, it had lost its priority through its actions.
Grounds Of Appeal
[17]
Treasury Branches raised the following grounds of appeal before me. (There are sixteen: items (a) to (p)). These grounds can be divided into four subject areas:
1. Evidentiary issues
(d) The Prothonotary erred in finding that the Affidavits of Ivan Sawchuk and Ken Haak, were unreliable, when they were supported by the documentary evidence;
(e) The Prothonotary erred in finding that the Affidavits of Ivan Sawchuk and Ken Haak, were unreliable, when the contents of both of those Affidavits were fully collaborated by the Affidavit evidence of Al Everitt, which was wholly accepted by the Prothonotary;
(f) The Prothonotary erred in placing little reliance upon the evidence of Ivan Sawchuk and Ken Haak and basing his reason for doing so on the "protection by counsel", when a review of the transcript clearly reveals counsel's intervention was necessitated by the irrelevant and inappropriate questioning by counsel for Scott Steel;
(g) The Prothonotary erred in placing little reliance upon the Affidavits of Ivan Sawchuk and Ken Haak based upon the "protection by counsel", in that the Prothonotary failed to properly consider the contents and sequence of the Interlocutory Orders granted by the Honourable Associate Chief Justice Jerome and the Prothonotary himself in sequence with the various cross-examinations that were being conducted on a "hurry-up" basis;
(m) The Prothonotary erred in taking judicial notice of certain marine business and trade practices which, while they may be generally accepted in seaport communities, are not a matter of common experience or usual business practice in the community in which the within dispute arose;
(p) The Prothonotary erred in law, when faced with conflicting Affidavit evidence on the critical fact of the knowledge of Scott Steel of the reliance of the Province of Alberta Treasury Branches upon the Scott Steel representations to the Defendant, the North Saskatchewan River Boat Ltd., which conflicting Affidavit evidence was not cross-examined upon, in failing to order a Trial of the issue relating to the Province of Alberta Treasury Branches reliance upon the representations of Scott Steel.
2. Existence of possessory lien
(a) The Prothonotary erred in finding that Scott Steel held a valid possessory lien;
(b) The Prothonotary erred in finding that there were no facts to support the waiver by Scott Steel of its right to possessory lien.
3. Waiver of possessory lien
(i) The Prothonotary erred in failing to give any or due consideration to the fact that Scott Steel was a shareholder in the Defendant North Saskatchewan River Boat Ltd.;
(j) The Prothonotary erred in failing to give any or due consideration to the repeated representations made by Scott Steel that the Riverboat's construction was on time and on budget;
(l) The Prothonotary erred in equating the alleged cost of construction of the Riverboat with fair market value of the Riverboat.
4. Reversal of priorities
(c) The Prothonotary erred in imposing an onus, greater than the balance of probabilities, upon the Intervenor, to justify upsetting the usual order of priorities;
(h) The Prothonotary erred in finding that there were "danger signs" evident during the course of construction when no such danger signs were evident in any documentation supplied to the Intervenor during the course of construction;
(i) The Prothonotary erred in failing to give any or due consideration to the fact that Scott Steel was a shareholder in the Defendant North Saskatchewan River Boat Ltd.;
(j) The Prothonotary erred in failing to give any or due consideration to the repeated representations made by Scott Steel that the Riverboat's construction was on time and on budget;
(k) The Prothonotary erred in placing undue reliance on hearsay appraisals of value;
(l) The Prothonotary erred in equating the alleged cost of construction of the Riverboat with fair market value of the Riverboat;
(n) The Prothonotary erred in holding that the Intervenor was attempting to utilize the doctrine of estoppel as a sword rather than a shield;
(o) The Prothonotary erred in not reversing the usual order of priorities in the face of evidence to the contrary.
Relief Sought
[18]
Treasury Branches request that the appeal be allowed and the following relief be granted:
(a) an Order directing that the priorities be established as follows:
(i) the marshall for fees and costs of the appraisal, study of the ship and sale, and Treasury Branches to the extent they have funded these fees and costs as already provided for or may be agreed or by taxation,
(ii) Treasury Branches, after the amount of their claim as established by reference,
(iii) Scott Steel, after the quantum of their claim for work properly done and authorized in writing by NSRB as established by reference,
(iv) if any funds remain in Court after the prior three claims are satisfied following the reference, to Damar, Peter Hatfield and William R. Brown, pari passu;
(b) alternatively, a trial of the issue of priorities be directed with the parties to go to full discovery of documents and proceed to trial in accordance with the
Federal Rules of Court
.
[19]
During the course of argument before me, counsel for the Treasury Branches admitted that the first advance to the defendant NSRB was not made by Treasury Branches on the basis of any representations made or documents supplied by Scott, but solely on the evidence of costs incurred at the relevant date. Therefore, Treasury Branches no longer seeks to have the usual priority for this advance reversed as between itself and Scott Steel, provided that Scott Steel is found to have a valid possessory lien.
Standard Of Review
[20]
A preliminary issue was raised respecting the standard of review to be applied on this appeal.
Normal Appellate Standard
[21]
The Supreme Court has established that, as regards determination of the facts, appellate review should be limited to those instances where it is shown that a manifest or palpable error has been made. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 1, at 794 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 81; 14 W.A.C. 81, at 388-389 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 262, at 358-360  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Error of law is always a reason for intervention by a judge.
Discretionary Orders
[22]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), it is established that a judge, on an appeal from the Prothonotary, ought to exercise his or her own discretion de novo where a discretionary order of the Prothonotary raises a question vital to the final issue of the case. [See footnote 1]. That is not to say that the Prothonotary's discretion should never be respected, but rather that it is subject to an overriding discretion by a judge where the question involved is vital to the final issue of the case (supra, at p. 464). In this circumstance, the parties are entitled to the discretion of a judge and not that of a Prothonotary. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 127 (F.C.A.)).
[23]
Therefore, in reviewing the order of the Prothonotary, on an appeal, a judge must determine whether it is a discretionary order and, if so, whether the question involved is vital to the final issue of the case. This means vital to the result of the case (
Aqua
, supra, at p. 463). When determining whether the order appealed from is relevant to the final issue of the case, the issue to be decided should be examined before the question is answered by the Prothonotary, that is, before the result is known (supra, at pp. 464-465).
[24]
Where a discretionary order of the Prothonotary does not raise a question vital to the final issue of the case but is clearly wrong, in that the Prothonotary has fallen into an error of law, which concept includes a discretion based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts, a judge ought to also exercise his or her own discretion de novo (
Aqua
, supra, at p. 463).
[25]
Although it dealt with a Prothonotary acting as a referee under rule 506, I conclude that the scope of review formulated by Mr. Justice Létourneau is applicable to an appellate review of an order of a Prothonotary in our court.
"It is clear from the decisions of my colleague Hugessen, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 193 (F.C.A.)) that a judge who reviews findings of fact based on an assessment of credibility and made by a referee who has heard witnesses is not at liberty to reverse these findings and substitute his views for those of the referee. I believe that, on an appeal from the decision of a referee under rule 506, the reviewing judge should not interfere with findings of law and findings of fact unless, in making the former, the referee has committed some error of law and, in the latter case, the findings of fact are wrong in that they are made in a perverse or capricious manner or are the result of some palpable and overriding error. (
Diversified Products Corp. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 350 (F.C.A.)). To put the matter simply, a judge who reviews a referee's findings under rule 506 is, as to questions of law and questions of fact, in very much the same position as this court would be on an appeal from the Trial Division.
"A judge is given more latitude when it comes to reviewing the exercise of a discretionary power by a prothonotary. In such case, the decision of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  disturbed unless it is clearly wrong, i.e., it is based upon a wrong principle or a misapprehension of the facts, or unless it raises questions vital to the final issue of the case. When the exercise of that discretion is reviewable, a judge ought to exercise his discretion de novo. ([1993] 2 F.C. 425; 149 N.R. 273 (F.C.A.))
"Although such finding was made in the procedural context when the prothonotary sits on motions, I believe the principle to be applicable as well when he sits as a referee pursuant to rule 500. In '
Jala Godavari
', supra, my colleague Hugessen, J.A., in stating the law applicable to the review of findings of fact made by a referee, acknowledged that the referee could be a prothonotary. Therefore, the scope of review of the prothonotary's discretion ought to be the same whether he sits as a prothonotary or as a referee." (Different considerations might apply where the referee was a judge.) (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at pp. 492-493 [F.C. and 229-230 N.R.].)
[26]
The Prothonotary considered extensive affidavit material and cross-examination thereon. In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, Madam Justice Wilson stated that even in those cases where a finding of fact is neither inextricably linked to the credibility of the testifying witness nor based on a misapprehension of the evidence, the rule remains that appellate review should be limited to those instances where a manifest error has been made. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 389)
Submissions Of Counsel
[27]
Counsel for Scott Steel submitted that the normal appellate standard should apply. He did not suggest that the Prothonotary's order did not raise questions vital to the issue of the case, but submitted that it was not discretionary in the circumstances.
[28]
At the hearing before me, counsel for Treasury Branches agreed with counsel for Scott Steel that if the order was not discretionary, the reviewing judge should not interfere unless the Prothonotary committed some error of law or made findings of fact that are wrong in that they are the result of some palpable and overriding error. However, counsel for Treasury Branches relied on the second branch of the
Aqua-Gem
test, that is, where discretionary orders of prothonotaries raise questions vital to the final issue of the case, a judge ought to exercise his own discretion de novo. Counsel interpreted this as meaning a trial de novo, and challenged numerous findings or conclusions reached by the Prothonotary both on evidentiary matters and questions of law.
Conclusion
[29]
A distinction must be made between the finding of the Prothonotary concerning the usual ranking of priorities, which in my view, clearly does not involve the exercise of any discretion, and the finding of the Prothonotary concerning the reversal of usual priorities, which involves equitable principles. With respect to the second, it is quite clear from the judgments of Hugessen, J.A.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Godavari
and of MacGuigan, J.A., in
Aqua-Gem
that the proceeding is an appellate review and that it is the discretion which ought to be exercised de novo in the appropriate case. Otherwise, the hearing before the Prothonotary would be nothing more than an expensive preliminary rest stop along the procedural route to a motions judge (
Aqua
, at pp. 454-455).
[30]
I have reached the conclusion that the determination by the Prothonotary concerning the reversal of the usual priorities is discretionary because it involves the exercise of a discretion based on equitable principles to prevent an obvious injustice. I have also concluded that the question involved is vital to the final issue of the case because it finally determines the ranking of the claims, even though the amount of the claims remains to be decided.
[31]
However, I have concluded that the finding of the Prothonotary concerning the existence of a valid possessory lien, which had not been waived or which Scott Steel was not estopped from claiming, is not discretionary. With respect to this part of the Prothonotary's decision, the normal appellate standards apply as enunciated by Mr. Justice Létourneau in the
Baker Energy
case (supra). The reviewing judge should not interfere with findings of law and of fact, unless in making the former, the Prothonotary has committed some error of law and in the latter, the findings of fact are wrong in that they are made in a perverse or capricious manner or are the result of some palpable and overriding error.
Decision
Nondiscretionary Findings
[32]
The appellant, Treasury Branches, has not satisfied me that the Prothonotary committed some error of law or any palpable and overriding error in making the following nondiscretionary findings:
1) that Scott Steel had a valid possessory lien;
2) that there was no waiver by Scott Steel of its right to a possessory lien;
3) that Scott Steel was not estopped from relying on its possessory lien; and
4) that the usual priorities would rank Scott Steel's claim ahead of that of Treasury Branches.
Exercise Of Discretion
[33]
Treasury Branches claims that even if Scott Steel had a valid possessory lien, Scott Steel, through its actions, lost its priority over Treasury Branches' claim as mortgage holder, since to hold otherwise, would be an unjust result. The Prothonotary did not see it as unjust to leave the usual priorities in place. This was an exercise of his discretion. It is the exercise of that discretion on that question which I am called upon to exercise de novo. In doing so, I am not called upon to hold a trial de novo. The Prothonotary noted that voluminous affidavit material had been filed, a substantial portion of which had problems of relevance or weight. (There were nine affidavits sworn between August of 1993 and December of 1995, and cross-examinations yielding thirteen separate transcripts.) What Treasury Branches is, in fact, attempting to do on this appeal is to have me rebalance the evidence which has already been weighed and balanced by the Prothonotary. However, it is only where the record, including the reasons, discloses a lack of appreciation of relevant evidence and, more particularly, the complete disregard of such evidence, that it falls on the reviewing tribunal to intercede. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 546; 65 C.C.C.(2d) 193, at 14  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[34]
Treasury Branches further submits that in the face of conflicting evidence, the court should direct the matter to proceed to trial. This proposition seems to be based on the rules governing summary judgment. However, even in such a case, a trial will be ordered only if there are real issues of credibility, the resolution of which is essential to determination of the facts. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[35]
Treasury Branches argued that the Prothonotary erred in imposing a greater onus than the balance of probabilities upon it to justify upsetting the usual order of priorities. It is clear from his reasons that the Prothonotary considered the relevant authorities in this court and the Admiralty Court in the United Kingdom and properly stated the applicable principles: the appellant must show that a particular ranking of claims would create an obvious injustice.
[36]
The argument that is central to Treasury Branches claim that the priorities should be reversed is based on its allegation that the Prothonotary failed to give any or due consideration to the repeated representations made by Scott Steel that the Riverboat's construction was on time and on budget. It is alleged that Scott Steel represented that the total contract price was $1.64 million, that the construction was on budget and on schedule and that, if there were any problems, they were minor in nature. Treasury Board relies on the following documents:
i) invoices from Scott Steel to NSRB referring to the contract amount;
ii) the letter from Scott Steel to NSRB dated January 18, 1993 stating, "This is to inform you that the Riverboat at present is still within budget";
[37]
It also relies on the alleged failure of Scott Steel to volunteer to Treasury Branches that there were various extras being ordered by the borrower, NSRB.
[38]
Treasury Branches submits that equity should intervene to prevent the obvious injustice of Scott Steel benefitting from its misrepresentations at the expense of the lenders.
[39]
The Prothonotary made the following findings:
- If the August 1, 1991, letter from Scott Steel was the construction contract initially, it was overtaken by events, including the addition of many extras and the evolution of the vessel from the box-like self-propelled barge design of Scott Steel through to the quite sophisticated larger and more involved ship, the "Edmonton Queen".
- In the spring of 1992, the Wm. R. Brown firm of naval architects produced new drawings at the request of their client, NSRB. While the design is still fairly basic, the hull now begins to look like that of a ship. The passenger capacity is larger. There are more amenities for the passengers. The design provides for a 200 horsepower bow thruster "if required". The vessel is altogether more attractive. Notwithstanding that it was somewhat more complex to build, it seems that Scott Steel, after discussing the vessel with architects, believe they could build the Wm. R. Brown designed vessel for the 1.64 million dollar price.
- The real evolution of the vessel from an underpowered basic barge-like vessel to what emerged as "The Edmonton Queen" is documented in the various revised drawings and by Peter S. Hatfield firm and in the extras added by NSRB. While there are no as-built drawings, it is apparent, from the Hatfield drawings and from the evidence, that improvements including:
(a) greater length, breadth [see footnote 2] and depth;
(b) substantially larger main engines;
(c) a bow thruster to improve manoeuvrability;
(d) air conditioning and later more costly water cooled air conditioning;
(e) an enlarged and raised wheelhouse in order to accommodate a stage below and at the forward end of the main deck dining room;
(f) a large aft deck house on the upper deck, to include washroom facilities, to complement new handicapped washroom facilities on the main deck;
(g) a raised deckhead throughout on the main deck;
(h) upper deck embarkation walkways to compliment the main deck entrance;
(i) galley facilities in lieu of shore catering;
(j) increased fuel and water capacity;
(k) increased generating capacity;
(l) and larger paddle wheels, to name just the obvious.
And with a larger, more powerful and more complex vessel goes much more supporting equipment and structures.
- Key to this disaster are comments made on at least two occasions by Ronald Scott, president of Scott Steel, when he was cross-examined on his affidavit material in connection with the present motion, that "We didn't know what we were building until the project was complete", (p. 31 of transcript) and when further questioned as to why he did not update the value of the vessel as set out in the Scott Steel letter of August 1, 1991, that "It would be impossible to do so. I didn't know what I was building." (p. 77 of transcript). It seems to me that none of the other deponents of the affidavits, relied upon in this proceeding, ever thought about what was being built.
- This confirms Mr. Scott's evidence that he advised NSRB that the changes to the vessel, the extras, were going to be costly, and I also accept his evidence that he was told by NSRB not to concern himself about the payment for the extras.
- Nor did Treasury Branches seem to have any idea of or interest in what was being built and perhaps this is consistent with their admission, on the cross-examination of Mr. Sawchuk, that NSRB's application for funding was considered almost exclusively on the basis of the Alberta Government's Guarantee.
- However, it would appear that Consulting and Audit Canada did not do the obvious and look at the plans and speak with the builder in order to obtain an explanation of how a self-propelled barge with basic accommodation on it was being turned into a sophisticated ship.
- ... Leaving aside that Treasury Branches made no reasonable inquiries and overlooked obvious signs that the vessel was going to cost more than they thought might be the case, including the cash flow sheet for January through March of 1993, and the evolution of the vessel as new designs were prepared by NSRB's architects and clearly visible extras were added, Treasury Branches has failed to establish the amount of the so-called budget, which amount they neither knew at the time nor enquired about.
[40]
In respect of Treasury Board's assertion that it was misled by Scott Steel, the Prothonotary noted:
"First, as to any representation, it was certainly not made by Scott Steel to Treasury Branches. Nor I think was it intended to induce any course of conduct.
"Second, it seems clear that Treasury Branches, if it relied on representations received third-hand from Scott Steel, it relied far more on and acted as a result of the information from their co-lender, Western Economic Diversification, ...
"Third, while the latter advances may have been made to the detriment of Treasury Branches, it is hard to say that they were a consequence of an act or omission resulting from a representation by Scott Steel, but rather they were a consequence of Treasury Branches' failure to make reasonable inquiries about and keep an eye on construction of the 'Edmonton Queen'.
"On this analysis, while Treasury Branches may have misled themselves, both by their failure to make reasonable independent enquiry and by their interpretation of the Scott Steel 'on-budget' memoranda, it does not appear that they were directly misled by Scott Steel: Treasury Branches had only to ask the proper question, not as to the budget for the vessel but as to the cost of the vessel and the extras."
[41]
The documents and processes set out in their lending agreement required nothing from Scott Steel.
[42]
The Prothonotary found that Scott Steel had no direct dealings of a contractual nature with Treasury Branches; its dealings were with NSRB. The Prothonotary made the following findings:
"In the present instance, the best that can be said for Treasury Branches is that they deluded themselves. It ought not to be for a shipbuilder to go behind its customer, the shipowner, and gratuitously explain to the lender what ought to have been obvious. In this instance, the loss will be where it has fallen, for I do not see that what has occurred was either a plainly unjust result or an obvious injustice.
"It is not up to Scott Steel, who have no direct or contractual dealings with Treasury Branches and owed Treasury Branches no contractual or fiduciary duty, to bring changes and plans and extras to the attention of Treasury Branches, let alone supply them with copies of change orders, without any request or questions from Treasury Branches."
[43]
What the appellant sought to do on this appeal is to have the court review the entire record and rebalance the evidence which has already been weighed and balanced by the Prothonotary. For the reasons given above, I do not agree. In my opinion, the record, including the reasons, does not disclose a lack of appreciation of relevant evidence and, more particularly, the complete disregard of such evidence by the Prothonotary. The Prothonotary did not commit an error of law and did not make findings of fact in a perverse or capricious manner.
[44]
The Prothonotary did not exercise his discretion in an unreasonable manner. However, in the circumstances of this case, the parties are entitled to the discretion of a judge. As stated in the
Aqua Gem
case (supra), a judge on an appeal from the Prothonotary, ought to exercise his or her own discretion de novo where a discretionary order of the Prothonotary raises a question vital to the final issue of the case. That is not to say that the Prothonotary's discretion should never be respected, but rather that it is subject to an overriding discretion by a judge where the question involved is vital to the final issue of the case. In this circumstance, the parties are entitled to the discretion of a judge and not that of a Prothonotary.
[45]
I concur with the discretion exercised by the Prothonotary and, in the exercise of my discretion, I also find that the usual priorities ought not to be departed from in the present circumstances.
[46]
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed. The matter of costs is reserved.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
Footnotes
1.	Supra, at p. 463.
[D]iscretionary orders of prothonotaries ought not to be disturbed on appeal to a judge unless:
(a) they are clearly wrong, in the sense that the exercise of discretion by the prothonotary was based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts, or
(b) they raise questions vital to the final issue of the case.
2.	The evidence does not disclose a changed breadth.
[End of document]