[1]
Richard, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board ("Refugee Division"), dated April 28, 1994, wherein the Refugee Division determined that the applicant was not a Convention refugee.
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Liberia who claims Convention refugee status based on a well-founded fear of persecution by reason of his perceived political opinion. Although the applicant left Liberia in August 1990, he did not claim Convention refugee status until August 1993, when he arrived in Canada.
[3]
The Board found that changes in country circumstances in Liberia since the applicant's departure were such that the applicant would not have a well-founded fear of persecution in the event of his return to Liberia. I am not persuaded that the Board committed any reviewable error in reaching that finding. There was sufficient evidence to support the Board's finding on this issue. [See footnote 1.]
[4]
The applicant also claimed that the Board erred in law through its failure to apply s. 2(3) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, which reads as follows:
"A person does not cease to be a Convention refugee by virtue of paragraph (2)(e) if the person establishes that there are compelling reasons arising out of any previous persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection of the country that the person left, or outside of which the person remained, by reason of fear of persecution."
Paragraph 2(2)(e) reads as follows:
"(2) A person ceases to be a Convention refugee when
. . . . .
(e) the reasons for the person's fear of persecution in the country that the person left, or outside of which the person remained, cease to exist."
Section 2(3) requires Canadian authorities to grant Convention refugee status on humanitarian grounds to a special and limited category of persons, that is, in the words of the Court of Appeal in
Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 748  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , to "those who have suffered such appalling persecution that their experience alone is a compelling reason not to return them, even though they may no longer have any reason to fear further persecution." The court also noted that "[t]he exceptional circumstances envisaged by s. 2(3) must surely apply to only a tiny minority of present day claimants". ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> )
[5]
The issue of the application of s. 2(3) was not raised before the panel during the oral hearing. Counsel for the applicant relies on his post-hearing written submission in which he recited the definition of a Convention refugee in s. 2(1), as well as ss. 2(2) and 2(3). [See footnote 2.] However, his recitation of these sections was in the context of his arguments regarding changes in circumstances and not regarding whether the applicant was entitled to consideration under s. 2(3). Counsel also referred me to a medical report. This medical report concluded that the applicant "showed signs of Post Traumatic Stress Syndrome, a disorder seen in many victims of physical and emotional stress". [See footnote 3.] There was no need for the panel to refer to this medical report in its reasons since it accepted the applicant's claim that he had experienced an arrest and a beating in Liberia. It cannot be said that in the absence of specific arguments on the issue, the post-hearing submission and the medical report were sufficient to trigger a s. 2(3) inquiry by the Board.
[6]
I was also referred to a decision of this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), in which Justice McKeown set aside the negative finding of the Board on the ground that it erred in its finding that there was no past persecution and in its analysis of change in country conditions. In referring the matter back to the Board, he noted that the issue of s. 2(3) had not been addressed by the Board and, in his view, it should consider further evidence on this issue. However, this is not the ground on which he set aside the decision. I do not accept that this decision postulates that the Board must consider s. 2(3) in every case regardless of whether there is evidence or claims to support such an inquiry.
[7]
Although a claimant is not required to identify the grounds of persecution and it is for the Board to decide whether the Convention refugee definition in s. 2(1) is met, [see footnote 4] it is for the claimant to establish under s. 2(3) that there are compelling reasons not to be returned. The claimant, in this case, did not advance any such reasons. In my view, the Board did not commit any reviewable error. Accordingly, the application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/nmg
Footnotes
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 745 S.C.R.
[End of document]