[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is an appeal from the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks made pursuant to s. 45 of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, and dated January 3, 1992, wherein she decided that by reason of the failure to file evidence of use, the appellant's trademark "Fascination" registered under No. TMA 341,188 ought to be expunged.
[2]
The appellant Lander Co. Canada Limited, a company involved in the manufacturing, packaging and sale of various products, is the owner of Registration No. TMA 341,188 for the trademark "Fascination", registered June 3, 1988 for use in association with a very extensive list of wares including skin and hair care products, personal hygiene wares, household cleansers, stationery goods, Christmas decorations. In 1988, the appellant launched a new line of hair care products under the trademark "Fascination".
[3]
On July 4, 1991, a Canadian firm of trademark agents initiated proceedings pursuant to s. 45 of the
Act
relative to Registration No. TMA 341,188. The appellant filed no evidence in response to the s. 45 application.
[4]
On January 3, 1992, the Registrar of Trademarks rendered a decision expunging the trademark in question from the trademark register in the following terms:
"Reference is made to the notice issued on July 4, 1991, under the provisions of s. 45(1) of the
Trade-marks Act
relative to the above-mentioned registration.
"You are advised that by reason of the failure to file the evidence required, the registration will be expunged from the register pursuant to s. 45(4) of the
Act
.
"The procedure prescribed by s. 45(5) of the
Act
will be followed."
[5]
Pursuant to s. 56 of the
Act
, the appellant filed a notice of appeal from that decision on March 2, 1992.
[6]
As a result of the appeal and the subsequent filing of an affidavit in these proceedings, it was the appellant's view that it would be more economical to resubmit an application for the trademark "Fascination" in the future, hence the failure to respond to the s. 45 notice. It was conceded that the trademark had not been in use in Canada since July 4, 1988, that is for a period of approximately three years preceeding the s. 45 notice. The document advises that prior to the actual launching of its new line, the appellant devoted approximately 12 months to preliminary market research, product development and marketing strategy and incurred expenses of approximately $50,000 in the development of the product line and the trademark. Counsel argued special circumstances justifying nonuse and suggested that it was due primarily to the recession, the introduction of the
Goods and Services Tax
, the signing of the Free Trade Agreement and cross-border shopping. It is submitted that, in order to survive the recession, the appellant company was compelled to implement prudent economic strategies which included the suspension of several new products including the "Fascination" line; that the appellant always maintained the intention to reintroduce the trademark but was awaiting economic recovery.
[7]
Counsel for the respondent argues nonuse of the trademark "Fascination" either before or subsequent to the s. 45 notice and decision. The evidence reveals that the only use of the trademark "Fascination" by the appellant was with respect to hair care products for a very short period of time in June 1988. As well, he submits that the reasons suggested by the appellant as being special circumstances justifying the absence of use are not sufficient in law.
[8]
He also pointed out that there is some confusion as to whether or not the registered owner of the trademark was in fact the party utilizing it since it is indicated on the label "made expressly for Jack Austin Drugs Limited". He is suggesting that there is some ambiguity as to who is the proper party in these proceedings. I acknowledge that this creates some uncertainty but I am not prepared to comment on this submission.
[9]
At the outset, may I say that this court must be circumspect when interfering with the Registrar's decision. It has been well- established by the jurisprudence that this court may intervene only when unequivocally convinced that the Registrar has erroneously concluded on the facts. As Mr. Justice Strayer pointed out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 135:
"... in my view the court should be reluctant to reverse the finding of the registrar or chairman
unless it is clearly satisfied that he came to the wrong conclusion on the facts or unless there is significant new evidence placed before the court that was not before the registrar
."
In the case at bar, the Registrar's decision to expunge the trademark was made on the basis that the registrant failed to produce any evidence whatsoever.
[10]
The ultimate issue which I must address is whether the difficult economic situation prevailing in 1988 does constitute special circumstances pursuant to s. 45 of the
Act
.
[11]
I think it is important to reproduce s. 45(3) of the
Act
:
"45(3) Where, by reason of the evidence furnished to him or the failure to furnish any evidence, it appears to the Registrar that a trademark, either with respect to all of the wares or services specified in the registration or with respect to any of those wares or services, it not in use in Canada and that the absence of use has not been due to special circumstances that excuse the absence of use, the registration of the trademark is liable to be expunged or amended accordingly."
[12]
It must be remembered that the onus is on the registered owner to establish special circumstances excusing nonuse.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , McNair, J., most adequately described the purpose of s. 45 (previously s. 44), at p. 293:
"It is well-established that the purpose and scope of s. 44 is to provide a simple summary and expeditious procedure for clearing the register of trademarks which are not bona fide claimed by their owners as active trademarks. The procedure has been aptly described as one for removing 'deadwood' from the register. The section does not contemplate a determination on the issue of abandonment but rather simply places on the registered owner of the trademark
the onus of furnishing evidence of use in Canada or of special circumstances excusing nonuser
. The registrar's decision is not one that finally determines substantive rights but only whether the trademark entry is liable to be expunged under s. 44 or not." (My emphasis)
[13]
The applicable test, when dealing with special circumstances justifying nonuse of a trademark, can be found in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 488 (F.C.A.). Three very important criteria must be considered. First, the length of time during which the trademark has not been in use; secondly, it must be determined whether the registered owner's reasons for not using its trademark were due to circumstances beyond his control; thirdly, one must find whether there exists a serious intention to shortly resume use.
[14]
In the case before me, the appellant has not used its trademark for approximately three years and offers no evidence as to when it may be reintroduced. Addressing the second part of the test, that is whether nonuse of the mark was due to circumstances beyond the owner's control; in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , which is the leading case on the meaning of the special circumstances provisions of s. 45(3) of the
Act
, Cattanach, J., wrote that the words "special circumstances" mean "circumstances that are unusual, uncommon or exceptional". The only explanation offered by the appellant for discontinuing use of its trademark was the poor economic conditions that prevailed in 1988. I am not convinced that this constitutes "special circumstances" pursuant to s. 45 of the
Act
. It is obvious that the recession is beyond anyone's control, nevertheless I fail to see how it can be said that a recession is an uncommon or exceptional situation; it is common knowledge that market conditions fluctuate. Finally, the decision to cease use of the trademark was entirely voluntary on the party of the appellant. In that respect, the Court of Appeal wrote in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  absence of use is due solely to a deliberate decision on the part of the owner of the mark rather than to obstacles beyond his control."
[15]
With respect to the third aspect of the test, the mere intention to resume use is not satisfactory and must be substantiated by factual elements such as purchase orders or, at least, a specific date of resumption. In the present case, no evidence whatsoever has been adduced by the appellant confirming its intention to resume use.
[16]
For the above reasons, I conclude that the appellant has failed to prove that the absence of use of the trademark "Fascination" was due to special circumstances as required by in s. 45(3) of the
Act
. A careful reading of the registration reveals that the appellant had outlined some 80 different wares which they were granted protection for use with this trademark. It would be unconscionable to allow this trademark to stand for this appellant when in fact the mark was only used for a very short period of time in 1988 for only two products in the hair care field.
[17]
The appeal is therefore dismissed. Costs to the respondent.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/blk
[End of document]