Introduction
[1]
Nadon, J.
[Translation]: The plaintiffs are seeking by motion to have this court rule on the objections raised by counsel for the defendant in the course of the examination of Bertrand Castonguay on April 28, May 19, June 2 and July 7, 1993.
[2]
The action commenced by the plaintiffs raises issues of patent infringement, passing off and copyright infringement. More specifically, the plaintiffs allege that the defendant has infringed claims 1 to 22 inclusive of Canadian patent 1,182,295 ("295") and claims 1, 2, 4, 5 and 9 of Canadian patent 1,204,296 ("296") by making and selling blocks for building retaining walls under the name "MINITALUS". In addition, the plaintiffs allege that the defendants' operations constitute passing off with respect to their own retaining wall system, which is marketed in connection with the trademarks PISA I and PISA II. Finally, the plaintiffs contend that there is copyright in certain prospectuses illustrating the PISA STONE products which was infringed when the defendant distributed a brochure illustrating its MINITALUS.
[3]
The defendant submits that it has not infringed any of the claims in patents 295 and 296. The defendant's argument is that several fundamental characteristics of the inventions claimed in the two patents are not found in the MINITALUS block system. In addition, the defendant has filed a counterclaim in which it asks this court to declare patents 295 and 296 invalid on the grounds of obviousness, prior use, prior disclosure and prior publication. On the issue of passing off, the defendant contends that the appearance of the PISA I and PISA II retaining walls is not distinctive to RISI STONE and derives solely from purely functional and utilitarian elements. It goes without saying that the defendant denies the allegations of copyright infringement.
[4]
Finally, the defendant contends that the plaintiffs are using these proceedings to discredit the defendant and its products, contrary to s. 7(a) of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13.
Rules
[5]
The conduct of examinations for discovery is subject to, inter alia, rules 458, 459 and 466 of the
Federal Court Rules
(the
Rules
), which read as follows:
"458(1) A person who is being examined for discovery shall answer, to the best of the person's knowledge, information and belief, any question that
(a) is relevant to any unadmitted allegation of fact in any pleading filed in the action by the party being examined or the examining party;
(b) concerns the names or addresses of any person, other than an expert witness, who might reasonably be expected to have knowledge relating to any matter in question in the action.
"(2) A person who is to be examined for discovery shall, prior to the examination, become informed by making all reasonable inquiries of any present or former officer, servant, agent or employee of the party, including any who are outside Canada, who might reasonably be expected to have knowledge relating to any matter in question in the action.
"459(1) A party may object to a question asked in an examination for discovery on the grounds that
(a) the answer is privileged;
(b) the question does not comply with rule 458(1); or
(c) the question is unreasonable or unnecessary.
"(2) A person may not object to a question asked in an examination for discovery on the grounds that
(a) the answer would be evidence or hearsay;
(b) the question constitutes cross-examination, unless the question is for the sole purpose of testing a person's credibility; or
(c) the question constitutes cross-examination on the affidavit of documents of the party being examined.
"466. Where, prior to the time when an examination for discovery is being conducted or discovery or inspection of documents is being obtained or given under these Rules, an order has been made under rule 480 that an issue of fact be, after trial, the subject of a reference, the discovery or inspection shall not extend to such issue of fact."
Issues
[6]
In my opinion, the objections that I must decide may be grouped under six headings, as follows:
1. Objections concerning the accounting, sales, profits and number of blocks manufactured/sold by the defendant;
2. Objections concerning questions relating to the names and addresses of potential witnesses;
3. Objections to questions about the development of the MINITALUS block;
4. Objections to questions requiring an interpretation of the patents in issue or the expression of an opinion;
5. Objections based on the "irrelevance" of certain questions; and
6. Objections based on the confidentiality of the information requested.
1. Objections Concerning The Accounting,
Sales, Profits And Number
Of Blocks Manufactured/
Sold By The Defendant
[7]
On June 1, 1993 my colleague Denault, J., allowed a motion brought by the defendant in which it asked this court to order [Translation] "that my question relating to the extent to which a right has been infringed, any question relating to the damages resulting from an infringement of a right and any question relating to the profits derived from an infringement of a right be referred after hearing".
[8]
Accordingly, in view of rule 466 and the relevant case law (see, for example,
A T & T  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.)), the examination of Mr. Castonguay could not and should not have extended to the questions covered by the order of Denault, J. Accordingly, objections 1, 2, 37, 38, 67, 77 and 108 are upheld.
2. Objections Concerning Questions
Relating To The Names And
Addresses Of Potential Witnesses
[9]
The defendant refused to disclose the identity of several people during the examination. The refusal relates to the identity of the members of the research and development committee which worked on the MINITALUS project in 1988 and 1989 (objection no. 9); whether or not there was someone who kept notes for meetings of the MINITALUS project research and development committee (objection no. 10); the identity of the person who decided whether a patent application should be made for MINITALUS Universel and MINITALUS
Classique (objections no. 55 and 56); the identity of the person responsible for publishing the defendant's brochures (objections no. 62 and 63); and the identity of the producer of moulds for the blocks (objection no. 69).
[10]
In view of rules 458(1)(b) and 458(2), Mr. Castonguay should have become informed about any matter in question in the action, and for that purpose he should have made inquiries of any person in his employ "who might reasonably be expected to have knowledge relating to any matter in question in the action". In addition, Mr. Castonguay should have answered any question concerning the name or address of any person "who might reasonably be expected to have knowledge relating to any matter in question in the action".
[11]
Accordingly, objections no. 9, 10, 55, 56, 62 and 69 are dismissed.
3. Objections To Questions About
The Development Of The MINITALUS
Block
[12]
The case law is to the effect that an objection to a question relating to the development of a product that is alleged to be an infringement or an objection to a request concerning documents relating to the development of a product is valid if the action relates only to the infringement of a patent and/or the validity of the patent.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  establishes that in an infringement action, not only is the construction of the specification exclusively within the province of the court, but it is also for the court a question of law ... the nature of the patented invention be ascertained from the specification and that has to be determined by the Judge alone ...
. . . . .
"Using the test of the
Western Electric
case, supra, the nature of the patented invention must be ascertained from the body of the specification itself by the trial judge, and having done so, he is required to determine whether defendant's instrument constitutes an infringement.
"Surely, then, any drawings or any memoranda of the defendant's relating to the development of his instrument, can be in no way relevant to the issues which will come before the trial judge."
(See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)).
[13]
The plaintiffs submit that the "purposive construction" test laid down in respect of patent interpretation in Canada in certain decisions of this court, such as
Eli Lilly and Co. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1 (F.C.A.), justifies greater latitude in examinations for discovery so as to allow any evidence concerning the development of the allegedly infringing product. This argument must be rejected. In my view, the "purposive construction" test might allow disclosure of information concerning the development of a patented product in order to assist in interpreting the claims in the patent, but this is not the case here, since the MINITALUS is not patented.
[14]
Moreover, an action in infringement is essentially a comparison of the claims in the patent with the allegedly infringing product. The details and documents relating to the development of the product are therefore, in my opinion, not relevant to the action. Such evidence might be admissible in an examination for discovery in certain circumstances. That information might be relevant, for example, to enable the court to determine the mens rea of a party in respect of the infringement allegations. Thus the court could take this information into account to order exemplary damages. This question does not arise in the case at bar, in view of the order made by Denault, J.
[15]
In this case, I am of the opinion that the plaintiffs are engaged in a fishing expedition. Even if I accepted the plaintiffs' argument that this information would establish the prior art at the time of the development of the MINITALUS blocks, that is not a matter in question in the action. The validity of patents 295 and 296 rests solely on the state of the art two years before the application which resulted in the two patents was filed. For these reasons, objections 5, 6, 7, 40, 75 and 76 will be upheld.
4. Objections To Questions Requiring
An Interpretation Of The Patents
In Issue Or The Expression Of
An Opinion
[16]
In view of rule 458, a witness who is subject to examination must only answer questions that are within his or her knowledge and that are relevant to a matter in question in the action. No question may be asked that requires an expert opinion, for example, a question that requires an interpretation of a patent, since the information to which the question relates may not be admitted in evidence other than under rule 482. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.)).
[17]
On several occasions Mr. Léger, counsel for the plaintiffs, tried to obtain information which, in my view, required an interpretation of the patents by an expert. Accordingly, Mr. Castonguay did not answer questions 19, 24, 25, 57, 58, 59, 74, 79, 84, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105 and 106. The objections to these questions are accordingly upheld.
[18]
On the other hand, certain of the questions asked by Mr. Léger fall within the general knowledge of the witness as a "block man" and as president of the defendant, even though the required, to some extent, the expression of a technical opinion. The mere fact that a question may seek to elicit an expression of a technical opinion from a witness who is not an expert is not necessarily fatal. My colleague, Reed, J., stated the following in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 35 (T.D.) at p. 52:
"The Federal Court of Appeal has made it plain that when the evidence sought is the subject matter of expert opinion, evidence to be disclosed pursuant to rule 482, questions relating thereto are not required to be answered on discovery. It has also made it plain that where the question is one clearly on its face seeking an opinion from the witness, that the question is not required to be answered. I have not been able to find, however, an articulation of the appropriate principle, in a case such as the present, where the information sought is technical in nature (and for that reason might be addressed in an affidavit of an expert witness), but is within the common knowledge of the plaintiff and where the question is of a factual nature although it can arguably be said to require expression of opinion by the witness, in the sense that many assertions of 'fact' require the expression of an 'opinion'. It is my conclusion that in such cases the principle to be applied is that the factual nature of the question takes precedence and the question should be answered."
[19]
I am of the opinion that the questions relating to (1) the feasibility of adding a certain MINITALUS block to a ruptured face (objections no. 21, 22 and 23); (2) the compatibility of certain existing products with Permacon's needs at the time the MINITALUS blocks were developed (objections no. 28, 29 and 39); (3) the importance to Permacon of a continuous open grove under a MINITALUS and PISA type block (objections no. 85 and 86); and (4) the existence of inventive activity or a degree of ingenuity in Minitalus Classique as compared to blocks that existed previously, require answers that contain elements of fact and opinion. Accordingly, objections 21, 22, 23, 28, 29, 39, 85 and 86 are dismissed.
5. Objections Based On The
"Irrelevance" Of Certain Questions
[20]
I am in complete agreement with the comments of McNair, J., of this court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 66 (F.C.T.D.) at 70, in which McNair, J., stated, at p. 70, with respect to the relevance of the evidence:
"The test as to what documents are required to be produced is simply relevance. The test of relevance is not a matter for the exercise of discretion. What documents parties are entitled to is a matter of law, not a matter of discretion. The principle for determining what document properly relates to the matters in issue is that it must be one
which might reasonably be supposed to contain information which may directly or indirectly enable the party requiring production to advance his own case or to damage the case of his adversary, or which may fairly lead him to a train of inquiry that could have either of these consequences
..."
[21]
Accordingly, insofar as the information sought by the examining party "may directly or indirectly enable the party ... to advance his own case or to damage the case of his adversary, or ... may fairly lead him to a train of inquiry that could have either of these consequences ...", this information must be admitted in evidence. In order to achieve this purpose, it may sometimes be necessary to allow evidence that may be repetitive. (See the judgment of Reed, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) at 415.).
[22]
From this perspective, I must dismiss objections 49 and 71. In my opinion, the plaintiffs are entitled to know the difference between the MINITALUS described at p. 13 and the one described at p. 14 in order to determine the extent of the infringement, if infringement there be. In addition, the plaintiffs are entitled to know the differences between MINITALUS Classique and MINITALUS Universel in order to determine what products of the MINITALUS family are infringements.
[23]
Objections 80 and 97 do not seek to obtain Mr. Castonguay's legal interpretation or to obtain disclosure of the evidence to be presented by the defendant at trial. These questions are intended simply to obtain information relating to facts that are relevant to the matters in question in the action. Objections 80 and 97 are therefore dismissed.
[24]
Objection 87 relates to the competence of Mr. Castonguay and his employees in terms of designing and manufacturing blocks. The information sought is relevant and falls within the witness's personal knowledge. This objection is dismissed.
[25]
On the other hand, the letters exchanged between Montco and the defendant, in which Montco alleges infringement of its patent by Permacon, are in no way relevant. Objection 73 is upheld.
[26]
On the question of the objections relating to production of photographs of retaining walls (objections 66 and 78), Mr. Séguin, for the defendant, submits that it is necessary for the distinctive nature of PISA walls to be established before any evidence relevant to the other aspect of the legal test for passing off - confusion - may be demanded. I agree with this. In addition, I do not see the relevance of the questions put by Mr. Léger in respect of these photographs. For these reasons, objections 66 and 78 are upheld.
6. Objections Based On The
Confidentiality Of The Information
Requested
[27]
On several occasions, Mr. Léger tried to question Mr. Castonguay with respect to a patent application (no. 609986) made by the defendant in relation to the MINITALUS system. The patent was never issued.
[28]
The defendant submits that the information sought by Mr. Léger is confidential under ss. 10 and 11 of the
Patent Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4, as amended by c. 10 (2nd Supp.), 1984, c. 40, which provides:
"10. All specifications, drawings, models, disclaimers, judgments, returns and other papers, except caveats, and except those filed in connection with applications for patents that are still pending or have been abandoned, shall be open to the inspection of the public at the Patent Office under such regulations as are adopted in that behalf.
"11. Notwithstanding the exception in s. 10, the commissioner, on the request of any person who states in writing the name of the inventor, if available, the title of the invention and the number and date of a patent said to have been granted in a named country other than Canada, or who pays or tenders the prescribed fee, shall inform that person whether an application for a patent of the same invention is or is not pending in Canada."
[29]
I agree with the defendant. The information sought by Mr. Léger is not relevant to matters in question relating to the infringement and/or validity of the plaintiffs' patents. Accordingly, objections 52, 53 and 61 are upheld.
[30]
On the other hand, I see no justification for upholding objection 81, which concerns questions relating to the patents issued. Objection 81 is therefore dismissed.
[31]
In conclusion, I would like to add that if I have inadvertently failed to decide any objection or if I have decided an objection that I was not asked to decide, the parties may apply to me for reconsideration.
[32]
Costs in the cause.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/slm