[1]
Cullen, J.
: The Canadian Parliament has adopted an
Immigration Act
which contains among its clauses s. 40.1 which reads:
"Section 40.1
"Certificate
"40.1(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, where the Minister and the Solicitor General are of the opinion, based on security or criminal intelligence reports received and considered by them, that a person, other than a Canadian citizen or permanent resident, is a person described in paragraph 19(1)(d), (e), (f), (g) or (j) or 27(2)(c), they may sign and file a certificate to that effect with an immigration officer, a senior immigration officer or an adjudicator.
"Delay of inquiry.
"(2) Where a certificate is signed and filed in accordance with subs. (1), an inquiry under this Act concerning the person in respect of whom the certificate is filed shall not be commenced, or if commenced shall be adjourned, until the determination referred to in paragraph (4)(d) has been made and a senior immigration officer or an adjudicator shall, notwithstanding s. 23 or 103, detain or make an order to detain the person named in the certificate until the making of the determination.
"Reference to Federal Court.
"(3) Where a certificate referred to in subs. (1) is filed in accordance with that subsection, the Minister shall
(a) forthwith cause a copy of the certificate to be referred to the Federal Court of Canada for a determination as to whether the certificate should be quashed; and
(b) within three days after the certificate has been filed, cause a notice to be sent to the person named in the certificate informing the person that a certificate under this section has been filed and that following a reference in the Federal Court of Canada a deportation order may be made against the person.
"Judicial consideration of certificate.
"(4) Where a certificate is referred to the Federal Court of Canada pursuant to subs. (3), the Chief Justice of that court or a judge of that court designated by the Chief Justice for the purposes of this section shall
(a) examine within seven days, in camera, the security or criminal intelligence reports considered by the Minister and the Solicitor General and hear any other evidence or information that may be presented by or on behalf of those Ministers and may, on the request of the Minister or the Solicitor General, hear all or part of such evidence or information in the absence of the person named in the certificate and any counsel representing the person where, in the opinion of the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, the evidence or information should not be disclosed on the grounds that such disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons;
(b) provide the person named in the certificate with a statement summarizing such information available to the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, as will enable the person to be reasonably informed or the circumstances giving rise to the issue of the certificate, having regard to whether, in the opinion of the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, the information should not be disclosed on the grounds that the disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons;
(c) provide the person named in the certificate with a reasonable opportunity to be heard;
(d) determine whether the certificate filed by the Minister and the Solicitor General is reasonable on the basis of the evidence and information available to the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, and, if found not to be reasonable, quash the certificate; and
(e) notify the Minister, the Solicitor General and the person named in the certificate of the determination made pursuant to paragraph (d).
"Evidence
"(5) For the purposes of subs. (4), the Chief Justice or the designated judge may receive and accept such evidence or information as the Chief Justice or the designated judge sees fit, whether or not such evidence or information is or would be admissible in a court of law.
"No appeal.
"(6) A determination under paragraph (4)(d) is not subject to appeal or review by any court."
[2]
The procedure outlined in the section has been satisfied.
[3]
Pursuant to s. 40.1(4)(c), I established a place and time when the person named in the Certificate would be given a "reasonable opportunity to be heard". His counsel did not call upon him to give evidence, but did call Mr. Bhupinder Singh Somal, an expert "to the Punjab human rights, Indian human rights situation, as a human rights activist and expert" (p. 12 of transcript). Eventually it was accepted by counsel for the Crown that "Mr. Somal is an expert in the field of human rights in India" (transcript p. 23) and I accepted him as an expert. Mr. Somal had no personal knowledge of Mr. Singh but was satisfied that if he was sent back to India, "he will be picked (up) on the airport and taken into legal custody. And, if it was the same like others he was killed in fake encounters, which is very popular in India" (p. 24 of transcript). (Note: this witness had some difficulty with the English language and tenses.)
Hardeep Singh (Singh)
[4]
Singh first came to the attention of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) in 1993. According to the Department of Citizenship and Immigration Canada (DCI) Singh claimed to have travelled from India to the United Kingdom on December 20, 1992 then on to the U.S.A. On December 21, 1992 Singh crossed into Canada by vehicle from the U.S.A. at a Montreal border crossing using false documents. On December 23, 1992 Singh claimed refugee status in Montreal in the name of Maan Singh Sidhu. Upon his arrival Singh informed immigration officials that he came to Canada from India to escape persecution by Indian authorities. Singh admitted being affiliated with the All India Sikh Students Federation (AISSF). AISSF is based in India and supports an independent Khalistan. The International Sikh Youth Federation (ISYF) is the overseas arm of the AISSF. The ISYF does not exclude the use of violence in achieving its goal and individual members of the ISYF have been involved in various violent terrorist attacks directed against India and Indian nationals.
[5]
Singh advised that if he were returned to India, he would be executed in a staged police encounter.
Human Rights
[6]
On this issue the only evidence I received was that of Somal, the expert on human rights in India, and he was not cross-examined although that was the right of counsel for the Crown, nor did they call any evidence on this subject.
[7]
Somal, in carefully worded evidence and in a most comprehensive manner cited several instances of the abuse of human rights by the government of India. Each allegation was backed in some instances with objective articles on the subject and on occasion Somal's own investigations which were done when he was in India (Somal, not incidentally, applied for and was granted refugee status in Canada.)
[8]
Somal first told us that he had specialized in TADA. When asked to explain he said (pp. 13-14 of transcript):
"A.	This was an act which came into existence in 1985 by the government. It had different provisions under the common law.
Q.	When you talk of TADA cases especially, what are the difficulties or the differences involved in TADA cases as opposed to ordinary criminal cases?
A.	The TADA cases were dealt in the special courts, even in the jails. Even the list of witnesses were given that who would come and who would not come.
Q.	When you talk of special courts, what are these courts?
A.	It is a camera trial, which has its lines in jail. It is not open for general public.
Q.	How many such TADA cases did you do in the thirteen (13) years that you were an active lawyer in Indian, approximately?
A.	Around six hundred (600) or seven hundred (700)."
[9]
Human rights advocates and groups should feel indebted to Somal not only for the work he did in India by way of investigations, but the reports and books he wrote of his many successes in having them published in the international community.
[10]
I was surprised to learn from Somal that Amnesty International are not permitted to go to India, and Asia Watch visited on only two occasions during Somal's tenure as the Investigation Secretary.
[11]
On a personal note we learned the following from Somal (p. 22 of transcript):
"Q.	And in what capacity did you come to Canada?
A. 	I come here to see my sick mother, but after that my General Secretary, Mr. Mohinder Singh Garewal, was picked up by the Indian authorities, because I made a movie of the incidents of human rights violation. The Indian Government embarrassed on that movie, which was distributed worldwide. And after that, they wanted me to entangle in false case, or kill me like other human rights activist. My organization advised me to stay in Canada, and I claimed a refugee status here in Montreal.
Q.	Were you accepted as a refugee?
A.	Yes, Your Honour.
Q.	When?
A.	It was on 13th of October, 1993."
I mention this only to show government officials believed Somal and his evidence, even to the extent of putting him in the fast track.
[12]
Somal in his evidence stressed that above and beyond TADA are violations of human rights and at p. 25 of the transcript, I asked:
"Q.	Excuse me, would this be under what you refer to as the TADA law; would that be the authority for them or would they just move in? You mentioned TADA cases.
A. 	TADA?
Q.	Yes, TADA.
A.	I already mentioned about TADA cases, about
TADA Act
.
Q.	I'm asking there were TADA cases. Would that be the authority that the government would use to take this man or would they just move in?
A.	No, this process I used to see in India, it is totally illegal process used by the Security forces in India. It is not a legal process.
Q.	So, it is not under the TADA law.
A.	No, no.
Q.	Okay, it is not -
A.	It is not under penal code or not like that. It is not."
He then gave us the evidence which he felt justified this comment about the illegal process (p. 27 of transcript):
"Q.	When you talk of disappearance, can you explain how someone can disappear when the person is in police custody?
A. 	Disappearance use to be believed by the people of India is to be killed in fake encounter.
Q.	How often or how many - also in your area of expertise, how many such reported cases do you think there are in India per year or ...
A.	There are maybe in two (2) years about sixty-nine (69) cases like that of disappearance.
Q.	When these people disappear what kind of inquiry is made into those disappearances?
A.	Indian government did not do any inquiry in these cases, because of the repeated requests by the human rights organizations like our organization or Amnesty International, Asia Watch.
. . . . .
"His Lordship:
Q.	You were able to get the habeas corpus at the beginning, but couldn't have it implemented, I gather, couldn't have it take effect.
A.	No.
Q.	Or did you get a habeas corpus at all?
A.	Yes.
Q.	You got that?
A.	Yes.
"Me Jean-François Fiset:
Q.	So, is habeas corpus a protection of India?
A.	According to me, no, it is not a protection in India. ... Warrant office works for the Honourable High Court of Punjab and Haryana, but the Security forces are so adamant, they flout the orders of the court.
. . . . .
Q.	Who is generally responsible for the human rights abuses, disappearances, executions in India?
A.	It is the Indian Security forces, mostly the Punjab Police, which is given wider power under the various acts.
Q.	Who is mainly targeted in those disappearances, ...
A.	Mainly targeted are Sikhs in Punjab, Kashmiris in Kashmir, Assamese in Assam, between the age of eighteen (18) to thirty-five (35) or forty (40)."
Somal had to concede this point (p. 33 of transcript):
"A.	Once the name appears in the list of the police, he is at the most risk in India.
Q.	So, let's turn to this case here. You have Mr. Singh - Maan Sidhu. Do you think his name would appear on what you call the police list?
A.
I don't know about his story
, but if he is once picked up by the police and taken in custody, he will not be spared anymore ..." (emphasis added)
Some of Somal's most damning testimony had to do with torture (pp. 33-36 of transcript):
"Q.	When you talk of C.I.A. staff, could you tell us what C.I.A. staff is?
A.	It is a term 'Criminal Investigation Agency', it is separately set up in India in - after the police stations. It is special purpose to interrogate criminals or like that. It is one type of interrogation centre, torture centre.
Q.	You call them torture centres.
A.	Yes, the human rights established call that a torture centre.
Q.	How widespread is torture in India? We'll talk about Punjab first, and we'll talk about India as a whole.
A.	As I know, the tortures started after '80, more popularly in Punjab Police because they were rewarded for the tortures.
Q.	Who was rewarded?
A.	Rewarded by the government.
Q.	They give rewards to torture.
A.	To torture, to kill persons listed in their list.
Q.	How widespread is it? How ...
A.	There is nowadays --
Q.	Let's talk of the present.
A.	Nowadays that is a rule of terror. The police can pick up anyone and take into illegal custody and given him two beatings by bed strap, put him like suspension, tie his feet from the - by the rope and picked it up and down like that way and take the guy downwards, it's like a suspension. There is other way who used to roll the heavy rollers of wooden on their thighs. There is other way to take apart their legs at ninety (90) degrees. There is other ways of giving shocks, like electric shocks. There are ways of cut down some - injure them, they put some pepper or salt on that, like that.
Q.	Have you seen torture victims yourself when you were in India?
A.	Yes.
. . . . .
Q.	So, you said there was a lot of it going on, but how widespread would it be in Punjab?
A.	It is - I already submit - told that it is very, very widespread in Punjab. There is now the increasement of police district, increasement of interrogation centres, C.I.A. staffs, and bringing so many militaries - para-military forces to Punjab. According to my knowledge, there is one (1) policeman after fifteen (15) persons in Punjab nowadays.
Q.	One (1) policeman for fifteen (15) persons in Punjab.
A.	Yes.
Q.	That's a high ratio."
[13]
Of similar shocking evidence is that contained in two most comprehensive reports, namely, "one from Human Rights Watch and the other Physicians for Human Rights, which deals with the situation of Punjab" (p. 40 of transcript).
[14]
Somal's honest evidence was typified in this response to counsel (pp. 41-42 of transcript):
"Q.	It is often said that as an excuse or as a justification for having killed a person, whether in custody or whether in fake encounter, that the person was a terrorist or that the person was a militant. And this is often said about persons. This is often printed in newspapers. What do you think of this allegation?
Should we give it weight?
A.
Sometime it was true
. And sometimes the policemen who get a reward take a person in custody, keep him in custody for year long and the incident in that area they attributed some incidents on that person." (emphasis added)
and later (p. 45 of transcript):
"Q.	When the Indian Government tortures somebody because he is suspected of being a terrorist, is it always true that the person is a terrorist?
A. 	No, it was not always true that a person is a terrorist who was picked up and tortured.
. . . . .
Q.	And what is the reason?
A.	The real reason is just on the suspicion; sometime they pick up a person from the way, and he were tortured like animals, he was gone to that extent, he was killed. And after that, they show him to be killed in an encounter. In fact, that person was killed in custody."
[15]
As indicated earlier Somal was not cross-examined nor did the Crown lead any evidence on this subject.
Singh's Position
[16]
Counsel first indicated his procedure in refugee cases where he uses "expertise that shows that a person was a torture victim and has a credible allegation that he was tortured by the Indian Government". Here, however, Singh did not give any evidence to me that he was tortured. However, there was uncontested evidence that Singh "was a torture victim because he was assessed by one of the best psychologists in Quebec dealing with refugee cases. His fear is genuine". (p. 51 of transcript).
[17]
Singh had applied for refugee status and his application was on stream until blocked under the provisions of s. 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
. The s. 40.1 process is called by counsel "somewhat a very special derogatory, exceptional, this position which I have never seen before, which I never dealt with before". (p. 53 of transcript). At page 54 of the transcript counsel argues:
"A lawyer came today here and told you that he came as a refugee because of the targeting of human rights activists. If a lawyer with the knowledge of Mr. Somal, with his activities, cannot seek protection in India, how can Mr. Maan Singh Sidhu, a simple young man of twenty-four (24) years old, seek protection in India? It is not possible. It is non-existent.
"The case was fully prepared for a hearing, but the Minister chose to arrest my client, to treat him like a criminal, because it is like a criminal. The person is taken in a criminal facility, is detained. Everything that we have in the Immigration law is discarded. Everything that we have in terms of the due process of law, equality before the law, is taken away. I cannot get bail for my client. I cannot have him testify for his refugee claim.
"The burden changes completely, and that on the basis of information which I have no access to, allegations that say that my client is a terrorist, information which does not tell me what is the extent of this information where the name Hardeep Singh came from."
On the position of the Minister (p. 55 of transcript):
"The position of the Minister, at least the resumé that I have of the case, shows me blatant mistakes. They used some of his problems or some of the narration of his problems to say that he is a terrorist, and that he belongs to the All Indian Sikh Student Federation, which is a terrorist group. I have produced a number of decisions showing refugee claimants who were accepted on that very base of being an All Indian Sikh Student Federation supporter, or sometime having a friend that was a member of that association, or simply hanging around with people who are members of that association."
On membership in AISSF (p. 56 of transcript):
"I could not produce them all. I made a selection to show that many of those cases were judged quite credible, that those people were tortured for having been alleged members of the All Indian Sikh Student Federation. You find most of these decisions on 'onglet' number 1. So, some range in 1992. Some talk of young men, twenty-four (24) years old. They talk of harassment of the family. They talk of torture. They talk of execution. All of this was judged credible and all of this was judged to be sufficient, coherent, and in tune with the human rights situation. And these people were all given refugee status.
What kind of membership would upset that?
" (emphasis added)
On membership by Singh (p. 57 of transcript):
"... we have read between the lines, these allegations state that the client was the President of the All Indian Sikh Student Federation. And this is not supported by his case, and it is a misreading of his case. He was the President of his college, All Indian Sikh Student Federation. And there are factions which are absolutely not terrorist organizations. They are peaceful political associations, fighting for the good of Sikh and sometimes aiming at independence to obtain Khalistan for Punjab. And even that is not a crime."
[18]
The process envisaged by s. 40.1 is savagely attacked as it applies to this case (p. 74 of transcript):
"It brings great concern to the Sikh community across Canada that this procedure has been used.
"In cases of torture cases what further tarnishes the picture is that, in the chronology of cases, this case was adjourned on three (3) occasions. I, being the lawyer in the case, have reported the chronology of the case. It said that he came to the attention of CC's? [CSIS] or R.C.M.P. in 1993. The claimant was here since 1992. He was not in detention. They did not detain him at the airport. They let him free of his own will. He claimed refugee. At no time was it told that he was a national security danger.
"He did what every refugee claimant did. He prepared his case. We were ready to proceed. On two (2) occasions, the case was postponed, on three (3) occasions, in fact. We were told on three (3) occasions that the case could not proceed, because there was a lack of a judge.
"Looking back at this, I think it was a pretext. It was a way to bring the case with a national security certificate in order to bypass the regular process. ... but we know for a fact that R.C.M.P. was even at the office of the psychologist who was doing an evaluation of this young man. It came to our attention that R.C.M.P. was there, and asked people around: What is Mr. Sidhu Maan Singh doing there? How long has he been doing there? Why is he at the psychologist?
"The psychologist has a responsibility, one (1), to protect the confidentiality of information. Number two (2), I have never seen such a thing happen also, R.C.M.P. barging in the office, asking what the gentleman is doing, and interfering in the normal process of a refugee case."
And then at pp. 77-78 of the transcript:
"It is always possible that the claimant may have done something in India. He was politically active, and he never - it is not like he admitted. It was the core of his case. He admitted having political activities in India, and he admitted probably being for Khalistan for a separate state of Punjab. And he admitted taking an active role in politics, but to admit that doesn't mean he is a terrorist. And to admit that does not mean also that the information that the Indian Government may have given our Canadian secret service or police secret service is reliable information."
[19]
The question asked by the Canadian Sikh community (pp. 80-81 of transcript):
"The Sikh community unanimously has voiced its concern about this young man, because it is an extraordinary procedure that is not often used. And questions are being raised why this young man, and what information would lead the government to take its human rights good reputation, worldwide good reputation for protection of refugee, of genuine refugee, that is, why they would put that aside and they would deport him under national security, when the case cannot be challenged. ... They trust that we have demonstrated that the Minister in this case has acted in haste, and has acted on information which has not been proved reliable and that falls short of the national safeguards that we normally expect in refugee cases. It falls short of international law, a pledge that Canada has taken not to send a person who is likely to be killed in his country to a sure death, because that's what the documents tell us."
[20]
And finally counsel has commented upon the burden faced by the court and asks if s. 40.1 puts aside all fundamental rights.
The Minister's Position:
[21]
Under the provisions of s. 40.1 I heard counsel for the Ministers, "in camera", and had the statement summarizing information from that hearing forwarded to Singh.
[22]
Counsel for the Minister argued (p. 93 of the transcript):
"Under 40.1(c) of the
Immigration Act
, Mr. Hardeep Singh was given the opportunity to present to this court with argument showing that the certificate already filed by the Minister was unfounded, unreasonable, and that the certificate which, in fact, is the Minister's opinion that Mr. Hardeep Singh is inadmissible, should be quashed. And in essence, that's what we are here for this morning.
"The Minister has already provided an opinion on Mr. Singh's admissibility in Canada as being a person which is of a class which is not admissible under 19.1(f). So, in answer to this certificate, given the opportunity to comment on his admissibility or inadmissibility, we have heard evidence that Mr. Hardeep Singh's return to India, pursuant to subsequent deportation, would lead to his arrest by Indian authorities and possible harm or death.
"Now, in all due respect, this court must establish, and this is according to 40.1(4)(d), this court must determine not that Mr. Singh will be harmed upon his return to India, but rather that the certificate filed by the Minister, which comments on Mr. Singh's admissibility or inadmissibility, is based on facts and evidence, and such evidence that the court must conclude at the end that the Minister's opinion is a reasonable one."
And at p. 96 of the transcript:
"In my opinion, My Lord, this is the exercise which this court must face this morning, not that deportation will lead to grave danger in the case of Mr. Hardeep Singh, but that the certificate is a reasonable one and is based on facts, evidence which meets the standards which have been established in Ali Seny (?) decision. Beyond that, My Lord, I believe that concern with possible harm upon deportation is premature."
Conclusions
[23]
It probably bears repeating that prior to the hearing under s. 40.1(4)(c), I had to examine the security intelligence reports considered by the Minister and the Solicitor General and heard other evidence and information presented on behalf of the Minister and the Solicitor General pursuant to s. 40.1(4)(a). That hearing was "in camera" and evidence advanced there cannot be made public by the court.
[24]
I have purposely endeavoured to cover Singh's case in some detail, particularly the evidence of Mr. Somal and the representations of counsel for Singh so that it will not escape the attention of the Ministers involved. I accept unequivocally that Mr. Somal's analyses of the fate waiting Singh should he return or be returned to India. Also, I accept the view of Singh's counsel and that the process under s. 40.1 is an unusual way to deal with the problem, but it is Parliament that had decreed the necessity for this process to protect Canadians and residents of Canada.
[25]
The court's role in this is difficult for it is not to concede or find that the Ministers were correct in this assessment of the evidence presented to them but rather to find whether or not, based on facts and evidence presented to the Ministers, the Ministers' opinion is a reasonable one, meeting the requirements of paragraph 40.1(4)(d) of the
Act
. I do so find. Would that I could comment or refer to the evidence I heard and that was presented to the Ministers but unhappily that is not the lot of the court.
[26]
Ministers, however, by these reasons, should be made aware of the likely consequences if Singh is returned to India - in that - I had the strongest possible evidence of Mr. Somal and the representations of Singh's counsel.
[27]
Accordingly, I have determined, pursuant to the authority of s. 40.1(4)(d) of the
Immigration Act
, that the certificate filed by the Solicitor General and the Minister for the purposes of Part III of the
Act
, is reasonable on the basis of the evidence and information available to me. An Order shall go accordingly.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/dlr
[End of document]