[1]
Muldoon, J.
: On January 17, 1991, this court pronounced judgment in favour of the plaintiff, and against the defendant, on the issue of liability in this tort case. At the same time, the Crown's action against the plaintiff herein, Rollinson as defendant (T-245-87) was dismissed. Those two actions were tried together, as is disclosed in [1991] 3 F.C. 70; 40 F.T.R. 1. The parties, through their respective counsel, agreed and the court permitted, that the trial at that earlier time should be directed only to the issue(s) of liability, and then, depending on the outcome, the court would convoke a second trial to fix damages if any.
[2]
There having been no appeal taken from the court's judgment finding the defendant liable in tort, the parties have sought and obtained from the Associate Chief Justice an appointment for this adjudication of their contentions about the quantum of damages. Considering the submissions made by the parties' counsel at the session in court and in their written material, it is not entirely certain that they truly perused this court's judgment issued  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -84, on June 28, 1991, long before - nearly a year and a half before - the second trial - or session - held to assess the quanta of damages. The executive text of that judgment runs thus:
"1. This Court Orders And Adjudges that in regard to the seizures of the vessel, the 'M.V. Rogue', the plaintiff's dwelling place, and all papers and materials whatever, the property of the plaintiff, the court accords the following remedies pursuant to section 24 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
[hereinafter, the
Charter
] which, the court considers, are appropriate and just in the circumstances:
(a) A finding and declaration that the plaintiff's private papers (the so-called 'ship's logs' of every kind and nature) which were seized from him on February 1, 1984, were seized ... in denial of his rights under section 8 of the
Charter
, and they are inadmissible in these proceedings.
(b) A finding and declaration that the defendant's servants of the mobile investigation unit on February 1, 1984, and by various subsequent actions and threats, and the Superintendent of Traffic Operations at the Port of Douglas, then acting on behalf of the defendant, by his mockery of the plaintiff, and the Crown, by entrapping and misrepresenting both negligently, on the part of the customs inspectors, and intentionally, on the part of its middle-management and its law officers, tortiously crossed-up and tricked the plaintiff into failing to comply with the inbound reporting provisions of the previous
Customs Act
to his loss, injury and detriment when the Crown on two distinct occasions, February 1, 1984, and March 13, 1984, purported to seize his vessel; and that all the foregoing, inter alia, constituted cruel and unusual treatment;
(c) A finding and declaration that the above recited first and third seizures of the vessel were unlawful and will be quashed so that the vessel shall be released, free and clear, to the plaintiff or his direction; and that all provisions of the previous
Customs Act
upon which the Crown based its seizures of that vessel are and were, in the circumstances of this case, inoperative and of no effect as against the plaintiff; or, in the alternative, at the Crown's option, that the
Act
prevails and that the Crown is liable upon its servants' tortious misconduct to compensate the plaintiff fully for replacement value of the seized and forfeited vessel, his dwelling, as at and from the time it was taken from the plaintiff's possession, and control.
(d) A finding and declaration that in regard to its seizures of the 'Rogue', the Crown is liable to compensate the plaintiff fully in special and general damages, and any exemplary damages which the court may assess for:
(i) breach and denial of the plaintiff's rights guaranteed by sections 7, 8, 12 and 15 of the
Charter
,
(ii) harassment, mental anguish, humiliation and inconvenience tortiously inflicted by Crown servants upon the plaintiff as indicated in the evidence before the court, and inferences therefrom, in the two cases herein, tried jointly, and
(iii) interest upon such damages as are exigible from any ordinary private tortfeasor of full age and capacity in British Columbia, as of and from February 1, 1984, or from such later date as the appropriate law makes such interest so exigible.
"2. This Court Further Orders And Adjudges that in further regard to the defendant's seizure of the 'Rogue', in regard to paragraphs (a) and (c) above, special damages shall comprehend the plaintiff's losses recited in the prayer for relief (a)(i) and (ii) alleged in the amended statement of claim;
"3. This Court Further Orders And Adjudges that the defendant and her officials, employees, servants and agents shall return to the plaintiff any and all papers and documents, including copies thereof, of his seized from him on and after February 1, 1984 and remaining in their possession;
"4. This Court Further Orders And Adjudges that the departmental adjudications process and the statutory provisions and regulations upon which it is based are hereby declared to be of no force and effect because the plaintiff was effectively denied fair procedures and fundamental justice by reasons of the defendant's servants' negligence, bias and denial of the principle of audi alteram partem; and all material proceedings thereof in regard to the plaintiff herein be, and they are hereby, quashed; and
"5. This Court Further Orders that the parties, or in the event of inability to agree, the plaintiff unilaterally, shall apply to the Associate Chief Justice of this court to appoint a judge and to fix a date for the assessment of damages awarded under all heads of damage mentioned in the said reasons for judgment herein, dated January 17, 1991; and with respect to such assessment, both parties shall be at liberty to avail themselves, within the scope of the applicable
Rules
of the court, of the right to secure discovery and inspection of documents, and the right upon such assessment to call viva voce evidence, and to cross-examine witnesses called by the other party, and to tender such documentary or other evidence as is permitted by the said
Rules
;
"6. This Court Further Orders And Adjudges that the defendant do pay to the plaintiff his solicitor-and-client costs of and incidental to this action, forthwith after taxation thereof with counsel fees to be abated by 6%, plus the plaintiff's costs in full without abatement on a solicitor-client basis for proceedings pursuant to rule 337(2)(b) herein."
[3]
There was also an action, T-245-87, pursued by Her Majesty the Queen against the defendant therein, the citizen George Gordon Rollinson, upon which the court rendered judgment on June 27, 1991. The pertinent executive provisions of that judgment are these:
"This Court Orders and Adjudges that
"1. ...
"2. All other claims to relief of the plaintiff be and the same are hereby dismissed, especially in regard to the Pontiac 1974 Parisienne automobile, registration number 7K69H41303581, owned by the defendant  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , which was seized on behalf of the plaintiff on February 7th, 1985; and the defendant is hereby awarded the replacement cost of the said automobile and any cost to the defendant from the loss of use thereof, together with interest at a rate to be assessed on the replacement cost of the automobile as of and from February 7th, 1985.
"3. The defendant is awarded costs as against the plaintiff on a solicitor-and-client basis with counsel fees, but not disbursements, to be abated by 6% after taxation, provided that, by reason of the within action and action number T-560-84 having been heard together at trial on common evidence, no counsel fee at trial is awarded in respect of the within action."
[4]
This latter judgment of June 27, 1991, can be dealt with first, because the respective counsel agreed upon the quantum of the replacement cost of the Pontiac Parisienne as of the date of its seizure, February 7, 1985. There were four volumes of transcript generated by the second trial on quantum. The agreement by counsel is recorded in Q.D. Tr. vol. 3, at pp. 465-466. They agreed upon special damages in the amount of $1,520.23, upon which the Crown must pay pretrial interest from February 7, 1985 to June 27, 1991. No evidence was tendered regarding "any cost to the defendant  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  from the loss of use thereof" awarded in the judgment in suit no. T-245-87. So be it. The judgment for $1,520.23 payable by the Crown in suit no. T-245-87 will be drawn up separately, and any costs therein will be subsumed in the judgment in suit no. T-560-84. The amount of such costs if any will be minimal because the matter was settled by agreement between the respective counsel, albeit after the trial in which the Crown was held liable.
[5]
Turning now to the quantum of special damages in suit no.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the major item has to do with the Crown's seizures of the "Rogue" and the vessel's subsequent and consequential damage and deterioration. It will be remembered that the court found no justification for such seizures, but rather specified breaches of the citizen's
Charter
rights guaranteed by ss. 7, 8, 12 and 15 thereof. At the White Rock dock, the customs agents and their superiors of the Douglas Station crossing customs house had caused to be erected a sign for the attention of masters of incoming vessels. Its message was very practical and sensible for the benefit principally of the overworked, 3.2 km distant, customs personnel at Douglas Station, but also of convenience to those sailing inbound to White Rock. The sign's message directed those who arrived at the dock by vessel to report to the Douglas customs house by telephone. That message was very practical and very illegal in terms of the
Customs Act
in force at the material times. Revenue Canada's mobile investigation unit in Vancouver hearing unsubstantiated rumours to the effect that the citizen had been smuggling liquor from the U.S.A. and had not been reporting each time he sailed into White Rock (sometimes more often than once per day) decided to execute a raid on the "Rogue" on February 1, 1984, shortly after it was docked. Before they swarmed aboard the vessel, they had to await the civilized departure from it of a uniformed customs officer. So, the raiders in plain clothes certainly had not caught the citizen, "red-handed", not reporting to Customs. He had, of course, reported his arrival to the Douglas Station customs house either by radio or by telephone, and that is why the uniformed agent had attended on board the "Rogue". Foiled in their first suspicion the mobile unit then turned its efforts (despite the doubt of one of its members) to turning the "Rogue" "inside out" in order to find contraband liquor, even although a uniformed customs agent had immediately preceded them on board. Foiled again! No contraband was found. So, without the benefit of a judicially issued search warrant, they seized the citizen's private papers in hopes of discovering therein something upon which they could base a charge of committing an offence under the
Customs Act
, if not also the
Criminal Code
. Their conduct was unlawful, and their search and seizure were abusive:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 291; 9 C.R.R. 355; 14 C.C.C.(3d) 97; 41 C.R.(3d) 97; [1984] 6 W.W.R. 577; 33 Alta. L.R.(2d) 193; 27 B.L.R. 297; 84 D.T.C. 6467; 2 C.P.R.(3d) 1; 11 D.L.R.(4th) 641. Detailed reference to such unlawful and abusive search and seizure, and cruel and unusual treatment can be found in the original typescript of the reasons for judgment, or in (1991), 40 F.T.R. 1, for the editor of the Federal Court series has (not entirely justifiably) abridged the melancholy facts, as found, out of the reported decision therein.
[6]
Before going into sums of dollars, the court must comment on one matter of assessment of damages raised by the defendant: the impecunious plaintiff. Although some might characterize the citizen as a "yachtsman", yet it is apparent from the evidence that the "Rogue" was not a sporadic vacation cruiser nor yet a palatial party-time yacht. The "Rogue" was the Rollinson's dwelling-house, and they were its only crew. They were classically impecunious. No use looking down a notionally aristocratic nose at them to inflict supposedly moral impalement upon them for not being affluent. Yet, when it comes to awarding real compensation for the wrong-doing of others, that is exactly what the quintessentially inequitable principle asserted by the defendant would accomplish based, it is said, on the 1933 House of Lords disposition of the case
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[7]
It will be important to note exactly what was declared about the impecunious plaintiff in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of Canada, before the court would be persuaded by the highest court in a Kingdom relatively long ago and far away where the judgments of Canadian courts have little or no influence on the decisions pronounced there which some Canadian judges are only too eager to follow for Canadian purposes.
[8]
The facts of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the defendants' steamship 'Edison' in proceeding to sea from the port of Patras, in Greece, fouled the moorings of the plaintiffs' dredger 'Liesbosch' and did not free them until that steamship had towed the 'Liesbosch' onto the open sea where it, being without crew aboard, filled with water in the heavy sea which was running, sank and became a total loss. The plaintiffs sued in the Admiralty Division, and when the defendants' sole liability for the loss (which they did not do until May 7, 1930) the claim was referred to the Registrar and Merchants to assess the damages.
"The plaintiffs were civil engineers who had contracted on March 4, 1927, with the Patras Harbour Board for the construction under heavy penalties of piers and quay walls at Patras, involving among other tasks considerable dredging, engaging the 'Liesbosch' in that work. The plaintiffs had purchased their dredger in October 1927, in the Netherlands, for 4,000
l
, and spent 2,000
l
more in fitting out that vessel and transporting it to Patras. It was insured for 5,000
l
.
"There was evidence that in the Netherlands there were available for purchase by the plaintiffs about December 1928, one or more dredgers which could have replaced the 'Liesbosch', but the plaintiffs made no move to buy one in substitution; all their liquid assets were taken up in the contract undertaking, including the deposit they had made for it. In January 1929, the Patras Harbour Authority threatened to cancel the contract and to forfeit the deposit unless a new dredger were engaged within a certain time. The plaintiffs having inadequate resources to buy a new dredger, decided to hire one from Ancona, in Italy, the 'Adria', which was somewhat bigger than the 'Liesbosch' but more expensive to operate. In order to obtain the 'Adria' the plaintiffs were compelled to take also on hire a tug and two hopper barges. The plaintiffs had been forbidden to do any other work pending the resumption of dredging but with the arrival of the 'Adria' with attendant fleet its monthly rental proved so burdensome that the Harbour Board, in order to help the plaintiffs, bought the 'Adria' for cash and resold it to the plaintiffs on extended terms of repayment."
[9]
By the time the plaintiffs' claim reached the House of Lords, it had been allowed, then slightly varied and finally disallowed in large part. The Court of Appeal had held that the registrar allowed damages which were too remote in law. For the unanimous House of Lords, Lord Wright wrote (App. Cas.) as follows:
"The substantial issue is what in such a case as the present is the true measure of damage. It is not questioned that when a vessel is lost by collision due to the sole negligence of the wrongdoing vessel the owners of the former vessel are entitled to what is called restitutio in integrum, which means that they should recover such a sum as will replace them, so far as can be done by compensation in money, in the same position as if the loss had not been inflicted on them, subject to the rules of law as to remoteness of damage." (p. 459)
. . . . .
"... I think it desirable to examine the claim made by the appellants, which found favour with the Registrar and Langton, J., and which in effect is that all their circumstances, in particular their want of means must be taken into account and hence the damages must be based on their actual loss, provided only that, as the Registrar and the judge have found, they acted reasonably in the unfortunate predicament in which they were placed even though but for their financial embarrassment they could have replaced the 'Liesbosch' at a moderate price and with comparatively short delay. In my judgment the appellants are not entitled to recover damages on this basis. The respondents' tortious act involved the physical loss of dredger; that loss must somehow be reduced to terms of money. But the appellants' actual loss insofar as it was due to their impecuniosity arose from that impecuniosity as a separate and concurrent cause, extraneous to and distinct in character from the tort; the impecuniosity was not traceable to the respondents' acts, and in my opinion was outside the legal purview of the consequences of these acts. The law cannot take account of everything that follows a wrongful act; it regards some subsequent matters as outside the scope of its selection, because 'it were infinite for the law to judge the cause of causes', or consequences of consequences. Thus the loss of a ship by collision due to the other vessel's sole fault, may force the shipowner into bankruptcy and that again may involve his family in suffering, loss of education or opportunities in life, but no such loss could be recovered from the wrongdoer. In the varied web of affairs, the law must abstract some consequences as relevant, not perhaps on grounds of pure logic but simply for practical reasons. In the present case if the appellants' financial embarrassment is to be regarded as a consequence of the respondents' tort, I think it is too remote, but I prefer to regard it as an independent cause, though its operative effect was conditioned by the loss of the dredger. The question of remoteness of damage has been considered in many authorities and from many aspects, but no case has been cited to your Lordships which would justify the appellants' claim. A dictum was quoted by Mr. Raeburn from the speech of Lord Collins in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> : 'It was contended that this implied that the defenders were entitled to measure the damages on the footing that it was the duty of the company to do all that was reasonably possible to mitigate the loss, and that if, through lack of funds, they were unable to incur the necessary expense of such remedial measures the defenders ought not to suffer for it. If this were the true construction to put upon the passage cited, I think there would be force in the observation, for in my opinion the wrongdoer must take his victim
talem qualem
, and if the position of the latter is aggravated because he is without the means of mitigating it, so much the worse for the wrongdoer, who has got to be answerable for the consequences flowing from his tortious act.' But, as I think it is clear that Lord Collins is here dealing not with measure of damage, but with the victim's duty to minimize damage, which is quite a different matter, the dictum is not in point. The case of
In re Polemis and Furness, Withy & Co. (2)
, a case in tort in negligence, was cited as illustrating the wide scope possible in damages for tort; that case, however, was concerned with the immediate physical consequences of the negligent act, and not with the cooperation of an extraneous matter such as the plaintiff's want of means. I think, therefore, that it is not material further to consider that case here. Nor is the appellants' financial disability to be compared with that physical delicacy or weakness which may aggravate the damage in the case of personal injuries, or with the possibility that the injured man in such a case may be either a poor labourer or a highly paid professional man. The former class of circumstances goes to the extent of actual physical damage and the latter consideration goes to interference with profit-earning capacity; whereas the appellants' want of means was, as already stated, extrinsic.
"I agree with the conclusion of the Court of Appeal that the Registrar and Langton, J., proceeded on a wrong basis and that the damages must be assessed as if the appellants had been able to go into the market and buy a dredger to replace the 'Liesbosch'." (pp. 460-462)
[10]
Then Lord Wright expressed doubt about the substituted award which the Court of Appeal did accord and he wrote:
"But the best opinion I can form is that they [the Court of Appeal] intended to give simply the replacement cost, without including in the value any allowance for disturbance and prejudice during the necessary period of delay. If that is so, though I agree with their disallowance of the claim as put forward, I do not agree with the disallowance, in ascertaining the value, of anything beyond the cost of replacement. I do not think in a case like this interest is a compensation for that factor, because I think that factor must be something to be taken into account in arriving at the figure of value on which interest must run. On the whole I think Mr. Raeburn is right in urging that the matter should be referred back to the Registrar and Merchants to ascertain the true value on the principles I have stated. From these it follows that the value of the 'Liesbosch' to the appellants [plaintiffs], capitalized as at the date of the loss, must be assessed by taking into account: (1) the market price of a comparable dredger in substitution; (2) costs of adaptation, transport, insurance, etc., to Patras; (3) compensation for disturbance and loss in carrying out their contract over the period of delay between the loss of the 'Liesbosch' and the time at which the substituted dredger could reasonably have been available for use in Patras, including in that loss such items as overhead charges, expenses of staff and equipment, and so forth thrown away, but neglecting any special loss due to the appellants' financial position. On the capitalized sum so assessed, interest will run from the date of the loss." (pp. 468-469)
[11]
This decision in the " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> " case is distinguishable at first sight, not binding in Canada, and, if it stands for what the defendant says it does, it would enshrine injustice as a principle of law.
[12]
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "
is distinguishable because the decision of the House of Lords relates to the consequences of a management decision not to carry adequate insurance, made by the plaintiffs in the course of their business. Such at least may be concluded from this passage recorded in the midst of the plaintiffs' counsel's arguments [1931] P. 230, at pp. 232-233:
"[Langton, J. Were not the plaintiffs insured? Could they not have bought a new dredger with the insurance money?]
"The question was not gone into at all, but very probably the policies were pledged. When the plaintiffs hired the dredger (i.e., the 'Adria') they did not know that they would not have to pay for it, for liability was not admitted until May 1930."
It appears that, in distinction from the case at bar, on the facts of the " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> " case the court was pronouncing upon the consequences of a consortium's or corporation's business decision either to pledge its insurance policies or to have none at all. Their own deliberate business or management decision appears to have rendered the plaintiffs impecunious. However, very few people, the court notices, and there is no evidence that the Rollinsons were or are among them, deliberately decide to become impecunious. It is a plight in which they find themselves no doubt as a result of some of life's decisions, of their own and others, never having had sufficient resources for aught but various degrees of poverty or subsistence. Persons with fixed, modest incomes in an era of inflation are in such a plight. The thousands of unemployed Canadians in the present era of economic recession and fishing prohibitions surely made no deliberate decisions to become impecunious. How and where one's corporate capital and cash flow resources are by decision to be deployed, was the stuff of the " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> " case.
[13]
Decisions of the House of Lords in the 1930's are not now binding on Canadian courts anymore than decisions since 1947 of the Supreme Court of Canada are binding on U.K. courts. Their Lordships who decided the " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> " case were surely the products of a different, class-riven society where in 1933 it seems to have been acceptable solemnly to penalize the poor just for being poor (if as some say, the " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> " applies to individuals as well as consortia and corporations), but that is a different society from that of Canada. Do judges reflect the norms and values of the society in which they grew up? Some say, to the contrary, that judges are often behind the times. Surely now, in the last decade of the 20th Century, Canada's judiciary possesses sufficient self-confidence to interpret the laws of Canada for Canadians without being bound by un-Canadian decisions rendered by the "parents", of Britain and France, or by the "cousins" of the U.S.A. or other related lands overseas.
[14]
No doubt, in the field of tort there are shared principles of law among the anglophone nations but judicial decisions are not binding, whatever their persuasiveness, and, indeed Professor S.M. Wexler of the University of British Columbia most persuasively demonstrates in his article
The Impecunious Plaintiff: Liesbosch Reconsidered
(1987), 66 Can. Bar Rev. 129, that the "rule" in " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> " exceptionally ventures beyond the ordinary rules of tort law on which damages are awarded in negligence cases.
[15]
Is it a species of
lèse majesté
to speak in these terms of a judgment of the House of Lords rendered sixty years ago? That august tribunal, sometimes wearing the hat of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, has, like other courts sometimes fallen short of perfection and consistency, as one can see in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1977] 2 All E.R. 492 (H.L.), on the one hand as against
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), on the other hand. This is not to mock the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom and some of Her Majesty's overseas dominions and possessions, but only to assert that Canadian courts should guard against permitting Canadian jurisprudence to become a sort of yo-yo to the philosophical vicissitudes of the House of Lords or the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Canadian judges should not follow the " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> " decision just because it is a pronouncement of the House of Lords, or at all, when it is pushed beyond its inherent limitations.
[16]
" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> " is bad law to the extent that for many jurists its import has been over-extended, beyond its inherent limits. In the introduction to his above cited article Prof. Wexler wrote:
"The well-known House of Lords decision,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.)] is generally taken to establish the proposition that:
'The plaintiff cannot recover damages -
real though they may be
- which arose out of his own impecuniosity [
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  is an exception to the ordinary rules on which damages are awarded in negligence. In general, the defendant who is found to be responsible for injuring a plaintiff must restore him, insofar as money can do so, to the position he occupied prior to the injury. This principle of full monetary compensation is limited by the principle of remoteness; a defendant is not required to pay for
all
the damages which flow from his negligence, but only for such damage as was foreseeable.
"Whether or not a particular injury was foreseeable is a question of mixed law and fact, but a number of legal rules have been developed to structure the factual issue. One is the so-called 'thin-skull' rule, which requires the defendant to accept the plaintiff as he finds him."
[17]
Prof. Wexler's forthright and penetrating argument in his article contains a few pithy passages which this court specifically adopts over and above ratifying that article in general. They are:
"As it is generally stated, the rule in ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ' fails to distinguish between two very different impecunious plaintiffs. One, characteristically injured in his business, is impecunious but not poor. He may actually be quite wealthy but, because he has been careless or reckless in conducting his business, he cannot cover a particular contingency. Such a plaintiff is to blame for his impecuniosity and, when it is applied to him, the rule in ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ' makes good sense.
"Because it has been stated too broadly, the rule in ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ' can be, and has been applied to a different kind of impecunious plaintiff. This plaintiff, typically, is injured, not in his business but in his personal affairs, and he is impecunious, not because he had done anything wrong, but simply because he is poor. An example of the application of the rule in ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ' to such a plaintiff is
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (N.B. App. Div.)." (p. 130, C.B.R.)
. . . . .
"The application of the rule in ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ' to plaintiffs such as those in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is unfair. The law is not supposed to draw any formal distinction between people who are rich and people who are poor.
'The law in its majestic equality forbids the rich as well as the poor to sleep under bridges, to beg in the streets, and to steal bread [Anatole France,
Le Lys Rouge
(1894)].'
"Anatole France's comment is, of course, ironic. He was not praising the law for its 'majestic equality', but criticising it for failing to recognize the special needs of the poor. The rule in ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ' goes further; it actually penalizes the poor for being poor. ... This is manifestly unfair and runs against the whole theory of tort law.
"Tort law is not revolutionary; it does not seek to change the lot of either the rich or the poor. Tort law is conservative; it contents itself with putting a person back in
whatever
economic position he was in before he was injured. This is a neutral principle. It allows the rich the advantages of being rich, and requires the poor to accept the disadvantages of being poor, but it does not actively discriminate against the poor." (p. 132, C.B.R.)
. . . . .
"No one ever suggests that a rich man 'cannot recover ... more than a person of reasonable means' [turning around the dictum in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 843 (B.C.S.C.)]. He can recover his actual losses. This is the general principle of tort. The rule in ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ' says the poor man cannot recover his actual losses. This is not a rule of nondiscrimination. It is a blatantly unfair rule, and the unfairness of it is not lessened by the fact that there are very few reported cases in which the rule in ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ' has actually been applied against poor people. The existence of the rule means that poor people will be advised that they cannot recover for damages which are the result of their own impecuniosity." (p. 133, C.B.R.)
. . . . .
"... The defendant who denies that his negligence was not the
proximate
cause of the plaintiff's damages does not say that there was another, more proximate cause. He admits he was the only cause, but says that on policy grounds the plaintiff should be left to shoulder the loss himself. In ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ', Lord Wright explained the point this way:
'The law cannot take account of everything that follows a wrongful act ... Thus the loss of a ship by collision due to the other vessel's sole fault, may force the shipowner into bankruptcy and that again may involve his family in suffering, loss of eduction or opportunities in life, but no such loss could be recovered from the wrongdoer. In the varied web of affairs, the law must abstract some consequences as relevant, not perhaps on grounds of pure logic but simply for practical reasons.'
"The difference between intervening cause and remoteness is that
someone other than the defendant
is responsible for damages which are held to be the result of an intervening cause, and
no one
is responsible for damages which are held to be too remote. If, in ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ', Lord Wright had decided against the plaintiffs on the grounds of remoteness, he would have been saying: the defendants caused the plaintiffs' damages, but on policy grounds they should not be made to pay for them. By deciding against the plaintiffs in ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ' on the grounds of causation, Lord Wright said not just that the plaintiffs would be left to pay for their losses, but that they were responsible for them. Since responsibility in tort is generally tied to fault, this amounts to saying that the plaintiffs were somehow at fault.
"It is morally wrong to say that the plaintiffs were at fault simply by virtue of being poor. This is the mistake in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and if there were no more to ' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ', one would have to regard the case as wrongly decided." (p. 137, C.B.R.)
[18]
In the fourth edition of
Canadian Tort Law
by Hon. Allen M. Linden, the " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> " case is mentioned with slight analysis, and Prof. Wexler's within referred to article is noted among a covey of contra publications and judgments. In the fifth edition of Linden's opus Prof. Wexler's article is not mentioned, but the rule of " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> " is still mentioned (p. 382) in regard to the law's (alleged) preference for the plaintiff with the thin skull over the thin pocketbook. In
Fridman on Torts
(1st Ed. 1990) (Waterlow Publishers), it is noted (p. 338) that: "Although the [' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> '] case has never been overruled [by a subsequent bench of the H.L., surely], it has been criticized; and its rationale seems inconsistent with the doctrine of mitigation of damage, under which the plaintiff ought to have been entitled to borrow money to lessen the effect of the loss caused by the defendant." In terms of the criticism and inconsistency above stated, the author provides abundant footnote references. Canadian courts have been far from unanimous in following this contentious decision by Lord Wright.
[19]
Here the court notes the outspoken and apposite dictum of Madam Justice McLachlin in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 289, at p. 365, "They [the courts] will refuse to accept injustice merely for the sake of doctrinal tidiness which is the motivating spirit of
Murphy
", cited above in conjunction with
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  followed against an individual person of few means, nor certainly against Rollinson, the beleaguered plaintiff herein. This is no sour criticism of invoking comparative jurisprudence in the spirit of the "republic of ideas". The House of Lords is a venerable tribunal which ought not to be mocked either slyly or frontally. It, under its both titles is, however, the Supreme Court of another country (a quintessential Commonwealth member to be sure) with its own distinctive society and laws, with its own armorial bearings (curiously arrogated by some provincial superior courts in Canada) with a common Head of State vis-à-vis Canada, and with diplomatic representation accredited in Canada and with diplomatic representation from Canada  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . It is virtually a foreign but parental country's Supreme Court, albeit in the common law tradition. Its judgments must be viewed on intrinsic merit, for they do not bind in Canada. The House of Lords, from time to time, like any other tribunal, makes or breaks its own reputation in terms of the ideas, reason and good sense which it promulgates. The notion of permitting a tortfeasor to inflict grievous loss on an impecunious individual without compensating the victim for all the grief inflicted by the sheer negligence or malice of that wrongdoer, is un-Canadian, and foreign to Canadian legal values, and unjust, and not to be followed in Canada.
[21]
One can first dispose of the much fought over sum of $312.58. With the payment of that sum, so said the citizen's principal official and antagonist Regan Borisenko, he and the "Rogue" were "free as a bird". That was a cruel deception, but does not mean that the sum or some other sum was not payable. Upon the authorities, legislation and regulations cited by the defendant's counsel the court finds that the painting of the vessel's hull in the U.S.A. was dutiable and to be declared upon returning to Canada. The citizen did not know this, and that is no crime, even although he himself was a former customs officer at Douglas Station. Interestingly, his counsel admitted, by analogy, that the like painting of an automobile would be dutiable and declarable. The court will not tally that sum among the damages to be awarded. However the incident is capable of bearing two aspects.
[22]
There is some jurisprudence about the discretion invested in customs officers in administering the former
Act
.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), at p. 126, it is written by Mr. Justice Marceau, then of the Trial Division:
"The customs officer is no doubt left with some discretion in practice, and the present case gives a good example of an exercise of such discretion ..."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Mr. Justice Strayer wrote this, reported at p. 803:
"I agree that s. 18 must be interpreted in this way, but I feel obliged to observe that it could equally be interpreted to authorize the seizure and forfeiture of anything which a Canadian had acquired in Canada, owned all his life, and carried abroad with him on a holiday should he fail to declare it upon his reentry to Canada. That the law is not administered in this way is a tribute to the good sense of the customs officers, but it does leave in their hands and that of the Minister an arbitrary power of decision as to what goods are to be forfeited for nondeclaration.
"Section 8 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
guarantees 'the right to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure'. The plaintiff in the present case was unrepresented by counsel and the possible application of s. 8 was not raised in argument. Nor do I think this an appropriate case, on the facts, for a court to determine whether ss. 18 and 180 of the
Customs Act
authorize an 'unreasonable seizure'. For example, it is probable that all relevant elements of the forfeiture pre-date the entry into force of the
Charter
. But that is not to say that the issue could not properly arise in other cases where these sections are invoked."
Strayer, J., made a valid point.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , is such a case in which the
Charter
is invoked. The "good sense of the customs officers" lauded by that learned judge, Strayer, J., says something pertinent about whatever kind of sense is evinced by the legislators. The
Act
, be it noted, has been subsequently amended, by the legislators. So, the second seizure of the "Rogue" which was characterized by the defendant's servants as an amended version of the first evinces one aspect of levying duty and penalty on the painting of the vessel's hull - a legitimate charge on the plaintiff's ignorance of the law - and a second aspect, one of being handled in an intimidating manner. There will, then, be no special damages in the amount of $312.58, or any amount, awarded to the plaintiff, but the intimidation started by one public servant and regulated by another - denounced as "blackmail" by the plaintiff's counsel will be subsumed into either general or exemplary damages, or both. The first information obtained about the hull painting by the defendant's servants was obtained from the citizen's private papers which, the court was held, were inadmissible because they had been seized in violation of common law and
Charter
s. 8 rights, but information was separately revealed de novo by the citizen in later conversations with the service. The left-over paint and the brushes and rollers carried into Canada by the citizen's automobile were said and shown to be related to the hull painting. It seems silly to levy duty on the painting done by the citizen and his friends in the U.S.A., when no duty would be levied if they had painted that same hull in Canada, however it would be asinine now to pretend that it never happened at all. Such is the kind of decision which renders the public justifiably cynical about certain other applications of s. 8 of the
Charter
. In any event too much trial time and written and oral argument have been devoted to the payment of the $312.58 in order to have the "Rogue" released from the second badly handled seizure, to spend more time or ink on it, here.
[23]
The state of the evidence regarding specific damages in the battering and ultimate physical deterioration of the citizen's home, the "Rogue", is not first class. Exhibit 17, the blaze-orange placard by which the customs officials demonstrated that the "Rogue" was subject to seizure, is dated March 13, 1984, the date of the third seizure. It reveals that the vessel is, in effect, arrested at the "end of government dock, White Rock, B.C." Dire consequences of "fine and/or imprisonment" are threatened for anyone who would tamper with this brightly visible placard. That, in itself, is not objectionable, for it is a standard printed form. The court has found that the first and third seizures violated the citizen's rights, and the damage caused to, and deterioration inflicted upon, the "Rogue" are the direct result of its having been pitilessly arrested at a dock where fresh water, fuel and electricity were not available, where the vessel had to face the fury of the thoroughly proved storm, all as related in the court's reasons reported in [1991] 3 F.C. and in (1991), 40 F.T.R.
[24]
There is a seeming contradiction in the testimony concerning the site of damage to the "Rogue". As arrested in March 1984, it was moored starboard side to the White Rock dock. No doubt the furious wind, high tide and huge waves which came over the breakwater battered the vessel; starboard beam against the dock and the pylon upon which it is secured to accommodate tide movements. (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, pp. 146 and 148). However, the plaintiff's own witness, Roger Wilson Mallory found the absence of caulking and four cracked ribs - the major breakage damage - on the port side! (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, p. 105). The devastation of that storm on March 16/17, 1984, was partly described by Rollinson, thus:
"The cat rails were leaking, because when the house was set adrift all of the rails were disturbed, and her sills were taking in water. They had been thrust against the dock, the pylons and the dock down at the end of the White Rock pier. Although I knew that the vessel had snapped her lines and she was only held by her bow line, I had two lines out from the bow, didn't have a breast line on, which you don't do in a storm condition, I had two spring lines and a stern line, and it snapped the stern line. And of course once one went the tremendous suction of the water going back out to sea again from these waves drew the stern of the 'Rogue' over onto these rocks and hammered her then. But I wasn't aware of the amount of damage that had been done to her. It was not apparent from looking [at] it from the dock." (vol. 1, p. 145)
[25]
The rocks to which the plaintiff referred, upon which the vessel's stern, and of course, its port side, were hammered, are part of the breakwater and are clearly visible in the first two colour photos, following p. 7, of exhibit 6, Thomas J. McGivney's first report, dated July 12, 1984, when he had then been retained by the plaintiff. Although Mr. Mallory reported the major damage to have been on the port side, he did not say where. Because the bow line held (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, pp. 145-146) one would expect no damage in that part of the port side leading to, or near, the bow. One would expect the damage to be near the stern. Here is how the plaintiff described Mallory's inspection to the defendant's counsel
"Q.	Did he make any other examination [other than under the galley floor] that you can remember?
A.	He lifted the hatches aft and now that the material which had been stowed in the hold had been removed, he was able to get down in there and he said a contortionist [p. 105 ante] and I agree. I couldn't get in there. Neither could I just by using a flashlight see the area that he searched, and he at that time told me that he didn't believe the vessel had any value and we both, he and I, believed she was in danger of immediate sinking." (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, p. 135)
[26]
So, having been sucked across to the rocky breakwater, while secured only by the surviving bow line alone, is what accounts for port side damage aft, where Mallory discovered the damage using the flexibility of a contortionist.
[27]
Of modest means, the plaintiff nevertheless attempted to mitigate his damages. Affluent folk are not accorded $500 grants to help them buy "a new generator for your floating home", from the Canadian Army Welfare Fund: letter dated January 3, 1985, exhibit 20(44). The Rollinsons were pensioners. Their home, the "Rogue", was obviously placarded and under seizure by Canada Customs. Had they been well endowed with income or disposable capital, they might have been able to lay out all at once the sums required to put their home into shipshape condition again, if they had been permitted to move the vessel to appropriate facilities. Who would help them when it appeared that the vessel was seized and might be forfeited to the Crown? Had the Crown's servants been more relenting and, as the court found, less malicious, the Rollinsons would not have had to face the fury of the gale, tied to the sufficiently exposed end of the White Rock dock to damage their vessel.
[28]
The first seizure of the "Rogue" has been found to have been tortious. The Mobile Investigation Unit members, like juveniles playing "Sea Hawk" after a Saturday matinée at the cinema, swarmed over the side and wrenched the starboard "stanchion bases number 4, 5 and 6 loose with fastenings torn from the deck" caused by "improper boarding" as noted in item 4, p. 4 of Timothy J. McGivney's survey report dated July 12, 1984, trial exhibit 6. Such was also the plaintiff's complaint about the damage done by the MIU's hyper-adrenalin manner of boarding; and that manner of boarding the "Rogue" was described in testimony-in-chief by one of the MIU members, Insp. Rocco Savaia, referring to "the vessel we boarded" that evening of February 1, 1984, thus: "we went over the walls of the boat". (Tr. 587).
[29]
The damage directly inflicted by the defendant's servants is proved by the plaintiff, McGivney and Savaia, but the sum of money required to put it right is not proved. In such a circumstance, the court may reason that the sum required could not have been less than a certain amount, and that certain amount is awarded as special damage. Here, the cost of labour time and materials to reset the stanchion bases could not have been less than $80. The court awards to the plaintiff, at the defendant's expense, the sum of $80 as special damage caused directly by the defendant's servants. This is a discrete award, apart from all other special damage awards, because this compensates for direct physical damage to the vessel directly inflicted by the MIU's physical negligence.
[30]
The vessel "Rogue" was released from seizure - the placard, exhibit 17, was removed by permission of the defendant's counsel - upon release of the court's final reasons for judgment on liability after the first trial herein - on or about January 17, 1991, as both counsel and the plaintiff all agreed. By then, that wooden vessel was a shambles. The plaintiff, over the intervening time since March 13, 1984, had done his best with his meagre resources to keep his vessel seaworthy. His efforts to mitigate his damages were reasonable, impecunious as he was. The plaintiff's testimony, recorded at p. 144 of Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, and exhibits 20 and 21 show, according to him, that over the years he spent $54,558.43 in attempting to restore the "Rogue" to seaworthiness.
[31]
The citizen feared, not without reason, that the defendant's servants truly wished to see his vessel - his and his wife's home - under seizure, high and dry ashore. So he was given the awful choice of moving his vessel, not under its own power, but under tow by the unseaworthy "Deep Six" (which subsequently sank) and its unsavoury owner, or remaining tied up at White Rock. He asked permission to sail to a better mooring, but had only the aforesaid choice. Given the Rollinsons' status of pensioners, their modest home, "Rogue", being their major asset and it being under customs seizure, the citizen did what was reasonable in the circumstances to mitigate his losses.
[32]
Not unnaturally, the plaintiff was sorely aggrieved by the cruel and unusual treatment inflicted upon him by the defendant's servants. His and his wife's plight was described fully and somewhat inarticulately and passionately in this long answer given on cross-examination:
"Q.	Now, the repairs you did, and you're claiming some fifty odd thousand dollars for those repairs, what were they for?
A.	From -- this was not -- this entire adventure was well planned. This was not some venture that we went into without any forethought. And at age 65 my Military Pension tripled. My Old-age Pension came into force. Canada Pension came into force also for my wife. And they -- without that type of problem, which was caused by Canada Customs, we would not have required to put out the type of money we're talking about.
We had a substantial amount of money saved, which was paid and up-date -- paid out in up-dating that vessel and putting it to the standard at which I wanted it for the use I intended to put it to. And that is -- you -- we talked about being without funds. That is one of the reasons that we were running close to the line at that time.
And the repairs that we made were stop-gap repairs to the best of our ability, to the best of the ability of the money which we had. No bank was going to loan us a dime at that time while the vessel was -- is under seizure with a big placard sticking on its window. So we could only spend the money which we received.
And until the end of that month, until the small pensions that we had came in, there was no possibility of doing other than -- than that repair which we attempted, to stop any further deterioration. You'll find in that list of cheques where we used a material called, weldtex.
This weldtex is -- it is used for repair work on water damage to vessels, but it is not the type of repair that I would normally use. When I had the money, when the money became available I hired people like Crumhard who are expert boat repair, who built boats, who are knowledgeable on the construction of them, and they did the work.
I considered myself knowledgeable on it, on boat construction. However, I didn't have that particular type of expertise, nor the carpenters' tools, nor the woodworking tools, or the training, to do it myself. So I did the best I could. My wife did the best we could. We hired people to help sand and grind that boat so that we could stop water leakage into it. And we had to pay them more money than we ourselves had.
No one can say that we didn't do the very best that was possible under those circumstances in which we were placed by Canada Customs to preserve the motor vessel, 'Rogue'. This was -- this was not a rich man's toy. This was my home, my house. And that house was lost to me all those years and taken 10 years out of an old man's life. Is it any wonder that I have to be treated for -- for problems. And unless --" (Q.D. Tr. vol. 3, pp. 383-385)
[33]
The above recited testimony can be better understood in light of the following exchange also on cross-examination:
"Q.	Now, if you were unhappy with the White Rock pier and you were free of restraint, free of seizure restraint until March 13, 1984, why didn't you move to another pier where you felt it had supplies. You said you had no water, you had no fuel, this and that. There's no toilet facilities. Why didn't you go somewhere else?
A.	We didn't realize that there was damage done to any of the machinery by frost, one thing. The other thing is the state of mind we were in. We had been under terrible stress, unbelievable stress. You have no -- no one here has any idea of what occurred to my wife and I and that which is, which continued, that has altered by life and changed my whole way of thinking. You have to understand that and I had absolutely no faith in Canada Customs or anyone at that time. I fully believed and I turned out to be right, that they were only waiting for me and they were. From Mr. Borisinko's attitude and things that he said such which recalls to my mind, one thing that he said that if I went to Salt Spring Island he would haul my ass back so often that I'd be glad to stay in that area.
Q.	Well, Mr. Rollinson, what I'm saying to you is this: You had that period of time and if you were so unhappy with the White Rock pier there was nothing stopping you, save your own thoughts, from going where you'd be satisfied, going where there was toilet facilities, going where there's water, going where there's fuel, going where they could get your motor started, anywhere else but where you were. Why did you stay there?
A.	For one thing we had to stay until the pension funds came in. We had applied to -- we had applied to the government for funds from the Department of Veterans Affairs. It wasn't until -- I was receiving very little money except a long-service pension and we had no - we had no funds. We did not have $1,100 then and with the full knowledge that I didn't do it, I don't know if I had of had the $1,100 would I have paid it to the government.
Q.	Well, you entered appeal. If you were -- if it was wrong you would have got the money back.
A.	I haven't got my $312 back and that was wrong.
Q.	Well, there are those who disagree with you, Mr. Rollinson. But in any event, the thing was that -- then on April the 4th, 1984, after the storm, you were allowed to go anywhere in Canadian waters as long as the Customs knew where you were.
A.	I did not have sufficient money, I did not believe the vessel to be seaworthy.
Q.	Now, how did it become unseaworthy. You mentioned the machinery, what happened to the machinery?
A.	Frost.
Q.	And why did it freeze?
A.	Cold weather.
Q.	But why would it not freeze at some other time in cold weather?
A.	Because it's heated.
Q.	Pardon?
A.	Because it is heated.
Q.	And why was it not heated?
A.	It was out of fuel.
Q.	And why was it out of fuel?
A.	Because we were under seizure at that dock.
Q.	No, but you went, before you went on the 27th of 1984 to Blaine and picked up fuel and water.
A.	Yes, and we could reheat it then but not properly because the furnace lines, the water lines to the furnace which is perimeter heating in that vessel, they were frozen and burst.
Q.	Why did they freeze and burst?
A.	Lack of fuel.
Q.	People have a duty to themselves, could you not have, if you were running short of fuel, have said something to the officials to allow them to get fuel delivered to you if that was a problem?
A.	It is illegal to fuel a vessel at a wooden deck. The vessel which Canada Customs said they were going to tow me with was a vessel called the 'Deep Six' which was an unworthy vessel, did not have proper power, operated by a person that was -- that eventually sank his own boat and set fire to it and this was Canada Customs offered to tow me with." (Q.D. Tr. vol. 2, pp. 333-336)
[34]
The marine surveyor, Timothy John McGivney, was called at the earlier trial by the plaintiff, and, at the later trial by the defendant. He had prepared the report, exhibit 6, but he had not inspected the port side ribs of the "Rogue" because the plaintiff had not directed his attention thither, and the plaintiff had not done that because, as he testified (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, p. 150; vol. 3, p. 393) he was not yet aware of that damage in June 1984. It was there, on the undoubted balance of probabilities, and was found in a deteriorated state by Roger Wilson Mallory, exhibiting the suppleness of a contortionist in December 1991 or January 1992. He had been examining the vessel "3 or 4 times before" he "eventually found the leak". (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, p. 393). Because of the ongoing deterioration the vessel needed to be hoisted out of the water for proper inspection and repairs and belated maintenance. Mr. Mallory, who, be it noted, was not a stranger to the plaintiff, and who, in better days, had his eye on the "Rogue" in the rôle of potential buyer, concluded that, at that stage after his inspection, the vessel was worth only a nominal sum, if any.
[35]
Mr. Mallory was extremely knowledgeable about vessels bigger, smaller and the same size as "Rogue", as was acknowledged by the defendant's counsel. (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, p. 96). Mr. Mallory was not found to be an "expert" in terms of the
Rules
, but his testimony was almost entirely of fact, in any event. He testified that prior to the damaging storm of March 1984, and subsequent arrest of "Rogue", it was very well maintained and he had offered to buy it from the plaintiff for $180,000. In 1992 Mr. Mallory subsequently did buy the vessel from the plaintiff for $1,000; and drew it up onto Mallory's own property. Because of the seawater damage to the engine, it had minimal salvage value. (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, pp. 103-104).
[36]
How should one compute the plaintiff's special (i.e., specific) damages in relation to his damaged, deteriorated property, his home so long as it remained habitable, the "M.V. Rogue"? The determination must be made on sound reasoning and some discretionary decisions, which might well appear to be arbitrary, since this precise case with its special and unique circumstances has not previously arisen so as to provide an instructive precedent. What follows is the court's attempt at sound reasoning and judicial (but sometimes, of necessity, seemingly arbitrary) discretion in arriving at decisions as to quantum of special damages to compensate the plaintiff for damage to his property.
[37]
Whatever might be overall loss of value, the plaintiff put forth detailed expenditures necessary, he said, to keep the "Rogue" seaworthy. He ultimately failed in this, but not for want of trying to mitigate his losses. The plaintiff claimed to have put out, in dribs and drabs, from March 1984, right up to the time Mr. Mallory bought the vessel, sometime in 1992, for $1,000, as acknowledged by the defendant's counsel (Q.D. Tr. vol. 2, p. 248, lines 15-19) the sum of $54,558.43 (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, pp. 143-146 and 154, and 181 to 210. Exhibit 21). During the course of the second trial, the plaintiff acknowledged that certain cancelled cheques ought not to have been included (Q.D. Tr. vol. 2, p. 217) in his calculations (Exhibit 24), totalling $1,556.98. So, the sum described as spent over the time of seizure and after to keep the "Rogue" seaworthy, $54,558.43, must be diminished by $1,556.98, leaving $53,001.45, which may be practically and conveniently rounded to $53,000.
[38]
In this case the defendant has not chosen the alternative of compensating the plaintiff with the market value of a new, comparable vessel, so special damages will be assessed on the plaintiff's loss in regard to the diminished value of the "Rogue". The plaintiff's counsel has elaborately proved the items making up the sum of $53,000 which is apparently claimed in addition to the loss of value. No doubt that some of that outlay represented that which would have been the incidence of normal maintenance had the plaintiff's mistreatment never arisen in the first place. However taking a long view of the testimony and documentary evidence, it would be wrong to attribute more than 20% of the sum to regular maintenance and so the sum of $42,400 can be attributed to reasonable attempts at mitigation.
[39]
Now, since the defendant is merely releasing the "Rogue" from seizure, and not replacing it, the true measure of the plaintiff's special damages, is surely the loss of value, irrespective of the plaintiff's virtually futile attempts at mitigation. Accordingly the court reasons that whenever little value remained in the vessel was maintained or enhanced by the amount of the mitigation to keep the "Rogue" at least afloat. To award as special damages, the vessel's loss of value, in addition to the $42,400 mitigation total, would be to count the latter twice, for it ought to be subsumed into the amount of loss of value. One logical premise of this principle is to deter a plaintiff from pouring more "mitigation" into the loss than it is worth. The court concedes that no defendant should have to pay for excessive, obsessed, reckless or mindless "mitigation". Therefore, what should be awarded as special damage should be the loss of the vessel's value, without the sums expended to keep it afloat, although attempts to mitigate reasonably ought to be partly compensated. That the "Rogue" was kept afloat and did not have to be raised or salved as a sunken vessel was due to the plaintiff's efforts and outlay. Here is where the court's assessment would appear to be arbitrary. The court assesses the plaintiff's almost futile prolongation of his vessel's remaining afloat until sold, in terms of special damages, at 20% of $42,400 or $8,480.
[40]
How, next, to determine loss of value, all of which the court has attributed to the defendant's servants' illegal and unwarranted seizure compounded by their malice toward the plaintiff, as already found? In the good old days, when "Rogue" was in "shipshape" and well maintained, Mr. Mallory offered $180,000 for it, and the plaintiff then declined. Mr. McGivney, recalling his earlier view of "Rogue", and employing his expert professional skills as a marine surveyor, opined in exhibit "C" of his affidavit, exhibit 25, that the vessel's pre-third-seizure value was between $120,000 to $130,000. That is the value range which the defendant's servants put at risk, and eventually caused to diminish by their illegal and malicious actions, their cruel and unusual treatment of the plaintiff. Because of the significantly higher offer for the vessel, which offer the defendant has not disproved, because of the first-rate condition of the vessel before March 16-17, 1984, and because of the electronic equipment which the plaintiff had installed after buying the vessel, the court accepts and finds a pre-storm-damage value of $130,000 as Mr. McGivney estimated.
[41]
Marine surveyor McGivney estimated damage to the vessel after the storm to be $12,500, but he did not know of the cracked port-side ribs, because not even the plaintiff was aware of that problem until Mr. Mallory, the "contortionist", discovered that damage. The task of installing sister-ribs would have required cradling (dry-docking, in effect) above the water level to achieve a result in about three weeks. But that cost pales beside the progressive deterioration of the caulking, and the concurrent admission of mildew and other molesters of wooden hulls, associated with the previously unsuspected broken ribs - caused by the fury of the March 1984 storm from which the vessel would have probably been sheltered if not forced to remain at the White Rock pier. Anyone - the defendant's servants included - who would seize and arrest a vessel at that pier in March, must be held negligent (if not malicious, as found) for ignoring the habitual high tides and fierce winds of the equinox time. In any event, the Rollinsons did not have, and were unable to borrow, the needed sum, well in excess of $12,500 in order to effect the dry-docking, inspection and true repairs of the "Rogue". The vessel deteriorated over the eight years until released in early 1992 because the impecunious plaintiff, despite his reasonable, but ultimately virtually futile attempts at mitigation, could not afford to pay for or borrow the wherewithal for aggressive, all-at-once, rehabilitation of his floating home. The defendant has been found liable for the loss and misfortune inflicted upon the plaintiff, because of the defendant's servants' illegal, malicious and unrelenting (until much too late) treatment of the plaintiff. So, Mr. McGivney's report of his January 1992 inspection of the "M.V. Rogue" concludes that the vessel's value had by then declined to zero to $3,000. Mr. Mallory bought the vessel for $1,000, so its value was not zero to him. The court accepts that as a value assessed by Mr. McGivney. The plaintiff's loss from $130,000 down to $1,000 will be expressed in terms of special damages in the amount of $129,000. To count the sum of $54,558.43, or $53,000 or even the $42,400 in addition to the stated special damages would be, as noted, to count it twice which would be unjust to the defendant, but not the 20% which the court recognizes as the impecunious plaintiff's minimal compensation for mitigation outlays.
[42]
In the amended statement of claim, the plaintiff claimed to be awarded the costs described in paragraph (a)(ii) of his amended statement of claim "the cost of food lost as aforesaid from the vessel's refrigerator". No precise evidence was led but at Q.D. Tr. vol. 2, p. 182, the plaintiff testified:
"Q.	Now, have you a value for the lost provisions?
. . . . .
A.	I would imagine knowing the type of -- that we ate, a lot of it of course was food that we caught, or provisioned ourself but half of it, I would say $150 or more."
The plaintiff's testimony was more of a guess, but it was uncontradicted and $150 is a reasonable sum. The court awards that sum as an incident of special damages.
[43]
Special damages incurred in regard to "Rogue", the Rollinson's home can be summarized thus:
Stanchion repairs estimated
by the court (Mr.
McGivney's report of
July 12, 1984, p. 4,
item 4)	80
Compensation for mitigation	8,480
Vessel's loss of value
March 1984 to Jan. 1992	129,000
Lost (spoiled) provisions
in refrigerator
150
Special damages
regarding vessel
$137,710
[44]
The only other special damages which arise are those which are to be awarded for the illegal seizure and loss of the plaintiff's Pontiac Parisienne, agreed by the Crown to be properly evaluated at $1,520.23. As earlier mentioned, judgment will be awarded in that amount in suit no. T-245-87 and costs will be subsumed in party-and-party costs awarded herein.
[45]
It remains to assess general damages and to decide whether punitive and exemplary damages are to be awarded. Herein lie considerations not of quantum of damages, only, but rather considerations of quanta of diverse damages on separate planes of compensation and denunciation.
Quanta Of General, Exemplary
And Other Damages At Large
General Damages
[46]
The reasons for judgment in which liability was found present a wearisome litany of malicious, unprofessional, and cruel and unusual treatment of the citizen and his wife by some public servants, members of the Customs and Excise component of the Department of National Revenue (Revenue Canada). It comprised tactics of after-dark terror-raiding, seizure of private papers, two unreasonable seizures of the plaintiff's home, "M.V. Rogue", false accusations, interrogation by and in the presence of several customs officials at once, threats to have the vessel either towed by an unsavoury incompetent operating an unseaworthy vessel, or, condemned to languish at an exposed pier with no water, electricity or fuel, and insisting it remain, where it was seriously damaged by the March 16-17, 1984 storm, mockery of the plaintiff, threats to have the vessel towed far inland, and unreasonable seizure of the plaintiff's automobile. If the quite unlawful (but, no doubt, practical) message displayed by the defendant's servants in a sign at the White Rock pier, to the effect that incoming vessel masters should report to customs by telephone, were a trap for the unwary, then they made sure it was sprung upon the plaintiff. Then, the defendant had the grievous chutzpa to instruct counsel to urge that by complying with that message, the plaintiff should be penalized for breaking the law! As mentioned these and other abuses of authority are set out in the earlier reasons for judgment.
[47]
More wearisome incidents of malice, being oppressive confrontation beyond the call of duty, were revealed in the trial to assess damages: the appearance of Inspector Borisenko at Lund and his poisoning of relationships between the Rollinsons and the dock owners, such that the Rollinsons could not stay in peace but had to move again (all amounting to "hounding" them (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, pp. 132-133; vol. 2, pp. 170-171)); and the defendant's instructions to counsel to threaten to take the plaintiff's vessel/home into close custody (ex. 20(31) 2nd para.); customs Inspector Graham Toomey participating by his presence in a delegation to pressure the plaintiff to sign a resignation or demit from his position in his masonic lodge (Q.D. Tr. vol. 1, pp. 161-162); and so on. The record and the reasons abound with wearisome recorded incidents of defendant's servants' petty-minded intimidation, oppression and abuse of authority, hounding and malice.
[48]
The defendant's servants' misbehaviour and cruel treatment of the Rollinsons blighted eight years of the lives of this elderly couple whose motor vessel was their home: they became worried, morose and paranoid. They not unnaturally came to believe that the customs officials were plotting to deprive them of their home, and their home, the "Rogue", progressively deteriorated, increasingly leaked, became damp and became an unhealthful residence for them. In tort principle, defendants take plaintiffs as they find them. In this instance the notion of "thin skull" can be lawfully replaced by "thin hull", "thin psyche" meaning aging and poor, and "thin wallet" <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> notwithstanding in Canada in these circumstances. The citizen having had two automobiles seized, suffered three placarded seizures of his vessel, had money forced from him, and being transfixed with despair because of the evident malice of Customs and Excise could not be expected at his age to be resilient in the repair of his home on which he could obtain little credit and which he justifiably expected would be taken from him. His testimony on cross-examination in Q.D. Tr. vol. 2, shows the physical and psychological plight inflicted upon him by the defendant's servants. Exhibit 20 is the expert affidavit of Dr. Edward Lau, which, the respective counsel agreed, at this second sequential trial, could be accepted as and for its weight and worth, as read, without requiring Dr. Lau's attendance before the court. Dr. Lau, a physician and surgeon, replaced the plaintiff's prior doctor who retired in early 1990, since which time, the plaintiff has been under his care. Dr. Lau's affidavit in its pertinent last two paragraphs runs:
"4. That it is my personal opinion that George Gordon Rollinson suffers from anxiety and stress, which I believe to be related, to some extent, to his on-going litigation with the Federal government.
"5. That on August 12th, 1992, I prepared a report at the request of the Solicitor for George Gordon Rollinson setting out my opinion that the aforesaid symptoms of stress and anxiety were probably related to the aforesaid litigation: and hereto attached and marked Exhibit 'A' to this my affidavit is a true copy of my said report of August 12th, 1992.
Sworn [etc.]	[signed] 'Edward Lau'"
The letter addressed to the plaintiff's counsel, which is exhibit "A", runs in its pertinent paragraph:
"Mr. Gordon rollinson [sic] has a long history of hypertension and ulcerative colitis. While under my care, I had seen them on and off for symptoms of stress and anxiety probably related to all the court cases he had gone through. For the past year Gordon has also developed an ulcer symptom which he is still taking medication for. ..."
[49]
There appears to be no other objective evidence as to the plaintiff's mental and physical health before the court and none reaching back into 1984 and subsequent years. Yet, the plaintiff's testimony about deteriorating health as a result of unjust treatment at the hands of minions of the Federal government, is not in the least unreasonable, and the court accepts it. Mr. Terry Langley, at the material time Customs' Chief of Marine and Rail Operations in Metropolitan Vancouver District, a witness for the defendant, testified that Mrs. Rollinson came to his office on approximately March 20, 1984, in order to have the seizure of "Rogue" lifted for repairs because it was uninhabitable, and she was, in his words "very distraught". No doubt.
[50]
Compensation, insofar as mere money can do it, must be real and not just nominal. The court considers that $6,250 per year for the eight years of agony, up until the "Rogue" was sold to Mallory for $1,000, and the plaintiff and his wife had to leave their home - she to live with one of her sons, so they separated - would not be too much for each of them. Because Mrs. Rollinson did not sue the defendant, that sum at least, should be awarded only to Mr. Rollinson, for a total of $50,000. It is not too much, but it could be too little, for the intimidation and aggravation.
[51]
The sum of $50,000 represents less than $20 per day over almost eight years. The circumstances in this case are surely aggravated by the defendant's servants' malice and cruel treatment. Now, aggravated damages, as noted later herein are not just to be added to general damages, but rather, as stated by high authority, "general damages are assessed taking into account any aggravating features of the case and to that extent increasing the amount awarded: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 19 W.A.C. 1, at p. 263 S.C.R. Taking those aggravating features so amply described and related in the original reasons for judgment in the first trial, and again newly revealed and recited here, the court ought to increase the amount awarded to at least $7,300 per year, yielding a grand total award of $58,400. That compensates the plaintiff for his ordeal to the extent of only $20 per day. Breach of
Charter
-guaranteed rights are yet another matter. They are to be directly assessed among general damages.
[52]
The plaintiff attempted to demonstrate loss of revenue and the opportunity to gain revenue from the carrying of paying passengers recruited principally by Helen Fosnaugh carrying on business as "Helen's Tours 'n' Travel". Indeed "Rogue" was pictured in one of Miss Fosnaugh's posters and in brochures and advertisements which she had caused to be published. (Exhibit 19) The plaintiff and his vessel had much compliance to make with federal regulatory laws before he and the vessel could legally take passengers for hire, no matter into whose hands the fares and accommodation money passed.
[53]
Floyd Harry Lorenz testified for the defendant. At the time of the second trial as to quantum of damages, he was employed with the Coast Guard in the Department of Transport. Mr. Lorenz then held the position of Superintendent of Technical and Operational Services and, in October 1992, he was Acting Regional Manager of Ship Safety Western Region. It was he, through his affidavit (exhibit 27) and his oral testimony, who persuaded the court that the plaintiff and his vessel did not and quite probably could not comply with the qualifications, certifications and regulations invoked pursuant to the
Canada Shipping Act
in force at the material times. This evidence went truly unanswered by the plaintiff. Lawfully carrying passengers for hire was just not and had not been a real possibility for the plaintiff at that time, in early 1984, nor yet thereafter. Paragraphs 6 and 9 of Mr. Lorenz' affidavit, exhibit 27, are telling in this regard. Therefore the plaintiff has no legitimate claim for damages for loss of revenue, actual or prospective in regard to the "Rogue's" arrest, damage and progressive unseaworthiness as a reason preventing the carriage of paying passengers on cruises. The plaintiff simply misapprehended the law, and the court cannot compensate him for loss of unlawfully earned revenues.
[54]
There is one further discrete head of general damages arising pursuant to paragraph 1(d)(i) of the judgment of June 28, 1991, and that is for "breach and denial of the plaintiff's rights guaranteed by ss. 7, 8, 12 and 15 of the
Charter
". That is a not inconsiderable infringement of any citizen's rights, perpetrated by public servants. In terms of general damages, the court considers, in all the circumstances, that the sum of $8,000 would not be too much, for such grievous misconduct by the defendant's servants. The wearisome details are all expressed in the court's reasons issued on January 17, 1991, and they support such a sum considering the aggravated nature of the cruel and unusual treatment the plaintiff had to endure in derogation of his
Charter
-guaranteed rights.
[55]
Heads of general damages are therefore awarded thus:
Aggravated general
damages	$58,400
Infringement of
Charter
rights
8,000
Total General Damages
$66,400
Exemplary, Punitive And
Aggravated Damages
[56]
Aggravated damages have now already been assessed with and in general damages awarded in the amount of $58,400. Aggravated damages, according to La Forest, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  latter are awarded to punish the defendant and to make an example of him or her in order to deter others from committing the same tort: see Linden,
Canadian Tort Law
(4th Ed. 1988), at pp. 54-55.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 1107-1108, McIntyre, J., thus set forth the circumstances where the defendant's conduct would merit punishment:
'... punitive damages may only be awarded in respect of conduct which is of such nature as to be deserving of punishment because of its harsh, vindictive, reprehensible and malicious nature. I do not suggest that I have exhausted the adjectives which could describe the conduct capable of characterizing a punitive award, but in any case where such an award is made the conduct must be extreme in its nature and such that by any reasonable standard it is deserving of full condemnation and punishment.'
"Although aggravated damages will frequently cover conduct which could also be the subject of punitive damages, as I noted, the two types of damages are distinguishable; punitive damages are designed to punish whereas aggravated damages are designed to compensate. See <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 1098-1099."
[57]
There are two sad but true observations to be made on the above recited jurisprudence in relation to the case at bar. Punitive damages to punish the wrongdoers here, in effect punish the tax paying public, although as noted by Mr. Justice MacGuigan in the appeal of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(3d) 103 (F.C.A.), at p. 618 F.C.:
"... The sum of $10,000 is far from negligible and I believe large enough to qualify as a deterrent against future conduct of this kind, especially since the financial consequences will in all likelihood be visited upon the budget of the particular government agency at fault."
[58]
The <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case should be kept in mind here. LeBar was a scoundrel who, all his life and despite his demonstrated ability to obtain gainful employment, criminally preyed on others and thereby forfeited and really devalued his own liberty. No malice was expressly found on the defendant's part in that case. However LeBar was kept imprisoned for 43 days when he could have been free. The Appeal Division upheld an award of $430 general damages, or $10 per day, even for a plaintiff who had squandered and devalued his own liberty during all his adult life. There, also, because the defendant's servants knowingly broke the law, albeit without malice, the Appeal Division affirmed an award of $10,000 exemplary damages. This court bears that in mind here.
[59]
The second sad, but true, observation to be made in these circumstances, as distinct from those in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  when inflicted by public servants, for they wield the virtually almighty, intimidating power of the State itself against the very people they are employed to serve.
[60]
The law forbids such an abusive wielding of State power even against wrongdoers, crooks and cheats (by great contrast with the Rollinsons) since the law is so configured to make it possible to bring the crook to book by means of the proper and constitutional wielding of State power. Here, for example, had the Mobile Investigation Unit headed by Inspector Borisenko joined the uniformed officer in the civilized boarding and inspection of the citizen's vessel after he reported by telephone, they, like that uniformed officer would still have found no contraband. But they would have started off on the right footing, and Borisenko would not have become mad at himself and the Rollinsons for having made a fool of himself, especially having effected an over-the-side raid as if the elderly couple were armed gangsters. Then, Borisenko could have tried, by sworn information, to persuade a justice of the peace to issue a search warrant for the citizen's personal private papers, if he thought they were needed in his investigation. A civilized wielding of State power, according to the exigencies of the case, of course - distinguishing between armed desperadoes and an elderly couple at home - would have given rise to no legitimate complaint. A competent investigator discharges a more cerebral than physical rôle, one of mind over machismo. Anyone who cannot understand that ought never be promoted to be an investigator, even although, from time to time, it is obvious that measured force must be employed in order to prevent the loss, destruction or removal of evidence and the escape of hard-to-apprehend suspects. The government's employees here were determined to find something, anything, against the citizen and they, Inspector Borisenko the paramount among them, just kept escalating their eight-year malicious, rotten mistreatment of the Rollinsons, from a very bad, stupid beginning.
[61]
The plaintiff is entitled to be awarded punitive, exemplary damages, without a shadow of a doubt. But how much? What are the limits of toleration of such abusive, malicious conduct on the part of public servants by the people of Canada, in whose behalf the court must articulate a standard of reasonable conduct? How to quantify the penalty for such abusive misconduct. In the case of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> with no malice or battery, the exemplary damages were fixed and confirmed at $10,000. In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), (A-721-92) November 4, 1993, the punitive and exemplary damages were fixed and confirmed at $16,000.
[62]
In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, Mr. Justice MacGuigan had been quite clear in stating that such damages were fixed at $10,000, "... to qualify as a deterrent against future conduct of this kind ..." above F.C. at p. 618, and the same "particular Government agency" was at fault (Correctional Service of Canada) again in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . It is not clear whether that circumstance merited escalated deterrence in law, but it may be noted that the scale of damages was in fact raised for the other reasons expressed in the trial judgment and affirmed on appeal. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the plaintiff was, during an approximately three-minute ambulance ride from Kingston Penitentiary to the Hôtel-Dieu, while strapped to a stretcher and naked, subjected to the pain and terror of battery to his throat, testicles and leg joints (all calculated to leave no visible marks). Punitive and exemplary damages were $16,000; and the court gave to the C.S.C. managers of a word of advice, not to permit still highly excited emergency response teams with their gushing adrenalin to act as escorts of involved prisoners, off the premises or anywhere. Malice was easily inferred there.
[63]
Here, there is no thought of escalating punitive damages, for, although the defendant is nominally the same as in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a different government agency is involved. However one may compare awards, taking into account the different circumstances. Here there was illegal search and unjustifiable seizure, arbitrariness, malice and terror enduring all the while the "Rogue" was under seizure and threatened with either closer custody or dry-landing far ashore, and the illegal seizure of an automobile, but no actual battery by the defendant's servants. In general the tortious behaviour resided in the high-handed, malicious, mocking, cruel treatment of the plaintiff - the citizen - in the wielding of awesome State power against him to his material loss and evident deterioration of health. The court concludes that punitive and exemplary damages ought to be not less than $20,000 payable by the defendant to the plaintiff. Here, too, one cannot overlook the infringement of the citizen's
Charter
-guaranteed rights. Keeping that - those - offensive treatments along with paragraph 1(d)(i) of the earlier judgment in mind, the court easily concludes that $20,000 is not too much to make an example of, and to denounce, the defendant's servants' misbehaviour in this matter. It could even be too little.
[64]
Such awards of punitive and exemplary damages against the Crown could, no doubt, be largely avoided if public service managers would evince leadership in training - yes, even preaching at - public servants to exercise their authority over the public - yes, even suspected wrongdoers - with moderation and personal self-restraint, to wield the State's awesome powers in a civilized manner. If those powers be insufficient for the administrative purposes to be discharged, then the agency involved should discover what the legislators would think about statutory enhancement of the allegedly insufficient power or authority, within the
Charter
, naturally.
[65]
Here, an effective but still civilized investigation of the citizen could have been effected, and even if, as was the case, he was not found to be doing anything worse than complying with the defendant's servants' illegal sign's directions, there would have been no valid suit to be taken against the defendant.
Summary Of Damages Awarded
[66]
The court awards the following damages to be paid forthwith by the defendant to the plaintiff:
Special damages	137,710
General damages	66,400
Punitive exemplary damages
20,000
Total Damage Award
$224,110
[67]
All with prejudgment interest according to the laws of British Columbia in that behalf on
(a) special damages from March 17, 1984 (the storm);
(b) general damages from February 1, 1984 (the beginning of the cruel treatment); and
(c) punitive and exemplary damages from February 1, 1984 (same as (b) above).
In regard to interest payable herein, be it noted that in the
Crown Liability Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-50, and its predecessor, the Crown is assimilated to "a private person of full age and capacity", liable in tort for damages, according to paragraph 3(a) and (b). This latter statute brings upon the Crown all the tort liability in civil cases between private parties including pre-judgment (and post-judgment) interest previously and now as contemplated in s. 36(1) of the
Federal Court Act
. Here, as noted, the cause of action arose within British Columbia.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]