[1]
Richard, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Refugee Division (the "panel") of the Immigration and Refugee Board given at the hearing on February 4, 1993, finding that the applicant was not a Convention refugee. The panel gave its reasons for decision on October 15, 1993. The applicant is seeking to have the decision set aside and a new hearing held.
[2]
The applicant contends that the panel failed to give him the opportunity to make representation before the decision was made and that, accordingly, the applicant was deprived of the right to a full hearing of his case. In his memorandum in reply, the applicant also argued that the panel was biased in the sense that it had made its decision before the end of the hearing. Counsel for the respondent consented to the matter being referred back to a new panel of the Refugee Division, which would consider only the evidence already in the record, and would make its decision only after giving counsel for the applicant and the refugee hearing officer the opportunity to make representations. In addition, the respondent acknowledges that the panel did not comply with s. 69(5) of the
Immigration Act
, which provides that at the hearing, the Refugee Division is required to afford the claimant an "opportunity to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and make representations". At the hearing, and after counsel for the applicant stated that his evidence was complete and that he had finished his questions, the presiding member said:
[Translation] "At this point, one way or another, I am prepared to stop the hearing. We have enough evidence to raise more than a reasonable doubt as to the credibility of the, of the [sic] the witness and not the credibility of the facts. And, I shall immediately say that the claimant whom we have before us, present here today, under one or another of the names that appear on your French passports or Guinean documents is not a Convention refugee and we are concluding the hearing. Thank you." (See page 140 of the transcript)
[3]
It is clear, in my opinion, that the panel failed to fulfil the duty that was incumbent on it, not only under s. 69(5) of the
Immigration Act
, but also by virtue of the rules of natural justice and procedural fairness. The panel did not afford counsel for the applicant the opportunity to make representations before the panel made its decision. The issue now is to determine what remedy is most appropriate. Section 18.1(3)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
provides that the Trial Division has the power to declare a decision of a board, commission or tribunal to be invalid or unlawful, or to quash it, set it aside or refer it back for determination in accordance with such directions as it considers to be appropriate.
[4]
In support of his request for a hearing de novo, counsel for the applicant argued that the panel exhibited bias. I am not prepared to agree that the panel exhibited bias within the meaning of the legislation and the case law. The questions that the presiding member put to the applicant were not aggressive to the point of compromising his impartiality and the panel did not base its decision on concealed evidence. On the contrary, the panel warned the applicant at the hearing that the doubts raised by the applicant in the panel's mind as to his credibility were serious, and at one point the panel adjourned to permit counsel for the applicant to go over the account of events with him. (See page 65 of the transcript)
[5]
However, it is apparent that the panel's decision dealt with the credibility of the applicant. In my opinion, the matter should be referred back to a new panel of the Refugee Division, but I do not agree with counsel for the respondent that the new panel should consider only the evidence already in the record and make its decision only after giving counsel for the applicant and the refugee hearing officer the opportunity to make representations. Nor do I agree that the new panel should ignore all the evidence that was before the previous panel.
[6]
I therefore order that the decision of the panel be set aside, that a new hearing be held before a panel of the Refugee Division composed of new members and that that hearing proceed de novo. However, I direct that the transcript of the hearing held on February 4, 1993 be entered in the record and that the new panel be authorized to take that transcript into consideration, with the exception of the comments of the presiding member with respect to the applicant's credibility (Specifically, the comments of the presiding member at the middle of page 64 (3rd paragraph), the last five lines of page 65 and the last paragraph of page 140). At the new hearing, the applicant and the refugee hearing officer will have the opportunity to present any other evidence that they consider appropriate in the circumstances and, of course, the new panel will give counsel for the applicant and the refugee hearing officer the opportunity to make representations on all of the evidence in the record.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/dlr