[1]
McKeown, J.
: The applicant raised three issues. In view of my findings on two issues I do not need to address the issue of any error of the Board in determining whether extortion in the circumstances of this case amounted to persecution. For the purposes of the internal flight alternative (IFA) determination only, I have assumed that extortion in this case amounts to persecution.
[2]
The applicants submit that the Board erred in not considering landlords to be a particular social class within
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Can. S.C.), and in its assessment of the risk of persecution in Manila, that is, the IFA alternative.
[3]
The
Ward
case set up three categories of groups to which a claimant may be a member and base a claim to refugee status:
"(i) groups defined by an innate or unchangeable characteristic (i.e., gender, linguistic background and sexual orientation);
"(ii) groups whose members voluntarily associate for reasons so fundamental to their human dignity that they should not be forced to forsake the association (i.e., human rights activists); and
"(iii) groups associated by a former voluntary status, unalterable due to its historical permanence (i.e., because one's past is an immutable part of the person)."
The applicants submit that the applicants fall within the third category. While it is true that capitalists or business class persons were thought to be a persecuted group at the time the refugee definitions were being determined, the situation is different now. The NPA is not part of the communist monolith as it existed after the Second World War and is strictly a rebel group within the Philippines who are or allegedly are called communists. In my view, in developing the categories, the court rejected a broad definition of a particular social group comprising basically any alliance of individuals who have a common objective or an interpretation which characterizes a social group merely by virtue of their common victimization as the objects of persecution. The applicants as wealthy persons or landlords are not part of a particular social group. There was no evidence that the applicants were informers or that the NPA knew they were informers. The government was aware from other sources that the applicants had been subject to extortion.
[4]
In my view the Board asked itself the proper questions in determining that the applicants had an IFA in Manila. Justice Linden set out the threshold in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.):
"... what threshold must an IFA meet before claimants will be required to avail themselves of it rather than seeking international refugee protection?"
He then set out the matters to be considered at pp. 6 to 8 in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[5]
The Board raised the issue of IFA as follows:
"Presiding Member: Well, there's one issue that could also be addressed. And this is also part of (inaudible) recently (inaudible) the Federal Court. The question of internal flight alternative.
"Mr. Johnson: Yes.
"Presiding Member: I would like that question to be explored. Whether that alternative existed in the present situation."
Accordingly the applicants received notice of the case to be met. The applicants submit that the Board's conclusion on the IFA was not reasonable on the totality of the evidence. However, it is for the Board not the court to weigh the totality of the evidence. It was open to the Board on the evidence, documentary, oral and affidavit evidence to find that "if the claimants were even subjected to extortion in the capital, it would be clearly on a hit and miss basis" (see p. 3 of the reasons) and further in Manila that the possibility of extortion is only a random or a mere one.
[6]
The application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/sms
[End of document]