[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This action concerns the use of clips for securing webbing to tubular aluminium frame furniture. The questions to be resolved are whether the defendants were infringing two Canadian patents owned by the plaintiffs by the use of similar clips; whether these two patents are valid and whether the plaintiffs are estopped from claiming damages by reason of their delay in bringing the action to trial.
FACTS
[2]
The plaintiff Hyman Kramer, resident of Connecticut, one of the United States of America, is the inventor of a fastening assembly device described as "web-to-tubing fastenings" and the owner of the two corresponding patents which were obtained from the U.S. Patent Office on April 11, 1961 and June 4, 1963 (Exhibits P-7 and P-9, their filing dates being respectively September 29, 1958 and December 31, 1958). The plaintiff was granted two equivalent Canadian patents on September 10, 1963 (No. 670,035) and May 3, 1966 (No. 733,402), filed at trial as Exhibits P-6 and P-8. The second plaintiff, Hy Kramer Canada Ltd., a Canadian corporation carrying on business throughout Canada as a vendor of hardware for, among other things, aluminium lawn furniture, is an exclusive licensee under Canadian Letters Patent No. 670,035 and NO. 733,402 and is claiming under the patentee pursuant to subsection 57(1) of the Patent Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-4 (hereinafter the Act).
[3]
The inventions disclosed by these patents were created to overcome certain problems being encountered by the furniture industry in fastening material to tubular frames. In 1957, the state of the art in the furniture industry consisted of the use of screws and grommets. This concept was not satisfactory in that the fastening elements which were installed to hold the material to the frame of the furniture weakened the webbing and eventually resulted in its tearing.
[4]
Around 1956 and 1957, the plaintiff Hyman Kramer learned of the problems facing the furniture industry by representatives of two American companies, the Finkle Umbrella Company and the Yonkers Aluminium Company. Before the plaintiff filed his inventions, M.I. Thomas was granted a U.S. patent on December 24, 1957. This inventor designed a web fastening device better known today under the name Duralite clip. This device was not satisfactory because it fell out or did not remain in place when no pressure was applied to the webbing even though the shank of the clip, which went through the webbing and entered the frame member, had a small bump or hump which was to prevent slippage.
[5]
Hyman Kramer's invention No. 670,035 describes various clip fasteners which have a T-configuration in their front elevation and include, generally speaking, an elongated bar-like head and an intergral prong-like shank portion extending from the middle of the head portion. The embodiment of the invention is in the combination of this fastener clip and webbing strip in tubular frame furniture construction. The clip secures the webbing strip to the tubular frame by the insertion of the prong-like shank through a hole in the webbing followed by the insertion of the prong-like shank through an opening in the aluminium frame. An intergral locking barb is cut from the middle portion of the shank and inclines somewhat away from the body of the shank, enabling this shank portion to self-lock itself, the fastener, and the webbing strip to the frame when pushed-fit into or driven into the opening of the said frame.
[6]
The success of this concept is based on two elements:
1) The thickness of the shank portion is increased by its upward and forwardly (or sideward and upwardly) inclined locking barb and this effective thickness of the shank is in excess of the effective width of the opening in the wall of the frame member, thus explaining the necessity for a push-in action rather than a hook-in action.
2) The locking barb terminates at its relatively upper end in an abrupt locking shoulder which engages against the inside wall portion of the frame member with increasing force when tension is applied to the webbing strip thus enabling the fastening assembly to be effective.
[7]
In his patent No. 733,402, the plaintiff modifies his previous patent by specifying in his claims the following (not exhaustive):
"- the prong-like shank portion terminates in a V point to facilitate its penetration through the webbing strip and its passage through the opening in the tubular frame member;
"- the locking barb is cut out from the pointed end of the shank;
"- the locking barb serves the dual purpose of initially securing the fastener to the webbing strip and, upon assembly of the fastener to the tubular member, of securing the fastener, and consequently the webbing strip, to the frame;
"- the above modifications are added to the combination process claims, the webbing-strip-to-tubular frame fastening assembly."
[8]
The defendants, J.E. Thomas Specialities Limited (hereinafter Thomas) and Lindsay Specialty Products Limited (hereinafter Lindsay) are related companies, carrying on business in the town of Lindsay, Ontario. Thomas is a manufacturer of lawn furniture and the company sells its merchandise to Lindsay which in turn sells the furniture to retail stores and other buyers across Canada.
[9]
The President of both Thomas and Lindsay, Mr. J.E. Thomas, was aware of the industry's development and of the higher production rates possible by using clips such as the web-to-tubing fasteners when he wrote to the plaintiff Hyman Kramer on May 6, 1963 (Exhibit P-23). He wanted to gather more information. He also obtained a few samples from the inventor during the same month (Exhibit P-24).
[10]
Around 1963, Hyman Kramer attended the defendants' plant in London, Ontario, for the purpose of assessing the defendants' needs. After complaining of the difficulties encountered when the clip was combined with a square frame (letter dated July 13, 1965, Exhibit P-26), J.E. Thomas ordered approximately one million clips from Hyman Kramer on November 10, 1965 (Exhibit P-27). Though not explained, it would appear the order was never completed.
[11]
The defendants, dissatisfied with the performance of screws and grommets and with the clips in production at that time, created and perfected their own fastener characterized by its plate-like head and by its folded over locking barb.
[12]
The plaintiffs brought this action against the defendants on May 30, 1971, for infringement of their two patents.
VALIDITY ISSUE
[13]
Every patent granted is protected by the statutory presumption of its prima facie validity (section 47 of the Act). The onus is on the party attacking the patent to prove its invalidity. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on that ground.
[14]
A patent may be shown to be invalid if it does not comply with one or more of the requirements for validity as recognized by the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  generally be described as:
- proper subject matter, paragraph 2(d) of the Act;
- display or exercise of inventive faculty, obviousness (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 556;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 56);
- novelty, anticipation: paragraph 2(d); subsections 28(1) and (2); subsection 29(2); sections 43 and 63 of the Act (see also  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 418);
- utility, usefulness of the invention: paragraph 2(d) of the Act (see also  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 6-10);
- the patentee is the true and first inventor: paragraph 28(1)(a) of the Act (see also  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[15]
These are not to be construed as limiting the scope of possible reasons for invalidity. As stated by Wm.L. Hayhurst in his article Grounds for Invalidating Patents, 18 C.P.R.(2d) 222 at 232:
"If it is correct that not all grounds of invalidity are necessarily to be found within the Patent Act itself, then, in the words of Lord Reid in the Cyanamid case ([1971] R.P.C. 425, at 436), the law is 'still sufficiently flexible for the court to be able to formulate a new ground of repeal or revocation to meet a new situation'. It would therefore be futile to attempt to discover all possible grounds of invalidity ..."
[16]
The validity of patent No. 670,035, one of the patents in issue in the present case, was considered by Addy, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (affd. (1979), 43 C.P.R.(2d) 231 (F.C.A.)). In that case, the same plaintiffs alleged that the defendant had infringed the patent while the defendant argued that the patent was not a valid one. Addy, J., found the patent to be valid but not infringed.
[17]
That finding, however, does not allow for the application of the legal maxim res judicata with regards to patent No. 670,035. As explained by H.G. Fox in his book on Canadian Law and Practice Relating to Letters Patent for Inventions, 4th ed. (1969), at pages 416 and 417:
"Estoppel is a personal matter and will apply only where the parties are the same in both the prior and subsequent actions, on the principle of res judicata. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .)...
"... A judgment, whether of validity or invalidity, in an infringement action is only a judgment inter partes and operates only in personam. A judgment of validity or invalidity in rem can only be obtained in an action for impeachment. A plaintiff, relying on estoppel on the issue of validity, must plead the estoppel. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Ex. C.R. 88.)"
[18]
Accordingly the question of the validity of both patents in issue in the present case must now be considered.
[19]
In their amended statement of defence, the defendants attack the validity of claims 1, 2, 3 and 5 of patent No. 670,035 and claims 1, 2 and 3 of patent No. 733,402 in these words:
"7. The defendants say that the claims in issue are invalid because their subject matter was not patentably inventive over what was known or used by others before the inventor named therein invented it having regard to the particulars of Schedule 1 hereto and the general knowledge at the date of the invention.
"8. The defendants say that the claims in issue are invalid because their subject matter was not patentably distinct over those patents, printed publications and public uses of clips on Schedule 2 hereof which are dated more than two years before the presentation of the petition for one or both of the patents and the general knowledge at the date of the inventions.
"9. The defendants say that the claims in issue are invalid because they claim more than the inventor invented if he invented anything."
[20]
The defendants argue that the M.I. Thomas patent U.S. No. 2817392 is equal in its operation to the defendants' clip, that it constitutes prior art to all patents involved and that it anticipates both of plaintiffs' patents since it was dated December 24, 1957 as opposed to April 5, 1961 and March 27, 1963, which are the filing dates of the plaintiffs' patents and well beyond the two-year limitation. The defendants also state that if their clip is included under the plaintiffs' patents, an infringement which they deny, then the M.I. Thomas patent anticipates the plaintiffs' patents. The defendants attack the validity of the plaintiffs' patents in the event there is a finding of infringement. Counsel for the defendants further argues that the anticipation of Van Buren's patent filed on November 10, 1958, and issued on October 25, 1960, renders the plaintiffs' patent No. 733,402 issued May 3, 1966, invalid.
[21]
To succeed on the anticipation or novelty argument, the defendants must adduce evidence showing that the patented inventions No. 670,035 and No. 733,402 were described in a patent or in a publication printed in Canada or in any other country more than two years before the actual filing dates for those patents in Canada (see paragraph 28(1)(b) and subsection 29(2) of the Act).
[22]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 157 (and followed by the F.C. of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 1, at 11;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 63) Gibson, J., examined the conditions which must exist before a finding of anticipation can be made. At page 157 he states:
"... In order that there may be a finding of anticipation, the prior art must (1) give an exact prior description; (2) give directions which will inevitably result in something within the claims; (3) give clear and unmistakable directions; (4) give information which for the purpose of practical utility is equal to that given by the subject patent; (5) convey information so that a person grappling with the same problem must be able to say 'that gives me what I wish'; (6) give information to a person of ordinary knowledge so that he must at once perceive the invention; (7) in the absence of explicit directions, teach an 'inevitable result' which 'can only be proved by experiments'; and (8) satisfy all these tests in a single document without making a mosaic."
[23]
I turn not to the expert testimony adduced by the defendants. None of the references considered by the expert witness who testified fully discussed what Hyman Kramer had initiated in either of his patents. In addition, there was a lack of conclusive evidence on the subject of prior art, prior use, public use, display of, offer for sale, manufacture and public distribution of lawn furniture assembled with similar clips (Schedules of Statement of Defence). For these reasons, I am unable to find the two patents invalid on the basis of anticipation and, accordingly, their novelty prevails.
[24]
The most pertinant evidence put forward was the M.I. Thomas U.S. patent granted December 14, 1957 and filed as Exhibit K to Van Buren's affidavit which can be compared to the plaintiffs' patent No. 670,035 filed on April 5, 1961 and patent No. 733,402 filed on March 27, 1963 (see paragraph 28(1)(b) and subsection 29(2) of the Act), as well as the Van Buren U.S. patent granted on October 25, 1960, filed as Exhibit L to Van Buren's affidavit presented to counter the plaintiffs' patent No. 733,402 only.
[25]
The plaintiffs' inventions are not disclosed by the M.I. Thomas patent because the latter is different in nature, being a hook-in-clip which had the impractical feature of falling out when tension was deceased, rather than a push-fit or driven-in clip which held the combination of web-to-tubing elements in place at all times. When analyzing the Van Buren patent, I come to the same conclusion, the Van Buren clip having a blunt type pointed shank, compared to the V-shape Kramer clip.
[26]
The relevant prior art does not give an exact prior description of the plaintiffs' invention. Therefore the cumulative elements of the test, as set out by Gibson, J., in the Reeves case, supra, are not present and the validity of the plaintiffs' patents is upheld.
[27]
As I understood the defendants' position on the issue of obviousness, the inventions claimed in the M.I. Thomas patent are a clear disclosure of a clip which possesses the essential features of the defendants' structure thus anticipating the plaintiffs'. In addition, the information available on the subject at the date of invention could have led an unimaginative skilled technician directly and without difficulty to the inventions claimed within No. 670,035 and No. 733,402.
[28]
As stated by H.G. Fox (supra) at pp. 70 and 71:
"In order that a thing shall be 'obvious' it must be something that would directly occur to someone who was searching for something novel, a new manufacture, or whatever it might be, without the necessity of his having to do any experimenting or serious thought, or research, whether the research be in the laboratory or amongst literature. So, the means by which an object is attained may be quite simple and common, but yet there may be invention, if the patentee had discovered a variant that will render more useful that which has been previously described. Where there is a problem awaiting solution, a disclosure solving that problem is likely to be accepted as one involving invention,
particularly if there have been unsuccessful attempts to solve that problem
. There may be an inventive step in recognizing that a problem exists at all: but given a problem which is known to exist which it is the object of the invention to solve, the question always is: 'Is the solution claimed by the patentee one which would have occurred to everyone of ordinary intelligence and acquaintance with the subject-matter of the patent who gave his mind to the problem?'"
(Emphasis added)
[29]
The facts have clearly demonstrated the furniture industry's problem with screws and grommets and the unsuccessful attempts to solve that problem by both M.I. Thomas with clips that fell out of place when tension was released, and H.S. Van Buren with a clip that was not commercially amenable because its blunt shank damaged the webbing material when penetrating it, and because of the fifty pounds of pressure required to push the clip into the frame opening. By his invention, patent No. 670,035, Hyman Kramer successfully solved the difficulties of web-to-tubing fasteners.
[30]
Having regard to prior art, the proper question to answer, in analyzing the existence or non existence of inventive ingenuity, is that which was formulated by Sir Stafford Cripps, counsel in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 162-163:
"... Was it obvious to any skilled chemist, in the state of chemical knowledge existing at the date of the Patent, that he could manufacture valuable therapeutic agents by making the higher alkyl resorcinols by the use of the condensation and reduction processes described? If the answer is 'No' the Patent is invalid as regards subject matter; if 'Yes' the patent is not valid."
[31]
A similar test has been applied by Canadian courts in determining the issue of obviousness. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 1, the Federal Court of Appeal considered the concept of obviousness in respect of the validity of a patent for a fabric sofener. Urie, J., writing for the court, stated at p. 27:
"The question to be answered is whether at the date of the invention ... an unimaginative skilled technician, in light of his general knowledge and the literature and information on the subject available to him on that date, would have been led directly and without difficulty to Gaiser's invention."
[33]
With regard to patent No. 670,035, three dates of invention are proposed by the plaintiffs:
- early February 1958, when Hyman Kramer met with a representative of the U.S. Finkle Umbrella Company in Detroit and presented a prototype clip (Exhibit P-10);
- March 14, 1958, draft memorandum dated March 1958 where parties and attorneys met to discuss arrangements between the Finkle Company and Hyman Kramer in relation to the invention, the prototype of which was prepared and disclosed;
- September 29, 1958, the U.S. filing date of the corresponding patent.
[34]
Whichever date is relied upon, the only relevant general knowledge and information available at the time was the M.I. Thomas U.S, patent. The numerous other patents filed as Exhibit A to Van Buren's affidavit and as supplementary art, are too far removed from the subject matter and consist of clips which differ so substantially from the plaintiffs' that they would not have led an inventor directly and without difficulty to the plaintiffs' invention.
[35]
The principle of a clip lockingly engaging under the metal to which it is affixed had been in general use in the automobile industry. The furniture industry transposed and adapted the above principle to the needs of the manufacturers. The principle became one of a clip, which lockingly engages under the metal to which material is secured. M.I. Thomas invented a particular method of applying that principle while Hyman Kramer invented other methods which utilized the same principle. The plaintiff engaged himself in an exercise of invention; that is to say, in the words of Lord Watson in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  which must have been the result of thought and experiment ..."
[36]
The plaintiff's inventive methods did not rely on the path of advancing technology, were not readily accomplished, and, were not a normal and expected result for the unimaginative skilled technician at the time of their creation. Accordingly, the obviousness or lack of inventiveness attack does not succeed against patent No. 670,035.
[37]
The other validity issue is raised against the plaintiff's second patent No. 733,400. The object of this patent is to modify the previous patent No. 670,035 as was admitted by the plaintiffs and as is stated in the preamble of the second patent.
[38]
The proposed date of invention by the plaintiffs is the filing date of the U.S. corresponding patent, December 31, 1958. No objection was heard by the defendants. The relevant evidence concerning the lack of distinctiveness of patent No. 733,402 is the M.I. Thomas patent and the H.S. Van Buren patent filed on November 10, 1958 and granted on October 25, 1960. My previous comments with regards to the filed prior art patents and the Thomas patent, made in relation to the validity of patent No. 670,035, are equally applicable to patent No. 733,402.
[39]
In answering the question posed by Urie, J., in the Beecham case (supra), the information disclosed by the Van Buren patent was not common knowledge at the date of invention of patent No. 733,402 and therefore could not have guided an unimaginative, skilled technician directly to the inventions found in the attacked patent.
[40]
The invalidity defence concluded with the commercial success factor. In the determination of whether the invention should be afforded a wide as opposed to a narrow protection, consideration must be given to any evidence of widespread use of the Kramer patented clips. No such evidence has been presented in this case and even if it is clear that Kramer sold some clips, it is not clear what the specifications of those clips were.
[41]
The defendants' position in this regard is that the clips which were sold were not made according to the claims of patents No. 670,035 and No. 733,402. The exhibits filed in relation to those patents support, in part, this statement since one notable element is absent, namely, the bar-like head. For example, the clips filed as Exhibit P-17 are clearly of an edge plate-like head nature and are shaped as a trapeze and not a rectangle.
[42]
In analyzing the evidence, weighing the facts and applying the law in relation to the validity issue of patents, the court must limit itself to the inventions claimed in the specification of that patent and not to the product offered for sale on the market.
[43]
As stated by H.G. Fox (supra) at p. 59:
"Upon an inquiry whether a patent is good or bad, and whether its subjectmatter can be sustained, regard must be had exclusively to the patent itself and not to the product that is produced by the patentee."
[44]
He adds the following at p. 79:
"Evidence of commercial success is not confined to Canada. Evidence of the success of the invention anywhere is admissible, provided of course, that the product sold abroad corresponds to the claims in suit."
[45]
The plaintiffs rely heavily on the decision of Addy, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  him further in asserting the presence of inventive ingenuity.
[46]
In view of the evidence before the court and Exhibit P-19, I am not convinced that the clips sold by the plaintiffs in Canada since approximately 1966 were clips designed and protected by the monopoly of the claims of the plaintiffs' patents, even though the plaintiffs have sold in the United States, from 1960 to 1971, and in Canada, from 1966 to 1971, almost two hundred million clips.
[47]
In view of the pleadings of invalidity, the evidence, the facts and the law, I am of the opinion that the defendants have failed to rebut the prima facie presumption of validity under section 47 of the Act in relation to both patents under attack.
[48]
By way of conclusion, even if res judicata does not strictly apply in the present case, I have not been convinced that the validity issue of patent No. 670,035 in the decision of Addy, J., was wrongly decided. The Federal Court of Appeal had a similar problem in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 28 N.R. 273) in the Bristol-Myers appeal, Proctor & Gamble Company was not called upon to deal with the argument as to prior art. It thus seems to me that in so far as this court is concerned the question of whether the Decker, Lerner and Scheur patents anticipate the Gaiser patent in suit, while perhaps strictly speaking is not res judicata, has been decided by this court and I have not been persuaded that the Bristol-Myers case in respect of this question was wrongly decided."
INFRINGEMENT
[49]
Briefly defined, any act that interferes with the full enjoyment of the monopoly granted to the patentee is an infringement, if done without his consent. A party may not imitate the invention in any way or apply its substance.
[50]
The claims, defining, the scope of the monopoly (see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  common vocabulary of the art. In doing so, the specification, by its phraseology, and the drawings, by their illustrations, may assist but should not be used to vary or enlarge the claims, especially if, as H.G. Fox wrote (supra) at pp. 217-218):
"... a claim is expressed in simple and direct language or in wide or general terms shoe meaning is plain and unequivocal. If the words of the claim are plain and unambiguous it will not be possible to expand or limit their scope by reference to the body of the specification. In such a case 'recourse to the body of the specification for explanation, qualification or extension is neither required nor is legitimate'."
[51]
In applying these principles on the issue of infringement, the court will narrow its analysis to the defendants' attacked mechanism and to the claims as constructed.
[52]
H.G. Fox's comments at p. 355 on the matter are noteworthy:
"... Infringement must be based upon the invention as claimed and not upon the invention as described in the evidence, or as constructed by the plaintiff. It is quite irrelevant to compare a defendant's structure with that of the plaintiff who claims to be manufacturing under his patent. What must be compared are the defendant's structure and that defined in the claims for it is obvious that the plaintiff's structure may itself not be within the claims of his patent."
[53]
The claims relied on by the plaintiffs in this action, are as follows:
"Patent No. 670,035
"1. In tubular-frame furniture construction, a webbing-strip fastening assembly comprising the combination of a frame member having an opening in its wall shaped operatively to accept a fastener shank portion inserted therein, a webbing strip folded on itself adjacent its end so as to have overlying and folded-under end portions extending as a partial wrap about said frame member, and a fastener operatively securing said webbing-strip end to the frame member, said fastener having substantial T-configuration in front elevation and including an elongated bar-liked head portion having length corresponding substantially to the width of the webbing strip and an integral prong-like shank portion extending from the middle length portion of said head portion and having width substantially less than the length of said head portion, said webbing strip being folded over the relatively forward longitudinal side edge of the head portion and said shank portion extending through both an opening in the folded-under end portion of the webbing strip and said elongated opening and thence well into the interior of said frame member, said shank portion having push fit in said opening and including intergral locking means enabling said shank portion to self-lock itself and thereby the fastener and webbing-strip end to the frame member when pushed into said opening, said locking means comprising a relatively upwardly-forwardly inclined looking barb on at least the forward face of the shank portion and progressively increasing the effective thickness of the shank portion to in excess of the effective width of said opening, said barb terminating at its relatively upper end in an abrupt locking shoulder which is spaced from the under side of the head portion a distance substantially equaling the wall thickness of the frame member thereby to engage against the inside wall portion of the frame member defining said opening with increasing force as the webbing strip is tensioned.
"2. A fastener assembly according to Claim 1, wherein said locking barb comprises an area cut from the middle portion of the shank portion and the free upper-forward end of said barb defines said locking shoulder.
"3. A fastening substantially as set forth in Claim 1, wherein said locking barb comprises a wedge formation on the fastener shank portion.
...
"5. A fastening substantially as set forth in Claim 1, wherein said fastener is fashioned from sheet metal and said locking barb is formed from the material of the shank portion thereof and which inclines relatively forwardly-upwardly from said relatively forward face of the shank portion and whose free, upper-forward end defines said locking shoulder.
"Patent No. 733,402
"1. In tubular-frame furniture construction, a webbing strip-to-tubular frame-fastening assembly comprising the combination of a tubular frame having a generally elongate opening in its wall which extends axially with respect to said frame member, a flexible webbing strip having an end portion arranged in doubled-over relationship and extending as partial outer and inner wraps about a portion of the frame member and a fastener securing said doubled-over end portion to the frame member, said fastener having general T-configuration at least in front elevation and comprising an elongated bar-like head part having length corresponding substantially to the width of the webbing strip and a prong-like shank part depending from the middlelength portion of the head part and being contained in a plane which extends longitudinally from end-to-end of the head part, said webbing strip end portion being doubled over on itself about one longitudinal side edge of the head part and the shank part passing through the inner wrap of said doubled-over end portion and thence through the tubing-wall opening wherein it is disposed in substantial alignment with the latter, the free end of the shank part terminating in a V point thereby to facilitate its passage through both the webbing strip under-wrap portion and said tubing-wall opening and being provided with a locking barb comprising an area cut out from said pointed end and which inclines side-wardly-upwardly away from the plane of said shank part and toward a longitudinal side edge of the head part, said locking barb serving the dual purpose of initially securing the fastener to the webbing strip in the preassembly of the fastener thereto and thereupon, responsive to movement of the pointed end of the shank part through said tubular-member opening to a depth such that the free edge of the barb engages the inside wall surface of the tubular frame member adjacent its said opening, of securing the fastener and thereby the webbing strip to tubular member.
"2. A webbing strip-to-tubular frame fastening assembly according to Claim 1, wherein the free edge of the locking barb is spaced from the under side of the fastener head part a distance corresponding substantially to the thickness of the wall of the tubular frame member adjacent the aforesaid opening.
"3. A fastener for securing an end portion of a flexible webbing strip arranged in doubled-over relation to the tubular frame member of a chair and the like provided with a generally elongated opening extending axially of said member, said fastener comprising an elongated bar-like head part having length corresponding substantially to the width of the webbing strip to be secured and about a longitudinal side edge of which said strip is adapted to be doubled back on itself, and a prong-like shank part intergral with and depending from the middle-length portion of said head part and being contained in a plane which extends longitudinally from end to end of said head part, said shank part terminating in a V point thereby to facilitate both its penetration of the webbing strip at a point set back from the end edge of the latter and its passage through said opening in the tubular frame member and being further provided with a locking barb comprising an area cut out from the pointed end of said shank part and which inclines sidewardly-upwardly away from the plane of said shank part and toward a longitudinal side edge of said head part, said locking barb serving the dual purpose of initially securing the fastener to the webbing strip end when preassembled thereto and thereupon, upon assembly of the fastener to the tubular frame member, of securing the fastener and thereby the webbing strip end portion to said tubular member."
[54]
I must address at this stage the issue of textual infringement, that is, whether what the defendants have done falls clearly within the words of one or more of the claims. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  claim 1, the others being subsidiary claims dependent to some extent on the first. I claim 1, the embodiments of the invention in which an exclusive property or privilege is claimed, it is defined by a specific reference to the head of the fastener or clip. It is described as an elongated bar-like head portion. After searching through the specifications and the drawings, no doubt can arise as to the meaning of the term "bar-like". But, as Justice Addy notes when referring to those words in the same patent in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 41-2, 23 Fox Pat. C. 112. But this does not mean that the drawing cannot be referred to if there is any doubt as to the meaning of the word and where, as in this case, drawings and specifications do not indicate any special meaning to be attributed to the descriptive words, the words not being technical in any sense, the question of interpretation then becomes conclusive."
[56]
Furthermore, the Oxford English Dictionary, Oxford, Clarendon Press, Vol. I at 660, defines the word "bar" as:
"- a piece of any material long in proportion to its thickness or width;
"- a straight piece of wood, metal, or other rigid material, long in proportion to its thickness;
"- a narrow four-sided block of metal or material as manufactured."
[57]
The head of the defendants' clips for example (Exhibit P-4) does not pass this bar-like characteristic. Rather, the head is rectangular and flat; about half a centimeter of each of the two longitudinal edges is bent to approximately a 45
o
angle from its original shape. In addition, the central portion of the head is cut out, taking us further away from the barlike notion of the plaintiffs' clip.
[58]
Van Buren refers to the expression "plate-like" when describing the defendants' clip in his affidavit (paragraph 88). Whatever vocabulary is chosen, the defendants' clip is clearly not of a bar-like nature because of its edges, width and opening in the center. Consequently, there is no literal infringement of Claim 1.
[59]
Claim 2 is dependent on Claim 1, for it refers to a fastener assembly according to Claim 1". It does not, for the same reasons as set out above, cover the defendants' clip. Furthermore, the locking barb is defined as "an area cut from the middle portion of the shank portion". The defendants' clip has a locking barb or hinge but it is cut from the head portion at the same place as the shank portion is, and is adjacent to it. The body of the shank is of a half arrow shape on one side but it extends into a triangular shape on the other side.
[60]
After depressing the central cut-out piece towards the inner edge, the extension is folded over the shank, although not completely, in the direction of the inner head, forming a leaf spring or hinge. The plaintiffs admitted there was no literal infringement under Claim 2 because the defendants' locking barb was not "an area cut from the middle portion of the shank portion".
[61]
As for Claim 3, it refers to a "fastening substantially as set forth in Claim 1". The word fastening is related to the realization of the invention which, in this case, is a webbing-strip fastening assembly comprising the combination of a frame member, a webbing-strip and a fastener. For example, on page 3 of the specification, the word fastening is used in the following manner (Patent No. 670,035):
"Fig. 2 is a separated view of the frame, webbing-strip end and fastener-element components making up one form of webbing strip fastening according to the invention;
"Fig. 3 is a sectional perspective view of a completed fastening of the invention which embodies the components illustrated in Fig. 2;
"Fig. 4 and 4A, 5 And 5A, 6 and 6A, 7 and 7A, 8 and 8A, and 9 and 9A are side elevation and end views, respectively, of various forms of driven fastener elements for use in a fastening according to the invention;"
[62]
As for the word "substantially", H.S. Fox states, supra, at p. 198:
"The word 'substantially' in a claim adds little if anything to the meaning of the claim. It really means nothing more than that the patentee is not limiting his monopoly to subject matter that corresponds in every detail with that described and illustrated, but clails the right to object to the manufacture and sale of something that is in substance the same as the shown. In other words, it merely draws attention to the doctrine of infringement by taking the substance of a patented invention."
[63]
Claim 3 then refers to the expression "as set forth in Claim 1". My remarks on the leading claim apply here.
[64]
Claim 5 must be interpreted as were Claims 3 and 1, because of the identical working found in its introduction:
"5. A fastening substantially as set forth in Claim 1, ..."
Furthermore, Claim 5 identifies the locking-barb as being "formed from the material of the shank portion". The defendants' locking barb is definitely not made from the metal of the shank portion but from the head portion. The metal of the locking barb is an extension of the metal of the not completed shank.
[65]
The neck and body of the shank are identifiable but only one edge is present. The locking barb and the shank gain their functional shape and structure when the cut section of the head, combining both, is bent towards the inner edge of the head, adjacent to the neck of the shank, at an angle of approximately 67.5
o
(see Exhibit P-4). The shank is completed when the metal intended for the locking barb is folded over but not to the body of the shank, thus enabling the shank to gain its prong-like shape and the locking barb to be identifiable functionally.
[66]
Claim 5 relates to Claim 1 and its specification on the locking barb formation, and not being applied by the defendants, cannot be found to have been literally infringed.
[67]
In conclusion, Claims 1, 2, 3 and 5 of patent No. 670, 035 are not found to be literally infringed.
[68]
As for patent No. 733,402 three claims form the embodiments of the invention.
[69]
Claim 1, in describing the webbing-strip-to-tubular frame fastening assembly, refers to the fastener "comprising an elongated bar-like head". The same remarks therefore apply as in the case of Claim 1 in patent No. 670,035. In interpreting the expression "bar-like head", the specification of this patent guides us further. Reference is made to the overlapping or folding over the edges to stiffen the head portion. For example, at page 4 of the specification (Patent No. 733,402)
"... In the event additional stiffening of the fastener head part 16 is considered necessary or desirable, such may be provided by bending over the longitudinal side edge portions of the top part which, for this purpose, may be provided with additional width so that they substantially abut as in Fig. 5 or so that they have overlapping relation as in Fig. 6."
And at p. 6:
"Thereupon, as with the Figs. 10-10B form, the opposite longitudinal side edge portion of the head part 56 may be folded over on said edge portion from which the vertical leg 38 is struck, as in Fig. 11B, thus to stiffen the head portion and fastener as a whole."
[Figure omitted. See original source.]
[70]
Regardless of its lifted side edges, the defendants' clip does not display the obvious bar-like head characteristic as described by the specification and by the drawings.
[71]
Furthermore, the locking-barb is described as "comprising an area cut out from said pointed end" of the shank. The wording in Claim 2 of patent No. 670,035 is somewhat different but the observations I made in relation to it nevertheless apply here. The locking barb of the defendants' clip is not cut out from the prong-like shank but from the head. The plaintiffs admitted there was no literal infringement of Claim 1.
[72]
Claim 2 is specifically related to Claim 1, "a webbing strip-to-tubular frame fastening assembly according to Claim 1". Claim 3 concentrates on the inventive description of the fastener but the locking barb is referred to as "comprising an area cut out from the pointed end of said shank part". My remarks in relation to Claim 1 apply to both Claims 2 and 3.
[73]
No literal infringement of Claims 1, 2, 3 and 5 of patent No. 670,035 and Claims, 1, 2 and 3 of patent No. 733,402 has been proven.
[74]
After arriving at a conclusion of this nature, the duty of the court is then to decide whether the defendants have taken the substance of the invention defined by the claims.
[75]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  combination. The principle of a webbing clip which hoods through a slot in the furniture had, I stated above, previously been invented and was in general use. The same applies to the idea of the webbing being wrapped around the clip and the tongue being forced through the inner part of the webbing before being inserted into the tubing. The principle of a clip, which lockingly engages under the metal to which material is secured, had also been in general use in the automotive industry."
[76]
The inventiveness of the plaintiff Hyman Kramer is expressed by way of a new method of applying the combined principles cited above to the lawn furniture industry. His combination of a webbing-strip, a specially designed fastener and a tubular frame member, is the skeleton of the invention's embodiments. The shank self-locks the fastener of which it is part, and the webbing strip through which it is inserted, to the frame member when push-fit into it. The specific locking barb increases the width of the shank so that it becomes wider than the opening of the tubular frame, thus necessitating the push-fit action to enter the shank in the tubing. The locking barb's free end, the locking shoulder, is spaced from the under side of the head portion at a distance "substantially" equaling the wall thickness of the frame. The result of this mechanism is that the webbing strip and the fastener are prevented from falling out at all times because the locking shoulder engages against the inner wall portion of the frame, near the opening which accepted the fastener's shank.
[77]
The effectiveness of the combination is increased when tension is added: the locking shoulder then gripping the inner wall more tightly.
[78]
A cooking action of the shank makes possible the presence of an increasingly engaging locking shoulder. When the webbing strip is tensioned, the front edge or outer edge of the head of the fastener raises slightly from the tube, following the pulling force of the webbing strip, forcing the shank to react to such a movement. Consequently, the locking shoulder, cut out from the shank and directed towards the outer edge of the head, follows the latter's action, thereby gripping the tubing tightly.
[79]
This particular method of applying the "principle of a clip, which lockingly engages under metal to which material is secure" when applied to furniture webbing, is the most essential element of the plaintiffs' invention.
[80]
The defendants have, by making a similar fastener clip, taken the substance of the plaintiff Hyman Kramer's invention. The defendants' clip is an accumulation of inconsequential variations of the Kramer clip. Two examples are specially relevant:
- the head is of an edged plate-like shape and not bar-like shape; (Patents No. 670,035 and No. 733,402)
- the locking-barb or locking spring is folded over the shank and not cut out from it. (Patents No. 670,035 and No. 733,402)
[81]
Concerning the first modification, this difference in shape does not change the development, the execution and the outcome of the plaintiffs' fastening assembly invention. The barlike head does not perfectly adhere to the outer surface of the frame, causing, when tension is applied, a cocking action. For the same reasons, the defendants' edged plate-like head reacts in a cocking way when tension is applied.
[82]
Analyzing the second modification, notice has to be given of one of the specification phrases found at page 7 of patent No. 733,402:
"... and structurally different locking means may also be substituted provided they function as the locking means specifically disclosed."
[83]
As already discussed, the defendants' locking spring is structurally different from the Kramer barb; but is it functionally different? In my opinion, it is not. This structural difference does not change the important factor of the shank's width which is increased by the locking barb and permits the push-fit action.
[84]
Also, the plaintiffs' locking shoulder in both patents is at a distance from the head which is "substantially" equal to the thickness of the tubular-frame wall. The effect of the word "substantially" has already been considered (see H.G. Fox on the subject, supra). I find, after reading the Claims with the specification, that such a distance is not a limited one and includes the thickness of the webbing-strip penetrated by the shank and locking barb. For the locking barb to be effective, the shank, when entering the opening of the frame, must go to a minimum depth in the tubular frame, causing the release of the locking shoulder. The combination of webbing, fastener and frame is secured by such locking means but is not permanently set and immobilized. This distance between the shoulder and head can vary somewhat as set out in the specification. The distance between the locking spring shoulder and the edges of the head is at about the same distance for the plaintiffs' clip as in that of the defendants'. The edges of the head are lifted to a certain degree so that the real distance is amplified, but such a distance is within the scope of the plaintiffs' claims. The above, in combination with the weight of the webbing-strip and the principle of gravity, lead to a finding that the defendants' locking spring is functionally the same as the plaintiffs' when no tension exists.
[85]
Furthermore, the shoulder of the defendants' locking spring engages more firmly to the inner-wall of the tubing when tension is applied and increased. The outer edge of the head is raised and the shank follows the movement, consequently forcing the shoulder of the locking spring to grip tightly to the inner-wall of the tubing.
[86]
The experiments and demonstrations done during the trial together with the expert evidence have failed to convince me otherwise. The engaging of the locking barb to the inner wall was inevitable. Counsel for the defendants argues that the upper edge of that locking spring comes close to the inside of the tubing but the reason for that was explained by Mr. Van Buren: one wants to have as long a locking spring as possible in order to obtain maximum flexibility. Therefore, the locking spring is as long as possible in order to achieve a better spring action. The spring action referred to is related to the "give and take" action when the push-fit motion is exercised. The locking barb or spring is compressed, displaying a certain degree of flexibility when pushed through the opening. The wall of the opening in turn reacts in a similar way. The locking barb or spring regains its initial angled position by springing into place.
[87]
Van Buren wrote in his affidavit (paragraph 97):
"That the defendants' leaf spring is merely intended to prevent withdrawal of the fastener under conditions of loose webbing. It is not designed to grip the tubing or to withstand the stress of being compressed against the tubing as the webbing is tensioned."
[88]
If the locking spring or leafspring is limited to such function, the question remains, why couldn't the leaf-spring have been, with few modifications, bent on the other side of the shank or, being kept as wide but somewhat shorter, at the same angle to the body of the shank while maintaining the same level of efficiency?
[89]
The defendants' clip, when assembled to a webbing-strip and a tubular frame, acts in the same manner, corresponds to the same functions and attains the same result as does the plaintiffs' fastening assembly. Performing those functions, which constitute the merits of the plaintiffs' invention as claimed, is the essence of infringement.
[90]
What has been done by the defendants' takes from Hyman Kramer the substance of his invention as claimed, a method of applying the known principles.
[91]
In his affidavits (paragraphs 90 and 92) Van Buren alludes to the complexity of the operation of the defendants' locking means, the leaf spring.
"90. That the leaf spring 22 in Exhibit F of the defendants' fastener is unique and the fastener has been manufactured by a method that is of necessity much more complex than the simple manufacturing process described in patent 733,402 which consists merely of striking a locking barb from the leg portion of shank.
"92. That the structure of the defendants' leaf spring on the other hand is a very much more complex operation and would require at least four separate operations in a multistage die."
[92]
However, it is not by complicating a process that one can show the inventive ingenuity when the substance or "pith and marrow" of the inventions has been taken. H.G. Fox clearly states, supra, at pp. 358-359:
"... Nor does it relieve from infringement if the defendant adopts a slower and more expensive method of doing what the patent clearly states can be done in another and easier way. One cannot escape infringement by adding to or subtracting from a patented device or machine, by changing its form, or by making it more or less efficient, while retaining the principle and mode of operation."
[93]
It was argued that the defendants' clip was an improvement of the Van Buren patent. This proposition is irrelevant to the question of whether or not there is infringement of the Hyman Kramer clip.
ESTOPPEL
[94]
The last issue to be dealt with in this case is that of estoppel.
[95]
Are the plaintiffs estopped from claiming damages because of their delay in bringing the action to trial? It is trite law to say that the person seeking an equitable remedy must come with clean hands. Since the defendants have consented to numberous amendments, which are the main cause for delay, these actions amount to acquiescence and the defendants cannot now rely on the principle of estoppel.
[96]
For these reasons, I find the plaintiffs' patents to be valid and to have been infringed by the defendants. Costs to the plaintiffs.
Action allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]