[1]
Denault, J.
[Translation]: The applicant has applied for judicial review of a decision by the Convention Refugee Determination Division to dismiss his claim, in which he alleged that he had a well-founded fear of persecution in Algeria because of his political opinions and his membership in a particular social group.
[2]
In Constantine, the applicant used his car as a taxi. For a number of weeks, he drove a customer to whom he gave his telephone number; there were always two other men with the customer. After his uncle, a sergeant at the Constantine police station, showed him some photographs of his vehicle taken while he was driving those individuals and asked him what he knew about them - which was very little - he never saw them again. Shortly afterwards, he was told by telephone that he would be shown what was done to informers. The next day, telling nobody that he had received death threats, the applicant took refuge in his uncle's home 150 km from Constantine, where he stayed for two months before returning to Constantine to stay with his grandfather seven km from his home; he frequented public places, worked as a door-to-door salesman for five months and then went to Italy for 19 months, working there before illegally entering Canada to claim refugee status after staying in France for a few days and in the United States for 20 days.
[3]
The Refugee Division dismissed the applicant's claim, holding that he had not proven the subjective component of his fear of persecution, as his conduct was considered contradictory, first when he decided not to tell anybody that he had received death threats and again when he returned to Constantine to go about his activities near his parents' home. The Refugee Division also felt that the applicant showed an absence of subjective fear in failing to claim refugee status during his 19 months in Italy and 20 days in the United States.
[4]
According to counsel for the applicant, the Refugee Division committed a serious error in basing its denial of refugee status on the applicant's failure to claim such status in Italy. She submitted that information obtained from friends, information one of them had received from a police officer in particular, confirmed that he had little, if any, chance of obtaining refugee status in Italy. She also relied on statistics indicating that similar claims in Italy have rarely been successful (The record contains no such statistics for the United States of America, the second country where the applicant could have claimed refugee status. Counsel for the applicant did not raise this argument in respect of this second country.) Finally, counsel for the applicant drew a parallel between the principle stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , that it is unnecessary to claim the protection of a state that is unable to afford it and the obligation to seek refuge in a country that does not grant it. She also argued that the Refugee Division erred in finding that the applicant did not have a fear of persecution in his country, Algeria.
[5]
In the case at bar, the court rejects the idea of a parallel, based on
Ward
, between a state's failure to protect its nationals and a state's apparent or proven refusal to accept certain refugees even though it has signed the Geneva Convention. These are very different situations. Furthermore, the facts of the instant case do not prove that the applicant satisfies the
Ward
tests, since he has not given clear and convincing proof of the inability of his country of origin, Algeria, to protect him, which, we might add, he never asked it to do. The same is true of his chances of obtaining refugee status, which he never claimed, in Italy. Before asserting that he had no chance of success either in seeking protection from the Algerian authorities or in claiming refugee status from the Italian authorities, it was still necessary for the applicant either to try to do so or, as the Supreme Court stated in
Ward
, to establish the reasonableness of his failure to seek such protection. In the case at bar, the applicant has not proven this.
[6]
Concerning the subjective component of the fear of persecution, it was up to the Refugee Division to assess it, and since it was reasonable for the panel to find on the evidence that there was no genuine basis for such a fear, the applicant has shown no error by the panel in this respect.
[7]
The record does not show that a question of general importance need be certified for the purposes of an appeal.
[8]
For these reasons, the application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/gs