[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an appeal brought pursuant to s. 56 of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13 (the "
Act
"), from a decision of the Registrar of Trademarks dated October 31, 1990 rejecting opposition to, and in effect permitting registration of the respondent's trademark "Pink Panther" for use in association with the respondent's hair care and beauty supplies and for use in the operation of a business dealing in the distribution of hair care and beauty products, and instructing and educating others in the distribution of beauty products and hair care supplies.
[2]
For the record, I note that the respondent Registrar of Trademarks took no part in these proceedings, and the term "respondent" in these reasons refers to the corporate respondent, not to the Registrar. These Reasons trace the background leading to the decision of the Registrar and to this appeal, then they deal with a preliminary issue concerning standing of the appellant to appeal the Registrar's decision, and finally they set out the basis for allowing this appeal after consideration of the principal substantive issue raised by the parties.
[3]
The appellant is the owner of three trademarks registered in Canada which are relevant in this appeal, as they were in the opposition proceedings. The first of these is "The Pink Panther", registration number 152,831, registered for use in association with "phonograph records; motion picture films; film leasing and distribution services; entertainment services by means of motion picture films". The other two trademarks are visual cartoon drawings of a panther, registration numbers 152,832 (a standing panther cartoon) and 152,833 (a sitting panther cartoon) which are registered in association with, respectively, "film leasing and distribution services; entertainment services by means of motion picture films", and "phonograph records; entertainment services by means of motion picture films".
[4]
I note for the record that in written submissions in the appellant's Memorandum of Fact and Law and in argument by counsel when the appeal was heard, reference made to the appellant's trademarks includes reference only to registered marks 152,831 and 152,832 and also to a mark applied for with reference to a mark "Pink Panther" & Design for "computer entertainment software, used as computer video screen savers". In the written submissions, the last of these is referred to with "S.N. 769,695" and the source of that is said to be the Stauss Affidavit, Exhibit B. That affidavit includes as Exhibit B, "certified copies of Registration Nos. 152,832, 152,833, 152,831 and the Application page for the mark filed under Serial No. 646,276". Only the registered marks 152,831, 152,832, and 152,833 were raised in opposition before the Registrar, were considered in his decision, and are relevant in this appeal.
[5]
The trademark "The Pink Panther" was registered in Canada in 1967. The original owner of that trademark and of the design marks, was Mirisch-Geoffrey-D-F, from whom the appellant, through a number of intervening assignments, claims to derive title.
[6]
The respondent, Pink Panther Beauty Corporation, was incorporated on December 30, 1985 under the law of Ontario. The owners of the respondent had earlier incorporated Jaguar Beauty Supplies Limited for the sale of hair and beauty supplies to professional beauticians. Jaguar Beauty Supplies Limited used a pink jaguar as its logo, and both the logo and the name "Jaguar Beauty Supplies" are registered trademarks. In order to develop a particular retail market, to customers of beauty salons, Pink Panther Beauty Corporation was incorporated to sell hair care and beauty supplies under its own name, products generally similar to those of the Jaguar Company but under a distinct trademark and not readily available except through beauty salons.
[7]
On February 19, 1986 the respondent applied to register the trademark "Pink Panther" for proposed use in Canada in association with a wide variety of hair care and beauty product supplies, and in the operation of a business dealing in the distribution of hair care and beauty product supplies, and instructing and educating others in the distribution of hair care supplies and beauty products. That application was advertised on November 11, 1987 for the purposes of opposition.
[8]
On April 8, 1988 MGM/UA Communications Co., a predecessor in title to the appellant's trademarks, filed a statement of opposition, which was later revised on June 3, 1988. MGM/UA Communications Co. subsequently sought leave to change the opponent in those proceedings to United Artists Pictures Inc., since that company, rather than the original named opponent, was the proper assignee of the trademarks, with an effective date of December 1, 1987. The respondent was notified of this request and given opportunity to oppose it, but did not raise an objection at that time. By the decision dated October 31, 1990 the member of the Opposition Board, acting for the Registrar, granted leave to the opponent to amend the statement of opposition to change the opponent to United Artists Pictures Inc.
[9]
By that same decision on behalf of the Registrar, it was determined that the opponent failed to demonstrate any recent use, or non-abandonment, of its registered trademarks. Further, it was determined that the trademark of the respondent is distinctive, there being no evidence of current or even recent use of its registered trademarks by the opponent or its predecessor in title. Finally, the Registrar found that the trademark proposed for registration by the respondent is not confusing with the registered trademarks of the opponent. The decision stated, in part, as follows:
"... the most pertinent of the registered marks relied on is No. 152,831 for the trade-mark 'The Pink Panther'. Thus, a consideration of the issue of confusion between that mark and the applicant's mark will effectively decide the outcome of the first ground. In considering that ground, I am mindful of the fact that the onus or legal burden is on the applicant to show no reasonable likelihood of confusion. Furthermore, the material time for considering the circumstances is as of the filing of the opposition. Finally, in applying the test for confusion set forth in Section 6(2) of the
Act
, consideration is to be given to all of the surrounding circumstances including those set forth in Section 6(5) of the
Act
.
"The marks of both parties are inherently distinctive. The only evidence pointing to a possible reputation in Canada for the registered mark is the Angeletti affidavit. However, that evidence only points to apparently minor activity more than twenty years prior to the material time. Thus, on the basis of the evidence of record, I must conclude that the registered mark had not become known to any significant extent in Canada as of the filing of the present opposition. There being no evidence of use of the applicant's mark, I must conclude that it had not become known at all in Canada.
"In view of the absence of evidence of any activity in Canada in association with the registered mark subsequent to 1965, I consider that the length of time the marks have been in use in Canada is not a significant factor in the present case. The wares and services at issue are entirely different. Presumably, the trades of the parties would also be entirely different. The marks themselves are virtually identical in all respects.
"In applying the test for confusion, I have considered that it is a matter of first impression and imperfect recollection. Notwithstanding that the marks at issue are virtually identical, I have considered that the wares, services and trades of the parties are completely disparate and that the opponent failed to evidence any current reputation for the registered mark in Canada. In view of the foregoing, I find that the applicant's mark is not confusing with the registered mark."
Thereafter this appeal was filed with the court, by MGM-Pathe Communications Co. as assignee of trademarks from United Artists Pictures Inc., the corporate opponent at the time of opposition proceedings.
Preliminary Issue: Standing To Appeal
[10]
When this matter came on for hearing, as a preliminary matter, a motion on behalf of the appellant sought a change of name, from that of the party which originated the appeal, to the current owner, by assignment, of the registered trademarks owned by predecessors in title at the time of the opposition proceedings. The respondent challenged the standing of the appellant to bring this appeal, mainly because it is alleged that the appellant's predecessors in title to the trademarks in issue lacked standing to oppose the respondent's application for registration, or to appeal the decision of the Registrar.
[11]
As noted earlier, the statement of opposition was initiated by MGM/UA Communications Co. on April 8, 1988, at a time when the party it considered its predecessor in title was the registered owner of the trademarks now owned by the appellant. The respondent maintains that the statement of opposition was filed outside of the one-month time period, provided for under the
Act
, after advertisement by the Registrar of the application by the respondent to register its trademark, here advertised on November 11, 1987. By an agreement dated September 28, 1988 the registered trademarks now claimed by the appellant were assigned, effective December 1, 1987, to United Artists Pictures Inc., and an amended statement of opposition was filed naming that company as the opponent to registration of the respondent's mark. It is urged that no evidence was filed in regard to the assignment to United Artists Pictures Inc., during the course of the opposition proceedings, or since, and thus it did not have standing to oppose the respondent's application.
[12]
I am not prepared to now reverse the decision of the Registrar to permit United Artists Pictures Inc. to file an amended statement of opposition, even though the original statement was filed beyond the one-month time period established as the general rule by the
Act
. All of the alleged defects in standing of United Artists Pictures Inc. could have been raised in the course of the opposition proceedings but were not.
[13]
In the decision on behalf of the Registrar reference is made to the application to change the opponent to United Artists Pictures Inc. as the correct assignee of the registered trademarks relied upon in the statement of opposition. The decision notes:
"... The applicant [i.e., Pink Panther Beauty Corporation] was given an opportunity to comment on the opponent's request and was notified that if it did not raise an objection, the request for leave would likely be granted. The applicant did not raise any objection but the opponent's request was then inadvertently overlooked. Thus, I now hereby grant leave to the opponent pursuant to Rule 42 to amend its statement of opposition as requested."
[14]
The Registrar clearly had the authority under s. 47 of the
Act
to extend the time permitted for filing a statement of opposition, and to accept the amended statement of opposition filed by United Artists Pictures Inc. Since the respondent failed to raise before the Registrar these issues which it now raises to contest standing of the opponent before the Registrar, I would not now interfere with the Registrar's decision to extend the time for filing an amended statement of opposition by United Artists Pictures Inc.
[15]
Following the filing of the decision on behalf of the Registrar, in January 1991 United Artists Pictures Inc. assigned the trademarks, with effect from November 1, 1990, to MGM-Pathe Communications Co. which, on December 31, 1990, filed a notice of appeal from the decision of the Registrar. In October 1994 MGM-Pathe Communications Co., then having had its name changed to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc., assigned the trademarks to United Artists Corporation.
[16]
The preliminary motion before the court when this matter came on for hearing sought to change the name of the appellant to United Artists Corporation. In the submission of the respondent, the last two assignments did not include an express assignment of any interest of the predecessor in title, as the party opposing registration, in these appeal proceedings, and thus neither of the last two assignees acquired an interest in these proceedings. It is urged therefore, that the appellant may not bring an appeal from the decision of the Registrar.
[17]
In the view of the appellant, any interest in these proceedings was transferred to the appellant, and to its predecessor in title, by respective assignments of "the right, title and interest in and to the said trademarks", or comparable wording of general description under the contracts of assignment. That phrase, describing a general assignment, it is said, includes any right to proceedings which protect the trademarks in question. In addition, the appellant maintains that there is no issue here of champerty and maintenance, and that the respondent has adduced no evidence to suggest such an issue.
[18]
The argument of the respondent is based on comments of the courts concerned in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 26; 32 Fox Pat. C. 17 at 34 (Ex.Ct.) and
Amsted Industries Inc. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 76; 32 C.P.R. (3d) 334 at 339 (F.C.A.), leave to appeal refused [1991] 1 S.C.R. xv; 128 N.R. 320. Neither case is authority for the proposition expressed by the respondent, in my view. Each case dealt with actions in relation to claims for patent infringement where some question arose concerning the right of an assignee of patent rights to initiate the actions. Here, while concerned with a form of action in this court, that form is a statutory appeal from a decision of the Registrar of Trademarks made in regard to an application for registration. The process here reviewed by appeal is an administrative process and the appeal is from the administrator's decision. It would be extraordinary, in my opinion, to preclude the assignee of all interests in a trademark from seeking to protect its primary right, to exclusive use, merely because the assignment of rights was general and did not expressly provide a right to oppose another party's application of a trademark alleged to be confusing with one already registered which by general assignment has been transferred to a new owner.
[19]
In my view, the appellant has standing to bring this appeal. The assignments which have occurred since United Artists Pictures Inc. filed its opposition have purported to assign all "right, title and interest" in the trademarks. In my view, that description includes the right to protect a trademark in opposition proceedings, and any appeals therefrom, which had been commenced at the time the trademarks were assigned.
[20]
The appellant here, as owner of the trademarks, has an obvious interest in protecting the rights associated with its trademarks. Moreover, the protection of trademarks clearly has a public interest element that would not be served by disallowing the appellant's attempt to assert or protect its rights in its registered trademarks.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 418 (T.D.), my colleague Mr. Justice Denault permitted an assignee of a trademark to appeal the decision of the Registrar even though its predecessor in title had initiated opposition proceedings. While the terms of the assignment in that case included the rights to oppose applications for registration of similar or confusing trademarks, in my opinion the same principles are here applicable.
[21]
Where the assignment is not one giving rise to champerty, the assignee should not be precluded from opposing or appealing, in regard to an application or a decision for, registration of a trademark considered to be confusing with a registered mark obtained by assignment. I am persuaded that the appellant here is entitled to bring these proceedings, and that the interests of justice are here served by recognizing the standing of the appellant to do so.
[22]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 75 (T.D.), Mr. Justice Denault dismissed an application to substitute a successor as appellant in an appeal from a decision of the Registrar. He there referred to the special assignment of rights to oppose applications for registration which was included in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , as a factor distinguishing that case. For our purposes, there were, however, more significant differences between the two cases, in particular, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the original appeal notice was filed by a party which was an undischarged bankrupt, not by its receiver, at the time the appeal was initiated. Moreover, unlike the case at bar, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the subsequent assignment by a receiver was not "to all right title and interest" in designated trademarks, but was rather more limited, to the name "Primax and all trademark registrations, if any, of that name". In my opinion, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is not persuasive authority in the case at bar.
[23]
In the result, I allowed the appellant's preliminary motion and an Order issued, following the hearing, confirming rulings made orally when the matter was heard. It provides for change of the name of the appellant in these proceedings to United Artists Corporation, currently the owner of the trademarks which were owned at the time of the opposition proceedings by the United Artists Pictures Inc. That Order also provides for the style of cause in this matter to be as set out as at the commencement of these Reasons and in the accompanying Order, now issued.
Substantive Issues On Appeal
[24]
The appellant challenges the merits of the decision of the Registrar on three grounds, concerning his findings in relation to each of the grounds of opposition to registration of the respondent's trademark. The decision is said to have erred in law and in fact
i) in finding the respondent's proposed mark was registrable in that it was not confusing with the three registered marks owned by the appellant;
ii) in concluding that the respondent was a person entitled to registration of the mark which at the date of filing of the respondent's application was not confusing with the appellant's registered marks previously used in Canada; and
iii) in finding that the respondent's trademark is distinctive in light of the use of the respondent's registered marks in Canada.
[25]
The Registrar's findings, here questioned, were based on the assessment that there was no confusion, or in relation to distinctiveness no possibility of confusion, between the trademark proposed by the respondent for registration and the registered trademarks of the appellant. That assessment in turn was based upon the evidence, or rather the lack of evidence, of recent use in Canada of the registered marks.
[26]
Of course, the decision of the Registrar was based on the evidence before him, including that of the opponent, United Artists Pictures Inc. which included three affidavits that provided only minimal information about use of the trademarks claimed by the opponent. While that included evidence of production and release of seven motion picture films, in all but one of which the words "the pink panther" were included in the title, the only evidence of use specifically in Canada was reference to revenues of $200,000.00 from distribution of the first of the films,
The Pink Panther
at an early stage after its release in 1964, up to 1965. On the appeal to this court from the decision of the Registrar, the appellant filed substantial additional affidavit evidence, as it was entitled to do. It is the evidence before me, which includes much more evidence of use in Canada, provided in relation to this appeal, on which this decision is based.
[27]
The appellant adduced evidence seeking to establish that its trademarks had been in use since 1964 and that those trademarks were well known through Canada. It is important to review that evidence in some detail for this appeal is allowed based on my conclusions about use of the registered marks in Canada, conclusions different from those reached on different evidence by the Registrar.
[28]
From 1964 to 1983 the appellant produced seven "Pink Panther" films, including
The Pink Panther, A Shot in the Dark, Return of the Pink Panther, The Pink Panther Strikes Again, Revenge of the Pink Panther, Trail of the Pink Panther
and
Curse of the Pink Panther
. For each of those films gross profits earned up to January 22, 1990 in the United States, and separately in Canada are stated in the affidavit of Maria C. Angeletti, General Counsel of MGM-Pathe Communications Co. The total earnings for those films in Canada is said to be $ 8,168,000.00 for the period to January 1990.
[29]
As the respondent notes, the appellant's evidence of revenues from display of the motion pictures indicates that these were mainly earned in the first year or so after release of each film. One may infer that most of these revenues from Canadian, as from other showings, was in the period from 1964 with the first release until perhaps 1985, two years after the seventh film was released, that is prior to the date the respondent applied for registration.
[30]
Yet those are not the only uses of the trademarks by release of films, for the films in the series were syndicated for reruns for television viewing and for home video rentals. Various Canadian television stations are listed as having shown films in the Pink Panther series. The films in the series are reported in
Variety
, February 1990, to be among the most widely viewed motion pictures ever made. The total U.S. and Canadian combined rentals paid to distributors for these motion pictures, presumably for purposes of viewing other than in theatres, is said to be in excess of $ 78,000,000.00, though no separate figure for distribution in Canada is given.
[31]
Several cartoon series featuring the Pink Panther were also produced and then began showing on television in 1969 and continued to be aired widely throughout Canada. Many cartoons have been made available for home video viewing. The earnings from televising and home video sales/rentals of these cartoons in Canada is said to be in excess of $700,000.00 up to May, 1989, including two Pink Panther animated special features. Sales and rentals of certain other Pink Panther cartoons in the combined U.S. and Canadian market were $ 827,587.16, and Canadian sales and rentals are said to typically represent approximately 10% of the total amount.
[32]
In addition, the appellant adduced several newspaper articles, advertisements and comments from daily newspapers and other publications, some as late as the early 1990's, which have a wide circulation in Canada, referring to "the pink panther" or the Pink Panther cartoon character drawings which, as noted, are registered trademarks. This is not evidence of use in Canada of the trademarks by the appellant or its predecessors in title, but it is clearly evidence that those trademarks were widely referred to in Canada.
[33]
The appellant submits that since 1964 the Pink Panther films and cartoon series have been seen in Canada by millions of viewers and that the cartoon character and trademarks have been referred to in numerous newspaper articles and advertisements having a wide circulation in Canada. This publicity, it is said, has enhanced the distinctiveness of the appellant's trademarks and demonstrates that they are widely known in Canada.
[34]
On behalf of the respondent it is submitted that there is no evidence that the appellant has utilized its trademark in connection with motion picture films or phonograph records, rather, the evidence of the appellant demonstrates use in connection with film titles, one of which does not include the words "the pink panther", and all but one of the others do not use that trademark but, rather, variants of it. In addition, it is said, the appellant has not adduced evidence demonstrating use of its trademarks in association with film leasing and distribution services, or demonstrating use of its trademarks in the cartoons that it claims to have issued in connection with those trademarks.
[35]
The respondent is critical of the evidence adduced concerning the appellant's use of its trademarks. I agree that the only relevant evidence is that which relates the use of those trademarks in Canada. Thus, financial records relating to both the United States and Canadian markets which do not separately show revenue or profits in connection with the Canadian market do not demonstrate much about use in Canada. Moreover, some of the newspaper articles adduced by the appellant relate to the use of the trademarks only in the United States. That use is not relevant in these proceedings since it is not related in any way to the market in Canada or to any alleged exposure to Canadian consumers of that use in the United States.
[36]
On the other hand, the respondent's criticisms, that revenues from films and from distributors' fees for television showing and video rentals in Canada provide no evidence that films or cartoons were ever actually distributed and seen by the public, is not significant in my view. It is evidence of distribution of the films and of the cartoon series, and of distribution with reference to the appellant's trademarks. That is a service for which the mark was registered; it was not registered only in association with "entertainment services by means of motion pictures" or the viewing by the public of the wares, the films, with which the trademarks were associated.
[37]
For the respondent it is submitted that there is no evidence that the trademarks of the appellant were in use in 1986 or 1990, the relevant dates for determining the respondent's application to register its trademark, and there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that the appellant has used its trademarks in Canada for a lengthy period of time. The respondent submits that the appellant has not continuously used its trademarks over the past 30 years and the evidence does not support a conclusion, urged by the appellant, that those trademarks are famous. In addition, it is said that the appellant has not demonstrated that it used the words "The Pink Panther" as trademarks in its films, but rather, that it used those words in titles for the films, a mere functional use that does not warrant broad protection.
[38]
I am persuaded on the evidence that the trademarks of the appellant were used by the appellant's predecessors in title over some 30 years from 1964 and that they are widely known throughout Canada and may be characterized as strong trademarks. As such, they are entitled to a wide ambit of protection which may make it more difficult for the respondent to demonstrate there is no likelihood of confusion if its mark is registered:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 49 C.P.R. (2d) 57 (T.D.).
[39]
The appellant adduced evidence indicating that it had used its trademark "The Pink Panther" in association with several movie titles. In my view, the functional use of these titles does not derogate from the fact that that trademark was used to associate the films with the appellant's predecessors, indicating that the films were from the same source. The respondent's suggestion that different individuals and corporations were credited with direction and production of various films does not, in my view, indicate a variety of origins for the films. Nor am I persuaded, as the respondent urged, that use of the trademark in the title of a movie is not use as a trademark for in my view, the authorities cited for this do not support such a conclusion. (See
Walt Disney Productions v. 468108 Ontario Ltd.
(1984), 2 C.P.R. (3d) 472 (T.M.Opp.Bd.) and
Science and Health Trademark, Re
, [1968] R.P.C. 402 (Ch.D.)). In any event, the evidence adduced indicates the appellant's use of the trademarks was more than mere use of the trademark in the film titles.
[40]
I am also persuaded that the use of the term "The Pink Panther" within the various film titles is use of that trademark by the appellant's predecessors in title. In that context, the term associates the films with each other, except perhaps for the film
A Shot in the Dark
. Moreover, the films and the cartoons, utilizing the appellant's trademarks including the animated cartoon character which appeared in the introduction to the first film,
The Pink Panther
, reinforce the impression that these originate from the one source.
[41]
In my opinion, the films themselves also demonstrate a connection to the trademark.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 7 (T.D.) the court stated that the televising of the Miss Canada Pageant would cause viewers to associate the "Miss Canada" name, a trademark, with the pageant. Similarly, in this case, I am of the view that the showing of the appellant's films and cartoons, by television or through home video rentals, would lead viewers to associate the films and cartoons with the trademarks.
[42]
I sum up my assessment of the evidence of use of the appellant's registered marks adduced on behalf of the appellant's predecessor in title. There is evidence, mainly in the affidavits of Ms. Angeletti and of Mr. Israel of significant use in Canada of the trademark "The Pink Panther" as used in the titles of motion pictures and in various cartoon series, and there is evidence of widespread distribution in Canada for television and home video rentals of film cartoons featuring the animated cartoon image claimed under two of the appellant's registered trademarks. These were widely distributed in Canada, first in theatres as the films were produced from 1964 to 1983, then through distribution for television viewing and video rentals. There is evidence also of widespread reference to the words "pink panther" and to the registered design marks in newspapers and other publications in Canada. That evidence of use, and of reference to the marks, extends from 1965 to the 1990's. The evidence supports the conclusion that "The Pink Panther" as a trademark, and its associated cartoon image trademarks, are strong marks, widely recognized in Canada from the mid-1960's until after the decision of the Registrar in 1990.
[43]
I turn finally to the issue of confusion. Section 6 of the
Act
sets out when trademarks may be confusing in the following relevant provisions:
"6. ... (2) The use of a trade-mark causes confusion with another trade-mark if the use of both trade-marks in the same area would be likely to lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with those trade-marks are manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by the same person, whether or not the wares or services are of the same general class.
. . . . .
"(5) In determining whether trade-marks or trade-names are confusing, the court or Registrar, as the case may be, shall have regard to all the surrounding circumstances including
(a) the inherent distinctiveness of the trade-marks or trade-names and the extent to which they have become known;
(b) the length of time the trade-marks or trade-names have been in use;
(c) the nature of the wares, services or business;
(d) the nature of the trade;
(e) the degree of resemblance between the trade-marks or trade-names in appearance or sound or in the ideas suggested by them."
[44]
In considering possibilities of confusion it is appropriate to compare the appellant's word trademark, "The Pink Panther", with the respondent's mark "Pink Panther", since it is the registered mark closest in form and sound with that of the respondent. That process was adopted also in the decision appealed from in the opposition proceedings.
[45]
The first of the factors to be considered under s. 6(5) is the inherent distinctiveness of the trademarks and the extent to which they have become known. The appellant claims its mark is inherently distinctive and that it has also acquired distinctiveness through widespread use over some thirty years, but the respondent's mark is not inherently distinctive because it has not yet been used and it is not distinguishable from the appellant's registered mark. The respondent concedes some distinctiveness in the appellant's mark but argues its own mark is distinctive in the trade in which it is to be used. That is said to be distinct from the trade of the appellant. Moreover, the respondent claims use of its mark in connection with stores established in recent years, with invoices and other documents featuring the use of the mark in the use of the company name Pink Panther Beauty Corporation. There was no history of use of the respondent's trademark with any wares at the time this matter was heard.
[46]
The respondent challenges the statement of the appellant that its trademarks are highly distinctive. The respondent submits that colour is to be given a narrow ambit of protection. Here, the words used are said not to be unique, invented or non-descriptive; they are commonly used terms. In the context within which it is used, the respondent claims, the trademark of the applicant is not distinctive. The respondent suggests that the use of the words "pink panther" in connection with a variety of other companies and products, such as a plant, a colour, a drink, etc., indicates that the appellant's trademark is not distinctive. That suggestion, if accepted, undercuts the respondent's own claim to distinctiveness for its own mark.
[47]
In my opinion, the decision on behalf of the Registrar was apt in a theoretic sense when it acknowledged that the marks of both parties are inherently distinctive. However, I find, on very different evidence now adduced for this appeal, that the appellant demonstrates widespread use, and widespread acknowledgement, in Canada, of its registered mark of longstanding. In view of this the newer mark of the respondent, not yet known for use in association with wares, and only for a limited extent in distribution of beauty supplies through a few stores in southern Ontario and the greater Toronto region, and then only among professional beauticians, cannot be considered to be inherently distinctive in light of the existence of another similar trademark, widely known over a long time, which is registered at the time of application and of the Registrar's decision.
[48]
There cannot be doubt that comparison in regard to the second factor listed in s. 6(5), the length of time the trademarks have been used, favours the appellant. Its mark has been in use in Canada over some thirty years, the respondent's mark only for a brief period in association with a few stores distributing beauty supplies to professional beauticians.
[49]
For the appellant it is submitted that the nature of the wares, services and business and the nature of trade, conducted by the parties in association with the trademarks, the matters set out in paragraphs 6(5)(c) and (d), bear some similarities. It is urged, without evidence adduced, that the entertainment and beauty products industries are related. In addition, the appellant suggests that it is unnecessary to establish that the parties will utilize their trademarks in the same business sector.
[50]
On behalf of the respondent it is submitted that the nature of the wares and of the business of each of the two parties, i.e., the beauty industry and entertainment services, are in no way related. Moreover, the respondent maintains that the choice of a hair care or beauty product is a choice about which the consumer deliberates and that consumers will realize that there is no association between the trademarks in the course of those deliberations. In addition, the stores at which consumers would purchase the respondent's products are said to be unrelated to any outlet for the appellant's wares or services. In my view, the nature of the wares and services of the parties, and the nature of their businesses or trades, are quite dissimilar.
[51]
The final factor for consideration under s. 6(5) is the degree of resemblance between the trademarks. Here there is no doubt that the two trademarks closely resemble each other. The appellant maintains that the respondent has essentially adopted the whole of the trademark "The Pink Panther". Here, it is said, the high degree of similarity will deceive or confuse an ordinary consumer into believing that the parties offering the wares or services are associated. The appellant submits that the degree of similarity between two trademarks is often the most compelling factor to consider when determining if the two marks are likely to be confusing.
[52]
The respondent submits that, pursuant to s. 6(5)(e), although the marks are in some respects similar, the
Act
does not preclude one party from using a trademark which is similar to another registered mark. In addition, it is said that the appellant's trademark, by inclusion of the first word "the" makes reference to a particular pink panther, while the respondent's trademark refers generically to a panther which is pink. In my opinion, the respondent makes too much of a minor difference in seeking to differentiate the two marks and to play down their close resemblance.
[53]
The appellant submits that the criteria in s. 6(5) of the
Act
are not necessarily to be given equal weight, the likelihood of confusion is to be judged on whether in all the circumstances the ordinary customer would be confused. The appellant submits that where a trademark, such as "The Pink Panther", has an extensive and well-known reputation and a strong association with a particular origin, the ordinary customer may believe there is a connection between two trademarks even though the nature of the wares or the trades or business of the parties are quite dissimilar. Thus, where the trademark in question is a strong mark, it is to be afforded a wider scope of protection. Here, it is said the fact that the trademarks of each party are so similar means they will cause confusion between the business and wares of the parties. The appellant's position is that its trademarks are so strong that use proposed by the respondent for its trademark will confuse the ordinary customer into believing that the wares and services originate from a single source.
[54]
The onus is at all times on the party seeking to register a trademark, in this case the respondent, to demonstrate that its trademark is not confusing with that of the party opposing registration, particularly where the latter claims the proposed registration will create confusion with its registered trademark. That onus prevails even in an appeal, such as this, where the party seeking registration is the respondent. In my opinion, that onus has not been met by the respondent in this case for I am not persuaded that there is no likelihood of confusion.
[55]
In my opinion, the trademark of the appellant can be said to be inherently distinctive and to have been in use for a long period of time. The first movie entitled
The Pink Panther
was released in 1964 and it and subsequent motion pictures were distributed for theatre and television viewing until after 1983, and videos of the films and of various cartoon series, utilizing and associated with that trademark, were released and distributed until the 1990's. I am persuaded that the appellant's trademarks have been widely known among the public in Canada for a long period of time. In contrast, the respondent admits that it has not used the trademark "Pink Panther" in Canada in association with wares. In my view its use of the words in association with stores bearing its corporate name has not been widespread and it has not offered distribution of beauty supplies except to professional beauticians. In sum its trademark has not become known.
[56]
In my view, the trademark "The Pink Panther", owned by the appellant and the trademark "Pink Panther" are virtually identical. In determining whether confusion between two trademarks is likely to exist, one must ask whether the ordinary consumer of the wares in question would be confused in that he or she would think that the wares were produced, or marketed by, a single source:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R. (3d) 462; 57 C.P.R. 1;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R. 43; 37 Fox Pat.C. 77. The test, as set out by Mr. Justice Cattanach in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 5 (F.C.T.D.), is as follows:
"To determine whether two trademarks are confusing one with the other it is the persons who are likely to buy the wares who are to be considered, that is those persons who normally comprise the market, the ultimate consumer. That does not mean a rash, careless or unobservant purchaser on the one hand, nor on the other does it mean a person of higher education, one possessed of expert qualifications. It is the probability of the average person endowed with average intelligence acting with ordinary caution being deceived that is the criterion and to measure that probability of confusion the Registrar of Trademarks or the Judge must assess the normal attitudes and reactions of such persons."
[57]
In the case at bar, the factors to be considered in determining whether confusion is likely to arise, as set out in s. 6(5), do not wholly favour either the appellant or the respondent. However, it is clear that those factors are not necessarily to be given equal weight, especially where one of the trademarks is a strong mark.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 193; 47 C.P.R. (2d) 145 at 149 (F.C.T.D.), Mr. Justice Cattanach stated:
"It is axiomatic that all these factors are not of necessity to be accorded equal weight and in some instances one or more of the factors mentioned might not even be present. Realistically appraised it is the degree of resemblance between trademarks in appearance, sound or in ideas suggested by them that is the most crucial factor, in most instances, and is the dominant factor and other factors play a subservient role in the over-all surrounding circumstances."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 520 (T.D.) my colleague Mr. Justice Rouleau stated:
"... As previously stated, I find the respondent's mark and design to be a strong one, well-known throughout Canada. In such cases the courts have held that the distinction between the wares and the nature of the trade of the two competing marks becomes less important. Certainly those factors are not conclusive of the issue of confusion; they are only incidental criteria to be regarded in ascertaining whether trademarks are confusing in the sense that they resemble each other so as to be likely to mislead the public. ..."
[58]
As noted earlier, the trademarks of the appellant in this case are strong marks, which have had widespread use throughout this country from the mid-1960's to the 1990's. In light of that fact, I am of the opinion that the differences in the nature of the wares and of the trades of the appellant and the respondent are less significant than they might otherwise be in the determination of the likelihood of confusion. As noted by Cattanach, J.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Bedding
, the degree of resemblance in the trademarks is often the most significant factor in determining whether confusion is likely to arise. This is particularly so when one of the marks in question is a strong mark.
[59]
While it makes no difference in the outcome of this appeal in view of the additional evidence adduced and my appraisal of that, I note for the record in the decision of the Registrar reference is made to the material time for testing confusion, set forth under s. 6(2) of the
Act
in light of the surrounding circumstances as described in s. 6(5), as the date of filing of the opposition, in this case in April 1988. There was some dispute between counsel as to the appropriate date. As I understand it, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 413 at 422-424  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Madame Justice Desjardins, for the court, stated that the relevant date for determining confusion under s. 6(5) of the
Act
is the date of the Registrar's decision, in this case, October 31, 1990. Since, on the evidence, I find use is established of the appellant's registered trademarks in Canada up to 1990, the test for confusion in applying s. 6(5) is met.
[60]
In conclusion I am not persuaded that there is no likelihood of confusion between the respondent's mark and the registered mark of the appellant, No. 152,831, "The Pink Panther". Indeed, in my opinion, the trademark of the respondent is likely to cause confusion with that trademark owned by the appellant. In light of the high degree of resemblance and the widespread use of the trademark "The Pink Panther", I am persuaded that the ordinary consumer of average intelligence would believe that the wares of the appellant and the wares of the respondent originate from the same person or organization.
[61]
Since I find that the respondent's trademark is confusing with the registered mark of the appellant at the time of the Registrar's decision, I make no findings about other issues raised on appeal, though the implications of my finding may be readily apparent for those issues.
[62]
For these reasons this appeal is allowed with costs. Judgment so providing now issues, and it sets aside the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks and directs that the respondent's application for registration of its trademark "Pink Panther" as proposed, be rejected.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/vem
[End of document]