[1]
Nadon, J.
: This is an application by the plaintiff for an order striking out the defendants' statement of defence. In the alternative, the plaintiff seeks an order requiring the defendants to provide particulars of the allegations contained in paragraphs 5 to 10 of their statement of defence.
n-
Facts And Background
[2]
The main action in this file concerns a patent infringement claim. The plaintiff is a corporation incorporated under the laws of Canada. The defendant, Massload Technologies Inc. (hereinafter "Massload"), is a corporation having a place of business in Saskatchewan. The defendant, Calgary Scale Services Ltd. (hereinafter "Calgary Scale"), is a corporation having a place of business in Calgary, Alberta. This action concerns the patent of a mobile weighing system. On July 4, 1995, Canadian Patent Number 2096761 for the invention of a mobile weighing system was issued in the name of William P. Strelioff. All rights, title, and interests in the patent were transferred by Mr. Strelioff to the plaintiff on August 2, 1995; prior to the assignment, the plaintiff was the beneficial owner of the patent as it was invented during the inventor's course of employment with the plaintiff. The plaintiff asserts that, by reason of its ownership of the patent, and pursuant to the
Patent Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4, the plaintiff has acquired exclusive right, privilege, and liberty in Canada of making, constructing, using, and selling the invention to others until May 21, 2013. According to the plaintiff, the defendant Massload, without the permission of the plaintiff, makes or causes to be made mobile weighing systems and weighing cells for use in mobile weighing systems and has used, sold, and offered these products for sale in Canada and has issued instructions with the sale of these products, knowing that mobile weighing systems would be assembled therefrom and used. The defendant, Calgary Scale, according to the plaintiff, has, without the plaintiff's permission, distributed the product of the defendant Massload. The plaintiff seeks a declaration that Canadian Patent No. 2096761 is valid and has been infringed by the defendants; and interlocutory and permanent injunctions restraining each of the defendants from infringing the patent, inducing or procuring any person to infringe the patent, and from selling, offering for sale, manufacturing or distributing in Canada mobile weighing cells, and from performing any method described and claimed in the patent.
[3]
The defendants assert, by way of their joint statement of defence, filed November 7, 1995, that the weighing system which they manufacture and sell is vastly different from that of the plaintiff as the plaintiff's is more expensive to produce and lacks versatility. The defendants are of the view that their weighing system does not infringe on the plaintiff's patent and therefore, the plaintiff's claim should be denied.
[4]
In support of this motion, the plaintiff has filed the affidavit of P. Scott Maclean, who is a partner of the firm of Barrigar & Moss. Mr. Maclean swears that his firm received a copy of the statement of defence on October 23, 1995. By letter dated January 17, 1996, a request was made by the plaintiff's counsel that the defendants' counsel provide particulars of the allegations contained in paragraphs 5-10 of the statement of defence. By letter dated January 23, 1996, counsel for the defendants responded to this letter; according to Mr. Maclean, this letter unsatisfactorily met the demand for greater particulars. The plaintiff's counsel sent a further letter, dated February 5, 1996, for the purpose of making a final request for particulars.
Relevant Statutory Provisions
[5]
Rules 408 and 412 of the
Federal Court Rules
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 663, govern the contents of pleadings. Rule 408 states:
"408(1) Every pleading must contain a precise statement of the material facts on which the party pleading relies.
(2) Without limiting the generality of paragraph (1), the effect of any document or the purport of any conversation referred to in the pleading must, to the extent that it is material, be briefly stated, and the precise words of the document or conversation should not be stated, except insofar as those words are themselves material.
(3) A party need not plead any fact if it is presumed by law to be true or as to which the burden of proof lies on the other party (e.g. consideration for a bill of exchange), unless the other party has specifically denied it in his pleading.
(4) A statement that a thing has been done or that an event has occurred, being a thing or event the doing or occurrence of which, as the case may be, constitutes a condition precedent necessary for the case of a party, is to be implied in his pleading.
(5) Whenever it is material to allege notice to any person of any fact, matter or thing, it shall be sufficient to allege such notice as a fact unless the form or precise terms of such notice be material."
Rule 412 is concerned with points of law raised in pleadings and provides that points of law must be accompanied by a statement of the material facts on which a conclusion of law is based:
"412(1) A party may by his pleading raise any point of law.
(2) Raising a question of law or an express assertion of a conclusion of law -- such as an assertion of title to property -- shall not be accepted as a substitute for a statement of material facts on which the conclusion of law is based."
[6]
Rules 415 and 419 deal with motions for particulars and the striking of pleadings. Rule 415 reads as follows:
"415(1) Subject to paragraph (2), every pleading shall contain the necessary particulars of any allegation including, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing words,
(a) particulars of any misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, wilful default or undue influence on which the party pleading relies; and
(b) where a party pleading alleges any condition of the mind of any person, whether any disorder or disability of mind or any malice, fraudulent intention or other condition of mind except knowledge, particulars of the facts on which the party relies.
(2) Where in any case it seems more convenient to do so, particulars may be set out in a separate document attached as a schedule to the pleading.
(3) The court may order a party to file and serve on any other party further and better particulars of any allegation in his pleading, or a further and better statement of the nature of the case on which he relies, and the order may be made on such terms as seem just.
(4) Without limiting the generality of paragraph (3), where a party alleges as a fact that a person had knowledge or notice of some fact, matter or thing, the court may, on such terms as seem just, order that party to file and serve on any other party
(a) where he alleges knowledge, particulars of the facts on which he relies on, and
(b) where he alleges notice, particulars of the notice.
(5) Where the applicant for an order under this rule did not apply in writing to the party against whom the order is sought for the particulars that he requires, the court may in its discretion refuse to make the order unless of opinion that there were sufficient reasons for such an application in writing not having been made or may take such omission into account in deciding what order to make as to the costs of the application."
Rule 419 states:
"419(1) The court may at any stage of an action order any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that
(a) it discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, as the case may be,
(b) it is immaterial or redundant,
(c) it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious,
(d) it may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action,
(e) it constitutes a departure from a previous pleading, or
(f) it is otherwise an abuse of the process of the court,
and may order the action to be stayed or dismissed or judgment to be entered accordingly.
(2) No evidence shall be admissible on an application under paragraph (1)(a).
(3) In this rule, 'departure' means that which is prohibited by rule 411."
Discussion
[7]
It is common ground that, in litigation, the plaintiff alleges certain facts in the statement of claim and the defendant either denies, has no knowledge of, or admits each and every allegation made in the statement of claim. The statement of defence is not a place to raise different allegations, unless it is by way of counterclaim. This is codified in rule 413, which states that where a party pleads to a pleading of an opposite party, he or she shall admit allegations of fact that he or she knows to be true, plead lack of knowledge of those allegations of fact in that pleading of the truth of which he or she has no knowledge, or deny the allegations of fact in that pleading that he or she intends to challenge. It is my view that the entire statement of defence suffers from the defendants' failure to adhere to this elementary rule of pleading.
[8]
Rule 419(1) provides six grounds upon which a pleading or a portion of a pleading may be struck by the court. The principles applicable to subs. (1) of rule 419 were established by the Supreme Court of Canada in
Inuit Tapirisat of Canada and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 1, where it was held that the court will only strike pleadings in plain and obvious cases where the case is beyond doubt. This position was confirmed in another Supreme Court of Canada case,
Hunt v. T & N plc et al.
, [1990] 2 S.C.R. 959; 117 N.R. 321; 4 C.C.L.T.(2d) 1; 43 C.P.C.(2d) 105; 49 B.C.L.R.(2d) 273; 74 D.L.R.(4th) 321, where the court observed that the test in Canada to strike out pleadings is whether it is plain and obvious that the claim discloses no reasonable cause of action. In considering a motion to strike, the court must consider the whole of the pleadings. Further, rule 419 must be interpreted in light of other rules, particularly rules 408 and 415. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), per Joyal, J.)
[9]
In the case at bar, I am of the opinion that it is not "plain and obvious" that the statement of defence discloses no reasonable defence. The statement of defence is clearly defective, but that, in my view, does not mean it discloses no reasonable defence. Under rule 419(1)(a), a pleading, or part of a pleading may be struck if it discloses no reasonable defence. The plaintiff must establish that a statement of defence cannot be revised before a defence will be struck under this rule. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), per Thurlow, A.C.J.) It is my view that the statement of defence is not so defective that it should be struck. Under rule 419(1)(b)-(f), it must be established that the pleading is so clearly immaterial, frivolous or abusive that it is clearly futile. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), per Dubé, J.) Again, this is not the case. I am, therefore, of the opinion that the entire statement of defence should not be struck.
Paragraphs 4-6 Of The Statement
Of Defence
[10]
Paragraphs 4-6 of the statement of defence read as follows:
"4. The plaintiff's action is brought for the improper purpose of restraining trade and competition as opposed to patent protection. In addition to vast and obvious dissimilarities of the two systems the plaintiff's system is substantially more expensive to produce and lacks versatility.
"5. The ML1200 modular weighing system was invented by Tom Grimsdale, Marcel Fendelet and William Elliott all of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan with design and development of such product having began (sic) in 1988. The ML1200 modular weighing assembly does not infringe the plaintiff's alleged invention. The ML1200 modular weighing assembly is particularized as follows:
(a) An on-board weighing system specifically designed to meet the stringent requirements of Canadian Weights and Measures to be certified in legal for trade applications.
(b) The system is designed to weigh the load carried upon the frame of a truck or semitrailer.
(c) Two ML1200 modular weighing assemblies are mounted on the truck frame in a manner appropriate for the physical design of the truck frame. The load to be weighed is then mounted above the weighing assemblies.
(d) As required by Canadian Weights and Measures, each weighing assembly has a weighing position and a rest position in which the load is removed from the loadcells in each modular assembly.
(e) Each modular assembly has two single acting hydraulic cylinders (designed and built by the defendant) specifically designed to raise only a load of twice the maximum weight.
(f) The hydraulic cylinders raise the shear beam loadcell through the upper rocker pin that passes through the upper section in the loadcell.
(g) The rocker pin is raised to a parallel position with the lower alignment pin which passes through the lower section of the loadcell. This system, integral to the loadcell itself, raises the upper mounting plate of the assembly upon which is mounted the load to be weighed.
(h) The hydraulic system of the ML1200 modular weighing assembly is controlled with a manual valve specifically designed for zero oil leakage in the weighing mode.
(i) The manual valve and the designed single action cylinders are a very important part of system safety. In the event of a hydraulic system failure where no pressure is available, the modular weigh assemblies can be returned to the transport position and the vehicle and its load safely operated.
(j) The transport locking mechanisms in each modular weigh assembly are mechanically activated to positively and mechanically attach the upper and lower mounting plates of the assembly together.
(k) The transport lock is designed to be disengaged by a 1½ (sic) inch by three inch hydraulic cylinder and is in engaged mechanically by a steel spring if the weighing assemblies are lowered by the operator or, or (sic) engage automatically, if a hydraulic hose fails or if pressure fails for any reason.
(l) The unique design of the ML1200 modular weighing assembly transport lock allows the operator of the system to lower and have the transport locks engaged in every event when the vehicle is to be moved.
(m) The ML1200 modular weigh assembly transport locking mechanism consists of three one inch steel plates attached alternately to the upper and lower mounting plates of the modular assembly and a one inch diameter steel pin passing through the centre of all of these to lock them together. The one inch pin is of heat treated alloy tool steel with a field strength in excess of 125,000 P.S.I.
"6. Design differences and operational differences of the ML1200 modular weighing assembly are particularized as follows:
(a) The ML1200 modular weighing assembly was designed for a specific purpose - that of meeting the criteria and consistency required in a system to be certified as legal for trade by Canadian Weights and Measures.
(b) The ML1200 modular weighing assembly, due to its unique design, is much less expensive to produce and is far more versatile in after market installations on trucks and semitrailers. The ML1200 was designed specifically to mount directly on a truck frame and provide a standard mounting surface on to which many different standard designs of equipment that are normally mounted on truck frames can be attached. No special designs are required to support the loads to be weighed and in the majority of cases no special reinforcing of the load structure is required.
(c) The ML1200 modular weighing system uses a specifically designed loadcell that is not used by the plaintiff or any other company and would not work in the plaintiff's design.
(d) The ML1200 system was developed strictly for 'legal for trade' application and for no other purpose. The plaintiff's patent is not specific on the area of use.
(e) The ML1200 modular weighing system does not use any of the following features or systems as claimed by the plaintiff:
(i) Linkage assemblies attached to top and bottom of the loadcell described as upper male rods with self-aligning rod ends.
(ii) Transverse reinforcing bars three inch by three inch tube attached to the underneath of the deck.
(iii) Support frame of four inch by six inch tubing passing through the weighing assembly.
(iv) Double acting hydraulic cylinders to raise the load.
(v) Double acting hydraulic cylinder to lock down the load.
(vi) Lock down adjusting bolts attached to a support frame and cross-arm.
(vii) The use of three weighing cells.
(viii) Rice Lake loadcells or any other S-type loadcell.
(ix) A cross-arm is not pulled down to lock the load.
(f) In using the S-type loadcell in its system the plaintiff lifts the load to be weighed into the weighing position from above and below the loadcell. In the ML1200 system the load to be weighed is placed in the weighing position from two points within the loadcell.
(g) The plaintiff's stationary and pivotal arms are external to the loadcell. The ML1200 system has stationary and pivotal arms internal to the loadcell.
(h) The plaintiff's system requires its three loadcells to be strategically placed for even weight distribution. The two module system of the ML1200 does not require this.
(i) The plaintiff's weigh system requires the construction of an additional sub-frame to facilitate its three point lifting and weighing. The ML1200 system uses no sub-frame other than that which is an integral part of the vehicle facilities.
(j) The plaintiff's system uses the loadcell as part of the lock down mechanism and in the ML1200 system the lock down mechanism is not part of the loadcell.
(k) The plaintiff's system uses digital technology and a four channel digital converter while the ML1200 system uses a simple analog indicator.
(l) The ML1200 system, with a locking mechanism totally unrelated to the loadcells operates positive locking through the absence of hydraulic pressure in the system.
(m) The ML1200 system uses a double ended shearbeam loadcell transducer, a design which permitted elimination of the linkage assembly used by the plaintiff."
[11]
In considering whether to strike specific paragraphs of the statement of defence, the principles noted above are relevant. The plaintiff alleges that paragraph 4 of the statement of defence concerning the plaintiff's motive in bringing this action should be struck because it is irrelevant, prejudicial, vexatious, and without foundation. In my view, paragraph 4 of the statement of defence should be struck on these grounds. The defendants make two assertions in paragraph 4 of the statement of defence. First, the defendants allege that the plaintiff's motive in bringing the action is improper. Second, the defendants assert that the plaintiff's system is more expensive to produce and lacks versatility.
[12]
Dealing with the second part of paragraph 4 of the statement of defence first, I am of the view that asserting that "in addition to vast and obvious dissimilarities of the two systems the plaintiff's system is substantially more expensive to produce and lacks versatility" is irrelevant.
[13]
With respect to the alleged motive of the plaintiff in bringing the action, I note that, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 51, my colleague Rothstein, J., stated that, even if a plaintiff was acting inappropriately, e.g. in breach of provisions of the
Competition Act
, such conduct was irrelevant insofar as the statement of claim was concerned. In his reasons, Mr. Justice Rothstein stated at p. 53 C.P.R.:
"In the case at bar, it may be that the plaintiff should not collect royalties in the way it is alleged it does. Or it may be that its conduct is contrary to certain provisions of the
Competition Act
. However, even if the plaintiff is acting inappropriately, such actions do not relate directly to the plaintiff's patent or whether the defendants are infringing that patent. There is no suggestion that the patent is invalid or otherwise cannot form the basis of a patent infringement action; nor is it suggested that these allegations, in some way, indicate there is no patent infringement. It has not been demonstrated that such conduct is directly related to the plaintiff's claim."
[14]
In
Amsted Industries Inc. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), affd. (1990), 112 N.R. 73; 32 C.P.R.(3d) 334 (F.C.A.), Mr. Justice Cullen was faced with a pleading in which the defendants had alleged the plaintiff's "motive" as a relevant fact. Cullen, J., concluded that it was not. He noted at p. 543 C.P.R.:
"Also, the defendant pleads the 'motive' of the plaintiff which is totally irrelevant. How does that help in any way or how is it determinative of the issues here, namely, does the plaintiff have a valid patent and has it been infringed? The fact that a party who initally held a patent and didn't move to protect that patent is hardly binding on the assignee who seeks a remedy provided for in law."
I am therefore of the view that all of paragraph 4 of the statement of defence should be struck.
[15]
I now turn to paragraphs 5 and 6 of the statement of defence. The plaintiff states that the allegations in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the statement of defence describe the defendants' weighing system in terms of its purpose and construction. The plaintiff asserts that, as such, the allegations are immaterial. Instead, the plaintiff notes that the defendants must identify whether their modular weighing system falls within the wording of the plaintiff's patent claims as particularized in the statement of claim. In her letter of 5 February 1996, counsel for the plaintiff observes:
"(2) Construction details are relevant only to the extent that they are recited as limitations within the asserted claim(s). In the case of the many details referenced in your client's Statement of Defence they are clearly not relevant and serve only to lengthen and cloud the Statement of Defence. Furthermore, it is improper for the defendant to refer to the plaintiff's product or even to the embodiment described in the disclosure of the asserted Canadian patent; rather, the comparison to be made is between the defendants' weighing system identified in the Statement of Claim and the weighing system defined by the particular asserted claim(s). ...
"(3) As stated in the previous paragraph the comparison which is required by law is a comparison of your client's product with the asserted claims of Patent No. 2,096,761. For example, with respect to claim 6 and the issue of infringement by the defendants' weighing cell the only elements of the wieghing (sic) cell which are subject to review are those defined by the claim namely: a lifting mechanism having an extended and arest (sic) position; a vertically disposed tension load cell which produces an output correlated to a tension load thereon; a linkage assembly whereby the linkage assembly couples the lifting mechanism and the load cell to cause an upward force on a first end of the load cell when the lifting mechanism is in an extended position; and, the second end of the load cell being configured for coupling to the load support frame such that the load support frame may be suspended by plurality of the load cells when the lifting mechanisms of the load cells are in extended positions. ...
"Is it the defendants' position that one (or more) of the foregoing claim limitations of claim 6 is not present in its weighing cell? If so, we demand full particulars of the defendants' position including an identification of the limitation which it alleges is not present in its weighing cell, an identification of the element of the defendants' weighing cell which is instead present and the defendants' reason for considering that any such element used by it serves to avoid infringement of the claim. Full particulars are required, in like fashion, with respect to each of the asserted claims."
[16]
It is my view that these paragraphs of the pleadings should be struck, and leave to amend these paragraphs given to the defendants. I am so ordering, first, so that the issues raised at trial may be narrowed, second, so that they are linked to allegations raised in the statement of claim, and third, to clarify the intent of these paragraphs. As counsel for the plaintiff noted in her letter of 5 February 1996:
"(5) The point you are trying to make in this paragraph [of counsel for the defendants letter of January 23, 1996, referring to paragraph 5 of the statement of defence] is not clear. If you are trying to allege that the claims of the patent are to be restricted to the specific embodiment disclosed in the patent disclosure your position is clearly in error in law. Patent claims generally stand alone and are to be read and interpreted on their face according to the plain meaning of the words of the claims. It is well established under the patent law that when interpreting patent claims reference is made to the disclosure only for purposes of construing words of the claims in cases where those words are ambiguous such that the meaning of the claim cannot be construed without reference to the disclosure. In the case of the claims of the subject patent the wording of the claims is clear and reference to the disclosure is unnecessary. In any event, the disclosure teaches the plain and broad meaning of the wording found in the claims. On the other hand, if paragraph 5 of your letter is intended to suggest that the claims are somehow to be limited to a method of weighing in pounds as distinguished from kilograms any such suggestion would be nonsense since claim 9 of the patent does not refer to any specific calibration but rather requires a determination of the 'outputs' of the load cells (whatever their calibration)."
Accordingly, paragraphs 5 and 6 of the statement of defence shall be struck and the defendants shall have until August 1, 1996 to amend their statement of defence, so as to properly respond to the relevant allegations in the statement of claim.
Paragraph 7 Of The Statement
Of Defence
[17]
Paragraph 7 of the statement of defence reads as follows:
"7. The plaintiff's patent falls within that class of patent within the rule in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  means described in the claim being protected. The defendant's entirely different method of means of determining load weight does not fall within the ambit of the plaintiff's claim."
[18]
Paragraph 7 of the statement of defence clearly violates rule 412 in that it pleads a question of law without the support of a statement of the material facts on which the conclusion is based. In
Société des produits  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), as per Dubé, J., it was held that a pleading which asserts a conclusion of law must be supported by a statement of the material facts on which the conclusion is based; otherwise, particulars will be ordered. Furthermore, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), it was held that raising a question of law is not acceptable as a substitute for a statement of the material facts. In the case at bar, in paragraph 7 of the statement of defence, it appears that the defendants have simply pleaded "the rule in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  one which falls within that rule. Clearly, the pleadings are inadequate in this regard. As counsel for the plaintiff stated in a letter to counsel for the defendants dated January 17, 1996:
"More particularly, the allegations contained in paragraph 7 are vague and ambiguous and, hence, are insufficient to reply to as the 'rule in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  why their system is considered to not fall within the scope of the plaintiff's patent claims."
I therefore order the defendants to provide particulars of paragraph 7 of the statement of defence, as requested by the solicitor for the plaintiff in his letter of January 17, 1996. The defendants shall have until August 1, 1996 to provide these particulars.
Paragraphs 8-10 Of The Statement
Of Defence
[19]
Paragraphs 8-10 of the statement of defence state:
"8. The patent is invalid being based on a specification that is insufficient or ambiguous. The plaintiff's several claims in the patent do not individually or collectively disclose an invention as defined in the
Patent Act
.
9. The patent is invalid because it involves a mere aggregation of know (sic) elements and arrangement of parts well known in the field of hydraulic lifting devices, truck and trailer design and the mounting of loadcell transducers in the field of electronic weighing.
10. The essence and substance of the plaintiff's claim is in the mounting of loadcell transducers to determine weight in an onboard application. As such the patent is invalid on the ground of widespread application and use for a period of time exceeding the period of protection provided in the
Patent Act
and the defendant specifically pleads such limitation."
[20]
With respect to paragraphs 8-10 of the statement of defence, the plaintiff asserts that these paragraphs appear to be intended to define a counterclaim against the validity of the plaintiff's patent; the plaintiff asserts that it requires further and better particulars of any such allegation or a further and better statement of the nature of the case it has to meet.
[21]
Mr. Maclean swears that paragraphs 8-10 of the statement of defence, when read in light of paragraph 11(a), comprise allegations which are the subject of an intended counterclaim alleging the validity of the plaintiff's patent. However, the statement of defence does not clearly identify whether the defendants counterclaim or allege as a defence that the plaintiff's patent is not valid. In any event, Mr. Maclean swears that it is necessary, for the purposes of the plaintiff preparing a reply or a reply and defence to counterclaim, that the defendants provide particulars to allegations of invalidity. In particular, Mr. Maclean swears that the following particulars are required:
"a. With respect to paragraph 8, the defendants are required to identify the alleged part(s) of the patent specification which they consider to be insufficient and ambiguous and to state their reasons for such a conclusion; and, for what reason or reasons do the defendants consider that the claim of the patent do not 'disclose' an invention.
b. With respect to paragraph 9, the defendants are required to identify which elements and parts of the subject matter defined by the plaintiff's asserted patent claims are alleged to be well known in the field of hydraulic engineering and when do the defendants allege that such knowledge became well known. The defendants are also required to identify why they allege that the plaintiff's claimed invention is considered to comprise a mere aggregation.
c. With respect to paragraph 10, the defendants are required to identify what is the meaning of the referenced 'period of protection' therein, how long such period is and when it is considered to have commenced. Further, the defendants must identify how such period would affect the validity of the patent. In addition, the defendants must identify what subject matter exactly is alleged to have been applied and used (i.e. structurally defined and supported by the particulars of any documentation on which this allegation is based), when and by whom and in what manner the subject matter allegedly applied and used."
[22]
The defendant Massload's counsel asserts that there are a number of ambiguities in the plaintiff's patent and that many of the claims in that patent are ambiguous. The defendant Massload's counsel canvasses these ambiguities in some detail; however, this appears to be more consistent with argument regarding the merits of the plaintiff's patent than it does with argument regarding the proper construction of the statement of defence. Counsel for the defendants asserts that the claim that particulars are required in respect of paragraph 8 of the statement of defence is not well-founded. The paragraph is relevant in that, in determining whether a patent has been infringed, the court must consider the "confused draftsmanship" in the patent. The defendants continue:
"8. ... The plaintiff has developed a mechanical devise (sic) for which it claims priority on a weigh system, a weigh assembly and a weighing process. The mechanical devise (sic) or arrangement of parts is only a mechanical feature in a larger process and is thus misdescribed and lacks subject matter. If this is regarded merely as a negative plea particulars may not be required.
(i)
Minnesota Mining and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  solicitor asserts that paragraph 9 of the statement of defence involves a plea that the subject matter of the patent is a matter of common general knowledge. The defendants cite
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) in support of this proposition.
[24]
In a letter dated 17 January 1996, the solicitor for the plaintiff stated:
"Further, with respect to paragraphs 8-10, which paragraphs appear to comprise a counterclaim pursuant to the
Rules
, we state as follows. The defendants have not provided sufficient, specific particulars of the allegations which challenge the validity of the patent. Specifically, the allegations do not particularize what part of the specification is alleged to be insufficient or ambiguous or why the claims are alleged not to disclose (sic) an invention (viz. paragraph 8) or which elements and parts are alleged to be well known in the field of hydraulic lifting devices (viz. paragraph 9).
"Moreover, the intent of paragraph 10 is unclear and the meaning of 'the period of protection provided in the
Patent Act
' unknown. What is the meaning of the referenced 'period of protection'? How long is it and when did it commence? What bearing does this have on the issue of validity with respect to the subject patent? Further, the defendants allege that 'the patent is invalid on the ground of wide-spread application and use.' However, the
Rules
of the Federal Court require that the particulars of the alleged 'widespread application and use', including dates, be set out in the defendants' pleading to support such a broad allegation. Thus the plaintiff requires particulars of what it is exactly which is alleged to have been applied and used (i.e. structurally defined and supported by the particulars of any documentation on which this allegation is based), when and by whom and in what manner."
Further, in her letter of 5 February 1996, the solicitor for the plaintiff again observed that:
"The allegations in paragraphs 8 through 10 of the Statement of Defence are clearly improper and unless these are amended to assert valid and recognized legal bases for invalidity, which are sufficiently particularized to enable the plaintiff to respond to the same, the proposed motion will be scheduled without further notice to you."
I prefer the plaintiff's submissions on this issue. It is difficult at first blush to ascertain whether the defendants are trying to establish a counterclaim or whether they are merely challenging the validity of the patent. The purpose of a statement of defence is to enable the plaintiff to know the basis of the defendants' case. I am of the view that paragraphs 8 to 10 are too broadly stated for the plaintiff to be able to adequately respond. The function of particulars, as I noted above, is to enable the party requesting them to know the nature of the case it has to meet, to prevent surprise at the trial, to facilitate the gathering of evidence, to limit the generality of the pleadings, to limit the issues to be tried, and to prevent the party, without leave, from going into matters not pleaded or included in the particulars. I shall therefore order the defendants to provide particulars of paragraphs 8 through 10 of the statement of defence pursuant to the request contained in the letters of counsel for the plaintiff dated January 17, 1996 and February 5, 1996. The defendant shall have until August 1, 1996 to do so. Costs shall be in favour of the plaintiff in any event of the cause.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Janette Blue/saf
[End of document]