[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for judicial review seeking an order to set aside the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division (the "tribunal") of the Immigration and Refugee Board, dated May 9, 1992, that the applicant is not a Convention refugee.
[2]
The application was heard in Toronto on August 31, 1993 when decision was reserved. After consideration of submissions then made and review of the transcript of the hearing before the tribunal, its decision and other documents on file, by order dated September 3, 1993, I dismissed the application. These are reasons for that order.
[3]
The applicant is a citizen of the People's Republic of China, now 28 years of age, who arrived in Canada on August 2, 1991 and claimed Convention refugee status on grounds of membership in a particular social group and his political opinion. He lived in Guang Zhou city where he was born and educated. In his Personal Information Form he claimed that his father was persecuted by government authorities because of his perceived political opinion, persecution which resulted in his father's death in 1972, and that thereafter the claimant and his family were regarded negatively and discriminated against because they were considered politically undesirable. After completing high school studies in 1980, the claimant was employed at a hotel as a cook until 1988 when he found employment with a state-operated trading company. First employed there as a sales person, he was promoted in 1989 to be one of two supervisors of purchasing and sales.
[4]
Soon after his promotion, two university graduates were assigned to work in sales under his supervision. He testified that he and they shared common views about shortcomings of the governmental system, which they discussed at his home. In May 1989, the claimant assigned the two students to Beijing, ostensibly to contact customers and suppliers of the trading company but in reality to permit the students to join in the pro-democracy demonstrations then being led by students in Beijing. The students returned to Guang Zhou about June 10 and completed the usual reports of their contacts on behalf of the trading company. They also informed the claimant that they had joined in the demonstrations in Tiananmen Square, including being there early on June 4, 1989, but not later in the day when the demonstrations were forcibly terminated by the army. Three days after their return the general manager of the company asked the claimant to account for the activities of the two university graduates during their absence from Guang Zhou and the claimant advised him of the companies they had visited while in Beijing.
[5]
A few days later the claimant and the two university graduates were taken to the Public Security Bureau where they were separately questioned. The claimant's story is that he was physically mistreated, questioned for some three hours and then detained at the Bureau for some two months during which he was questioned and physically mistreated, tortured, on a number of occasions. At the end of that period he was forcibly made to sign a confession that he was a counter-revolutionary. He was then sent to prison where he served a sentence for one year. When released in August 1990, he was considered under house arrest at his home in Guang Zhou and required to report to the local Public Security Bureau office every three days. In September 1990, he was sent by his company to a labour camp in Lai Chen County, a camp designed for reorientation of those considered to be politically unreliable. There he was required to work long days in the fields and to engage in political orientation sessions at night. Apparently there was no term fixed for his detention at the labour camp; release was dependant upon perceived progress in political education. He remained at the labour camp until early February 1991, when, while ostensibly on a shopping expedition under relaxed security practices of the camp, he simply walked away.
[6]
He called at the home of a farmer whom he did not know and who, without asking him any questions, gave him money he asked for because he said he was tired and hungry. That money he used to pay bus fares for public transit first to Guang Zhou and thence to Zheng Zhun, near Hong Kong, where he stayed in hiding for two months. He was visited there by a brother who lived in Hong Kong. Arrangements were made for him to leave the People's Republic of China, by way of Hong Kong, and he left there by airplane in mid-April. No details of his journey to Canada are set out in his PIF or by his testimony before the tribunal where he was not questioned about the matter.
[7]
Having introduced documentary evidence at the hearing including the claimant's birth certificate, student card, graduation certificates from training courses as a cook, and other documents, counsel for the applicant introduced a further document after his questioning of the applicant was completed. This document, with translation provided, was a summons issued February 6, 1991, after he had left the work camp, directing him to report to the local police station in Guang Zhou on the morning of February 10, 1991. The applicant testified that document had been sent to him from China by his mother, for use at his hearing in regard to his refugee claim. Other documentary evidence was presented at the hearing by the Refugee Hearing Officer ("RHO").
[8]
After hearing his testimony and having submissions from the RHO at the hearing and subsequently from counsel for the applicant in writing, the tribunal found the applicant not to be a Convention refugee. In its decision, it found his claim to refugee status by reason of his membership in a particular social group, his family, was not established since even his own testimony did not provide any objective evidence of his claim to fear persecution on that ground. That finding is not disputed. The decision also found that his claim relating to his political opinion was not well-founded. By his own testimony, authorities were not aware of any involvement on his part in pro-democracy demonstrations in Guang Zhou, his only involvement known to authorities concerned his authorization of the two students to go to Beijing where they participated in demonstrations. For that, his imprisonment for a year and his internal exile in the labour camp appeared to the panel to be unduly harsh treatment in light of documentary evidence before the panel which described a lax response to capturing and prosecuting pro-democracy activists in Guang Zhou city.
[9]
The tribunal's conclusion was stated thus:
"Given the documentation before the panel ... it seems so unlikely as to be implausible ... that government authorities in Guang Zhou would ... have arrested and imprisoned the claimant for his alleged involvement in pro-democracy activities. Furthermore, the panel is of the opinion that the documentation which was sent by the claimant's family to him in Canada, for purposes of using in his refugee claim, is self-serving and, therefore, the panel did not give much weight to this evidence. The panel is of the opinion that the claimant's entire story is not plausible. We cannot find that the claimant's alleged fear is well-founded. Based on all the evidence before us, the claimant has failed to establish a well-founded fear of persecution in the People's Republic of China on any of the grounds in the definition."
[10]
Several errors by the tribunal are urged by the applicant in written submissions but at the hearing of this matter counsel relied in the main on two errors which, in his view, warranted the setting aside of the tribunal's decision. The first, described as an overriding error, was the tribunal's reference to the summons as "self-serving" evidence to which little weight should be given. The tribunal did not question the validity of the document, but the applicant's testimony that it was sent to him by his mother for use at his hearing appears to have been the basis for the tribunal's description. Counsel points out that all documentary evidence adduced by the applicant can be described as "self-serving". I do not accept the suggestion of counsel for the respondent, referring to
Black's Law Dictionary
, that the tribunal meant by the description that the document was manufactured by or for the applicant to serve his purposes at the hearing. While I would not have described the document as the tribunal here did, that is not the test I must apply (see, per Mr. Justice Noël in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Moreover, its assessment of weight to be given to that document, as to any other, is a matter within the discretion of the tribunal in assessing the evidence before it.
[11]
The tribunal's conclusion of the weight to be given to the summons arises from its overall assessment of the applicant's evidence, particularly in light of its inference that the applicant's story of his imprisonment and subsequent exile at a labour camp was harsher treatment for the comparatively little involvement of the applicant in pro-democracy activities which was known to the authorities. By his own testimony, his involvement in demonstrations in Guang Zhou was not known to them and their only concern was with his authorization of the two former students to travel to Beijing, where they, not the applicant, participated in supporting demonstrations. The documentary evidence, which the tribunal, by quoting from it, acknowledged was incomplete, clearly indicated few cases of punishment and comparatively little active pursuit by authorities of pro-democracy activists in Guang Zhou. By inference drawn from that evidence the tribunal found the applicant's story of his punishment implausible.
[12]
That finding and the conclusion that the applicant's entire story was implausible raises the second principal error here alleged by the applicant. It is said that the tribunal erred in not confronting the applicant with the bases of its finding of implausibility and providing him an opportunity to respond before concluding that his evidence was implausible, or not credible. In relation to this ground I accept that while the tribunal did not describe its concerns as the bases of a potential finding of implausibility, a member of the tribunal did indicate, in questioning the applicant at the tribunal's hearing before its decision was made, that certain matters puzzled him. He invited the applicant to provide further explanation about the apparently harsh treatment for permitting two others to go to Beijing where they participated in demonstrations and why, after his escape from the labour camp, he received a summons simply to report at a certain time at the local security bureau. I believe that insofar as there were specific concerns about his testimony, held by members of the tribunal, those were indeed brought to his attention through questions asked of him.
[13]
The tribunal may have had a general sense, not related to any specific aspect of his evidence, that led it to conclude his entire story was implausible. For example, he claimed to fear persecution on grounds of membership in a social group, his family, but this was not supported by any objective evidence or testimony, rather his testimony on the whole negated his claim to mistreatment by authorities because of his family membership. This could not have supported his claim generally. While that claim is not mentioned by the tribunal as a ground for finding his story implausible, the decision clearly rejects that claim on the evidence given by the applicant himself. In my view, conclusions of that sort, which form a part of the tribunal's assessment of implausibility, or its general conclusions on credibility of the evidence, do not require the tribunal to provide opportunity for the claimant to respond to its concerns before the tribunal's final decision is made. The burden is on the claimant to persuade the tribunal that he or she meets the definition of Convention refugee. If he or she is not persuasive, the tribunal so decides and sets out, as clearly and succinctly as it can the reasons why it reached that conclusion. Those reasons need not all be related to the applicant's response to concerns expressed by the tribunal, unless those concerns be particular and the bases of its conclusions.
[14]
In sum, it is my view that the tribunal's conclusions were open to it on the evidence before it. It did not commit an overriding error which would warrant intervention by this court. Its conclusion about the weight to be given to the summons presented by the applicant, said to be such an error, is not an overriding error, in my view. Rather, the weight to be given to that was a matter for the tribunal to assess.
[15]
The tribunal's decision ultimately rests on its conclusion that the evidence of the applicant in support of his claim was not credible, or as the decision described its conclusion, "the claimant's entire story is not plausible". Since I am not persuaded that the tribunal erred in law, or erred in a perverse or capricious manner in finding facts upon which its decision was based, this court will not intervene.
[16]
The application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/blk
[End of document]