Background
[1]
Joyal, J.
: The issue before me had its roots over thirty years ago when the Musqueam Indian Band, comprising at that time some 235 members, surrendered 162 acres of its reserve lands in Vancouver to the defendant Crown which in turn leased the acreage to the defendant Shaughnessy Golf and Country Club (the Club).
[2]
The terms of the lease were not agreeable to the plaintiff Band and many years later, in 1977, it instituted an action in damages in this court against the Crown [see footnote 1]. In its statement of claim, the Band prayed for the following relief:
"(a) A declaration that the defendant Crown was in breach of its trust responsibility in agreeing to and executing the lease;
"(b) A declaration of the amount of damages suffered by the Band as a result of the breach of trust and;
"(c) An award of damages for the loss of revenue suffered;
"(d) Further or other relief."
[3]
The action eventually came on for trial on September 18, 1979, before Collier, J., who found that the Crown had indeed been in breach of trust and awarded the Band $10 million in damages.
[4]
The Crown appealed that judgment to the Federal Court of Appeal which, in its unanimous decision on December 10, 1982, found that the Crown did not owe a fiduciary duty to the Band and allowed the appeal.
[5]
The Band then appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada. In its judgment rendered on November 1, 1984, the Supreme Court allowed the appeal and restored the original trial judgment as to both the Crown's liability and the quantum of damages awarded. Effective that same day, the damages, together with interest, were paid into the Band's revenue account held by the Crown.
[6]
And there the matter rested until January 21, 1988, when another action was instituted by the Band before this court against the Crown and the Club. The facts alleged are substantially the same as in the original action but this time, the Band's claims are expressed as follows:
"(a) a declaration that the 1956 surrender from the Band to the Crown is void and illegal;
"(b) in the alternative, rescission of the surrender;
"(c) a declaration that the Band is entitled to the exclusive use, occupation and possession of the lands encompassed by the lease;
"(d) a declaration that the lease is void;
"(e) a declaration that the Band is entitled to terminate the lease;
"(f) in the alternative, rescission of the lease."
[7]
In the eyes of both the defendant Crown and the defendant Club, this new action was not one from which they could jauntily run away. Consequently, the Club applied to the court for an order pursuant to rule 419(a), (b), (c), (e) and (f) of the Federal Court Rules striking out the Band's statement of claim as being redundant, vexatious, and otherwise an abuse of the process of this court. At a later date, the Crown applied to the court for similar relief under rule 419 and further alleged that the Band's claims were statute-barred and extinguished.
[8]
The two motions came on to be heard together in Vancouver on November 29 and 30, 1989. Two days before the hearing, however, the Band's counsel filed a notice of discontinuance against the defendant Club.
[9]
This latter move provided the grounds for some skirmishing between counsel for all three parties. It seemed evident, however, that notwithstanding the discontinuance, the Club's counsel should be heard in argument for purposes of the motions. Counsel then agreed to a procedure which would avoid unnecessary duplication and give the Band's counsel full opportunity to respond. In any event, as I indicated to counsel, I would have otherwise granted the Club intervenor status in order to enable it to pursue its motion.
The Plaintiffs' Pleadings
[10]
The impugned statement of claim, if I may summarize it, recites in detail the events which took place in October 1957, when the Band voted to surrender 162 acres of its reserve lands to the Crown. This approval was on the basis that the surrender was for the expressed purpose of leasing the lands to the Club for use as a golf club upon specific terms, i.e., a total lease period of 75 years with an initial ten year term and subsequent renewal terms of five years; an amount of $29,000 for rental for the first term with rental increases based on fair market value at each renewal; no limitation on rental increases, and at the lease's expiration, reversal to the Band of all lessee's improvements.
[11]
The statement of claim alleges that the Crown exercised undue influence on the Band, misrepresented the value of the land for lease purposes, failed to disclose that other people had shown interest in the land, refused to provide for the Band access to legal counsel and appraisers and eventually entered into a lease with the Club on terms which were unknown and unacceptable to the Band.
[12]
There is a further allegation that both defendants unlawfully conspired to defraud the Band, to injure its economic interests, to deprive it of its economic rights and to permit the Club to enjoy an unconscionable benefit from the Crown's breach of trust.
[13]
As a consequence, the Band claims that both the surrender and the lease are void and unenforceable, that the leased lands should revert to the Band's possession and that the defendant Club should be ejected from the premises.
The Defendants' Case
[14]
The defendants' motion to strike is basically founded on the doctrine of res judicata or issue estoppel. The Crown suggests that the court is asked to entertain a claim which has already been fully adjudicated and that the settled issue between the Band and the Crown should not be resurrected under another guise by the use of artful language in the pleadings. The Band, says the Crown, had ample opportunity in the earlier case to challenge the validity of the surrender and subsequent lease. It chose, however, to accept them as valid and subsisting and to claim damages for breach of trust. The Band was successful in this claim and the $10 million award is the measure of damages assessed and that should be the answer to all issues.
[15]
The proposition in law, as stated by the defendants, is that the principles of res judicata or issue estoppel preclude the Band from claiming again, over the very same issue. The action is inconsistent and contradictory to the facts which were fundamental to the previous action. Damages were assessed against the Crown in that earlier case and it is clear on reading the judgments at both the trial and the Supreme Court level that such damages were assessed on the basis of full recovery to the Band for any loss suffered as a result of the Crown's breach. The doctrine of restitution was fully respected in the assessment process and the nature of this restitution in monetary terms was to provide the Band with the kind of compensation for all losses, past, present and future suffered by the Band. In essence, it is said, the action of the Band is merely an attempt to relitigate an issue which was fundamental to the decision in the earlier proceedings brought by the same plaintiff.
[16]
As regards the Club's position, its absence from the roster in the earlier proceedings is of no consequence. There are no new material facts pleaded in the new action which might lead to different results. There is no allegation that the previous decision favourable to the Band was obtained through fraud or misconduct and might justify a rehearing.
[17]
Furthermore, according to the Club, the Band has not only enjoyed the benefits of a $10 million compensation package but since the very beginning of the lease in 1958, it has enjoyed the benefit of the rental payments. It would be inconceivable that after more than thirty years, the Band should now strive to turn back the clock, dispossess the Club and be put back into possession of the leased lands.
The Band's Response
[18]
The main thrust in the Band's argument is that the court is faced with a separate and distinct cause of action. The first cause of action which was for breach of trust lies within the realm of private law and private policy. The new cause of action rests in the field of public law affecting the statutory duties and responsibilities of the Crown in dealing with Indian lands. The Crown's action respecting the surrender and the lease, in the light of all the circumstances which were determined in the earlier case, raises the issue of statutory conditions for the exercise of Crown powers. Such conditions being found wanting, there is a serious issue that the Crown acted in excess of its authority or jurisdiction, resulting in a surrender and a lease which are void ab initio and which cannot be validated by an award of compensation or by any antecedent, current or future action on the part of any or all the parties involved.
[19]
Accordingly, says the Band, the fact that its new action is based on the same set of facts as in the previous one is not material. The issue in the new action cannot be said to be the same. The actual validity of the surrender and lease has not yet been litigated.
[20]
Furthermore, the Band suggests that even though the requisite elements of estoppel or res judicata might be met, there are special or equitable circumstances in the case justifying an exception to be made. The Band enumerates these various circumstances as follows:
"1. There is the matter of a 'conspiracy' between the Crown and the Club to defraud the Band;
"2. The compensation already awarded is not a fair remedy, keeping in mind that the trial judge in the earlier action significantly reduced the damages award on the contingency that the Club might terminate the lease on any one of its several renewal dates;
"3. Damages were assessed in 1985 as of 1958 and no prejudgment interest was paid;
"4. The Club has been unjustly enriched to the detriment of the Band;
"5. The lands have a current value of $100 million which should yield to the Band an income of $10 million annually, a figure far more realistic than the $1 million received over the past thirty years under current terms."
[21]
In this light, argues the Band, fairness requires that the Band be permitted to proceed to trial. There are serious issues raised and these issues involve matters of fact and law as well as policy considerations affecting native rights which have evolved considerably over the past thirty years.
The Law
[22]
There is no dearth of cases to which reference might be made in support of one side or the other. Over the years, various principles have accumulated respecting motions to strike in general and in applying appropriate doctrine to the issue.
[23]
There is no doubt that any motion to strike pursuant to rule 419 of the rules of this court must be considered very carefully. Striking an action has a draconian flavour to it and it is settled law that it should only be used in exceptional cases.
[24]
Rule 419, in its substantive provisions under subrule 419(1), is clearly worded and offers no structural difficulties in its interpretation. It provides as follows:
"Rule 419(1) The court may at any stage of an action order any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that
(a) it discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, as the case may be,
(b) it is immaterial or redundant,
(c) it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious,
(d) it may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial to the action,
(e) it constitutes a departure from a previous pleading, or
(f) it is otherwise an abuse of the process of the court,
and may order the action to be stayed or dismissed or judgment to be entered accordingly."
[25]
It is clear that the rule provides for striking out a whole pleading or for striking out any part of it. It is meant to cover many situations. Its whole purpose is to assure the orderly administration of justice and, in the context of procedural rules and an adversary system, to control to some degree the kinds of cases which are deserving of the litigation process.
[26]
I need not go into a full analysis as to how each individual head of rule 419 has been applied by the court to meet the facts and circumstances of individual cases, limited as they are to an analysis of a particular pleading. The pleading before me, the statement of claim as a whole, cannot be said to be immaterial or redundant, or prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action, or constitute a departure from a previous pleading. Nor can the Crown or the Club rely on rule 419(1)(a) when, for striking purposes, the facts alleged in the statement of claim are taken to be true and no evidence is admissible thereunder. Nor can they rely on the issue of limitations. The general principle in that regard, if one follows  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  statement of defence before the court will consider striking an action on those grounds.
[27]
We are left therefore with the plea that the statement of claim is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious or otherwise an abuse of the process of the court. In more articulate terms, it might be one of issue estoppel or res judicata, two somewhat parallel doctrines which have been historically shackled by judicial subtleties but which, in a more contemporary mode, appear to adopt a more unadorned fabric.
[28]
As between these two concepts, the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 560-561, attempts to distinguish them:
"I fully recognize the distinction between the doctrine of res judicata where another action is brought for the same cause of action as has been the subject of previous adjudication, and the doctrine of estoppel when the cause of action being different, some point or issue of fact has already been decided (I may call it 'issue estoppel')."
[29]
This is the view adopted by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in dealing with issue estoppel as follows: ... "(1) that the same question has been decided; (2) that the judicial decision which is said to create the estoppel was final; and, (3) that the parties to the judicial decision or their privies were the same persons as the parties to the proceedings in which the estoppel is raised or their privies".
[30]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Supreme Court of Canada cites with approval the comments found in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 115:
"... I believe I state the rule of the court correctly when I say that where a given matter becomes the subject of litigation in, and of adjudication by, a court of competent jurisdiction the court requires the parties to that litigation to bring forward their whole case, and will not (except under special circumstances) permit the same parties to open the same subject of litigation in respect of matter which might have been brought forward as part of the subject in contest, but which was not brought forward, only because they have, from negligence, inadvertence, or even accident, omitted part of their case. The plea of res judicata applies, except in special cases, not only to points upon which the court was actually required by the parties to form an opinion and pronounce a judgment, but to every point which properly belonged to the subject of litigation, and which the parties, exercising reasonable diligence, might have brought forward at the time."
[31]
Again, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Supreme Court of Canada quotes with approval the following from Lord Shaw's speech in the Hoystead case (supra), at p. 254:
"Parties are not permitted to begin fresh litigations because of new views they may entertain of the law of the case, or new versions which they present as to what should be a proper apprehension by the court of the legal result either of the construction of the documents or the weight of certain circumstances. If this were permitted litigation would have no end, except when legal ingenuity is exhausted. It is a principle of law that this cannot be permitted, and there is abundant authority reiterating that principle."
[32]
Lord Shaw goes on to state  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"Thirdly, the same principle -- namely, that of setting to rest rights of litigants, applies to the case where a point, fundamental to the decision, taken or assumed by the plaintiff and traversable by the defendant, has not been traversed. In that case also a defendant is bound by the judgment, although it may be true enough that subsequent light or ingenuity might suggest some traverse which had not been taken. The same principle of setting parties' rights to rest applies and estoppel occurs."
[33]
And further:
"It is seen from this citation of authority that if in any court of competent jurisdiction a decision is reached, a party is estopped from questioning it in a new legal proceeding. But the principle also extends to any point, whether of assumption or admission, which was in substance the ratio of and fundamental to the decision."
[34]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the court was faced with an action of damages for assault by six people who had been convicted of murder in a terrorist explosion.
[35]
The allegations of assault had been made in the course of their murder trial when the admissibility of certain statements to the police was brought in question. The trial judge had ruled that the statements were admissible and the jury itself, left with the option of deciding that those statements were worthless, nevertheless convicted the six people. On the subsequent action for damages for assault, Lord Denning, M.R., at p. 316, said this:
"In seeking to strike out these actions, the police rely first on the law as to issue estoppel. They say that the six men are estopped from raising again an issue which was decided by Bridge, J. Secondly, if that be wrong, the police say that these actions are an abuse of the process of the court. Now of these two propositions, I feel that priority should be given to issue estoppel. If they are to be stopped, it must be by way of an estoppel of some kind or other."
[36]
At p. 323, Lord Denning went on to say:
"It cannot be right that these actions should go any further. They should be struck out either on the ground that the six men are estopped from challenging the decision of Bridge, J., or alternatively that it is an abuse of the process of the court. Whichever it is, the actions should be stopped."
[37]
Another opinion in the same appeal was expressed by Goff, L.J., at p. 330:
"... the court clearly has a discretionary power to stay an action on the ground that the plaintiff is seeking to raise again a question already judicially decided against him, where he has had a full opportunity of presenting his whole case, even though the parties are different so that there is technically no estoppel. In my judgment also this power can be exercised at an early stage on application to strike out, although its exercise then calls for great caution ..."
[38]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , mortgagors had complained against the bank and its appraisers that they had been negligent and in breach of fiduciary duty in connection with the forced sale of a property at a price of $330,000 which had later been resold for a considerably larger sum. The mortgagors had objected to the order approving the sale but had been unsuccessful. When the bank claimed against the mortgagors to make good on their personal covenants, the mortgagors counterclaimed against both the bank and the appraisers and again alleged breach of trust and fiduciary duty. The bank applied to have the counterclaim struck. In allowing the application, Harding, L.J.S.C., said this at p. 265:
"In this case, the appraisers were not party to the original action. ... It would, however, be an abuse of process to allow the action against the appraisers. The Singhs seek judgment against the appraisers on exactly the same facts and issues as were dealt with by Cowan, L.J.S.C. To hold against the appraisers I would have to hold that Cowan, L.J.S.C., was wrong."
[39]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the plaintiff had repudiated his offer to purchase some 24 townhouses in Winnipeg on grounds of misrepresentations. The negotiations had been through Smith and Montreal Trust as agents for the vendor. An action in damages was then commenced by the vendor in Alberta and the court there found for damages in the amount of $129,032. The vendor and the purchaser later settled for $85,000. The purchaser then commenced an action against the agents Smith and Montreal Trust in Manitoba claiming the same amount as indemnity.
[40]
In striking the action, Lyon, J.A., for the majority of the Court of Appeal stated the following, at p. 419:
"Plaintiff's counsel argues that the breach of a fiduciary duty allegedly owed by the defendants to Mr. Solomon transforms the Manitoba action into a new and nonadjudicated issue. At first blush that argument is persuasive, save for the plaintiff's pleading in para. 10 of the statement of claim that the fiduciary duty had been 'breached by making the said misrepresentations'. The breach of fiduciary duty, therefore, derives its sole vitality, as the pleadings state, from the allegation of 'misrepresentations'. And that allegation, to complete the circle, has already been decided against Mr. Solomon and declared untrue. That being so, to permit it to be retried in a vain attempt to sustain his action against Montreal Trust and Mr. Smith would constitute, in the circumstances of this case, an abuse of process."
[41]
Lyon, J.A., went on to say at p. 421:
"I agree with Philp, J.A., that a plea of issue estoppel is not available. However, to permit the statement of claim to proceed would be an abuse of process and that is the principle applicable. In considering this doctrine, it seems to me prudent to avoid hard and fast institutionalized rules such as those which attach to the plea of issue estoppel. By encouraging the determination of each case on its own facts against the general principle of the plea of abuse, serious prejudice to either party as well as to the proper administration of justice can best be avoided. Maintaining open and ready access to the courts by all legitimate suitors is fundamental to our system of justice. However, to achieve this worthy purpose, we must be vigilant to ensure that the system does not become unnecessarily clogged with repetitious litigation of the kind here attempted. There should be an end to this litigation. To allow the plaintiff to retry the issue of misrepresentation would be a classic example of abuse of process -- a waste of the time and resources of the litigants and the court and an erosion of the principle of finality so crucial to the proper administration of justice."
[42]
In a similar case where res judicata was pleaded in defence of a second action, Weatherston, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , stated at p. 305:
"Because this is a rule of public policy, in which the court exercises its inherent jurisdiction to prevent an abuse of its process, I think I am entitled to take a rather broader view of the matter than by simply applying the doctrine of res judicata in its narrow sense."
[43]
Substantially the same view that the principle of res judicata in its various manifestations had become far too complicated was adopted by Chief Justice McEachern of the Supreme Court of British Columbia in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1964] 1 All E.R. 341 (C.A.); and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1966] 3 W.L.R. 125; [1966] 2 All E.R. 536 (H.L.).
"More recently, however, a number of English authorities, particularly Lord Denning, have suggested that the principle of abuse of process prevents a party from relitigating a question which has been fairly decided against him. This received grudging approval in the House of Lords in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1987] 3 All E.R. 727.
"In the United States as early as 1927 it was held that no one can have an issue retried unless the original finding was obtained by fraud or some similar ground of invalidity: Eagle,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (1927). Then, in 1971, the United States Supreme Court stated they would not be mechanically bound by rules of mutuality or of mutuality of estoppel but, rather, that trial courts ought to have a broad discretion to determine whether issue estoppel should be applied. Fairness seems to be the test they applied:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  L. Ed. 2d 788; 91 S. Ct. 1434 (1971), and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a plaintiff had advised the defendant that he was abandoning his claim for specific performance on a contract and would only proceed on damages for breach. When he claimed for specific performance in his action, the defendant moved to have it struck out. Reed, J., of this court reviewed the authorities, raised the issue as to whether or not the information given by the plaintiff to the defendant constituted an election in the absence of any material detriment to the defendant and refused the application. At p. 514 of her reasons, she said this:
"On the basis of the authorities cited to me by counsel for the plaintiff I do not think the issue is so clearly beyond doubt. There is an issue of law which should be fully canvassed at trial and not dealt with in a summary fashion on an interlocutory application such as this."
[46]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the British Columbia Court of Appeal, in a majority decision, refused to strike an action by a spouse seeking a declaration that her divorce, as well as her subsequent remarriage, were null and void on grounds that the divorce had been obtained by fraud and through collusion between all parties to the divorce action. The court found that the situation involved breach of statute and raised questions of public interest which justified the matter proceeding even though the plaintiff herself had been a party to the fraud.
[47]
In Re Bullen, a British Columbia Supreme Court decision reported at (1971), 21 D.L.R.(2d) 628, refused an application to strike on grounds of res judicata when it was not clear on what principle or principles of law the earlier decision had been based.
[48]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Alberta Court of Appeal decided that allegations of bias and nondisclosure of essential information in an earlier decision was a bar to the application of the doctrine of res judicata.
[49]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Court of Appeal found that where special circumstances exist, an application to strike on grounds of res judicata will be refused.
[50]
Some general observations may now be made on what the courts have said, or permitted themselves to say, in dealing with the various factual situations when motions to strike were being entertained. I observe, for example, that the various strictures historically imposed on the application of res judicata or estoppel seem to be slowly withering away. In the Hunter case (supra), Lord Denning had no hesitation in striking the plaintiffs' claim even though the parties to the second action were not the same. It could be suggested that on the face of the action taken by six convicted murderers, the issue was so scandalous that his Lordship might not be found wanting in boldly stating that whether it was a case of estoppel or an abuse of process, the action should be stopped.
[51]
It would also appear, as in Solomon (supra), that when estoppel is in doubt, a court will not hesitate in staying an action on grounds of abuse of process. There again, the parties were not the same.
[52]
The comment of Chief Justice McEachern in the Saskatoon Credit case (supra), is in my mind quite appropriate. He paraphrases Lord Denning's colourful observations in indicating how needlessly confusing has been the issue of res judicata or estoppel.
[53]
I have also quoted Lyon, J.A., in the Solomon case (supra) and I conclude that he also adopts the view that where respect for judicial pronouncements on estoppel creates more obstacles than solutions, a simple case of abuse of process may be found.
[54]
There is finally the constant, underlying exercise of judicial discretion whenever a motion to strike is entertained. Whatever expressions a court may adopt in giving its reasons, or in quoting reasons for judicial pronouncements in support, the final tip of the scale either way becomes not very much more than a reasoned judgment call.
[55]
I should therefore conclude that on the state of the law, as contemporaneously expressed, the individual and indeed the special circumstances of any given case are paramount and it is not necessary to rely on confused principles of res judicata or estoppel when in the eyes of the court, the case is one of abuse of process.
[56]
With these somewhat gratuitous observations in mind, I should now return to the issue before me and review case law cited by the parties, more particularly related to leases and to Indian lands.
[57]
In the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the House of Lords held that as the respondents had not repudiated certain leases on machinery after the discovery of alleged false representations but had continued to work the machines and had paid royalties thereon, they had elected to treat the leases as subsisting and could not afterwards avoid them. Lord Atkinson, at p. 339, quotes the rule laid down in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  forfeiture he, by the receipt of rent or other unequivocal act, shows his intention to treat the lease as subsisting, he has determined his election for ever and can no longer avoid the lease".
[58]
A similar conclusion was reached by Lysyk, J., of the British Columbia Supreme Court in the celebrated case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  one party seeks to avoid a contract on the basis of the other party's failure to comply with statutory requirements, the approach taken by the court may be influenced by the consequence of such noncompliance. Does it render the contract void (as in Home Assur.) or voidable (as in Dorsch) or, as in the present case, merely unenforceable? Waiver, for example, may be available if the transaction is voidable but not if it is void:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 181 (S.C.). The question of whether one party may be precluded from relying upon the other's noncompliance with governing legislation as a defence to an action on the contract can be framed in more than one way. While the choice of doctrine and vocabulary varies, the central issue posed may be much the same: has the party invoking the statute affirmed the contract unequivocally by his words or conduct in circumstances making it unfair or unjust for him now to resile from that contract? The answer to that question, in the instant case, requires an examination of Mr. Bekei's actions between the time he signed the contract documents on 16th December 1981 and his repudiation of the contract some 15 1/2 months later on 4th April 1983."
[59]
The case of St. Ann's  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , contains elements of facts related to the leasing of Indian lands and the provisions of the Indian Act, R.S.C. 1906, relating thereto. Section 51 of the statute provided as follows:
"51. All Indian lands which are reserves or portions of reserves surrendered, or to be surrendered, to His Majesty, shall be deemed to be held for the same purpose as heretofore; and shall be managed, leased and sold as the Governor-in-Council directs, subject to the conditions of surrender and the provisions of this Part."
[60]
The Supreme Court of Canada held in that case, and I quote from the headnote, "that s. 51 imposed an imperative requirement of a direction by the Governor-in-Council before surrendered Indian land could be validly leased; and in the absence of an authorizing Order-in-Council, a lease with a private Club entered into by the Superintendent General (of Indian Affairs) was not binding. It was immaterial that a prior lease had been authorized by Order-in-Council since the efficacy of the Order was exhausted on the termination of that lease. No estoppel could arise in the face of s. 51 even though the Superintendent General held himself out as authorized to execute a lease and as a result money was expended by the Club in improving the property".
[61]
At p. 232 Rand, J., had this to say:
"But I agree that s. 51 requires a direction by the Governor-in-Council to a valid lease of Indian lands. The language of the statute embodies the accepted view that these aborigines are, in effect, wards of the state, whose care and welfare are a political trust of the highest obligation. For that reason, every such dealing with their privileges must bear the imprint of Governmental approval, and it would be beyond the power of the Governor-in-Council to transfer that responsibility to the Superintendent General.
"But the circumstances here negative any delegation of authority. The Order-in-Council approved a lease for a definite period on certain stipulations; by its terms, it would come to an end, even with renewal, within ten years; and the efficacy of the order was exhausted by that instrument.
"It was argued that the Crown is estopped from challenging the lease, but there can be no estoppel in the face of an express provision of a statute:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; A.C. 66; and a fortiori where the legislation is designed to protect the interest of persons who are the special concern of Parliament. What must appear -- and the original trustees were well aware of it -- is that the lease was made under the direction of the Governor-in-Council, and the facts before us show that there was no such direction."
[62]
On the issue of estoppel when facing a void as against a voidable transaction, or on the issue of lack of jurisdiction whenever a matter of public law is raised, the plaintiff Band refers to Wade's Administrative Law, Fifth Edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford, at p. 33:
"In public law the most obvious limitation on the doctrine of estoppel is that it cannot be invoked so as to give an authority powers which it does not in law possess. In other words, no estoppel can legitimate action which is ultra vires. Thus where an electricity authority, by misreading a meter, undercharged its customer for two years, it was held that the accounts it delivered did not estop it from demanding payment in full; for the authority had a statutory duty to collect the full amount, and had no power to release the customer, expressly or otherwise. Where a local planning authority served an invalid discontinuance notice, the landowner's acquiescence could not estop him from later denying its validity. Nor could a parish council, which had no power to undertake to allow a neighbouring district to make use of its sewers, be estopped by its long acquiescence from terminating such an arrangement. Where a minister took possession of land under statutory powers of occupation which did not extend to the grant of leases, he was not estopped from denying that he had granted a lease, even though he had expressly purported to 'let' the land to a 'tenant'. The result was the same where the supposed landlord was a local authority which had failed to obtain the requisite consent from the minister, so that the lease was void. Accordingly the local authority were at liberty to deny the validity of their own 'lease', contrary to the rules which govern private lettings. No arrangement between the parties could prevent either of them from asserting the fact that the lease was ultra vires and void."
[63]
There is also the observation of Tysoe, J.A., in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Rules:
"In my respectful view it is only in plain and obvious cases that recourse should be had to the summary process under O. 25, R. 4, and the power given by the rule should be exercised only where the case is absolutely beyond doubt. So long as the statement of claim, as it stands or as it may be amended, discloses some question fit to be tried by a judge or jury, the mere fact that the case is weak or not likely to succeed is no ground for striking it out. If the action involves investigation of serious questions of law or questions of general importance, or if facts are to be known before rights are definitely decided, the rule ought not to be applied."
[64]
Finally, I should note to what extent "special considerations" and "fairness" have been mentioned in jurisprudence in deciding whether an action should be struck. Such qualifiers may be found in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  stressed the unfairness in Collier, J.'s, award of damages in the earlier case and the relatively meagre return on rent as compared to its potential return on the alleged current market value of the leased lands. These special circumstances, according to the Band, are of a nature that all other things being equal, the Band should now be given another chance to seek substantial justice, a goal which would only be achieved by evicting the Club and obtaining immediate possession of the lands.
A Review Of The Facts
[65]
Every case cited by the parties has of course a factual base. It is within the parameters of this factual base that full meaning and proper interpretation may be given to doctrine as expressed from time to time by the courts. As the Supreme Court of Canada is wont to say, statutes cannot easily be interpreted in a vacuum. Neither, in my respectful view, can judicial doctrine.
[66]
The factual base with respect to the surrender and the lease may be found in the lengthy and considered reasons for judgment of Collier, J., following trial of the original action. I shall refer to this judgment as it appears in [1982] 2 F.C. 385. In the findings which he had to make at that trial, Collier, J., had to focus his mind on events which had occurred some twenty-five years earlier. He had to sift through the testimony of witnesses who had to recall these events. He had to weigh various statements made by survivors attributable to witnesses who were now deceased. He had to interpret the events, as incompletely as they were set out for him, in the social and economic clock of 1957. The clock had not stopped ticking in 1982. Collier, J., necessarily had to face history revisited, taking care of course that in the process, he should not be revising it.
[67]
Concurrently, the participants' view of their own motivation and involvement with respect to events as recounted a whole generation later involved risks of vagueness, or obscurity, or ambiguity, or the transposition of a more current value system with respect to Crown and Indian relationships to that existing in 1957.
[68]
Collier, J., admittedly had difficulties in coming to term with these problems, yet on his findings of fact and on credibility issues, he did not waffle. He gave weight and credence to the testimony of the Band members. He found no element of reconstruction or hindsight. He found that although the project of a lease of 160 reserve acres for golf club purposes was foremost in the minds of the Band and of the Crown, other people had expressed an interest in the lands but the Band had not been informed of this. He reviewed at length the valuation placed on the lands of some $5,500 per acre and the evidence of the appraiser, Mr. Howell, with respect to a fair return to the Band based on the 3.75% bank rate applicable at that time. Collier, J., found specifically that the Band was not informed of various spreads as to the estimated annual rent prior to the first renewal term, of the fifteen year term, of the limits imposed with respect to the annual rent payable at the end of the first fifteen year term, of the proviso in the lease that all improvements would not revert to the Band and that the Club reserved the right to terminate the lease at the end of each fifteen year term.
[69]
At page 413, Collier, J., further finds that on a balance of probabilities, the majority of the Band members who voted on surrender on October 6, 1957, would not have assented to it had they known of all the terms of the lease entered into between the Crown and the Club on January 22, 1958. He also found, and this is equally important, that the Club would not have entered into a lease otherwise.
[70]
At page 415, Collier, J., concludes that on all the facts before him, the Crown was liable for breach of trust.
[71]
Collier, J., then entered into the problem of assessing damages. He cites at p. 420, the leasing experience respecting Musqueam Recreations Ltd. with respect to some 58 additional acres of reserved lands which had been advertised for tenders. A lease agreement had been concluded in 1963. This lease called for
"(a) fixed annual rents for the first, second and remaining eight years of the first ten year term;
"(b) fixed annual rents for the subsequent ten year terms to be negotiated; failing agreement, the rents to be determined under the provisions of the Exchequer Court Act;
"(c) the annual rent payable at any time would never be less than 10% of the gross revenue of the lessee;
"(d) no increase or decrease of rent arrived at in respect of a new ten year period would exceed 15% of the fixed annual rent of the preceding ten year period;
"(e) any improvements to the leased lands reverted to the Band."
[72]
At page 430 et seq., his Lordship elaborates on the various expert analyses of the values of the lands, of their highest and best possible use, which he finds to be 99 year leases for residential purposes. He breaks down the various rental values per annum, finds that the original valuation placed on the lands of $5,500 per acre in 1956 was not a breach of trust and later analyzes the various levels of estimated losses otherwise suffered by the Band. He then refers to a Master Plan Survey, prepared by the British Columbia Lands Services in December, 1956 and recommending massive development of the well-known University Endowment Lands adjacent to the Musqueam Indian reserve.
[73]
Although Collier, J., refers only briefly to that report, the whole of it was filed for purposes of the motion before me. It runs through some 125 pages and is the cumulation of the work of half a dozen British Columbia government departments and of some 100 consultants and collaborators. I provide here a summary of that report.
[74]
The lands involved contained some 1,740 acres and it was the report's conclusion that to ensure a perpetual endowment for the University of British Columbia at the highest rate of return, the solution called for 99 year leases for residential housing, shopping plazas and other supporting uses.
[75]
At page 100 of the report, after noting an implementation period for the scheme of fifteen years, it is stated:
"It is estimated that the revenue directly attributable to land, when fully developed, should be in excess of $1,000,000 annually."
[76]
I observe that the University Endowment Lands comprise in excess of ten times the acreage involved in the lease between the Crown and the Club. I further observe that all the data and calculations set out in the report are based on 1956 values. There is no retrospection there, no hindsight, no ex post facto interpolations.
Findings
[77]
Underlying the whole issue before me is the Band's conviction, whether it is of more recent or more remote vintage does not matter, that it has been unjustly and inequitably deprived of its 160 acres and that its economic interests have been severely prejudiced. The events surrounding the negotiations and communication between the Band and the Crown and the disclosure of the lease terms some twenty years later conjure images of intrigue, indulgence and condescension on the part of the Crown to deprive the Band of its rights in the reserve lands. These images are also brought into focus by the current use of the reserve lands as a golf and country club whose selected members alone enjoy the privileges of roaming over some 160 acres of lush greens and rolling fairways.
[78]
No comment which I might make in that regard will eliminate this troubling and sombre perspective nor remove the continuing suspicion that once again the Band's individual and collective rights made all the more evident by increasing levels of group consciousness, have been denied. The Band's only recourse is to find some means of getting more money, or better still, to have the current lease cancelled, obtain possession of the lands and proceed afresh with their development.
[79]
The position taken by the Band at the hearing before me is quite clear on this. The Band has concluded, some four years after the Supreme Court of Canada had finally settled the issue, that the award of $10,000,000 in damages was not sufficient, that it was unfair, that it was based on erroneous assumptions, that it did not take into consideration the current values of the acreage and what might be expected as a reasonable annual return on it.
[80]
There is no doubt that viewed in current economic terms, the reserve lands have a present day value far beyond the appraised value in 1957, a value, I need repeat, which the trial judge found fair and reasonable for that particular period. There is also no doubt that some of the terms of the current lease are not favourable to the Band or at least, are not the terms which the trial judge found the Band could reasonably have expected. I have in mind in this regard the fifteen year as against the ten year renewal periods, the restrictions on the rental adjustments during the first renewal term and the loss of reversionary interest in leasehold improvements.
[81]
On the other hand, the surrender was for purposes of a golf club and that was respected. Furthermore, the 75 year term was agreed upon and so too the principle of rental adjustments at each renewal term either by consensus or arbitration. The annual rent for the first term, as I interpret the trial judge's findings, was also the subject of agreement.
[82]
I have not overlooked the proviso in the lease where the fifteen year renewals are effectively on an option basis exercisable by the lessee. I can only observe that such a clause is far from unknown in a long-term lease when the leased lands require considerable capital improvements and where the rent is periodically reviewed. If such a proviso is not available to the lessor, it is simply because the risk is borne exclusively by the lessee. In any event, the irony of it all is that the Band would now be perfectly happy if the Club were to exercise its option and abandon the lease.
[83]
In the foregoing observations, I should not be attempting to propound a balanced view of the tugs and pulls of lease negotiations. The trial judge's finding, at page 430, is that "The Indian Affairs Branch personnel in entering into the golf club lease acted, in my opinion, honestly. There was no deliberate or willful dishonesty towards the Band. But the personnel, and ultimately the defendant, did not act reasonably in signing the lease without first going back to the Band."
[84]
This finding by the trial judge is consonant with the finding of an equitable breach of trust by the Crown. He adopts the test of reasonableness to the whole transaction and concludes that the Crown was not guilty of fraud in the usual sense of the term, but did not give to the negotiations that degree of care or attention which is expected of a good trustee.
[85]
The issue facing the trial judge, one would always remember, was to determine if there were a breach of trust and if so, what would be the appropriate amount assessed as damages to put the Band in as close a financial situation as it would otherwise have enjoyed.
[86]
In so doing, the trial judge had to face the fact that the freehold value of the leased lands had increased ten times over the twenty year period between 1958 and 1978. He also had to face and analyze any number of hypotheses advanced by several expert appraisers and to adopt the view that the measure of damages had to be calculated on the best possible use formula, i.e., 99 year leases for residential purposes. At page 441 of his reasons, he lists several factors and contingencies which guided him in arriving at a $10 million award of damages. These are as follows:
"(a) The difficulty in determining when the 162 acres would have been developed, in what way and at what monetary return. This, on the basis the present lease would never have been consummated.
"(b) The contingency that the area might not, even today, be satisfactorily developed, or providing a realistic economic term.
"(c) The astonishing increase in land values, inflation and interest rates since 1958, and the fact no one could reasonably, in 1958, have envisaged that increase.
"(d) The counter-factor to (c) as that those same tremendous increases must be taken into account in any damage award.
"(e) The possibility the present lease would remain in effect until its expiry in 2033.
"(f) The very real contingency, in his view, that the lease might be terminated at a future rental review period.
"(g) The money which the plaintiffs have received to date under the present lease or what might be received in the future if the lease remains.
"(h) The value of the revision of the improvements, whether at the end of prepaid 99 year residential leases, or at the end of the golf club lease."
[87]
If the Supreme Court of Canada could not find fault with this particular approach to damages, neither can I.
Conclusions
[88]
As a preamble to my conclusions, I might cite the comments of Le Dain, J.A., in the Federal Court of Appeal's judgment of December 10, 1982, and reported in (1982), 143 D.L.R.(3d) 416, at p. 441: His Lordship states that:
"It is important to keep in mind that this is an action which is based on breach of trust and only on breach of trust. It is not an action to set aside a surrender, and a disposition of surrendered land pursuant thereto, on the ground of fraud or nonfulfillment of the conditions of the surrender. It is not an action for negligence in the exercise of a statutory authority with respect to the disposition of land in a reserve. It is not an action for rectification of the terms of a surrender of land in a reserve."
[89]
I might also refer to the comments of Dickson, J., as he then was, in his reasons for judgment in the Supreme Court of Canada, reported at [1984] 2 S.C.R. 335, at p. 371:
"The plaintiffs based their case on breach of trust. They asserted that the federal Crown was a trustee of the surrendered lands. The trial judge agreed."
[90]
Such was the issue before the trial judge. The same issue was debated before the Court of Appeal. It was again debated over three days of argument before the Supreme Court of Canada. The disposition ultimately made was to compensate the Band for the damages suffered and to assure its members a level of economic return they would otherwise have enjoyed.
[91]
At no time during trial, or on successive appeals, on my reading of the several judgments on the issue, was the question of the validity of the surrender, or of the lease ever raised. At no time did anyone of a dozen judges who became seized of the case at one level or another, advance, hypothetically or otherwise, the validity issue.
[92]
I should subscribe to the views expressed in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  should not be allowed, except in special circumstances, to perpetuate the dispute by discovering new grounds for action. As Lord Shaw stated, if this were permitted, litigation would have no end except where legal ingenuity is exhausted.
[93]
I should also subscribe to later views expressed by Lord Denning in the Hunter case, by Lyon, J.A., in the Solomon case and by Chief Justice McEachern in the Saskatoon Credit Union case, to the effect that whether or not a case falls into the complex issue of res judicata or issue estoppel with all of its historical refinements, it should not be allowed to proceed, if to do so, it would constitute an abuse of process.
[94]
In the case before me, the Band's approach was to claim damages for breach of trust. It did not claim anything else, in the alternative or otherwise. It claimed damages and was awarded damages.
[95]
The Band has enjoyed the benefits of the lease for over thirty years. It has enjoyed the benefits of $10 million award for five years or more. In the same period of time, the Club was paid its annual rent and has expended substantial sums of money on course layout and club facilities. Should the Band now be given leave to start from scratch on a rescission claim based on facts identical to those it relied on earlier? In my opinion, the answer must be in the negative. In my opinion, it would constitute an abuse of process.
[96]
The jurisprudence I have cited appears to qualify the application of the doctrine of issue estoppel or res judicata or for that matter abuse of process by directing a regard for "special circumstances". I interpret these terms, as they are found in the Henderson case as imposing a degree of care whenever a court is urged to apply the doctrine and stop a case from going further. Some special circumstances often surround particular cases and some of these circumstances, as case law tells us, are such as to invite a court, in the exercise of its discretion, to let a particular case proceed.
[97]
Counsel for the Band has advanced a case for special circumstances on the grounds that the damage award of $10 million is far from adequate compensation. Counsel suggests that the current value of the leased lands approaches the $100 million mark which, on a perpetual yield basis, should provide the Band with $10 million in annual income, an amount far above current or projected rental income.
[98]
In my respectful opinion, nothing flows from this. If credence is to be given to such calculations, one could with equal force, suggest that a $10 million award in 1984 with interest at ten per cent compounded annually over the remaining term of the lease, would have a value in the year 2033 of $1,280 billion. Even on a straight yield basis, a $10 million fund provides a beneficiary with a perpetual annual income of $1 million and to which must be added the ever-increasing value of the reversionary interest. In either case, it might not be an inconsiderable patrimony to leave to one's progeny.
[99]
I venture to suggest that annual yield on rentals when dealing with long-term leases are concomitant factors to the value of any reversionary interest in the freehold. It may be expressed as an element of short-term pain mixed with an element of longer-term gain. Such a mixture depends of course on the financial policies of the beneficiary and on how he decides to administer the capital he has on hand, spend it or compound its revenue in whole or in part. How provident or improvident such a beneficiary might be, in any given case, is of course of no concern in these proceedings.
[100]
I have gone to some lengths in these reasons to refer to the various analyses and findings of the trial judge relating to the highest desirable use of the lands, to the value per acre in 1956 and to the rapidly increasing land values over the first twenty odd years of the 75 year lease. The trial judge found as a fact that $5,500 per acre in 1956 was a reasonable figure. He also found that the best possible use of the lands was for residential purposes on a 99 year lease basis. His analysis of the quantum of damages is firmly based on these premises.
[101]
I have also referred to the Master Plan Survey published in 1956 and relating to the furture development of the University Endowment Lands on Point Grey. That plan also fixes acreage value, propounds a 99 year scheme for residential housing and generally provides a scenario for the creation of a perpetual endowment to the University of British Columbia. The estimated return under this formula, if funding be provided for the development of services and other projects is $2 million minimum annually. Revenue directly attributed to land, as I have already noted, would be in excess of $1 million annually. One may observe that $1 million annually is in relation to a land area in excess of 1,700 acres. One may also observe that the damage award of $10 million also yields $1 million annually on a perpetual basis but is in relation to an acreage of 162 acres, less than ten per cent of the acreage contained in the University Endowment Lands. The comparison is striking.
[102]
Apart from the substantial income earned from the $10 million compensation package, the Band is also entitled to an annual rent adjusted on a fifteen year renewal basis. I was told by counsel that the parties are negotiating for the fixing of an annual rent for the fifteen year term beginning 1987. Failing agreement, the rent will be fixed by arbitration. Whatever be the amount fixed, it will accrue to the band as an additional annual benefit.
[103]
These comments should not be construed as establishing that the Band members should be quite happy with what they have. I only need to state that, in my respectful view, the Band has not made out a case of unfairness deserving of special considerations and which would otherwise make its new action less abusive or more deserving of favourable treatment. I should find that in the measure possible in our adjudicative process whenever a court is called upon to deal with monetary compensation for financial grief or prejudice, the damage award appears to me, as it did to the trial judge and to the several judges of the Supreme Court of Canada, to be fair and reasonable.
[104]
I have not overlooked Band counsel's argument that the action raises new grounds of public law and public authority and that the court is now invited to consider the surrender and the lease as being void ab initio and, on the strength of the Supreme Court of Canada judgment in St. Ann's Island Shooting and Fishing Club case (supra), there can be no estoppel in the face of an express provision of a statute.
[105]
This might be true, as far as it goes. One recalls, however, that in that case, the Indian Act provided in clear terms that no Indian lands could be leased except under the authority of an Order-in-Council, a statutory disposition which has long since been amended. One also observes that the court's decision was on the basis of an original action and not of a subsequent one.
[106]
I will concede that where the court, in the face of an original action as is now framed, asked to strike it under rule 419(1)(a) as disclosing no reasonable cause of action, the court would have little hesitation in letting the action proceed. Such, however, is not the case before me and my disposition of the case is not on those grounds.
[107]
Furthermore, I am not satisfied that the issues raised in this action are new in the sense intended by Band's counsel. The whole of the previous action, in my view, constituted formalized debate on public law and public authority and was posited by the Band itself on the premiss that both the surrender and the resulting lease were valid, binding and enforceable instruments. Whether or not, had their validity been raised in the earlier action, the course of events would have been different, is not for me to decide. From my perspective, that issue can no longer be an issue deserving of the attention of the court. Any interest one might have in it is now hypothesis, speculation and conjecture.
[108]
In my view, the action by the Band is, in all the circumstances which I have described, in the language of the law, an abuse of process and it should not be allowed to proceed. The statement of claim is therefore struck, with costs to the defendants if demanded.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
Footnote
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 416.
[End of document]