[1]
Cullen, J.
: This is an application for judicial review, pursuant to s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 ("the
FCA
") of a decision of the Minister of Agriculture dated January 11, 1994, to destroy two Lincoln Red Cattle ("the cattle") owned by the applicant under s. 48(1) of the
Health of Animals Act
, S.C. 1990, c. 21 ("the
Act
"). The applicant seeks an order quashing the decision of the Minister and permanently restraining the respondent from destroying the cattle.
[2]
Owing to the subject matter and urgency of this case, the hearing of this application has been expedited through this court. On January 27, 1994, Mr. Justice Gibson heard an application for an interim and interlocutory injunction to restrain the respondent from destroying the cattle until such time as the merits of the case could be decided. Gibson, J., refused to grant the injunction. As this was heard by telephone conference call, no written reasons were given and no oral reasons for his decision were recorded. The applicant appealed, and the Court of Appeal heard the matter on February 4, 1994. By decision dated February 8, 1994, the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and granted the interlocutory injunction and ordered that the application be heard on an urgent basis, no later than March 7, 1994 (unreported decision, file # A-44-94).
[3]
By order of Jerome, A.C.J., dated February 14, 1994, the parties were given a timetable for this application, for the filing of affidavits, for the cross-examination on said affidavits and for the filing of application records. All this was apparently complied with, which brings us to the hearing of this application on March 3, 1994. It should be noted that in accordance with rule 1612 of the
Federal Court Rules
, the respondent filed and served all the evidence which it had in its possession at the time the decision was made. This material consists of six volumes, comprising two parts, four volumes in part one and two volumes in part two. The reason for the two parts was explained to be the fact that the material was compiled in two different locations. For convenience, this material will be referred to as the department material.
[4]
The affidavits filed in this application are:
For the applicant:
Mrs. Jean Hunt, President of the applicant, David Hunt Farms Ltd.
Dr. Phillip Robert Scott, Senior Lecturer at the Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies in Scotland
For the respondent:
Dr. John B. Tattersall, Regional Veterinary Supervisor (Central), Ontario Region, Animal and Plant Health, Food Production and Inspection Branch, Agriculture Canada
Dr. John A. Kellar, Associate Director, Disease Control Section, Animal Health (Policy) Division, Food Production and Inspection Branch, Agriculture Canada
Dr. A.A. (Tony) van Dreumel, Scientific Co-ordinator and Pathologist, Veterinary Laboratories Services Branch, Ontario Ministry of Agriculture and Food ("OMAF").
[5]
The general facts of this case are not substantially in dispute. I take the general history of the disease known as Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy ("BSE"), or more colourfully in the media as "Mad Cow Disease" from Mr. Justice Robertson's decision in the Court of Appeal, at pp. 2-3. This summary will be supplemented and further explored in my reasons below.
"In 1986, a fatal neurological disorder was diagnosed and reported in adult cattle in the United Kingdom. The disease, 'Bovine Spongform [sic] Encephalopathy' ('BSE') is more commonly known as 'Mad Cow Disease'. It is contracted through contaminated feed and has two distinct attributes. First, the affected animal degenerates rapidly after the first symptoms appear, typically following a several-year incubation period. Second, its presence can only be verified by post-mortem examination of the brain tissue of the deceased animal.
"Since BSE was first reported, it has attained epidemic proportions: over 112,000 cases have been tallied in the United Kingdom alone, where approximately one-half of all dairy herd and one-tenth of all beef herd have been affected. In response to these realities, Agriculture Canada discontinued issuing import permits for cattle from the United Kingdom in 1990. It currently requires incidences of the disease to be reported and has instituted an 'active surveillance network' to ensure that suspected cases are submitted to a laboratory for confirmation.
"In 1988, two years prior to Agriculture Canada's ban on cattle imports, the appellant purchased and imported into Canada two Lincoln Red cattle from the United Kingdom. In November of 1993, a beef cow imported into Canada from the United Kingdom in 1987 by an Albertan farmer was slaughtered after exhibiting neurological symptoms of the kind associated with BSE. In December of 1993, laboratory testing confirmed the preliminary diagnosis of the presence of the disease. Agriculture Canada has subsequently learned that of the 11 United Kingdom herd from which cattle had been exported to Canada between 1982 and 1990, eight had reported their first case of BSE within the preceding 24 months.
"In fulfilment of Canada's international obligations, Agriculture Canada notified the Office International des Epizooties, an international health agency, of the Alberta occurrence of BSE in December 1993. That organization had established guidelines for the treatment, diagnosis and reporting of the disease on a global basis. Agriculture Canada also alerted foreign governmental authorities of the incidence of BSE in Alberta. This information engendered an immediate and negative reaction. Several countries threatened to restrict Canada's access to the export market if it did not take appropriate measures to eliminate the risk of BSE spreading. It is maintained that the Canadian farm economy, both domestic and export, will sustain substantial damage unless all cattle imported from the United Kingdom since 1986 are promptly destroyed. Apparently a failure to take such action, compounded with a second reported incidence of BSE, will result in a revocation by Canada's key trading partners of its recognition as being free of this disease. Under these circumstances, the respondent Minister directed that all cattle imported from the United Kingdom between 1986 and 1990 be destroyed."
[6]
As stated, the applicant, a cattle breeder, imported two cows from the U.K. in 1988. These cattle were purchased from C.L. Bembridge ("Bembridge"), who maintains a herd of Lincoln Red cattle at Anwick House in London. The applicant states, and I do not see any contradiction in the evidence, that Bembridge has never had a confirmed case of BSE within its herd. The cattle have not manifested any signs of BSE to date, nor has any other animal within the applicant's herd.
[7]
On January 11, 1994, the Minister of Agriculture delivered a Notice of Requirement to Dispose of Animals ("the notice"), dated January 10, 1994, purporting to compel the applicant to deliver the cattle for destruction on January 31, 1994. The notice, signed by Dr. Tattersall, states that the:
"... animal(s) is/are suspected of
being affected or contaminated by the disease Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy, or
having been in contact with or in close proximity to another animal or thing that was or is suspected of having been affected or contaminated by the disease Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy at the time of being in contact or close proximity," (Application record, Vol. 1, Tab 2,A, p. 17)
[8]
The appellant submits that there are three issues to be decided in this case:
1. Did Dr. Tattersall have the jurisdiction under s. 48(1) of the
Act
to decide to dispose of the cattle?
2. Did Dr. Tattersall fail to properly exercise his discretion because he was fettered by Agriculture Canada's "commitment" to foreign countries to destroy the cattle?
3. Did Dr. Tattersall fail, as obliged under s. 18.1 of the
F.C.A.
and the Rule of Law, to take into account relevant circumstances in reaching his decision, or did he take into account irrelevant matters thus poisoning his decision?
Issue #1
[9]
Counsel for the applicant is arguing that Dr. Tattersall did not have jurisdiction to decide as he did under s. 48(1) because the wording of the notice and the basis of his decision are outside the statutory language. Counsel argues that the basis for Dr. Tattersall's decision was the suspicion that the cattle had been in contact with another animal or thing that was, or is suspected of, having been affected or contaminated by the disease. He points to the wording of the notice and the following portion of the cross-examination of Dr. Tattersall, by counsel for the applicant, for support of this position.
"267	Q.	I take it that both you and Dr. Utpott on January 10th suspected that Mrs. Hunt's cattle had been in contact with or in close proximity to another animal or thing that was or was suspected of having been affected or contaminated by BSE.
A.	That's correct.
. . . . .
270	Q.	On January 10th you had that suspicion?
A.	Yes, I did." (Applicant's Application Record, Vol. III, Tab 12, pp. 74-76)
Thus, counsel submits that Dr. Tattersall based his decision on the grounds of his suspicion, which ground is not provided for in the statutory language.
[10]
Counsel for the respondent submits that this admission should be given little weight because it was in the course of a greater series of questions and answers and was in fact asked and answered by counsel. I cannot agree, because to do so would be to render meaningless the process of cross-examination on affidavits within the framework of a judicial review. Clearly an admission by a witness on cross-examination is to be given weight by the trier of fact, as that is the reason for cross-examination in the first place. Having said that, however, counsel for the applicant has not convinced me that Dr. Tattersall did indeed exceed his jurisdiction in the manner suggested. It should be noted that I am addressing this issue as framed by counsel for the applicant, although as will be seen from the remainder of my reasons below, I have grave doubts as to whether Dr. Tattersall is the proper subject of the issue.
[11]
Section 48 of the
Act
reads as follows:
"48(1) The Minister may dispose of an animal or thing, or require its owner or any person having the possession, care or control of it to dispose of it, where the animal or thing
(a) is, or is suspected of being, affected or contaminated by a disease or toxic substance;
(b) has been in contact with or in close proximity to another animal or thing that was, or is suspected of having been, affected or contaminated by a disease or toxic substance at the time of contact or close proximity; or
(c) is, or is suspected of being, a vector, the causative agent of a disease or a toxic substance.
"48(2) The Minister may treat any animal or thing described in subsection (1), or require its owner or the person having the possession, care or control of it to treat it or have it treated, where the Minister considers that the treatment will be effective in eliminating or preventing the spread of the disease or toxic substance.
"48(3) A requirement under this section shall be communicated by personal delivery of a notice to the owner or person having the possession, care or control of the thing or by sending a notice to the owner or person, and the notice may specify the period within which and the manner in which the requirement is to be met."
[12]
For convenience, I shall reproduce the relevant portion of the notice:
"... animal(s) is/are suspected of
being affected or contaminated by the disease Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy, or
having been in contact with or in close proximity to another animal or thing that was or is suspected of having been affected or contaminated by the disease Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy at the time of being in contact or close proximity,"
[13]
Counsel for the applicant relies on the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 457 to submit that where there is an excess of jurisdiction, such as in that case where the Board exceeded its jurisdiction by ordering the parties to refer to arbitration, the standard of review is one of the correctness of the jurisdictional question, and not the now familiar patently unreasonable test often used in judicial reviews of specialized tribunals (see also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 1,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 1; 102 D.L.R.(4th) 609; 93 C.L.L.C. 14,032).
[14]
Thus, he submits that since s. 48(1)(b) does not include the ground of "suspected contact with an animal or thing ...", the decision being based on this ground, as worded in the notice and shown by Dr. Tattersall's admission, amounts to an excess of jurisdiction by the decision maker. He argues that we must look at the plain meaning of the words of the statute and that those words do not support the purported basis of decision.
[15]
I agree that in issues of jurisdiction, the standard of review of this court is whether the jurisdiction was correctly exercised. However, unlike the
C.P. Air
case, the wording in this section is not as clear in its limitation on the discretion of the Minister in reaching a decision under the section. In fact, the very wording of the section leads me to believe that the Minister is afforded a great deal of discretion upon which to base the decision to require the destruction of animals. In my opinion, the language of the notice is meant to track the language of the section. A common sense reading of the two leads me to no other conclusion, nor does the evidence of the case. That being the case, I do not agree that basing the decision, in part, on the suspicion of contact amounts to a jurisdictional error. It would be too literal an interpretation of the statute to hold otherwise and I do not think that Parliament intended such an interpretation. As stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 7 S.C.R., the court should avoid a narrow, technical construction of the statute and endeavour to give effect to the legislative intent. Thus, I conclude that Dr. Tattersall did not exceed his jurisdiction as suggested by counsel.
Issue #2
[16]
I must confess that this issue gave me some cause for concern and thus, I will review the evidence on this point in some detail.
[17]
Counsel for the applicant submits that Dr. Tattersall was the decision maker and that his exercise of discretion in making the decision was fettered by Canada's commitment to foreign trading partners that all cattle imported from the U.K. would be destroyed. In support of this, counsel refers to various parts of the evidence, primarily in the department material.
[18]
As quoted above from the Court of Appeal decision, Canada discontinued issuing import permits for cattle from the U.K. in 1990. In accordance with the policies of the Office International des Epizooties ("O.I.E."), Canada undertook to report any occurrences of suspected BSE and to make the disease reportable. In addition, it began a program to locate and monitor (by regular examinations) all cattle which had been imported into the U.K. since 1982, as these cattle represented the only apparent BSE threat in Canada (Kellar affidavit, Applicant's Application Record, vol. I, Tab 4, para. 25).
[19]
As early as September 1993, Dr. Kellar states that he and his colleagues became aware, based on scientific reports from the U.K. that the risk of BSE infection in the Canadian herd was greater than anticipated, although still based on the imported cows. Thus, the efforts to monitor the imports was "redoubled". He indicated in his affidavit that the reason for this concern was the recent indications that the disease may be horizontally (from cow to cow) or maternally transmitted (affidavit, para. 26). There is still no indication at this point that any decision had been made with respect to destroying the cattle imported from the U.K.
[20]
In November 1993, a beef cow which had been imported from the U.K. in 1987, and which was residing in a herd in Alberta was slaughtered after the owner reported it was demonstrating neurological symptoms consistent with BSE. On November 29, 1993, the animal was tentatively diagnosed with BSE. This diagnosis was confirmed on December 3, 1993, at the Animal Disease Research Institute in Nepean, Ontario and further confirmed on December 7, 1993, by the Central Veterinary Laboratory at Weybridge in the U.K., which lab has been designated by the O.I.E. as the international reference lab for the diagnosis of BSE. Thus, Canada had its first confirmed case of BSE.
[21]
In a memo dated December 6, 1993, from Matt Taylor, a cattleman who had been seconded to Agriculture Canada, to Dr. Kellar, suggestions are made for the control of the disease. Included in these suggestions is the gathering of information from the herds of origin in the U.K. of the imported cattle. On the face of this memo, it appears that Mr. Taylor is not aware of the Alberta case of BSE (department material, part 1, vol. 3, p. 665).
[22]
At p. 667 of the same volume of the department material, there is a list of information requested from the herd of origin of the Alberta cow submitted by Animal Health. This was apparently to properly assess the risk to Canadian cattle. This search for information was confirmed in a memo from the Assistant Deputy Minister to the Minister, dated December 9, 1993 (p. 734 of the same volume). The memo also stated that BSE information was being sought from each of the herds of origin of the imported cattle.
[23]
The evidence indicates that at this point, no formal decision had been made as to the remainder of the U.K. imports. In fact, the "Proposed BSE Policy Measures" dated December 9, 1993 (p. 730) state that various actions could be taken depending on the nature of the cattle in question. Thus, it can be seen that options were being drafted and considered, but that no course of action had been charted. In a form letter sent to Chief Veterinarians of Canada's trading partners, N.G. Willis, Director General of the Animal and Health Directorate notifies them of the confirmed case of BSE in the Alberta cow and the action being taken by Agriculture Canada in response. Included in this is the fact that all the other U.K. imports from 1982 to 1989 had been identified and accounted for and that:
"Active consideration is also being given to the mandatory slaughter of the other animals now quarantined in the index herd, and of the remaining 67 animals imported into Canada from Great Britain during the period of 1982 and 1989." (Volume 3, page 743)
[24]
At p. 763 is another "
Proposed
BSE Policy Measures" (emphasis in original), this one dated December 10, 1993 and signed by Dr. Kellar. In it he outlines six possible courses of action, one of which was the destruction of all the U.K. imports.
[25]
At p. 778, in a BSE Update, dated December 13, 1993, it is confirmed that Mexico had imposed a ban on live ruminants and meat from Canada, pending further information on the situation in Canada. However, the same update states that Australia and New Zealand would not be imposing any trade restrictions and still consider Canada BSE-free.
[26]
At pp. 814-824 of vol. 3 is the first serious indication that the destruction of all the U.K. imports was accepted as a viable option. It begins with a BSE Policy Proposal indicating that one of the options for action is to slaughter the cattle, sample and hold the samples (presumably for testing) from the remaining U.K. imports (totalling 67 animals in 21 herds). This is confirmed in a letter from Dr. Kellar to Dr. Haslam, Veterinary Counsellor, Embassy of Australia, dated December 14, 1993. Thus, it appears that the policy decision to destroy the applicant's cattle, as part of the remaining U.K. imports had already been made as of December 14, 1993.
[27]
As of December 15, 1993, Taiwan had imposed a ban on ruminants and meat from Canada (vol. 4, p. 836). On December 16, 1993, the policy decision of Agriculture Canada was communicated to the O.I.E. by fax, sent by Dr. Willis. Similarly on December 16, 1993, Dr. Kellar, in an "Update on BSE Incident in Alberta, Canada", writes (at p. 866 of vol. 4):
"5.
Fate of Imports
As described, 67 await destruction."
[28]
One of the most telling pieces of correspondence in the department material is a memo from Dr. Kellar to the Regional Directors General, dated December 17, 1993 (p. 908, vol. 4). In it, he writes:
"In accordance with a policy decision recently made in the Animal and Plant Health Directorate, and upon receipt of a form letter to be signed and hand delivered to owners by district veterinarians, please make arrangements as soon as possible to:
1. Report on, and remove for destruction with compensation, all remaining monitored cattle imported from the United Kingdom. The UK cattle in question have been under surveillance since Canada imposed a ban on ruminants from that country in 1990. They total 64 on 24 sites across Canada.
2. Trace and report on their natural and embryo transfer offspring.
. . . . .
"While we expect you to retain control on these animals during transportation through any means you consider necessary, do not consider them infected. Do not apply a quarantine. Do not clean and disinfect. Do not apply a transport of dangerous goods permit."
[29]
To me, this defines the stance which Agriculture Canada has taken with respect to the U.K. imports, including the applicant's cattle, long before Dr. Tattersall signed the Notice of Disposal for the cattle on January 10, 1994. This shows that the decision was based on the general information about BSE, the situation in the U.K. and the risks to Canadian cattle and exports. It also shows that consideration was given to the possibility that these animals may not be affected by the disease, but that this circumstance was not sufficient to change the decision being made. As counsel for the applicant argues, there is nothing to suggest that anything was known by Dr. Tattersall, or Agriculture Canada, about the cattle in issue here before me.
[30]
Agriculture Canada admittedly took an extremely cautious approach to the risk of a BSE outbreak in Canada, including the decision to destroy all 270 of the cattle in the Alberta herd of the only confirmed case (p. 983 of vol. 4). However, because of the policy decision, Mexico lifted its ban and a similar ban was avoided in both Japan and Russia.
[31]
With the commencement of two separate litigations in this court challenging the proposed destruction of U.K. imports, one in Nova Scotia (MacDonald) and one in Alberta (Jerram), Agriculture Canada contacted the U.K. Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food ("MAFF") for a confirmation that the U.K. could not certify that any cattle exported prior to mid-1988 were not potentially exposed to BSE contaminated feed. The reason for this was the declaration by the owner of origin in the U.K. of the Nova Scotia cattle that they had never been fed anything but home grown feed (p. 994 of vol. 4). The U.K. authorities refused to certify that any cattle imported were indeed free of risk from contaminated feed because it had no way of confirming the owner's declarations. However, the response did state that their field investigations had found exposure to contaminated feed where owners believed there was none, although this involved cases where the animals had been fed concentrate feed, as opposed to merely hay and straw, in which case the response indicated that there would be no risk (p. 1034, vol. 4 of department material).
[32]
Thus, what we have is a decision from Agriculture Canada to dispose of cattle imported from the U.K. prior to the ban on importation in 1990. There appears to be little disputing the fact that at the time of the decision, mid-December, 1993, no specific facts were known about the subject cattle.
[33]
What is crucial in deciding this issue, in my opinion, is to decide who is the decision maker as regards these cattle. Counsel for the applicant urges that it was Dr. Tattersall, but that in so doing he was practically fettered in the exercise of his discretion by a policy decision of Agriculture Canada. Counsel for the respondent disputes this and submits that Dr. Tattersall was not fettered and points to his evidence in paras. 22 to 24 of his affidavit as support for the proposition that Dr. Tattersall considered all the relevant factors, including representations by Mrs. Hunt in reaching his decision.
[34]
Based on my above review of the evidence, I conclude that Dr. Tattersall had no decision to make when he purported to sign the Notice of Disposal on January 10, 1994. While I acknowledge that the policy bureau and Dr. Tattersall are within different branches of Agriculture Canada and not within the same hierarchy, it is clear to me that Agriculture Canada, on the basis of a decision made at least as early as December 17, 1993, committed to killing all the cattle imported from the U.K. prior to 1990. This is the decision which affects the applicant's cattle, not the actions taken by Dr. Tattersall, and his representative, Dr. Utpott, who were simply doing what was required to be done by the District Veterinarian to implement the decision. The nature of Dr. Tattersall's role in the decision with respect to the cattle is evinced by the memo to the District Veterinarians of January 4, 1994, found at p. 1460, part 2, vol. 2 of the department material. In referring to the Notice to Dispose to be provided to the vets, the memo states:
"NOTE: If you do not believe that these animals are 'suspected of being contaminated' with this disease do not sign this Notice but inform your supervisor.
The document will be endorsed in these cases regionally or in headquarters
. We are informed that this may be a necessary precaution to prevent misunderstandings if the case(s) proceeds to litigation." (bold in original, emphasis added)
[35]
This contingency plan devised by the department shows me that Dr. Tattersall's role was only to implement the decision. Even in the event that he did not feel that these cattle should be destroyed, and for the record he states that he agrees with the decision, his opinion was essentially meaningless in the plan to deal with the U.K. imports and respond to the BSE threat. These cattle were slated for destruction regardless of Dr. Tattersall's conclusion about their condition.
[36]
Thus, I have reached the conclusion that Dr. Tattersall was not fettered in the exercise of his discretion because he had no decision left to make. It was already made for him. This is what the department prescribed and I believe what the legislation requires.
[37]
As set out above, s. 48(1) allows for "the Minister" to make a decision to destroy animals in a case such as this. In s. 2, "Minister" is defined as the Minister of Agriculture, and in my opinion, Agriculture Canada (namely the Minister) was the decision maker in this case, and as stated that decision was made long before the Notice to Dispose addressed to the applicant was ever signed.
[38]
Counsel for the applicant relies in part on the decision of my colleague MacKay, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R. 215 (T.D.), to submit that Dr. Tattersall's discretion was fettered by an absolute policy decision of Agriculture Canada.
[39]
In that case, the applicant was seeking to quash the decision of an inspector made under the
Seeds Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. S-8 and the
Seeds Regulations
, C.R.C. 1978, c. 1400, to refuse to issue a certificate for the whole of the applicant's potato crop. The inspector relied in part on a policy directive issued by Agriculture Canada which called for the rejection of all crops produced by the same machinery as crops contaminated by bacterial ring rot, regardless of whether the crops were grown on the same farm.
[40]
MacKay, J., held that although it was permissible for the Department to issue policy directives of this nature, the statutory discretion vested in the inspector was fettered by the policy which was considered binding on the decision makers, namely the inspectors. Such a binding directive was found to be inconsistent with the discretionary authority of the inspector vested by the
Regulations
.
[41]
As stated, counsel for the applicant relies on the decision in that case, on this issue (it is also relied upon in arguments on issue 3, which I shall discuss below), to support the argument that Dr. Tattersall's discretion was fettered by the policy directive of Agriculture Canada and its commitment to kill the cattle. While the two situations are not entirely dissimilar, the statutory and regulatory scheme concerning MacKay, J., was worded quite differently than s. 48(1) of the
Act
and I believe that the nature of the policy directive can also be distinguished.
[42]
Under ss. 50 and 51 of the
Seeds Regulations
, the inspector is charged with inspecting the growing crop in order to determine if it meets grading requirements. Then, under s. 52(1), once the inspector has inspected the growing crop, "he shall issue to the grower a certificate ...". Further, in subsec. (2)(d), a certificate shall not be issued where "in the opinion of an inspector, the crop has been contaminated with bacterial ring rot ...". Clearly, the discretion for inspection and decision is vested with the inspectors and they are mandated to base the decision on their opinions according to their inspections. That is what the inspector purported to do in that case and what MacKay, J., found was not properly done.
[43]
Not so in the case before me. Section 48(1) vests the discretion to require the disposal of animals in the Minister, not in a person such as an inspector, or a District Veterinarian such as Dr. Tattersall. That discretion is left to the Minister and the decision can take many forms, including a policy directive such as the one here. Although there is provision in the
Health of Animal Regulations
, C.R.C., c. 296 ("the
Regulations
") for a veterinary inspector to make such a decision, the Notice of Disposal in this case clearly relies on the Minister's discretion in s. 48(1). Section 5(1)(a) of the
Regulations
is only relied upon for the temporary quarantine of the applicant's cattle until delivery for destruction (see Notice, Applicant's Application Record, Tab 2,A). The fact that the Notice was signed by Dr. Tattersall cannot change the reality that the decision to destroy the cattle was made by the Minister, on the recommendation and acceptance of the proposed policy developed by Dr. Kellar and his group. Further, in my opinion, the so-called policy directive from Agriculture Canada, or its commitment to foreign trading partners was much more than a mere general policy to be followed in individual cases. As expressed above, it
was
the decision to be implemented in each case.
[44]
Therefore, the issue as framed by the applicant need not be answered as I have found, based on all the evidence before me, that Dr. Tattersall had no responsibility to decide and therefore, he had no discretion which could be fettered by any policy decision of the Department (i.e. the Minister). Were the language similar to that before MacKay, J., I would be left with no other conclusion but that the policy directive had the same fettering effect on Dr. Tattersall as in
Griffin
, supra. However, the Minister's policy, being the decision itself, can have no such fettering effect on the Minister as the decision maker.
Issue #3
[45]
The third issue concerns the consideration of irrelevant factors or the lack of consideration of relevant circumstances in making the decision to destroy the cattle. Specifically, counsel for the applicant argues that the suspicion of being in contact with an animal or thing affected by BSE, or suspected of such, is an irrelevant consideration given the wording of the
Act
and that the relevant circumstances of the cattle, as presented in the evidence of Mrs. Hunt, have been ignored. He suggests that therefore, the decision to destroy the cattle was not properly made.
[46]
As mentioned, counsel for the applicant relies inter alia on
Griffin
, supra to support the argument that even in the absence of a requirement for a formal hearing, there is an obligation on the decision maker to consider all relevant factors before exercising any statutory authority. Accordingly, counsel suggests that Mrs. Hunt's concerns about her cattle were never considered. These include the declaration from Bembridge that the herd of origin was BSE-free, that the cattle had never been fed anything but natural, home grown feed and the fact that these cattle have shown no signs of BSE contamination. The applicant also submits that the information from the post-mortem examinations of the destroyed U.K. imports (except the confirmed case) should be considered and that such examinations, all concluding in a negative BSE finding, would support the position not to destroy the cattle.
[47]
There can be little disputing the fact that as of mid-December, when the decision was made to destroy all the U.K. imports, without exception, little or nothing was done specifically about the applicant's cattle. True, the Department had information from MAFF, from the O.I.E. and from the scientific literature concerning BSE which provide a solid basis for the decision to destroy all the U.K. imports. However, the applicant contends that it knew nothing of the decision, and that when concerns were raised, those concerns were ignored.
[48]
In my opinion, as can be seen from my conclusion above with respect to issue #1, I do not believe that the suspicion of these cows being in contact with an animal or thing affected with or suspected to be affected with BSE is an irrelevant consideration for the decision maker to take into account. There is some scientific evidence, although by no means conclusive to suggest that BSE like sheep scrapie (another member of the encephalopathy family of diseases) is horizontally transmitted from animal to animal. Further, the refusal of MAFF to certify that any declaration by an owner of the herd of origin in the U.K. that there was no contaminated feed given to the cattle leads to the very relevant consideration that the cattle may have been in contact with contaminated feed or animals.
[49]
As for the trade impact of another confirmed case of BSE in Canada, the applicant did not dispute that such a factor is a relevant one for the government to take into account in reaching its decision. Thus, it cannot be said that trade concerns are an irrelevant factor to consider in reaching the decision.
[50]
It can be seen from the evidence that general information was known by Agriculture Canada or acquired in consultations with MAFF, which addressed each of the concerns raised by the applicant, including the declaration as to feeding practices from Bembridge. In circumstances of normal administrative decisions, I think that the lack of consideration of relevant circumstances (such as counsel for the applicant points to in this case) would have the effect of vitiating the decision. However, as I believe the evidence shows, this is not a normal administrative decision.
[51]
Agriculture Canada was faced with the potential outbreak of a disease on which there is much information but little agreement within the scientific community. It had seen the consequences of the outbreak of such a disease in the U.K. and knew of the history of sheep scrapie around the world, including within the domestic herd. In the face of all the risks to the animal population, the human population and the beef export market, the department took an admittedly draconian approach and decided to destroy the cattle. In my opinion, it was entitled to do so given the urgency and seriousness of the situation and the risks involved. This finding is not without precedent, see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), where Ryan, J.A., held that the inspectors were entitled to err on the side of caution when faced with an "invasion" of gypsy moths into Canada (at p. 334 F.C.).
[52]
Therefore, I conclude that although it may have been preferable to gather specific information about each individual cattle imported from the U.K., this is a situation which allowed for the approach taken by the department. The decision taken to destroy all the cattle imported from the U.K. was made in good faith and in the interest of the public at large. In my opinion, this factor outweighs the property rights of the applicant and the decision is one which should not be interfered with. The requirements of procedural fairness must be determined in the context of a given decision and having regard to the circumstances surrounding that decision. Although it is now well-settled that procedural requirements do attach to administrative decisions that would not otherwise be classed as judicial or quasi-judicial, a court in reviewing a Ministerial or policy decision should be reluctant to impose strict standards of procedural fairness. As Dickson, J. (as he then was), stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(2d) 353; 106 D.L.R.(3d) 385; 13 C.R.(3d) 1, at pp. 628-629 S.C.R.:
"The authorities, in my view, support the following conclusions
. . . . .
2. A purely ministerial decision, on broad grounds of public policy, will typically afford the individual no procedural protection, and any attack upon such a decision will have to be founded upon abuse of discretion. Similarly, public bodies exercising legislative functions may not be amenable to judicial supervision. On the other hand, a function that approaches the judicial end of the spectrum will entail substantial procedural safeguards. Between the judicial decisions and those which are discretionary and policy-oriented will be found a myriad decision-making processes with a flexible gradation of procedural fairness through the administrative spectrum. That is what emerges from the decision of this court in
Nicholson
. In these cases, an applicant may obtain certiorari to enforce a breach of the duty of procedural fairness."
[53]
Thus, as we have here a Ministerial decision, based on grounds of public interest and policy, I believe the decision is not one which warrants the intervention of this court on the ground of procedural fairness. Unlike
Griffin
, supra, we are not here dealing with the effects of a policy guideline on a decision within the licensing scheme under a statute or its regulations. Rather, we are dealing with the policy decision itself. Consequently, the third issue as framed by the applicant should be answered in the negative.
Conclusion
[54]
As expressed above, I am of the opinion that this application must be dismissed. In so doing, I realize the loss which the applicant must feel. Surely, these cattle have an importance to the applicant, as shown by this application and the other measures taken in this court to prevent their destruction. While I also realize that the compensation payable under the
Maximum Amounts For Destroyed Animals Regulations
, SOR/93-492, being limited to $2,000, may be less than the market value of these cattle, on the basis of all the evidence before me, I can reach no other conclusion than the one expressed above.
[55]
I believe that the Minister has acted within the discretionary jurisdiction conveyed in s. 48(1) of the
Act
and I have not been persuaded that this decision should be quashed.
[56]
At the conclusion of the hearing, counsel addressed the issue of costs under rule 1618. However, I do not believe that any special reasons exist which warrant such an order.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]