 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 348)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Gleason, J.
April 5, 2013.
Counsel:
Steven Welchner, for the applicant;
Orlagh O'Kelly, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Welchner Law Office, Ottawa, Ontario, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Gleason, J.
: The applicant, Mr. Plato, is one of the unsuccessful candidates in a job competition run by the respondent, the Canada Revenue Agency [CRA or the Agency]. In accordance with CRA's policies governing such job competitions, Mr. Plato filed a request for Independent Third Party Review [ITPR]. He made several claims to the reviewer, who upheld three of them. Subsequent to the issuance of the reviewer's decision, CRA, through its Assistant Director Audit Division, Southern Interior Tax Services Office, issued corrective measures in an attempt to address the breaches found by the reviewer. In the present application for judicial review, Mr. Plato seeks to have CRA's corrective measures decision set aside, arguing that it is unreasonable because it fails to address one of the errors in the selection process identified by the reviewer.
[2]
For the reasons set out below, I have determined that CRA's corrective measures decision is unreasonable and, accordingly, must be set aside. To understand why this is so, it is necessary to review the policies under which the decision was made as well as the background to the decision.
Relevant Background
[3]
Section 54 of the
Canada Revenue Agency Act
, SC 1999, c 17 [the
CRA Act
] requires CRA to "develop a program governing staffing, including the appointment of, and recourse for, employees." In furtherance of this requirement, CRA developed the CRA Staffing Program, which includes a Directive on Recourse for Assessment and Staffing and the ITPR Processing Directive. Under these directives, employees who are dissatisfied with a staffing decision may request ITPR. The third party reviewer is charged with determining whether errors that requestors allege to have been made in the staffing process were in fact made by the Agency. Under section 7.4 of the Directive on Recourse for Assessment and Staffing, the reviewer is limited to issuing one of the following remedies:
1. ordering that an error in the internal selection process be corrected (but the reviewer has no authority to order how the error should be corrected);
2. recommending the revocation of a successful incumbent's employment; and
3. recommending that a different CRA representative be involved in issuing corrective measures.
[4]
The staffing policies leave the selection of the appropriate corrective measure to an authorized representative of CRA.
[5]
In this case, CRA advertised a notice of job opportunity for the positions of tax auditor, excise tax auditor and interior tax services officer within the Southern Interior Tax Services office. CRA has developed a job profile for these positions that outlines several technical competencies. Among them is the competency of Legislation, Polices and Procedures. At the time of the job competition, the Agency had adopted and was applying a standardized assessment tool for the assessment of this technical competency. It subsequently ceased using this standardized tool, and it was not in use when the corrective measures were issued in this file.
[6]
The notice advising of the opportunity in this case provided general information regarding how candidates would be assessed, including the technical competencies that would be assessed. These comprised Writing Skills and Planning, Organizing and/or Monitoring Results. No mention was made in the job poster of there being an assessment of the technical competency of Legislation, Policies and Procedures. The job poster indicated that candidates' current job-related performance would be considered at both the assessment and placement phases, via reference checks, interviews and/or review of samples of candidates' work.
[7]
After the initial screening phase, a hiring manager indicated that he wished the selection board to assess candidates' abilities with respect to interpreting and applying relevant legislation. The selection committee developed a local selection tool to evaluate these competencies, and assessed them by rating candidates' work done in connection with a selection of files that each candidate had worked on. The selection committee reviewed the files in question and assigned candidates scores based on evaluation of abilities with respect to understanding and applying the relevant legislation.
[8]
In assessing these abilities, the hiring manager did not wish to evaluate the skills and knowledge that were tested as part of CRA's formal technical competency through the standardized assessment tool. Rather, the hiring manager wanted a more specific and pointed assessment of the candidates' knowledge of and ability to apply the legislation in question. The evidence before the reviewer was to the effect that the standardized selection tool, used to evaluate the technical competency of Legislation, Policies and Procedures, was incapable of providing the assessment required by the hiring manager. CRA's Directive on the Assessment and Selection Process, however, provides that where a standardized assessment tool had been adopted by CRA for the assessment of a technical competency, it must be used, unless the applicable authority in the human resources department provides an exemption.
[9]
In accordance with its policies governing the selection process, CRA provided a debrief to candidates regarding the assessment of the candidates in a June 10, 2008 memo, addressed to each candidate. (The memo is termed a "Qualified Notice"  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's staffing policies.) In the Notice, CRA advised the recipients that it had used file reviews "for another technical competency that may be used at the placement stage of the selection process. This technical competency is Legislation, Policies and Procedures." The memo went on to note that "If a hiring manager chooses to use the scores [from the local assessment of Legislation, Policies and Procedure] at the placement stage, he/she will determine what levels of proficiency will be acceptable."
[10]
In his complaint to the reviewer, Mr. Plato argued that CRA had acted arbitrarily in assessing the Legislation, Policies and Procedures competency at the placement stage by using a locally developed tool rather than the standardized assessment process. The reviewer accepted Mr. Plato's argument and concluded that CRA "did not act in accordance with established policy. The communication by the Agency was not transparent in contravention of the staffing principle; the assessment of Legislation Policies and Procedures using a locally developed tool (without the approval of an exception), where a standardized assessment tool was available, was arbitrary" (at page 13 of the reviewer's decision). The reviewer also found that CRA's communication about the Legislation, Policies and Procedures criterion lacked transparency and that CRA had been unclear in the job poster when it noted that the Planning, Organizing and/or Monitoring Results competency would be assessed twice. The reviewer's overall conclusions and remedial order are set out at the end of her decision and provide as follows (at pp 39-40 of the decision):
Conclusions
In summary, I have determined that the conduct of the selection process was arbitrary, as defined in section 4.2 of
Annex L
of the Staffing Program,
Directive on Recourse for Assessment and Staffing
for the following reasons:
a. There was a standardized assessment tool for Legislation, Policies and Procedures, but it was not used (as required in both
Annex E
and
Annex E-1
), and the scores for Legislation were used at placement. It is my conclusion that the Agency did not act in accordance with established policy. The assessment of Legislation, Policies and Procedures using a locally developed tool, when a standardized tool was available, was arbitrary.
b. The communication by the Agency regarding the assessment of Legislation, Policies and Procedures was also not open and clearly understood in contravention of the staffing principle
transparency
.
c. Indicating on the SOSR [i.e. the Statement of Staffing Requirements] that POMR [i.e. Planning, Organizing and/or Monitoring Results] would be assessed twice (and on the Qualified Notice that POMR was assessed twice) was confusing and misleading for candidates and therefore contrary to the staffing principle
transparency
.
Order
Pursuant to section 7.4 of
Annex L,
I order these errors in the process be corrected by the Agency.
[11]
CRA's corrective measures decision commences by noting that the reviewer had determined there were three errors in the staffing process, and then quotes from the decision, listing those errors. The decision continues by stating that, in order to correct the errors outlined by the reviewer, the Agency's representative was providing:
[...] a clear, detailed, and transparent explanation of how the assessment of the following criteria was conducted during the assessment stage and how these criteria were used at the placement stage:
• Legislation
• Policies and Procedures
• Planning, Organizing & Monitoring
• Planning Organizing and/or Monitoring Results
The letter then goes on to explain in detail how the staffing process was conducted and to clarify that the file review was used to assess abilities with respect to application and understanding of relevant legislation as opposed to being an actual evaluation of the Legislation, Policies and Procedures technical competency. As the applicant rightly notes, this explanation was provided to the independent third-party reviewer, and she rejected it as unconvincing in light of the contents of the job posting and the Qualified Notice. She wrote in this regard (at p 13 of her decision):
Although it was the Agency's position at the hearing that two separate "qualifications" "(1) Legislation and (2) Policies and Procedures" had been assessed, this is not consistent with what candidates were told at the conclusion of the selection process. In the Qualified Notice, candidates were advised in writing that the "technical competency" "Legislation, Policies and Procedures" had been assessed using file reviews, and the results might be used at the placement stage. In addition in the Qualified Notice, candidates were further advised that locally developed assessment tools had been used to assess "Legislation, Policies and Procedures".
[12]
The applicant argues that the corrective measures decision should be set aside because it is unreasonable in that it fails to address the first error identified by the reviewer. More specifically, he asserts that the reviewer made two findings that could not be adequately addressed through the issuance of a mere explanation, namely, that CRA was required to assess the Legislation, Policies and Procedures competency at the placement stage of the selection process and that CRA erred in assessing this competency via a locally developed assessment tool, which had not been appropriately approved under CRA's staffing policy.
[13]
The respondent, for its part, argues that the decision is reasonable, essentially, because all that occurred was that CRA used imprecise language in the Qualified Notice and failed to actually describe what had occurred - which was not an assessment of a technical competency but rather an assessment of only part of that competency (i.e. abilities in respect of legislation) - and that this use of imprecise language may be reasonably remedied through provision of a better and more accurate explanation. The respondent stresses that, in light of the broad authority afforded to management in matters of staffing under the
CRA Act
and the deferential nature of reasonableness review, its corrective measures decision should be upheld.
Standard of review
[14]
Both parties concur that the standard of review applicable to the assessment of the corrective measures decision is that of reasonableness as, indeed, was determined in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  aff'd on other grounds 2011 FCA 49 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. The applicant, however, asserts that to the extent the corrective measures decision is premised on an interpretation of the independent third party reviewer's decision, that interpretation must be correct, because to find otherwise would be unfair and would allow the employer to unilaterally usurp the entire review process by substituting its views for those of the reviewer. The applicant asserts that such would be the result if the employer is allowed to rely on a reasonable - as opposed to a correct - interpretation of the reviewer's decision. The applicant relies for this proposition on the decisions in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Appelby-Ostroff
];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  arguing that the holdings in these cases (that the employer in a grievance process must correctly apply the law) apply by analogy to the interpretation of an independent third party reviewer's decision, which is asserted to be akin to a legal issue.
[15]
The respondent, on the other hand, argues that one cannot bifurcate the corrective measures decision in the manner proposed by the applicant because so doing imports a correctness standard into the review of the corrective measures decision. The respondent argues in this regard that a necessary inquiry in the judicial review process in this type of matter will always be determining what the independent third party reviewer determined, as the reasonableness of the remedy will depend on what breach occurred. If the ruling on breach is reviewed on a correctness standard, then, in effect, the selection of remedy will be afforded no deference as its underpinning will be a matter for the court - as opposed to CRA - to determine. The respondent notes that a somewhat similar argument was rejected by this Court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the
Appelby-Ostroff
and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> cases were found to be inapplicable to the situation of a CRA corrective measures decision.
[16]
I agree with the respondent on this point for several reasons. First, it is not logically possible to bifurcate the review of the reasonableness of the measures imposed in a CRA corrective measures decision from review of the findings made regarding the basis upon which the independent third party reviewer decided. The two are inextricably intertwined. Second, it would be anomalous to impose a correctness standard on this issue when it is clear that if the independent third party reviewer's decision were reviewed, a reasonableness standard would apply. It would seem illogical that in the review of a decision under which the employer possesses greater authority - as it reserved to itself the issue of remedy - the Court would be more interventionist. Finally, to a large extent, this issue has been settled in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where Justice O'Keefe noted (at para 21):
I am satisfied that the question before the applicant's supervisor was one that involved the exercise of his discretion in his capacity as a manager and was dependent on the facts of the applicant's particular case. Despite the applicant's assertions, his supervisor was not dealing with a question of law or jurisdiction, nor was his decision precedent setting.
[17]
Thus, the reasonableness standard of review applies to the assessment of all aspects of the corrective measures decision, including the CRA manager's interpretation in that decision of what the independent third party reviewer had decided.
[18]
In terms of the content of that standard, as noted by the respondent, the reasonableness standard of review is a deferential one, and mandates that a court provide significant leeway to tribunals and not be hasty to substitute its views for those of the decision-maker. As the Supreme Court of Canada noted in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ecision will be reasonable if it is transparent, intelligible and justified and if the result reached falls within the range of acceptable outcomes in light of the facts and applicable law. The scope of the required deference is all the greater in a situation like the present, where what is being reviewed is the employer's exercise of a discretionary power to determine the manner in which it will implement a decision related to staffing, a matter that in this case is excluded from the purview of collective bargaining and the grievance process under the collective agreement.
[19]
However, while the range of acceptable remedial decisions open to CRA in a case like the present is broad, it is not limitless. At the end of the day, there still must be some logical connection between the remedy selected and the breach it is designed to address. If there is no connection, the remedy will be outside the range of possible acceptable outcomes. As Justice Gagné recently noted in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in assessing the reasonableness of a remedial award in a staffing grievance, an award will be set aside if "it is not responsive to the applicant's claim and does not provide him any meaningful remedy" (at para 24). To somewhat similar effect, the courts have long held that there must be a rational connection between the breach found by other sorts of labour tribunals and their remedial orders (see e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p 409).
Reasonableness of the decision
[20]
Turning, then, to the heart of the matter, the CRA manager in the corrective measures decision here noted that the third party reviewer had found three separate breaches in the staffing process: two related to the lack of transparency in the process and the other related to the failure to use the standardized selection tool to evaluate the Legislation, Polices and Procedures technical competence without authorisation from the appropriate CRA human resources authorities. This interpretation of the reviewer's award is reasonable and, indeed, correct.
[21]
However, while the provision of a better explanation is logically tied to the transparency failures identified by the reviewer, such an explanation is in no way connected to the first breach, i.e. the failure to use the proper selection tool for a competency. CRA's explanation that what was being evaluated was not the technical competency but rather just a part of it (and therefore that the standardized tool was not necessary) was foreclosed to the Agency as the reviewer heard and rejected this very explanation. In effect, by proceeding in the way it has done, CRA has completely ignored the finding that there was any breach at all in respect of the Legislation, Polices and Procedure. The corrective measures decision is therefore unreasonable as it fails to provide any remedy for the first breach found by the reviewer.
[22]
While certainly not determinative of this outcome in this case, a memo written by an HR manager to the CRA manger who made the corrective measure decision is telling and highlights that the HR manager was unsure about the appropriateness of the corrective measures decision that was eventually made. In the memo, the HR manager states that she understood that "the intended approach to corrective measures [was] to reissue the final assessment results." She went on to note that "[a]lthough [she] could see how this could address two of the three points raised in the decision, [she was] unsure that this overall approach to corrective measures will meet the expectations of the Requestor" (Exhibit "G" to the affidavit of Shelley Welchner).
[23]
Thus, the corrective measures decision will be set aside and the matter remitted to CRA for re-issuance of corrective measures by a different member of management than the one who issued the present decision. This ruling does not necessarily mean that CRA is required to rerun the competition or excise consideration of abilities in respect of legislation from the selection process. Indeed, as was conceded by counsel for the applicant during oral argument, it may well be open to CRA to retrospectively authorize the use of the local selection tool for evaluation of the legislation policies and procedures competency in this case. However, it is not for me to comment on what remedy must be selected, as this a matter of discretion for the manager making this decision, who is required only to ensure that his or her remedy is logically tied to the third party reviewer's decision and in some way addresses the breach that the third party reviewer found to have occurred.
Costs
[24]
The parties concurred that costs should follow the event, but differ as to the appropriate quantum. The applicant suggested an all-inclusive lump sum amount of $3000.00 whereas the respondent filed a draft bill of costs totalling $2296.96.
[25]
Given the sums involved and the nature of this matter, and exercising my discretion under Rule 400 of the
Federal Courts Rules
, SOR/98-106, I have determined that a lump sum award is appropriate in the amount of $2500.00.
JUDGMENT
[26]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. This application for judicial review of the decision of the Assistant Director Audit Division, Southern Interior Tax Services Office, dated October 25, 2011 is granted and the decision is set aside;
2. The determination of corrective measures flowing from the decision of the independent third party reviewer in the request filed by Mr. Plato is remitted to CRA for re-determination by a different manger; and
3. Costs are fixed in the all-inclusive amount of $2500.00, which are to be paid by the respondent to the applicant.
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  été reçu à un concours de dotation tenu par la défenderesse, l'Agence du revenu du Canada [l'ARC ou l'Agence]. M. Plato a présenté une demande de révision par un tiers indépendant [RTI], en conformité avec les politiques de l'ARC régissant les concours de dotation. Il a fait valoir plusieurs prétentions à l'examinatrice et trois d'entre elles ont été retenues. Pour donner suite à la décision de l'examinatrice, l'ARC, par l'entremise de son directeur adjoint, Division de la vérification, bureau des services fiscaux - Sud intérieur, a pris des mesures correctives visant à remédier aux manquements relevés. Par la présente demande de contrôle judiciaire, M. Plato sollicite l'annulation des mesures correctives de l'ARC, qu'il prétend être déraisonnables puisqu'elles ne remédient pas à l'une des erreurs constatées par l'examinatrice dans le processus de sélection.
[2]
Pour les motifs qui suivent, j'ai conclu que la décision de l'ARC de prendre les mesures correctives en cause était déraisonnable et qu'elle doit en conséquence être annulée. Pour bien comprendre pourquoi il en est ainsi, j'estime nécessaire de passer en revue les politiques qui sous-tendent la décision contestée ainsi que le contexte dans lequel elle s'inscrit.
Contexte
[3]
L'article 54 de la
Loi sur l'Agence du revenu du Canada
, LC 1999, c 17 [la Loi sur l'ARC] exige que l'ARC « élabore un programme de dotation en personnel régissant notamment les nominations et les recours offerts aux employés ». Pour se conformer à cette obligation, l'ARC a mis en place le programme de dotation de l'ARC, dans le cadre duquel elle a élaboré la directive sur les recours en matière d'évaluation et de dotation et la directive sur le traitement des demandes de révision par un tiers indépendant [RTI]. En vertu de ces directives, les employés insatisfaits d'une décision en matière de dotation peuvent demander une RTI. L'examinateur indépendant doit déterminer si l'Agence a commis, dans le processus de dotation, les erreurs que l'employé concerné lui impute. Conformément à l'article 7.4 de la directive sur les recours en matière d'évaluation et de dotation, les mesures que peut prescrire l'examinateur sont limitées aux suivantes:
1. ordonner que l'on corrige l'erreur décelée dans le processus de sélection interne (l'examinateur n'a toutefois pas le pouvoir de prescrire la façon dont l'erreur devrait être corrigée);
2. recommander la révocation de la nomination du candidat reçu;
3. recommander qu'un autre représentant de l'ARC participe à la décision concernant les mesures correctives.
[4]
Les politiques de dotation laissent au représentant autorisé de l'ARC le soin de décider des mesures correctives à prendre.
[5]
En l'espèce, l'ARC a publié un avis de possibilité d'emploi pour les postes de vérificateur fiscal, de vérificateur de la taxe d'accise et d'agent interne des services fiscaux à son bureau des services fiscaux - Sud intérieur. L'ARC a élaboré pour ces postes un profil d'emploi faisant état de plusieurs compétences techniques, dont une concernant la législation, les politiques et les procédures. Au moment de la tenue du concours de dotation, l'Agence avait adopté et utilisait à l'égard de cette dernière compétence technique un outil d'évaluation standardisé. L'ARC a par la suite cessé de recourir à cet outil, qui n'était plus en usage lors de la prise des mesures correctives dans la présente affaire.
[6]
L'avis de possibilité d'emploi en l'espèce fournissait des renseignements généraux sur le mode d'évaluation des candidats et précisait les compétences techniques qui seraient considérées, soit les compétences en rédaction et en planification, organisation et/ou contrôle des résultats. Nulle mention n'était faite dans l'avis d'emploi d'une évaluation des compétences techniques en matière de législation, de politiques et de procédures. On y précisait toutefois que le rendement actuel au travail des candidats serait pris en compte tant à l'étape de l'évaluation qu'à celle du placement, au moyen d'une vérification des références, d'entrevues ou d'un examen d'échantillons du travail accompli par les candidats.
[7]
À l'issue de l'étape de sélection préliminaire, un gestionnaire d'embauche a indiqué qu'il souhaitait que le jury de sélection évalue l'aptitude des candidats à interpréter et à appliquer la législation pertinente. Le jury a alors mis au point un outil local de sélection lui permettant d'évaluer cette aptitude, ce qu'il a fait en procédant à un examen du travail effectué par chaque candidat dans divers dossiers choisis. Le jury de sélection a examiné ces dossiers, et il a attribué une cote aux candidats en fonction de leur aptitude à comprendre et à appliquer la législation pertinente.
[8]
Le gestionnaire d'embauche ne voulait pas que le jury s'intéresse aux habiletés et aux connaissances qu'il avait déjà examinées dans le cadre de l'évaluation des compétences techniques requises par l'ARC à l'aide de l'outil d'évaluation standardisé. Il préférait une évaluation davantage ciblée et plus pointue des connaissances du candidat relatives à la législation en cause et de sa capacité de l'appliquer. Il ressort de la preuve présentée à l'examinatrice que l'outil de sélection standardisé utilisé pour l'évaluation des compétences techniques en matière de législation, de politiques et de procédures ne permettait pas de procéder à l'évaluation requise par le gestionnaire d'embauche. La directive de l'ARC sur le processus d'évaluation et de sélection prévoit toutefois que, lorsque l'Agence a adopté un outil d'évaluation standardisé en regard d'une compétence technique, il faut recourir à cet outil, à moins que l'autorité compétente du service des ressources humaines n'ait accordé à cet égard une dispense.
[9]
Conformément à ses politiques régissant le processus de sélection, l'ARC a transmis à chaque candidat une note datée du 10 juin 2008 dans laquelle elle lui rendait compte de son évaluation (il s'agit d'un [traduction] « avis fait sous réserve » selon la terminologie des politiques de dotation de l'ARC). L'ARC informait les destinataires qu'elle avait procédé à des examens de dossiers [traduction] « à l'égard d'une autre compétence technique qui pourrait servir à l'étape du placement du processus de sélection. Cette compétence technique est liée à la législation, aux politiques et aux procédures ». Elle ajoute: [traduction] « Si un gestionnaire d'embauche choisit d'utiliser les résultats [tirés de l'évaluation locale visant la législation, les politiques et les procédures] à l'étape du placement, il établira les niveaux de compétence qu'il estime être acceptables ».
[10]
Dans sa plainte adressée à l'examinatrice, M. Plato a soutenu que l'ARC avait agi de manière arbitraire en recourant à un outil conçu localement plutôt qu'à l'outil d'évaluation standardisé pour apprécier les compétences en matière de législation, de politiques et de procédures à l'étape du placement. Souscrivant à l'argument de M. Plato, l'examinatrice a conclu que l'ARC n'avait [traduction] « pas agi conformément à la politique établie. L'Agence n'a pas communiqué de manière transparente, en violation des principes de dotation. Elle a agi de manière arbitraire en recourant à un outil conçu localement (sans le bénéfice d'une dispense), alors qu'un outil d'évaluation standardisé était disponible » (à la page 13 de la décision de l'examinatrice). L'examinatrice a également conclu que l'ARC avait manqué de transparence dans ses explications sur le critère de la législation, des politiques et des procédures, et manqué de clarté en mentionnant dans l'avis d'emploi que les compétences en planification, organisation et/ou contrôle des résultats seraient évaluées deux fois. Les conclusions générales et l'ordonnance corrective figurent à la fin de sa décision et se lisent comme suit (aux pages 39 et 40):
[traduction]
Conclusions
En résumé, j'ai conclu qu'on avait mené le processus de sélection de manière arbitraire, au sens de l'article 4.2 de l'annexe L de la directive sur les recours en matière d'évaluation et de dotation, du programme de dotation, pour les raisons suivantes:
a. L'examen des compétences en matière de législation, de politiques et de procédures aurait dû être fait à l'aide de l'outil d'évaluation standardisé, mais celui-ci n'a pas utilisé (tel que le requéraient tant l'annexe E que l'annexe E-1), et on s'est servi des résultats concernant la législation à l'étape du placement. J'arrive à la conclusion que l'Agence n'a pas agi conformément à la politique établie. L'évaluation des compétences susmentionnées au moyen d'un outil conçu localement, alors qu'il existait un outil standardisé, avait un caractère arbitraire.
b. Les renseignements sur l'évaluation des compétences en matière de législation, de politiques et de procédures, n'ont pas été communiqués par l'Agence de façon ouverte et n'ont pas été bien compris, ce qui contrevient au principe de la
transparence
qui existe en matière de dotation.
c. La mention dans l'EEMD [l'énoncé des exigences en matière de dotation] que les compétences concernant la POCR [c.-à-d. la planification, l'organisation et/ou le contrôle des résultats] seraient évaluées deux fois (et, dans l'avis fait sous réserve, qu'elles avaient été évaluées deux fois) était trompeur et source de confusion pour les candidats, et contrevenait ainsi au principe de la
transparence
qui existe en matière de dotation.
Ordonnance
J'ordonne à l'Agence, en application de l'article 7.4 de l'annexe L, de corriger les erreurs décelées dans le processus de dotation.
[11]
Dans sa décision relative aux mesures correctives, l'ARC commence par mentionner que l'examinatrice a conclu à l'existence de trois erreurs dans le processus de dotation, puis elle cite un extrait de la décision où il est question de ces erreurs. Elle ajoute que, pour corriger les erreurs relevées par l'examinatrice, le représentant de l'ARC a fourni:
[traduction]
[...] des explications claires, détaillées et transparentes sur la façon dont les critères suivants ont été appréciés à l'étape de l'évaluation et sur leur utilisation à l'étape du placement:
• Législation
• Politiques et procédures
• Planification, organisation et suivi
• Capacité de planifier, d'organiser ou de contrôler les résultats.
L'ARC explique ensuite en détail le déroulement du processus de dotation, puis elle précise que, pour évaluer la capacité des candidats d'appliquer et de comprendre la législation pertinente, on a eu recours à l'examen des dossiers plutôt que de procéder à une véritable évaluation des compétences techniques en matière de législation, de politiques et de procédures. Tel que le demandeur le fait remarquer à juste titre, cette explication a été offerte à l'examinatrice, et celle-ci l'a rejetée parce qu'elle l'a jugée non convaincante au vu de l'avis de postes à pourvoir et de l'avis fait sous réserve. L'examinatrice a écrit ce qui suit à cet égard (à la page 13 de sa décision):
[traduction]
Bien que l'Agence ait soutenu à l'audience qu'on avait évalué deux « compétences » distinctes, soit « (1) la législation et (2) les politiques et les procédures », cela ne cadre pas avec ce qui a été dit aux candidats au terme du processus de sélection. Dans l'avis fait sous réserve, on a informé les candidats par écrit que la « compétence technique » en « législation, politiques et procédures » avait été évaluée par l'examen de dossiers, et que les résultats alors obtenus pouvaient être utilisés à l'étape du placement. On y informait aussi les candidats du recours à des outils d'évaluation conçus localement pour l'évaluation du volet « législation, politiques et procédures ».
[12]
Le demandeur soutient que la décision relative aux mesures correctives devrait être annulée parce qu'elle est déraisonnable en ce qu'elle ne corrige pas la première erreur décelée par l'examinatrice. Il fait plus particulièrement valoir que l'examinatrice a conclu à l'existence de deux erreurs auxquelles il n'était pas possible de remédier valablement au moyen d'une simple explication, à savoir que l'ARC était tenue d'apprécier les compétences en matière de législation, de politiques et de procédures à l'étape du placement du processus de sélection, et qu'elle a commis une erreur en évaluant ces compétences au moyen d'un outil d'évaluation conçu localement, qui n'avait pas été dûment approuvé conformément à la politique de dotation.
[13]
La défenderesse soutient pour sa part que la décision est raisonnable. Essentiellement, l'ARC aurait simplement employé des termes imprécis dans l'avis sous réserve et omis de décrire ce qui s'était véritablement produit - on n'avait pas évalué une compétence technique en tant que telle, mais seulement une partie de celle-ci (c.-à-d. les aptitudes en matière de législation) -, et ce manque de précision pouvait être corrigé de manière raisonnable par une explication plus fidèle. La défenderesse insiste aussi sur le fait que, compte tenu du vaste pouvoir dont les gestionnaires disposent en matière de dotation en vertu de la Loi sur l'ARC et de la retenue que commande la norme de contrôle de la raisonnabilité, la décision concernant les mesures correctives devrait être maintenue.
Norme de contrôle
[14]
Les parties s'entendent pour dire que la norme de la raisonnabilité s'applique au contrôle de la décision relative aux mesures correctives, tel qu'il en a été décidé dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  confirmé pour d'autres motifs 2011 CAF 49 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]. Le demandeur fait toutefois valoir que, dans la mesure où cette décision repose sur une interprétation de la décision de l'examinatrice, cette interprétation doit être correcte parce que la conclusion contraire serait inéquitable et permettrait à l'employeur de détourner unilatéralement le processus entier de révision en substituant son appréciation à celle de l'examinatrice. Il en serait ainsi, affirme-t-il, si l'on permettait à l'employeur de se fonder sur une interprétation raisonnable - plutôt que correcte - de la décision de l'examinatrice. Le demandeur invoque à l'appui de cette proposition les jugements
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Appelby-Ostroff
];
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] et
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  et soutient que la conclusion tirée dans ces affaires (soit que l'employeur doit appliquer la loi correctement dans le cadre d'une procédure de griefs) s'applique par analogie à l'interprétation de la décision d'un examinateur indépendant, ce que le demandeur assimile à une question de droit.
[15]
La défenderesse soutient pour sa part qu'on ne peut pas diviser la décision relative aux mesures correctives de la manière suggérée par le demandeur, car cela aurait pour effet d'importer la norme de la décision correcte dans le contrôle de cette décision. Elle prétend à cet égard que, dans ce type d'affaire, il faudra toujours examiner, en procédant au contrôle judiciaire, ce en quoi la décision de l'examinateur indépendant a consisté, puisque le caractère raisonnable de la mesure de réparation dépendra du manquement commis. Si l'on appliquait la norme de la décision correcte à la décision relative au manquement, on ne ferait alors preuve d'aucune retenue à l'égard de la réparation choisie puisqu'il reviendrait à la cour de révision - plutôt qu'à l'ARC - de se pencher sur son fondement. La défenderesse fait valoir que la Cour a rejeté un argument assez semblable dans la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , après avoir conclu que les arrêts
Appelby-Ostroff
et <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ne s'appliquaient pas dans le cas d'une décision de l'ARC concernant des mesures correctives.
[16]
Je partage l'avis de la défenderesse sur ce point pour plusieurs raisons. Premièrement, il est contraire à la logique de distinguer le contrôle du caractère raisonnable des mesures correctives imposées par l'ARC du contrôle des conclusions sur lesquelles repose la décision de l'examinateur indépendant. Ces deux éléments sont étroitement liés. Deuxièmement, il serait anormal d'appliquer la norme de la décision correcte au contrôle de cette question, alors qu'il est évident que si le contrôle portait sur la décision de l'examinateur indépendant, c'est la norme de la raisonnabilité qui serait applicable. Il semblerait illogique que, s'agissant du contrôle d'une décision à l'égard de laquelle l'employeur dispose d'un pouvoir plus important - puisqu'il s'est réservé le droit de décider des mesures de réparation - la Cour se montrerait davantage interventionniste. Enfin, la question a été réglée dans une large mesure dans la décision <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , où le juge O'Keefe a formulé les commentaires suivants (au paragraphe 21):
Je suis convaincu que la question que le superviseur du demandeur devait trancher était une question à l'égard de laquelle il devait exercer son pouvoir discrétionnaire à titre de gestionnaire et qui dépendait des faits d'espèce du dossier du demandeur. En dépit de ce que le demandeur a affirmé, son superviseur ne devait pas trancher une question de droit ou de compétence, et sa décision n'établissait aucun précédent.
[17]
La norme de la raisonnabilité s'applique donc à l'évaluation de tous les aspects de la décision relative aux mesures correctives, y compris l'interprétation que le gestionnaire de l'ARC a faite de la décision de l'examinatrice.
[18]
S'agissant du contenu de la norme de la raisonnabilité, rappelons qu'il s'agit d'une norme qui commande la retenue, comme la défenderesse l'a souligné, et qu'elle demande à la cour de révision d'accorder une grande latitude à l'instance administrative et de ne pas substituer à la légère son opinion à celle du décideur. Comme l'a déclaré la Cour suprême du  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> une décision est raisonnable si elle possède les attributs de la transparence, de l'intelligibilité et de la justification, et qu'elle appartient aux issues acceptables au regard des faits et du droit applicable. Il est d'autant plus nécessaire de faire preuve de retenue dans une situation comme celle qui nous occupe où ce qui fait l'objet du contrôle, c'est l'exercice par l'employeur du pouvoir discrétionnaire d'établir comment il mettra en œuvre une décision concernant la dotation, ce qui est exclu en l'espèce de la négociation collective et de la procédure de règlement des griefs prévue dans la convention collective.
[19]
Bien que l'éventail des décisions acceptables que l'ARC puisse prendre en matière de réparation soit fort large dans une affaire comme celle dont nous sommes saisis, il n'est toutefois pas illimité. En dernière analyse, il doit toujours y avoir un certain lien logique entre la réparation choisie et le manquement auquel elle est censée remédier. En l'absence de tout lien, la mesure de réparation n'appartiendra pas aux issues possibles acceptables. Comme la juge Gagné l'a récemment fait remarquer dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  lorsqu'il s'agit d'apprécier le caractère raisonnable d'une décision faisant suite à un grief en matière de dotation, la décision sera annulée si elle « ne répond pas à la prétention du demandeur et qu'elle ne lui offre aucune mesure de réparation valable » (au paragraphe 24). De manière assez semblable, les tribunaux reconnaissent depuis longtemps la nécessité d'un lien rationnel entre le manquement constaté par d'autres types de tribunaux du travail et la réparation prévue par l'ordonnance (voir, p. ex.,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , à la page 409).
Caractère raisonnable de la décision
[20]
Nous arrivons maintenant au cœur du litige. Le gestionnaire de l'ARC qui a pris la décision relative aux mesures correctives a relevé en l'espèce que l'examinatrice avait conclu à l'existence de trois manquements distincts dans le processus de dotation: deux avaient trait au manque de transparence du processus et l'autre au défaut d'avoir recouru, sans l'autorisation des autorités compétentes en ressources humaines de l'ARC, à l'outil standardisé de sélection pour évaluer les compétences techniques en matière de législation, de politiques et de procédures. Cette interprétation de la décision de l'examinatrice est raisonnable et, à vrai dire, correcte.
[21]
Or, bien que le fait d'avoir fourni une meilleure explication soit logiquement lié aux problèmes de transparence relevés par l'examinatrice, cette explication n'a absolument aucun rapport avec le premier manquement, celui de n'avoir pas utilisé le bon outil de sélection pour évaluer une compétence. L'explication de l'ARC selon laquelle l'évaluation ne portait pas sur une compétence technique, mais plutôt sur une partie de celle-ci, de sorte que l'outil standardisé n'était pas nécessaire - ne pouvait être avancée par l'Agence, puisqu'elle avait déjà été présentée à l'examinatrice et que cette dernière l'avait rejetée. En effet, en procédant comme elle l'a fait, l'ARC a tout simplement fait abstraction de la conclusion selon laquelle il n'y avait eu aucun manquement quant au volet législation, politiques et procédures. La décision relative aux mesures correctives est par conséquent déraisonnable, car elle ne remédie pas au premier manquement relevé par l'examinatrice.
[22]
Bien que cet élément ne soit pas déterminant quant à l'issue de la présente affaire, une note rédigée par une gestionnaire des RH à l'intention du gestionnaire de l'ARC ayant décidé des mesures correctives à prendre nous révèle que la gestionnaire des RH doutait de la justesse de la décision arrêtée. Elle y déclarait que, selon ce qu'elle en comprenait, [traduction] « l'approche visée avec les mesures correctives [était] de présenter à nouveau les résultats finaux de l'évaluation ». Puis elle ajoutait que [traduction] « [b] ien qu'[elle] puisse concevoir comment cela pouvait régler deux des trois problèmes soulevés dans la décision, [elle n'était] pas certaine que cette approche globale réponde, en termes de mesures correctives, aux attentes du requérant » (pièce G jointe à l'affidavit de Shelley Welchner).
[23]
Par conséquent, la décision relative aux mesures correctives sera annulée et l'affaire sera renvoyée à l'ARC pour la prise de nouvelles mesures correctives par un gestionnaire différent de celui qui a pris la décision contestée. Cela ne signifie pas nécessairement que l'ARC devra tenir un nouveau concours ou soustraire du processus de sélection le critère de la compétence en matière de législation. Tel que l'a d'ailleurs concédé l'avocat du demandeur dans sa plaidoirie, l'ARC pourrait bien autoriser rétroactivement le recours à l'outil de sélection local pour l'évaluation des compétences en matière de législation, de politiques et de procédures en l'espèce. Cependant, il ne m'appartient pas de me prononcer sur la réparation qu'il conviendrait de choisir, puisque ce choix relève du pouvoir discrétionnaire du gestionnaire chargé de cette décision, qui doit seulement s'assurer que la réparation a un lien logique avec la décision de l'examinatrice et qu'elle remédie d'une certaine manière au manquement constaté par celle-ci.
Dépens
[24]
Les parties sont toutes deux d'avis que les dépens devraient suivre l'issue de la cause, mais elles ne s'entendent pas quant à leur montant. Le demandeur a proposé l'adjudication d'une somme globale de 3 000 $, tout compris, tandis que la défenderesse a présenté un projet de mémoire de frais visant un montant total de 2 296,96 $.
[25]
Compte tenu des montants en jeu et de la nature de la présente affaire, et dans l'exercice du pouvoir discrétionnaire que me confère l'article 400 des
Règles des Cours fédérales
, DORS/98-96, j'estime approprié d'octroyer une somme globale de 2 500 $.
JUGEMENT
[26]
LA COUR STATUE
:
1. La présente demande de contrôle judiciaire visant la décision du 25 octobre 2011 du directeur adjoint, Division de la vérification, bureau des services fiscaux - Sud intérieur, est accueillie et la décision est annulée.
2. La décision relative aux mesures correctives applicables par suite de la décision rendue par l'examinatrice sur la demande présentée par M. Plato est renvoyée à l'ARC pour être réexaminée par un gestionnaire différent.
3. La défenderesse devra payer au demandeur les dépens, fixés à 2 500 $, tout compris.
[End of document]