[1]
Richard, J.
: This is an application pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as am., for judicial review of an interlocutory ruling, file number 95-NAR-0094, by Mr. A.H. Rosenbaum, Chairman of an Appeal Board of the Public Service Commission (the Board) constituted under s. 21 of the
Public Service Employment Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-33, as am. (the
Act
), dated June 6, 1995. The decision is to the effect that the applicant, who was an unsuccessful candidate in a public service employment competition, would not be permitted to personally examine documents pertaining to the standardized tests used to assess ability qualifications.
[2]
Mr. Khalil Hasan was a candidate in closed competition # 94-TAX-NY-CC-13, AU-05 for the position of Manager Audit /Special Audit. He was administered the Public Service Commission's Manager Simulation 757 test and was found not to meet the qualifying standard set in the overall ability qualifications. As a result, he was not selected for the appointment.
[3]
Mr. Hasan appealed, pursuant to s. 21(1) of the
Act
, against the selection. Having chosen not to be represented at the appeal, he requested disclosure of all relevant material be made to himself personally. For the purposes of the appeal, counsel for the respondent agrees that the following materials pertain to the simulation test in question:
(i) the simulation's background information booklet;
(ii) the simulation's test booklet;
(iii) the handbook for assessors, which is the simulation's scoring key;
(iv) the applicant's written summary;
(v) the selected candidates' written summaries;
(vi) the Selection Board's notes and ratings for the applicant; and,
(vii) the Selection Board's notes and ratings for the successful candidates.
[4]
Simulation tests, including the one in question, are developed by the Personnel Psychology Centre of the Public Service Commission. There are approximately forty standardized tests, measuring skills from typing speed to managerial abilities, used to staff various positions in the Public Service. The tests are administered to more than 125,000 individuals each year. The Simulation 757 test is a work-sample test which is intended to simulate the most frequent problems encountered in managerial positions within the federal Public Service.
[5]
A few days prior to the test, candidates are given the simulation's background information booklet which contains information about the hypothetical organization and position to be simulated. At the test session, candidates are given the test booklet which contains instructions and fourteen job-related documents such as letters, memoranda, forms and directives. Candidates are allowed three hours to prepare a written summary of their proposed actions and solutions. Candidates are then required to make a thirty minute oral presentation summarizing the overall issues and problems found in the test items, as well as their proposed actions and rationale for the decisions made. During the presentation, the selection board members are expected to listen, observe and take notes. The presentation, which is usually followed by a question period from the selection board, is used to assess oral communications, among other skills, while the written summary is used to assess written communication.
[6]
The actions and decisions taken by the candidate in handling the problems presented in the Simulation are evaluated by the Selection Board members on the basis of criteria set out in the handbook for assessors. This handbook contains a definition of the six ability qualifications being assessed, as well as a list of "expected" actions or behaviours.
[7]
The Department of National Revenue (the Department) uses these tests routinely. Since there is only one version of each test, the Department imposes a retest period of six months within which the candidate may not be administered the same test. This restriction is intended to preserve the integrity of the testing system so that the results reflect the candidates' assessed abilities, and not their familiarity with the test answers.
[8]
The respondent takes the position that in order to preserve the integrity of the testing system and fairness to other candidates, the confidentiality of the test documents cannot be compromised. To this end, the Personnel Psychology Centre has developed a practice for the disclosure of materials necessary to the conduct of a s. 21 appeal which is described as follows: (Affidavit of Ken W. Grant, Director of the Personnel Psychology Centre, Staffing Policy and Program Development Directorate, Staffing Programs Branch, sworn November 3, 1995, paragraph 19.)
"(a) the appellant is asked to appoint a representative who would not be in a conflict of interest situation, i.e., a person who would not be seen as a potential candidate for positions for which the simulation could be used as a testing requirement; and
(b) the disclosure of Simulation 757 is conducted in the following manner:
Phase One: Limited disclosure with the appellant
The appellant is given all documents that pertain to
his/her
assessment, i.e.:
(i) the applicant's written summary; and
(ii) the Selection Board members' personal notes and ratings on the appellant's qualifications
During this first phase, the departmental representative (and Selection Board members, as needed) is expected to describe how the simulation was used in the selection process under appeal, i.e., what ability qualifications were assessed by the simulation, and to explain why the appellant received the marks or ratings he/she did, without describing the 'expected' or 'correct' answers or behaviours.
Phase Two: Full disclosure with representative only
The applicant's representative is given full access of the simulation materials, including all documents that pertain to the appellant and the successful candidate(s), i.e.:
(i) the Simulation's Background Information Booklet;
(ii) the Simulation's Test Booklet;
(iii) the Simulation's Handbook for Assessors;
(iv) the Selection Board's personal notes and ratings on the appellant's and selected candidates' qualifications; and
(v) the appellant's and successful candidates' written summaries.
At the conclusion of disclosure, all documents relating to the simulation that have been handed out to the appellant and/or his/her representative must be returned to the Departmental representative."
[9]
The above disclosure process is generally subject to the following rules: (Ibid., paragraph 20)
"For the purpose of providing disclosure of Simulation 757 in the manner described in the paragraph[s] above, the following rules normally apply:
(a) the appellant may consult the Background Information Booklet, i.e., the organizational chart, the description of duties, etc.
(b) the appellant is not authorized to consult the Handbook for Assessors;
(c) only the appellant's representative is authorized to make personal notes. However, such notes must be of a general nature only so as not to compromise the confidentiality of the test material; and
(d) no copy, photocopy or reproduction of the confidential test material would be made at the disclosure meeting, by either the appellant or the appellant's representative."
[10]
Counsel for the respondent advised the court that the appellant's representative could not disclose to the appellant any material which had not been disclosed to the appellant.
[11]
To date, the Department has offered to provide directly to Mr. Hasan only the limited disclosure of documents described above. The Department has objected to allowing full disclosure of all other Simulation 757 test materials, arguing that such disclosure can only be provided to an appropriate representative of the appellant in accordance with the usual procedures adopted by the Public Service Commission with respect to the disclosure of standardized test materials. (Affidavit of Florence Fava dated November 9, 1995, paragraphs 7-8.)
[12]
In an interlocutory ruling dated June 6, 1995, the Board rejected the appellant's request for full disclosure in the following terms:
"After considering the arguments advanced, I am of the opinion that the Department is justified in refusing to provide the appellants access to the information requested. What follows are my reasons for arriving at this decision.
"I agree with the appellant that the use of the term 'shall' in s. 24 of the
Public Service Employment Regulations
, is indicative of there being a mandatory requirement for the Department to provide access to him, on request, of any document that contains information which pertains to him or the successful candidates and which may be disclosed before me. Indeed, the
Interpretation Act
contains the provision that 'shall' is to be construed as imperative. However, the matter does not end there. I still subscribe to the following comments that I made in
Ruskoff
, 92-CAE-0020 (Rosenbaum) at pp. 12-13 and am of the opinion that they are applicable to the case at hand:
'... The appellants' right to disclosure is not an unfettered one ... Thus, I have to take into consideration the Department's concern and indeed its right to maintain the integrity of the Customs Inspector Abilities Test against the appellant's and her representative's right to the information requested. I agree with the Department that there should not be disclosure of the information requested to the applicant ... since there is more than a mere possibility that she may have to undergo the test at some future date. Disclosure of the information requested would, in my opinion, compromise any assessment of the appellant's performance on that test ...'
"Accordingly, I am of the opinion that there should not be disclosure of the information with respect to the Public Service Commission's Manager Simulation Test to the appellant, which the Department has refused to disclosed ...
. . . . .
"In view of the foregoing, the appellant is denied access to the information that he has requested. Should an application not be made to the Federal Court, Trial Division, pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
to have this ruling set aside, the appellant is entitled to retain a representative, which is acceptable to the Department, to whom disclosure of the information requested, shall be made. Such access to the information should be provided under circumstances which would ensure that the integrity of the Manager Simulation Test is not compromised ..."
[13]
The nature of a s. 21 appeal was explained by Mr. Justice Pratte, for the Court of Appeal, as follows:
"... [I]t is important to remember that the purpose of section 21 conferring a right of appeal on candidates who were unsuccessful in a competition is also to ensure that the principle of selection by merit is observed. When an unsuccessful candidate exercises this right, he is not challenging the decision which has found him unqualified, he is, as section 21 indicates, appealing against the appointment which has been, or is about to be, made on the basis of the competition. If a right of appeal is created by section 21, this is not to protect the appellant's rights, it is to prevent an appointment being made contrary to the merit principle. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.R. 288 (C.A.), at 1221 (F.C.).)"
[14]
The issue raised before the Board and before this court, pertains to the correct interpretation to be given to the disclosure rights provided for in s. 24 of the
Public Service Employment Regulations
, 1993, SOR/93-286. (the
Regulations
). More specifically, it was disputed whether this section was mandatory or directive and whether it provided an unfettered or a qualified right. (The question of Crown or state privilege was not raised in the Board's decision or in argument before me. I therefore need not consider whether any form of privilege might attach to these documents.)
[15]
The relevant provision reads as follows:
"24(1) An appellant or the appellant's representative shall be provided access, on request, to any document that contains information that pertains to the appellant or to the successful candidate and that may be disclosed before the appeal board.
"(2) The appropriate deputy head may provide, on request, to the appellant or to the appellant's representative a copy of any document referred to in subsection (1).
"(3) Where the appropriate deputy head refuses to provide a copy of a document, the appellant or the appellant's representative may request that the appeal board order that a copy of the document be provided to the appellant or the appellant's representative.
"24(1) L'appelant ou son représentant a accès, sur demande, à tout document qui contient des renseignements concernant l'appelant ou le candidat reçu qui sont susceptibles d'être communiqués au comité d'appel.
"(2) L'administrateur général compétent peut fournir, sur demande, une copie de tout document visé au paragraphe (1) à l'appelant ou son représentant.
"(3 Dans le cas ou l'administrateur général compétent refuse de fournir une copie d'un document, l'appelant ou son représentant peut demander que le comité d'appel ordonne la délivrance d'une copie du document à l'un ou l'autre."
[16]
There is little doubt that the respondent's concern for the integrity of the testing system is legitimate. In
Barton and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). Mr. Justice Rothstein found that "the confidentiality of such tests is an important aspect" of the objective of the
Act
; that objective being to ensure that all appointments are made according to the merit principle. This decision was rendered before the coming into force of s. 24 on June 1, 1993, SOR/93-286.
[17]
In view of the mandatory and unambiguous language of that regulation, I must conclude that mandatory and full disclosure must be made of all documents that contain information that pertains to the appellant or to the successful candidate and that may be disclosed before the Appeal Board. This does not embody the right to make or receive a copy which is dealt with in subs. 24(2) and (3) of the
Regulations
.
[18]
There is no statutory justification for distinguishing between the disclosure to be made to the appellant and the appellant's representative. Although the objective of the
Act
is to ensure that selection is conducted according to the merit principle, this is not determinative of the precise procedure to be adopted in attaining this end. In enacting the above regulatory provision, the Public Service Commission has decided that full disclosure of documents that contain information pertaining to the appellant or to the successful candidate is the best method to preserve the merit principle.
[19]
I note, however, that on a careful reading of the regulation, disclosure need be made only of documents that pertain to the appellant or to the successful candidate. The manual for assessors, which is the Simulation's answer key, does not pertain to either of these persons. It is an internal document which is intended solely for the assistance of the Selection Board to preserve some consistency in evaluating candidates. Thus, I find that the manual for assessors is not within the class of documents for which disclosure rights are provided by s. 24(1).
[20]
For these reasons, I find that s. 24(1) of the
Regulations
provides access to the following documents, without distinction, to the appellant's representative or to the appellant:
(i) the simulation's background information booklet;
(ii) the simulation's test booklet;
(iii) the applicant's written summary;
(iv) the selected candidates' written summaries;
(v) the Selection Board's notes and ratings for the applicant; and,
(vi) the Selection Board's notes and ratings for the successful candidates.
The Commission is entitled to control the circumstances under which the material is viewed, including an undertaking of non-disclosure and control over any notes taken.
[21]
The application for judicial review is allowed, the decision of the Appeal Board is quashed and the matter is returned to the Appeal Board to be determined in accordance with these reasons.
Application allowed.
Editor: Giovanni A. Merlini/slm
[End of document]