[1]
MacKay, J.
: The applicants seek reconsideration, pursuant to rule 337(5) of the
Federal Court Rules
, of an order dated October 14, 1993, whereby I dismissed their earlier application, made pursuant to s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
, for leave and for judicial review of a decision made July 6, 1993 by the CRDD that the applicants were not Convention refugees. The applicants also now seek an extension of time to file an application record in support of the application for leave and for judicial review.
[2]
By separate order the applications now made are dismissed, for the following reasons.
[3]
(1) The order made October 14, 1993 was a final order made in the following circumstances. The application for leave and for judicial review was filed in this matter on July 23, 1993 without any supporting affidavit or other material. Under the
Federal Court Immigration Rules
, rule 10(1)(a), when the applicant has received the tribunal's written reasons, as the application for leave and for judicial review indicates was the case, the applicants were required to perfect their application for leave by filing a record, consisting of the documents set out in rule 10(2), within 30 days, i.e., in this case on or before August 22, 1993. When no application record was filed in accord with the
Rules
and there was no application for an extension of time to file, the application was brought forward for consideration by a judge. I dismissed the application on October 14, 1993, in accord with rule 14(1) which authorizes a judge, without further notice to the parties, to determine an application for leave on the basis of materials filed where any party has failed to file documents within the time fixed by the
Rules
. Having determined that the applicants' application for leave is dismissed, the court or a judge may not reconsider the matter except in very special circumstances.
[4]
(2) Rule 337(5) of the
Federal Court Rules
permits a party to apply within ten (10) days of the pronouncement of judgment or such further time as the court may allow for reconsideration of the terms of the pronouncement, but only where it does not accord with the reason given or that some matter that should have been dealt with has been overlooked or accidentally omitted.
[5]
In this case I gave no reason for dismissing the application for leave, and no evidence, or adequate reason is now suggested that any matter before me on October 14, 1993 was overlooked or accidentally omitted when I determined that the application for leave be dismissed. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) per Madame Justice Reed.)
[6]
It is now said, by affidavit of Alexander Vinogradov sworn the 26th day of November, that the applicants were not able to retain services of previous counsel who represented them at their refugee hearing. That alleged inability was not a matter before me, nor was there any indication of it by correspondence or application for an extension of time, when nearly two months after the application record was required to be filed and was not, I dealt with the application for leave. In the circumstances, inability to retain counsel at the important time in July and August, or thereafter, is not a matter which brings this application within rule 337(5).
[7]
Other
Federal Court Rules
permitting the court or a judge to reconsider a decision are applicable only in narrow circumstances, eg., in case of a clerical error (rule 337(6)) or in case of a matter arising subsequent to the decision or subsequently discovered, or in the case of fraud (rule 1733). None of the circumstances underlying these rules apply to this case.
[8]
I note for the record that this application was not brought within ten (10) days of the decision of October 14, 1993 as is ordinarily required under rule 337(5), and the applicant seeks an extension of time to bring this application.
[9]
For the reasons set out below in dealing with the application for an extension of time to file an application record, in seeking leave for an extension of time for reconsideration of the decision the applicant is required to set out a reasonable explanation for the delay and to provide a basis for the court to conclude that there is an arguable case that warrants the exercise of discretion to extend the time for applying. Here the order was made October 14, 1993. Efforts were made by the Registry to telephone the order to the applicants on October 14, at the telephone number given for them on the Application for Leave and for Judicial Review, but there was no response at that number. On October 27, 1993 a certificate of a Court Registry Officer, certifying the order of October 14, was sent by registered mail to the applicant Alexander Vinogradov at his Toronto address, as given on the Application for Leave and for Judicial Review. In the Notice of Motion for reconsideration filed, originally without service on the respondent, on November 30, 1993, it is said that the order was received by the applicant on November 17, 1993. No explanation of delay in receiving registered mail, or delay after November 17, before seeking to apply under rule 337(5) is given, except in written reply to the respondent's written submissions, where it is said the failure to comply with the time requirement of rule 337(5) "was inadvertent". Further, the written reply refers to the applicants' inability to retain services of previous counsel and the need to look for another counsel for assistance in this matter. I do not accept that as any explanation for the delay.
[10]
(3) The court will only exercise its discretion to grant an extension of time fixed by the
Rules
where the applicant satisfactorily accounts for the entire delay and discloses a fairly arguable case for consideration of the court. Here the only explanation is that the applicants were unable to retain the services of counsel who acted on their behalf at their CRDD hearing. That counsel apparently did assist with preparation and filing of the application for leave and for judicial review. No evidence is offered, by affidavit, of the applicants' efforts to retain the services of other counsel before the application for leave was filed, or at any time thereafter. It would appear they have had some advice from other counsel in preparation of their application for reconsideration and that counsel may be prepared to act for them in further proceedings, though in this application, apparently, the applicant Alexander Vinogradov appears to be acting on his own behalf and for his wife. In any event, no explanation of efforts made, or difficulties encountered, in obtaining services of counsel at any time is before the court. Nor is there at this stage any indication of the nature or significance of the issue that the applicants would present to the court if permitted to proceed. There is no evidence before me of a fairly arguable case for consideration of the court. Both the application for reconsideration, and the written reply to the respondent's written submissions, set out that it is in the interests of justice that the application for reconsideration and for an extension of time be allowed, but that is not evidence, and there is nothing in the affidavit of Mr. Vinogradov that would support that conclusion.
[11]
I appreciate some of the difficulties for the applicants acting without representation of counsel in seeking access to the process for review of the decision by the CRDD in their case. Nevertheless, they must comply with the rules applicable to the process.
[12]
I note this result is consistent with that in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), where the Court of Appeal dismissed an application for an extension of time to file written representations, in support of an application for leave to commence an application for judicial review, where the application for an extension of time was brought after the application for leave was dismissed.
[13]
Because no basis is submitted by the applicants which would justify reconsideration of the order made on October 14, 1993, and no satisfactory grounds are here submitted for exercising discretion to permit late filing of an application record, the order of October 14 must be considered final.
[14]
Thus, my order goes dismissing this application.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/sms
[End of document]