[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: The plaintiff's motion is to certify this proceeding as a class action and to appoint the plaintiff, Harbans Singh Pawar, as the representative plaintiff for the class. I would observe that the English class action procedure, set out in O. 15 rule 12, is substantially similar to our rule 1711. The
White Book
(Supreme Court Practice, 1997), as a gloss on O. 15 rule 12, notes that no leave or representation order is necessary, but that a representative plaintiff may apply for such an order. In my view, certification is a flexible procedural mechanism to assist the parties and the court in dealing with particular concerns that may arise in class actions. It is a sensible approach for the parties to formally deal with issues similar to those raised, for example, in the
Class Proceedings Act
, S.B.C. (1995), c. 21, so there are no surprises or embarrassments later, when substantial time and expense have been expended on the action. Before turning to the submissions of counsel and an analysis, some background material is in order.
Background
[2]
Mr. Pawar, who has been a resident of Canada since 1987, became 65 years of age in about December of 1993: at that point and several times in the intervening years, he sought an old age security pension. The pension has been denied for to date Mr. Pawar has not met one of the conditions of eligibility, residence in Canada for 10 years leading up to the approval of an application for a pension, as set out in s. 3 of the
Old Age Security Act
, revised statutes chapter O-9.
[3]
From the statement of claim it is evident that the class, as envisioned by Mr. Pawar, is to be composed of Canadian citizens or permanent residents, of 65 years of age or older, who have not resided in Canada for the required 10 consecutive years leading up to pensionability. Mr. Pawar, on behalf of the group and himself, seeks a declaration that s. 3 of the
Old Age Security Act
be declared invalid pursuant, principally, to s. 52 of the
Constitution Act, 1982
. Should that be accomplished, then the issue would be liability for damages, equal to the pensions each might have collected since age 65, under s. 24(1) of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
(the "
Charter
").
[4]
Not long after the statement of claim was filed in June of 1996, the defendant brought on an unsuccessful motion to strike out the class action aspects of the claim. I touch on this point, for one of the key arguments raised by the defendant, in opposition to certification as a class action, is that the plaintiff does not have a cause of action in damages and thus the action ought not to be certified as a class action. It would have been more appropriate to bring up this point at the time of the earlier motion to strike out portions of the statement of claim.
[5]
As I noted in my reasons of 2 December 1996, which dealt with the application to strike out, the group who wish Mr. Pawar to represent them has been put together from a number of sources. Mr. Pawar has made considerable efforts, at least as far east as Ontario, to reach those who might fall within the class he seeks to represent, by reaching out to various ethnic groups and to the media. As of 7 April 1997, his group of signed up supporters totalled 1,027. Mr. Pawar submits that many of those who wish his representation, are impoverished; some are less well educated; and thus many are not in a position to pursue claims for pensions themselves.
Submissions Of Counsel
[6]
As I have already noted, the motion seeks certification of the proceeding as a class action and the appointment of Mr. Pawar as represented the plaintiff. In support of these requests, counsel for the plaintiffs refers to the British Columbia
Class Proceedings Act
, S.B.C. (1995), c. 21, which provides for such certification. Counsel submits the court ought to apply rule 5, the gap rule, in order to import the procedures set out in the British Columbia legislation. Alternately, counsel refers to Federal Court Rule 1711, which sets out procedure for a class action.
[7]
Counsel for the defendant, in opposing certification, refers to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , for the proposition that the plaintiff cannot have both a declaration under s. 52 of the
Constitution Act, 1982
as to the validity of the impugned portion of the Old Age Pension legislation and damages, under s. 24(1) of the
Charter
in order to bring any pension entitlement up to date: certainly this is a valid point. Counsel for the plaintiff also submits that there is no need for a representative action, a point already dealt with in my reasons of 2 December 1996. There, I touched on the preference of a representative action to a plethora of similar proceedings, economics in the context of the feasibility of a number of individuals to afford the luxury of litigation, the benefit of a class action to the public who might otherwise have to pay the lion's share of the cost to the justice system of a number of parallel actions and the benefit to individuals in the class of having their day in court, even if only by proxy.
Analysis
Certification Of Class Actions
[8]
I must first deal with whether the class certification provisions of the British Columbia
Class Proceedings Act
ought to be imported as the test for certification. As noted in my 2 December 1996 reasons, on the motion to strike out portions of the statement of claim, I am not convinced this is necessary. Federal Court Rule 1711, subss. (1) and (3) provide both for the continuance of a class proceeding, subject to the court otherwise ordering and for directions.
[9]
In addition, the court has an implied or inherent jurisdiction, not in the sense of a substantive jurisdiction, but rather of an inherent procedural jurisdiction to control its own process, notwithstanding its rules and limiting statutory jurisdiction: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 26 and following. As Mr. Justice Addy put it, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 301, "... every court of superior jurisdiction ... must possess the innate right of controlling its own process and, subject to the requirements of justice, to control the actions before it of those wishing to avail themselves of its jurisdiction.". Similarly, "... this court has an inherent jurisdiction over its own process to enable it to carry out the basic raison d'être it shares with every court of civil jurisdiction: ...":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 402. Thus our court, having the procedural machinery in its rules to allow class action suits, must also have an inherent or implied jurisdiction to carry out the purpose of remedial procedure, such as that of a class action. Certification and the designation of the plaintiff as a representative plaintiff, which are sensible steps at this point, will be pursuant to rule 1711 and the inherent procedural jurisdiction of the court.
Designation Of A
Representative Plaintiff
[10]
In my December 1996 reasons, relying on the existing case law, I concluded there was an identifiable class and common grievance which was suitable for a class proceeding. Further, I determined that Mr. Pawar, as a representative plaintiff, would fairly, adequately and properly represent the class for his approach, to that time, had been one of reasonable steps to advance the proceeding. In this latter regard Mr. Pawar has carried on with an apparent workable and practical approach to press forward this action. There is every reason to designate Mr. Pawar as the representative plaintiff at this time. That Mr. Pawar may, within the near future, fulfil the residency requirement and so be able to qualify for his pension, could raise other considerations which counsel for both sides might wish to consider. However, we now have a new and more pressing issue as to whether Mr. Pawar's pleadings disclose a reasonable cause of action.
Reasonable Cause Of Action
[11]
That the plaintiff's pleadings must disclose a reasonable cause of action is a requirement for any action. It would certainly be a bar to certification and to allowing this class action to proceed. Challenges of this nature should all be brought at one time: the challenge ought to have been raised by the defendant on her motion to strike out heard 9 September 1996. Generally a party needs special reasons to try a second time to strike out a pleading: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 15 F.T.R. 302 (T.D.), at p. 233. However, lack of a reasonable cause of action is a serious matter: indeed the court has the power to strike out a pleading, in whole or in part, at any stage of an action (see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1 (T.D.), at p. 11).
[12]
The defendant refers to the fact that the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decision (supra), on which counsel relies in its submission as to a lack of a cause of action, came down after the hearing of her striking out motion on 9 September 1996. The <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case does not establish any new law: indeed the defendant's point, that once legislation is struck down under s. 52 of the
Constitution Act, 1982
, that is the end of the matter, for no retroactive
Charter
remedy under s. 24 will generally be available, was clearly set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 1; 92 C.L.L.C. 14,036; 10 C.R.R.(2d) 1, at p. 720 S.C.R.:
"An individual remedy under s. 24(1) of the
Charter
will rarely be available in conjunction with an action under s. 52 of the
Constitution Act, 1982
. Ordinarily, where a provision is declared unconstitutional and immediately struck down pursuant to s. 52, that will be the end of the matter. No retroactive s. 24 remedy will be available. It follows that where the declaration of invalidity is temporarily suspended, a s. 24 remedy will not often be available either. To allow for s. 24 remedies during the period of suspension would be tantamount to giving the declaration of invalidity retroactive effect."
The
Schacter
case was further complicated by the fact that Parliament had amended the legislation in order to rectify a clear inequality in benefits between adopted parents and natural parents. However, one must keep in mind that the bar referred to by the Supreme Court, to s. 24 damages in conjunction with a s. 52 declaration, is not an absolute bar, but only that s. 24 damages "... will rarely be available ...".
[13]
The Supreme Court, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , went through a fairly detailed analysis in leading up to the
Schacter
decision, on which it based its decision. Mr. Justice Gonthier who wrote the judgment of the court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , referred to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  for the proposition that an action in tort for civil damages will not lie when the claim arises from the enactment of laws that are subsequently determined to be unconstitutional, referring to a passage written by Mr. Justice Laskin (as he then was), in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case:
"In exercising such authority, a municipality (no less than a provincial Legislature or the Parliament of Canada) may act beyond its powers in the ultimate view of a court, albeit it acted on the advice of counsel. It would be incredible to say in such circumstances that it owed a duty of care giving rise to liability in damages for its breach. 'Invalidity is not the test of fault and it should not be the test of liability': see Davis, 3
Administrative Law Treatise
, 1958, at p. 487." p. 969
Key in this passage is that invalidity of a statute is neither the test of fault nor the test of liability.
[14]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Chief Justice, on behalf of the court, pointed out it would be unfortunate if a government official, charged with enforcement of legislation, were held guilty of intimidation where he was required to enforce a statute subsequently held to the ultra vires (p. 90).
[15]
The Supreme Court of Canada in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> reiterated the general rule from
Schacter
, but qualified it by clearly indicating the rule is not absolute:
"Although it cannot be said that damages can never be obtained following a declaration of constitutional invalidity, it is true, as a general rule, that an action for damages under s. 24(1) of the
Charter
cannot be coupled with a declaratory action for invalidity under s. 52 of
Constitution Act, 1982
. (p. 360)"
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the court concluded that the facts did not warrant an exception from the general rule, but did point to an example of where damages might lie, referring to
Crown Trust Co. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 41 (C.A.), at pp. 48-49, an appellate decision out of Ontario in which Mr. Justice Henry explained:
"... we consider the law to be clear that no cause of action exists for the conduct of the appellants as agents and representatives of the registrar when acting within the authority of the legislation in the absence of any allegation of wrongful conduct, bad faith, negligence or collateral purpose." (pp. 48 and 49)
[16]
In the present instance there is no allegation in the statement of claim of any of the elements suggested as necessary in the
Crown Trust
case to found a claim for damages, namely wrongful conduct, bad faith, negligence or collateral purpose. Counsel for the plaintiff submits there was some wrongful element in the Crown repeatedly refusing Mr. Pawar a pension each time he applied. However, mere refusals by Crown servants charged with enforcing a clear legislative provision, to a persistent claimant, are not in any way improper conduct.
Conclusion
[17]
To deny certification would be to deny the class its day in court. Denial ought not to be done lightly. It is akin to striking out an action and thus it ought first to be tested to see whether it is plain and obvious that the action, or a portion of it, will not succeed and if that is so, a futile case, or a futile portion of a case, ought not be allowed to proceed. To allow such a case to go forward would be to waste time and money, not only that of a plaintiff, a class and a defendant, but also that of the public who pay for the judicial system.
[18]
Counsel for the plaintiff submits that there ought not to be a ruling, on an interlocutory motion, to prevent his client, as the representative plaintiff, from proceeding with the claim for both declaration and damages, for such a ruling would not allow the law to evolve. However, there is a difference between, on the one hand, giving the law an opportunity to evolve and progress along possible open channels and on the other hand, allowing a proceeding to take place against clear directions from the Supreme Court of Canada. In this framework, the law is still able to evolve, whenever it possibly can, for the test that is applied in striking out a suspect cause of action is severe: it must be a cause of action that plainly and obviously cannot succeed. That is the test I have applied.
[19]
In this instance, the plaintiff's action for a declaration, under s. 52 of
the Constitution Act, 1982
, is certainly arguable and might conceivably succeed, but given the clear position taken by the Supreme Court of Canada, in various cases leading up to the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, that is not so when it comes to the present claim for damages under s. 24 of the
Charter
which is futile.
[20]
That portion of Mr. Pawar's action in seeking a declaration is certified and may proceed as a class action with a representative plaintiff. Mr. Pawar is appointed as a representative plaintiff for the class.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/saf
[End of document]