[1]
Dubé, J.
[Translation]: In this motion, the respondent is asking the court to dismiss the applicant's reply affidavit, which was served and filed with this court in response to the respondent's reply affidavits of November 7, 1996, on the ground that the
Federal Court Rules
("the
Rules
") do not specifically provide for the filing of reply affidavits by applicants.
[2]
In the case at bar, the applicant filed an originating motion under s. 77 of the
Official Languages Act
(the
Act
), R.S.C., 1985, c. 31 (4th Supp.), which provides for a remedy against a decision of the Commissioner of Official Languages (the Commissioner). Section 80 of the
Act
provides that an application for the remedy in question must be heard and determined in a summary manner in accordance with any special rules made in respect of such applications pursuant to s. 46 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C., 1985, c. F-7, as amended. Since no rules have been made pursuant to that section, the
Rules
of this court must apply.
[3]
Rule 321.1 sets out the procedure applicable to originating motions. It provides that the applicant's record must contain certain elements, including all documentary evidence, and that the respondent's record must also contain certain elements, including any documentary evidence. Rule 321.1 does not provide for reply affidavits by the applicant.
[4]
Rule 1603 provides that an applicant for judicial review must file one or more affidavits in support of his or her application and that the adverse party may file one or more affidavits in reply. The filing by the applicant of an affidavit in response to the adverse party's reply affidavit is not mentioned. Although the instant case is of course not a judicial review, rule 1603 constitutes a valid analogy.
[5]
Rule 319 is the basic rule for filing any application to the court that is made by motion and initiated by notice of motion. Rule 319(2) provides that a motion must be supported by affidavit as to all the facts on which the motion is based and that an adverse party may file an affidavit in reply. The filing by the applicant of an affidavit in response to the respondent's affidavit is not mentioned.
[6]
In
Hiram Walker -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  stated the following (at p. 7) in discussing a motion filed under s. 59 of the
Trade Marks Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. T-10:
"... The summary procedure for Trade Marks cases under rule 704 is not intended to adopt rules of pleading and allow for answers to affidavits and replications to such answers. Each party should file all its affidavits at one time and it is only by exception that additional affidavits should be permitted at a later date and then only if there was a very valid reason why they could not have been produced earlier and if it appears that the court may well require the information in them to adjudicate on the issue."
[7]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Teitelbaum, J., of this court referred to the above decision of Walsh, J., and concluded as follows (at p. 285):
"I am satisfied that the
Rules
of the Federal Court are not to be interpreted in such a manner as to prevent an applicant from producing all of his evidence. It is important that a petitioner should be allowed to make all of his evidence. Only if a serious prejudice would be caused to a party or if an undue delay would be caused by the additional evidence should it be refused."
[8]
More recently, on May 15, 1995, Noël, J., of this court discussed the very case of an originating motion under s. 77 of the
Act
in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). He stated the following (at p. 70):
"[2] The applicant, who is unrepresented, filed an originating notice of motion on August 23, 1994 [see footnote 1], seeking various relief pursuant to s. 77 et seq. of the
Official Languages Act
. The dispute arises from the applicant's employment with the respondent Human Resources Canada (formerly Health and Welfare Canada) and related complaints filed with the Commissioner of Official Languages (the 'Commissioner'). Section 77 provides that a person who has made a complaint to the Commissioner may thereafter apply to this court for a remedy. Section 80 provides that such an application is to be heard in a summary manner in accordance with rules made pursuant to s. 46 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7.
As no such rules have been promulgated, general rules pertaining to applications made to the court are applicable
[see footnote 2]." (emphasis added)
[9]
I therefore conclude that the
Rules
of this court do not provide for the automatic filing of a reply affidavit by the applicant in the case of an originating motion. What is important is that justice be done. Thus, the court can grant leave to file a supplementary affidavit provided that the party concerned seeks leave to do so and satisfies the three tests stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  27, 1992 (at p. 3):
1) was the information in the affidavit available before the cross-examination?
2) are the facts established by the supplementary affidavit relevant to the case?
3) might the filing of the supplementary affidavit cause serious prejudice to the other parties?
[10]
The motion is accordingly allowed and the applicant's reply affidavit is dismissed.
Motion allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/saf