[1]
Noël, J.
: Plaintiff launched an action against defendants for infringement of its copyrights. Specifically, the statement of claim alleges that the defendants caused, permitted or authorized the performance in public in Canada of musical works forming part of plaintiff's repertoire without a licence.
[2]
One of the named defendants, Landmark Cinemas of Canada Ltd. (herein "the defendant"), filed a statement of defence, and plaintiff now moves to have certain paragraphs of the defence struck out and for particulars. (At the beginning of the hearing, plaintiff advised that the action as against defendant, May Theatres (1984) Limited, had been discontinued, and moved to amend the style of cause accordingly. Counsel for the defendant consented, and the motion to amend was granted.) In response to plaintiff's motion to strike and for particulars, the defendant filed two statements of particulars. According to plaintiff, these statements of particulars fail to adequately respond to its motions.
[3]
Plaintiff raised a general objection with respect to the phraseology used by the defendant in its statements of particulars. In it, the particulars provided were preceded by the verb "include", thereby suggesting the possible existence of other particulars which were not being disclosed. Counsel for defendant acknowledged this difficulty and agreed to amend his statements of particulars to eliminate the use of the word "include" and replace it throughout by the words "particulars of which the defendant is aware of are:". In these reasons, the statements of particulars are read as amended.
[4]
As a result of this amendment, counsel for plaintiff declared herself satisfied with the particulars provided with respect to paragraphs 9, 10, 11 and 12 of the statement of defence, and withdrew her motion to strike with respect to paragraphs 11 and 12 thereof. On the other hand, counsel for defendant consented to the motion to strike with respect to paragraph 2 of the statement of defence by eliminating the words "and are an infringement of the defendant's rights". These words are accordingly struck out.
[5]
I am left with a motion for particulars with respect to paragraph 4 of the statement of defence, and a motion to strike with a request for particulars in the alternative with respect to paragraphs 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the statement of defence.
[6]
The relevant paragraphs of the statement of defence are reproduced below:
"4. In answer to the whole of the plaintiff's claim, this defendant states that it was authorized, properly, to present any performances of musical works to the public by the distributors and producers of the motion picture, which distributors and producers were the owners of the motion picture including the sound track thereof and who had the good and proper right, power, authority and license to permit this defendant to present to the public performances of musical works contained in the sound track of the subject motion pictures and for which this defendant paid to the distributors, and indirectly to the producers, a fee or charge.
"5. Alternative, the plaintiff, the distributors, and the producers of the subject motion pictures, by their deeds and actions, are estopped from claiming they did not permit this defendant to present to the public performances of musical works contained in the sound track of the subject motion pictures and such distributors and producers are further estopped from denying they, or either of them, are the owners of the motion pictures including the sound track thereof.
"6. In answer to the whole of the plaintiff's claim for charges or royalties, the quantum thereof was set, determined and fixed under and pursuant to the
Copyright Act
, being a Statute of Canada. This defendant pleads and states those provisions of the
Copyright Act
which authorize and permit the Copyright Board to certify the statement of all royalties that are permitted to be collected by the plaintiff for the grant of licences for the performance of its works with or without alterations to the royalties proposed by the plaintiff, as contained and set forth in s. 67.2 of the
Copyright Act
, are ultra vires the Parliament of Canada by virtue of:
(a) Such provisions being in violation of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, being Part I of the
Constitution Act
, 1982, and inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution of Canada, and by virtue thereof such provisions of the
Copyright Act
are of no force or effect.
(b) The power and authority to set and determine fees is properly within the jurisdiction, right and power granted to the Provinces of Canada pursuant to the
British North America Act
and the Constitution of Canada under their enumerated power to pass laws respecting property and civil rights and the setting, fixing, and determination of the amount to be paid pursuant to the licence is not a proper exercising of the powers of the Parliament of Canada to pass laws respecting copyright.
"7. The quantum of royalties proposed by the plaintiff and altered and certified by the Copyright Board, insofar as such relates to motion picture theatres, constitutes a restraint of trade or commerce and, in addition, is used or employed so as to unreasonably enhance the price and, in either case, is contrary to the
Competition Act
, being Chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada 1985, and in particular s. 32 thereof.
"8. The establishment by the plaintiff and/or the Copyright Board pursuant to the
Copyright Act
, of royalties payable constitutes an illegal price fixing and thereby an unfair and monopolistic trade practice which is injurious to the members of the Canadian public who attend the display of motion pictures and who pay for such privilege. The actions of the plaintiff and the Copyright Board are designed and intended, and do in fact result in, the additional payment by the general public for attending the display of motion pictures including the integral component of the sound track within the motion picture."
[7]
The particulars sought by the plaintiff with respect to paragraph 4 of the statement of defence are as follows:
"A. With respect to paragraph 4,
(i) identify each of the distributors and producers referred to, the nature of the authorizations given by them, the dates they were given, the musical works authorized, the motion pictures and sound tracks involved and the owners thereof, the nature of the ownership of such motion pictures and soundtracks, the amount of each fee or charge paid by the defendant to each of the distributors and each of the producers and the time and manner of each payment;
(ii) when and how each of the distributors and producers acquired ownership of the motion picture and sound track referred to, apart from the performing rights in the musical works embodied therein (i.e. as original authors, by assignment, etc.);
(iii) when, how and from whom each of the distributors and producers acquired the alleged good and proper right, power, authority and license to permit the defendant to present to the public performances of musical works referred to, and produce a copy of any document to such effect;
(iv) when and how did the defendant allegedly obtain authorization from the distributors and producers to present any performances of musical works to the public, and produce a copy of any document to such effect."
[8]
The particulars provided by the defendant with respect to paragraph 4 of its statement of defence are as follows:
"(a) As to paragraph 4 of the Statement of Defence, particulars of the identity of the distributors and producers referred to include (The word 'include' is to be substituted throughout, with appropriate consequential modifications, by the words 'particulars of which the defendant is aware of are:'):
MCA Film & Entertainment Inc.
Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation
Paramount Pictures (Canada) Inc.
Warner Bros. Canada Inc.
Columbia Pictures Industries Inc.
MGM/UA Distribution Company
Orion Pictures Distribution (Canada) Inc.
Buena Vista Pictures Distribution Canada, Inc.
Cineplex Odeon Corporation
"(b) As to paragraph 4 of the Statement of Defence, particulars of when and how each of the distributors and producers acquired ownership of the motion picture and sound track referred to are not within the knowledge of this defendant.
"(c) As to paragraph 4 of the Statement of Defence, particulars as to when, how and from whom each of the distributors and producers acquired the alleged good and proper right, power, authority and license to permit the defendant to present to the public performances of musical works referred to, are not within the knowledge of this defendant.
"(d) As to paragraph 4 of the Statement of Defence, particulars of when and how the defendant obtained authorization from the distributors and producers to present performances of musical works include that this defendant obtained such authorization by purchasing the right from the distributors and producers to display motion pictures intact to members of the public. In each case, the authorization was obtained at the time of purchasing the right to display the motion picture.
"A. As to paragraph 4 of the Statement of Defence,
(i) particulars of the dates of authorization include those dates that the plaintiff acquired the licence to show the particular motion pictures to members of the public in each case. Particulars of the musical works authorized and the motion pictures and soundtracks involved include those named in paragraph 10 of the Statement of Claim. Particulars of the owners thereof include the distributors and producers referred to in Paragraph 4 of the Statement of Defence.
(ii) particulars of when and how each of the distributors and producers acquired ownership of the motion picture and soundtrack referred to are not within the knowledge of this defendant.
(iii) particulars of when, how and from whom each of the distributors and producers acquired the alleged good and proper right, power, authority and licence referred to are not within the knowledge of this defendant.
(iv) particulars of how the defendant obtained the authorization from the distributors and producers to present such performances include by the defendant's purchasing the licence to display the motion picture to members of the public."
[9]
I am of the view that the particulars provided with respect to paragraph 4 of the statement of defence properly respond to plaintiff's motion. In paragraph 4, defendant sets up as a defence the fact that it was authorized to present performances of the musical performances in issue by the motion picture distributors and producers. Its statement of particulars provides plaintiff with the names of the distributors and producers who authorized the performances, and indicates that, in each case, the authorization to present the performance of the musical works was obtained at the time the licence to show the relevant motion pictures was granted. The fact that defendant is unaware of the legal source of the rights of the distributors and producers is of interest, but does not result in the provision of insufficient particulars by the defendant. Quite clearly, the defendant acknowledges that it is not in a position to disclose facts establishing that the distributors and producers had the rights which are alleged to have been conveyed to it, and that, it seems, is the very particular which the plaintiff was seeking. As to the amount of the fees paid to the distributors and producers for the acquisition of such rights, it appears from the particulars provided that the defendant will take the position that it is encompassed in the purchase price of the licence to display the motion picture to members of the public, and this is something that can easily be ascertained at discovery or at trial.
[10]
I now turn to the motion to strike. Paragraph 5 of the statement of defence sets up a defence of estoppel as against plaintiff and the producers and distributors. The particulars provided with respect to paragraph 5 are as follows:
"As to paragraph 5 of the Statement of Defence,
(i) particulars of the distributors and producers referred to include:
MCA Film & Entertainment Inc.
Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation
Paramount Pictures (Canada) Inc.
Warner Bros. Canada Inc.
Columbia Pictures Industries Inc.
MCM/US Distribution Company
Orion Pictures Distribution (Canada) Inc.
Buena Vista Pictures Distribution Canada, Inc.
Cineplex Odeon Corporation
Particulars of the soundtracks referred to include the soundtracks to those films referred to in paragraph 10 of the Statement of Claim.
(ii) Particulars of the deeds and acts referred to by the distributors and producers mentioned include by their accepting the defendant's money and allowing the defendant to display the motion pictures intact to the public. Particulars of the deeds and acts of the plaintiff include its acquiescence and the acquiescence of its predecessors, since 1972, in taking no steps against this defendant or others.
(iii) Particulars of the actions estopping the distributors and producers from such denial include by their granting the defendant a licence to display the motion pictures intact."
[11]
Plaintiff argues in essence that the producers and distributors are not parties to the proceedings and that, accordingly, their deeds and actions cannot estop it. It adds that it cannot defend against allegations relating to unrelated third parties and that the plea disclosed is immaterial and does not disclose a reasonable defence. If, as alleged by paragraph 4 of the statement of defence, the defendant can establish that the distributors and producers had the right to authorize the performance of musical works, then the plea of estoppel as against them would disclose a reasonable defence. The plea will therefore stand.
[12]
With respect to the defence of estoppel raised against the plaintiff, the particulars disclose that it is based on the acquiescence of plaintiff and its predecessors since 1972. Counsel for the plaintiff takes the position that the actions of its predecessors cannot bind its client. I have nothing before me, however, which would allow to come to any conclusion in that regard. The plea will therefore also stand.
[13]
The next attack is aimed at paragraph 6 of the statement of defence. That paragraph alleges that section 67.2 of the
Copyright Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-42 (as amended), is in violation of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, and ultra vires the Parliament of Canada.
[14]
In its statement of particulars, the defendant indicates that the alleged
Charter
violations arise under section 2(b) and section 15 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. In this respect, plaintiff asserts that the mere invocation of the
Charter of Rights
does not automatically raise a triable issue, and that a party must plead the material facts on which it proposes to base its
Charter
argument. As to the latter, I believe the material facts have been pleaded. The provisions on which the
Charter
attack is based have been spelled out, and the attack is aimed at that part of the legislative scheme which authorizes the Copyright Board to determine the royalties which plaintiff will be permitted to collect for the performance of its works by third parties. As to whether the
Charter
invocation raises a triable issue, it has not been made clear and obvious to me that this attack cannot succeed. The motion to strike must accordingly fail.
[15]
As to the alternative constitutional attack based on the separation of power, defendant argues that the Copyright Board's legislative authority to determine royalties is in pith and substance law respecting property and civil rights and is not ancillary to the powers of Parliament to pass laws respecting copyright. This argument moves directly against long-established jurisprudence which has held that the Copyright Board's power to fix licence fees is not a matter of contract, but of statutory fixation which is ancillary to, if not an essential component of, Parliament's jurisdiction with respect to copyright under s. 91(23) of the
Constitution Act, 1867
. (
Composers, Authors and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .)
[16]
The statement of defence does not suggest that this attack is based on changed circumstances, an evolving factual context, or some novel aspect of jurisdictional relevance. Defendant merely puts in issue the established precedents on grounds which have already been thoroughly debated and dealt with. In my opinion, this plea does not disclose a reasonable defence as it is clear and obvious that it cannot succeed and, accordingly, it should be struck out, at this stage.
[17]
Plaintiff also seeks to have paragraphs 7 and 8 of the statement of defence struck out. Paragraph 7 alleges that the quantum of royalties certified by the Copyright Board constitutes a restraint of trade and is used to enhance price, with the result that it is contrary to the
Competition Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-34 (as amended) and, in particular, section 32 thereof. Paragraph 8 alleges that the establishment of royalties by the Copyright Board constitutes illegal price fixing and an unfair and monopolistic trade practice which is injurious to the Canadian public.
[18]
As argued by counsel for the plaintiff, the activities of plaintiff and the Copyright Board within the framework of s. 67 of the
Copyright Act
are expressly sanctioned by federal legislation and therefore exempt from the operation of s. 32 of the
Competition Act
under the "Regulated Industry Defence". The Board's fee-setting activities fall within its explicit legislative mandate and its activities are deemed to be in the public interest. In addition, s. 32 of the
Competition Act
, which empowers the Attorney General of Canada to seek compliance with the
Act
by way of an information filed with the Federal Court, can have no conceivable application in the case at hand.
[19]
Counsel for the defendant recognized so much during oral argument, but pointed out that the
Competition Act
was being advanced to evidence a legislative standard in the area of competition, to be used, I presume, to buttress his
Charter
attack. That may be so, and nothing prevents the defendant from raising this argument at trial. But the paragraphs in issue are not framed as such. They allege as a defence that plaintiff's and Copyright Board's actions are in breach of the
Competition Act
and, as such, constitute illegal activities. This plea, in my view cannot succeed, and the relevant paragraphs will be struck out at this stage.
[20]
Turning to different matter, defendant's counsel moved on short notice for an order that all future interlocutory motions be held in Edmonton, where his client resides. Underlying counsel's motion was the allegation that the bringing of interlocutory motions by the plaintiff in Ottawa, where its solicitors reside, works an injustice, is oppressive and vexatious to the defendant.
[21]
I refused to hear the motion on short notice, but did take the occasion to indicate to counsel for both parties that the ability of a litigant before this court to file a motion in the Registry of his choice must not be abused. Counsel are expected to strike a fair balance as between themselves with respect to venue. There is in this court no rule permitting a party to bring its motions in the city of its choice without regard to the convenience of the other party. In matters which involve protracted pretrial motions, the parties must share the inconveniences irrespective of who initiates the motion and counsel are expected to ensure that result.
[22]
Costs in the cause.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Janette Blue/saf
[End of document]