[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an application for judicial review to set aside a decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division on May 14, 1992. In that decision the tribunal found that the claimant would have a reasonable fear of persecution if he were returned to his homeland, Somalia, but that he was excluded from the status of a refugee by virtue of article 1.F(a) of the United Nations Convention on Refugees which forms part of the definition of a "convention refugee" as the Schedule to the
Immigration Act
. That article provides that:
"F. The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
(a) he has committed a crime against ... humanity ...
. . . . .
(c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations ..."
The tribunal found the claimant to fall within both paragraphs (a) and (c).
[2]
The claimant is the son of the former President of Somalia, Mohammed Siad Barre, who was deposed in January, 1991. It is not disputed that the claimant was an officer in the Somalian army nor that the Barre regime was extremely repressive. The tribunal found there to be serious reasons for considering that the claimant had committed crimes against humanity or acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations, in part because it concluded that he had been a "prominent member of the Barre regime" and in particular that he was governor of a notorious prison, Lanta Bur (spelt by one expert of Somalian origin as Laant-Buur). It does not appear to be in dispute that torture and other atrocities occurred at this prison.
[3]
Briefly put the claimant's position is that he was not the governor of this prison nor did he have any significant role in his father's regime. He attacks the decision of the tribunal principally on the grounds of denial of natural justice, in particular that the Minister failed to disclose to counsel for the claimant statements or other documents pertaining to Mr. Roble and Mr. Issa, two witnesses called by the Minister, nor did the claimant's counsel have an opportunity to cross-examine Professor Samatar whose written statements on events in Somalia, including the role of the claimant, were received by the tribunal as evidence. The main additional ground argued on behalf of the claimant was essentially that the tribunal erred in its assessment of credibility of the claimant and of the two witnesses presented by the Minister.
[4]
I am prepared to assume without deciding that the general requirements of s. 7 of the
Charter
apply, so that refugee hearings should be conducted in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. I do not believe however that it is necessary in this case to resort to the
Charter
. At common law there is certainly a requirement of fairness, and more particularly subs. 69.1(5) of the
Immigration Act
, as it read at the time of this hearing, required that:
"(5) At the hearing into a person's claim to be a Convention refugee, the Refugee Division
(a) shall give
(i) the person a reasonable opportunity to present evidence, question witnesses and make representations ..."
Needless to say, what the requirements of fairness may be or what is a "reasonable opportunity to ... question witnesses ..." will depend on the circumstances of the particular case. I have come to the conclusion that these requirements were not met in the present case although this is certainly a border line situation.
[5]
I believe the essential factual issue being addressed by the tribunal was as to whether the claimant was indeed the governor of Lanta Bur prison for a time during his father's regime. While the tribunal in finding against him stated its conclusions somewhat more broadly as implicating the claimant in the general activities of the Barre regime, a careful reading of the decision indicates to me that the finding that he was the governor of Lanta Bur prison was inextricably linked with the more general finding. I believe its conclusion that he had been given a responsible role in governing a prison enabled the tribunal to put a particular interpretation on what was otherwise very ambiguous evidence as to his role in the Barre regime.
[6]
It is impossible to lay down general rules as to the kind and degree of disclosure which must be required by tribunals of the C.R.D.D. It must always be recognized that tribunals have a wide discretion as to the procedure they adopt and by s. 68(3) of the
Immigration Act
the refugee division is not bound by legal or technical rules of evidence. I have with some difficulty concluded, however, that the tribunal in this case denied a fair hearing to the claimant because of its casual approach to the receipt of evidence in support of the Minister's contention that the claimant had been a prison governor and otherwise an advisor and aide to his father President Barre. It is not in dispute that the burden of proof of such allegations was on the Minister. I recognize, however, that the standard of proof for the Minister to establish that "there are serious reasons for considering" that a refugee claimant comes within one of the exclusionary clauses is
"something more than suspicion or conjecture, but something less than proof on a balance of probabilities."
[7]
I shall first deal with the question of failure to order disclosure of information concerning the two witnesses called by the Minister, Mr. Roble and Mr. Issa. At the hearing, while Mr. Roble was being cross-examined, counsel for the claimant first asked that Mr. Roble's own personal information form submitted with his own refugee claim be ordered produced. The tribunal refused to so order. Subsequently counsel for the claimant made a lengthy submission largely based on the Supreme Court decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 161; 8 W.A.C. 161 to the effect that counsel for the Minister had an obligation to disclose any previous statements made by these witnesses or any records or notes of interviews with them. The tribunal declined to order the Crown to make such production or to delay the cross-examination for such purposes, essentially taking the view that it had already ruled on the matter in refusing to order the production of Mr. Roble's personal information form. It is fair to say that counsel for the claimant was not particularly diligent in seeking such disclosure and this is one of the reasons I have some hesitation in setting aside the decision. Counsel for the Minister by letter of January 15, 1992 had advised counsel for the claimant that he would be calling two witnesses who would testify as to the claimant's role at Lanta Bur prison. The next day counsel for the claimant sent to counsel for the Minister a letter by fax stating his general position (referring to <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) that the Minister was obliged to make full disclosure. He went on to say:
"Without adequate disclosure I do not see how the claimant would properly cross-examine the Minister's witnesses, and the hearing may have to be adjourned for that purpose."
On the same day counsel for the Minister phoned claimant's counsel and advised him of the names of the witnesses, the period to be covered by their evidence, the fact that they would testify that the claimant was governor of the prison, where the witnesses had worked in Somalia, and that they would testify that one had official dealings at the prison and both had personal knowledge that the claimant was its governor. Counsel for the claimant did not make any requests for further disclosure in the several weeks thereafter, prior to the hearing commencing on February 20, 1992. Therefore when he raised objections at the hearing as to the lack of disclosure, counsel for the Minister objected that the claimant had not taken the opportunity to ask for such information prior to the hearing if he wanted it. The Minister still takes this position and further argues that counsel for the claimant knew the names of the witnesses and could have interviewed them if he wished prior to the hearing. While this is a persuasive argument, it appears to me in reading the transcript of the February 20th hearing that it was only when counsel for claimant during cross-examination sought to have the tribunal order the production of a particular document, namely Mr. Roble's personal information form, that the need for further disclosure became apparent to him. Counsel for the claimant also observed during the hearing that he was not in a position to interview the two witnesses because counsel for the Minister had declined to give him their phone numbers. This allegation has not been refuted in the material filed in the present hearing nor has the respondent otherwise demonstrated that these witnesses were truly available to the claimant for interviews prior to the hearing. Without trying to lay down any guidelines as to the nature of disclosure in such a case, I have concluded that fairness does require that, where the Minister as here is intending to prove that there are serious reasons for considering that a claimant has been guilty of crimes against humanity or acts contrary to the principles of the United Nations, he should make every reasonable effort to provide claimant's counsel with copies of statements he may have from witnesses or records of interviews with them or at least "will-say" statements. The kind of cursory information given here over the telephone on January 15, 1992, was not enough. If counsel for the Minister has not been forthcoming in making such disclosure a tribunal should not proceed, where the claimant so requests, until it is made. I recognize that there may be special circumstances, such as those involving national security or the safety of witnesses, where disclosure will have to be restricted in terms of content or timing. No such circumstances have been invoked here by the Minister.
[8]
I make no ruling on whether the personal information forms of the two witnesses specifically should have been produced. I have some doubts as to the relevancy of these documents to the refugee claim before the tribunal and this matter was not fully argued before me. But previous statements given by these witnesses in respect of the claimant should have been disclosed. It should have been apparent to the tribunal that fairness required that the claimant be given every reasonable opportunity to prepare for cross-examination of these witnesses because neither of them in fact asserted any first-hand knowledge of the position actually occupied by the claimant. They both inferred, from seeing him in uniform in the area of the prison and from what they had been told by others, that he was its governor. The tribunal was entitled to receive such evidence but fairness required that the claimant be given a reasonable opportunity to test it through cross-examination.
[9]
The other element of unfairness which I find in the proceedings was the use made by the tribunal of the unsworn statements of Professor Samatar of Rutgers University as to the role of the claimant. In the first place the confusion present at the tribunal is indicated by its reference to Professor Samatar's main statement as an "affidavit". The statement was in fact a letter stating Professor Samatar's opinion not only on the history of, and current events in, Somalia but also on the specific fact that the claimant had been governor of the prison from the late 1970's until 1990. There is nothing to suggest that Professor Samatar had any personal knowledge of this or does he name his informants or indicate the source of their knowledge. It is true that these statements were provided by counsel for the respondent to the claimant's counsel on January 12, 1992, over a month before the hearing actually took place. The respondent's counsel invited counsel for the claimant to contact him if there were any problems or questions. Lamentably, the only question raised by counsel for the claimant concerning Professor Samatar's reports was in the form of a request in a letter of February 19, 1992 for a copy of the letter sent on behalf of the Minister requesting Professor Samatar to produce his report (which counsel for the claimant also erroneously referred to as an "affidavit"). Counsel for the Minister therefore had some right to object to counsel for the claimant insisting, for the first time, at the hearing on February 20, 1992 that Professor Samatar be available for cross-examination, it being then too late to arrange for his appearance at the hearing. Clearly counsel for the claimant should have indicated well in advance of the hearing that he would be insisting on Professor Samatar being available for cross-examination if Samartar's statements were to be used. Nevertheless he was entitled to object, as he did, at the hearing on February 20, 1992 to the admissibility of these opinions if their author was not to be available for cross-examination. At that point it appears to me that the tribunal itself should have refused to receive such materials, notwithstanding failure of counsel for the claimant to have signalled his position before the hearing. While again recognizing that the tribunal is not bound by the formal rules of evidence, it appears to me that in this situation the tribunal was not acting in accordance with fairness in receiving this evidence and relying on it as I find was done. There seems to have been a belief in the tribunal that the receipt of these opinions of Professor Samatar was in the same category as the use of general articles or books which he had written on Somalia which writings had, apparently, been referred to in other tribunal hearings. The use of general treatises and articles may well be justified as providing access to generally recognized facts (as referred to in s. 68(4)), but the opinions of Professor Samatar used in this case included statements purportedly identifying this particular claimant as performing a particular role. The statements were not even attested to, and did not purport to be based on the author's own first-hand knowledge. Nor were the sources of his information identified. In the circumstances it was not appropriate for the tribunal to accept this very material as evidence without its author at the very least being available for cross-examination when the claimant requested (however belatedly) the right to cross-examine. This situation is somewhat analogous to that in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) involving judicial review of a deportation order where the adjudicator had received two statutory declarations but had refused to require their author to be available for examination or cross-examination. The court set aside the decision because of this failure to provide for cross-examination. In addition, Urie, J., made the following observations on the use of statutory declarations in lieu of their author being called. He stated (ibid at p. 570):
"... However, as a first principle, it seems to me that it is incumbent upon the adjudicator to be sure that he bases his decision on the best evidence that the nature of the case will allow. That ordinarily would require viva voce evidence in the proof of essential ingredients, if it is at all possible. Only when it is not possible to adduce that kind of primary evidence should secondary evidence be relied upon. The circumstances of each case will dictate what evidence the adjudicator will accept and the weight which he will give to it."
In the present case any evidence to the effect that the claimant was in fact governor of this prison related to an essential ingredient of the Minister's allegations. I am satisfied from reading the decision of the tribunal that Professor Samatar's opinions were regarded as important corroboration of the hearsay evidence of Roble and Issa as to the claimant's role. As such they should not have been accepted other than through viva voce evidence unless it was demonstrated that such was impossible. There is no evidence to suggest that Professor Samatar could not have been called and been available for cross-examination.
[10]
I am unable to say that the result would have been the same in the absence of these lapses from fairness, particularly having regard to the fact that they tainted the principal sources of evidence on the main issue.
[11]
I will not endeavour to state more widely the requirements of disclosure and cross-examination because I think fairness and reasonability will dictate different results in different circumstances.
[12]
Although there is some argument in the applicant's memorandum to the effect that the tribunal here had misconceived the burden of proof in respect of whether the claimant should be excluded pursuant to article 1.F(a) or (c) of the Convention, it appears to me that the tribunal correctly understood the burden to be on the Minister.
[13]
Nor do I think that there was any reviewable error in the assessments of credibility made by the tribunal in terms of the evidence before it.
[14]
While there is some discussion of whether the tribunal had correctly interpreted the scope of crimes against humanity, no serious argument was made on that point on behalf of the claimant and I need not deal with it given the disposition I am making of this case.
[15]
I will therefore set aside the decision of the tribunal and refer the matter back for hearing before another panel in a manner not inconsistent with these reasons. Counsel for the Minister suggested that if I were to decide to set aside the decision of the tribunal, I should certify a question of general importance with respect to the degree of disclosure required by C.R.D.D. tribunals. It is my understanding that the Chief Justice has made a direction pursuant to s. 118 of
An Act to Amend the Immigration Act
, S.C. 1992, c. 49, to effect that a proceeding such as this, which was originally filed in the Court of Appeal, shall be dealt with in the Trial Division as if former s. 73 of the
Act
had not been amended. The effect of this is that judicial review in such a case is carried out by the Trial Division pursuant to the provisions of s. 82.1 of the
Immigration Act
as it stood prior to the above mentioned enactment, the result being that there is a right of appeal from the Trial Division to the Court of Appeal without the need for a question being certified. I am therefore not certifying any question.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jean Merlini/slm
[End of document]