[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an appeal from a decision of the Senior Prothonotary dated December 20, 1992.
[2]
The facts of this appeal, as gleaned from the appellant's Memorandum of Fact and Law and which facts are not contradicted by the respondent, can be summarized as follows:
[3]
On October 7, 1987, the respondent filed application No. 593,009 for the registration of the proposed trademark:
[See printed version]
(the trademark "West Bay Polo
Club & Design")
(i) for use in association with
certain articles of clothing
[4]
As well, on October 7, 1987, the respondent filed application No. 593,010 for registration of the proposed trademark:
[See printed version]
(the trademark "West Bay Polo
Club & Design")
(ii) for use in association with
certain articles of clothing
[5]
On November 17, 1988, the appellant opposed the respondent's applications Nos. 593,009 and 593,010. In its Statement of Opposition, as amended, the appellant alleges that the trademark is not registrable because it is confusing with four of its trademarks, Nos. 313,324 "Polo", 314,406 "Polo by Ralph Lauren", 314,256 "Polo Player Design" and 318,560 "Ralph Lauren & Design", because the respondent is not the person entitled to the registration of the trademarks and that the trademark "West Bay Polo Club & Design" is not distinctive.
[6]
On June 30, 1992, the Hearing Officer rejected the appellant's opposition. On August 31, 1992, the appellant appealed the decision of the Hearing Officer to the Federal Court Trial Division.
[7]
On September 14, 1992, as part of its evidence in the appeals, the appellant filed the affidavit of D. Jane Mussett sworn on September 9, 1992 and the affidavit of Michael Belcourt sworn on September 11, 1992. Pursuant to a Consent Order of Mr. Justice Joyal dated October 22, 1992, the appellant was permitted to file the affidavit of Victor Cohen sworn on October 5, 1992 as part of the evidence in the appeal.
[8]
On October 28, 1992, the respondent filed a Notice of Motion by which, as amended on November 4, 1992, the respondent sought orders to strike para. 9 of the Belcourt affidavit and paras. 10 to 14 and 19 of the Cohen affidavit.
[9]
On the same date, October 28, 1992, the respondent filed a Notice of Motion wherein the respondent sought leave of the court to cross-examine D. Jane Mussett, Michael Belcourt and Victor Cohen on their affidavits filed by the appellant in this appeal from the decision of the Hearing Officer.
[10]
The Motions were heard by the Senior Prothonotary who, on November 20, 1992, issued the following decision and Order as it relates to the Motion to Strike.
"After hearing arguments of both counsel, upon reading the file and more especially the Amended Notice of Motion to Strike and the supporting Affidavit of Chantal Desjardins, the decision of the Trade-marks Opposition Board under the signature of Myer Herzig and the Notice of Appeal, para. 9 of Michael Belcourt's Affidavit is struck because it is not only a new evidence in appeal but new grounds to enlarge the scope. Regarding paras. 10 to 14 and 19 of Victor Cohen's Affidavit, it is left to the trial judge to decide about their relevancy. The grounds of my decision in both cases refer to the numerous authorities submitted by the parties on the matter."
[11]
As for the motion to cross-examine, the Senior Prothonotary issued the following decision and Order:
"After hearing arguments of both counsel, upon reading the file and more especially the Motion for Leave to Cross-examine on Affidavits D. Jane Mussett, Michael Belcourt and Victor Cohen, and the supporting Affidavit of Chantal Desjardins; upon studying the said affidavits of D. Jane Mussett, Michael Belcourt and Victor Cohen, upon referring to the chain of jurisprudence; under the special circumstances of the case, this motion is granted as follows: referring to the supporting Affidavit of Chantal Desjardins, the cross-examination is permitted but restricted to items listed at para. 8 of the said affidavit and numbered (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (8), (11), (12), (13) and (14). The whole at a place, date and time to be agreed between the parties and according to the terms of this order."
[12]
On December 4, 1991, the appellant appealed the orders of the Senior Prothonotary pursuant to rule 336 of the
Federal Court Rules
.
[13]
On December 4, 1991, the respondent cross-appealed the Orders of the Senior Prothonotary pursuant to rules 336 and 1203 of the
Federal Court Rules
.
[14]
The grounds of appeal from the decision of the Senior Prothonotary as it relates to the Motion to Strike, as stated by the appellant in the Notice of Appeal, are:
"1. the Senior Prothonotary erred in law in finding that the statement contained in Para. 9 of the Belcourt affidavit constituted new grounds of appeal;
"2. the Senior Prothonotary erred in law in finding that the appellant could not introduce fresh evidence on appeal; and
"3. upon such further and other grounds as counsel may advise and this Honourable Court may permit."
[15]
The grounds for the cross-appeal on the Motion to Strike, are stated as:
"1. The Senior Prothonotary erred in law in finding that it should be left to the trial judge to decide the relevancy of para. 10 to 14 and 19 of the Affidavit of Victor Cohen;
"2. The Senior Prothonotary erred in law in refusing to strike the said paragraphs;
"3. Upon such further and other grounds as counsel may advise and this Honourable Court may permit."
[16]
The grounds for the appeal of the Senior Prothonotary's decision on the issue of cross-examination are:
"1. the Senior Prothonotary erred in law in permitting cross-examination on the Belcourt Affidavit and the Cohen Affidavit in that no ambiguity or inconsistency was shown to exist in either of the Belcourt or Cohen Affidavits;
"2. the Senior Prothonotary erred in permitting cross-examination on the Belcourt Affidavit and the Cohen Affidavit on the basis of the Desjardins Affidavit because the Desjardins Affidavit is deficient in not specifying any ambiguity or inconsistency in either of the Belcourt or Cohen Affidavits."
[17]
The grounds for the cross-appeal on the issue of the cross-examination as stated by the respondent are:
"The Senior Prothonotary erred in law in refusing to the respondent leave to cross-examine D. Jane Musset, Michael Belcourt and Victor Cohen on their respective affidavit with respect to items listed at para. 8 of the Affidavit of Chantal Desjardins and numbered (6), (7), (9), (10) and (15)."
[18]
As appears from the decision of the Senior Prothonotary as it relates to the Motion to Strike, he concludes that para. 9 of the Belcourt affidavit should be struck "because it is not only a new evidence in appeal but new grounds to enlarge the scope (of the appeal from the decision of the Hearing Officer)" and, with regard to paras. 10 to 14 and 19 of the Cohen affidavit, the Senior Prothonotary states "it is left to the trial judge to decide their relevancy".
[19]
It is common ground that on an appeal from a decision of a Prothonotary, a judge is required to exercise his own discretion and is not to rely on the discretion of the Prothonotary. In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 127 (C.A.), Mr. Justice Hugessen, speaking for the Court, states at p. 128:
"... a judge who hears an appeal from a prothonotary on a matter involving the exercise of discretion is called upon to exercise his own discretion and is not bound by the prothonotary's opinion. He may, of course, choose to give great weight to the views expressed by the prothonotary, but the parties are, in the final analysis, entitled to the discretion of a judge and not that of a subordinate officer."
[20]
With regard to the decision of the Senior Prothonotary, I am satisfied that his decision to strike para. 9 of the Belcourt affidavit is correct.
[21]
Both counsel submit, and I am in full agreement, that an appellant cannot enlarge the scope of the appeal by making evidence in an affidavit filed as part of the evidence in an appeal of a decision of a Hearing Officer on an Opposition to a trademark application.
[22]
It therefore becomes necessary to examine the Statement of Opposition filed by the present appellant opposing the proposed registration of the trademarks that respondent proposed to have registered.
[23]
As previously stated, the respondent is attempting to have registered the trademark and design "West Bay Polo Club & Design". The appellant opposed the proposed registration by filing a Notice of Opposition in which the appellant states that the proposed trademark is not registrable because:
a) It is confusing "with each of the following trademarks". The appellant then lists four specific trademarks:
1) No. 312324		Polo
2) No. 314406		Polo By Ralph Lauren
3) No. 314256		Polo Player Design
4) No. 318850		Ralph Lauren & Design
b) The appellant also states that the respondent is not a person entitled to the registration because at the time of filing of the application the proposed trademark was confusing with each of the above registered trademark.
c) The appellant also alleges in its Statement of Opposition that the proposed trademark is not distinctive.
[24]
The above are the grounds of opposition.
[25]
In para. 9 of his affidavit, Mr. Belcourt speaks of the appellant having "adopted various design marks which feature its principal menswear trademarks "Polo" and "Polo Player Design". These design marks are not mentioned in the Statement of Opposition.
[26]
I am satisfied that by attempting to put before the Court "other" design marks, other than those mentioned in the Statement of Opposition, by affidavit evidence, the appellant is attempting to enlarge the scope of his opposition to include the design marks mentioned in para. 9 of the Belcourt affidavit.
[27]
Counsel states that it is not an issue of extending or enlarging the scope of his appeal but only a question of relevancy and that it should be left to the trial judge hearing the appeal to decide the issue of relevancy.
[28]
I am in full agreement that the issue of relevancy must be decided by the judge who will hear the appeal of the Hearing Officer's decision. The issue, as it relates to para. 9 is not an issue of relevancy. Mr. Belcourt is saying in his affidavit, as I read para. 9, is that the appellant has adopted various other Polo design marks and that the proposed trademark registration will also be confusing with those marks in the same manner as they are confusing with the trademarks specifically mentioned in the Statement of Opposition. I am satisfied that this is a clear attempt to enlarge the scope of the appeal.
[29]
The appeal from the decision of the Senior Prothonotary as it relates to para. 9 of the Belcourt affidavit must be denied.
[30]
The respondent has filed a cross-appeal from the decision of the Senior Prothonotary's decision not to strike paras. 10 to 14 and 19 of the Cohen affidavit.
[31]
The grounds of the cross-appeal, as stated by the respondent in the Notice of Cross-Appeal are 1) that the Senior Prothonotary erred in law in finding that it should be left to the trial judge to decide the relevancy of paras. 10 to 14 and 19 of the Cohen affidavit, and 2) the Senior Prothonotary erred in law in refusing to strike the paragraphs without stating where or how or in what manner the Senior Prothonotary erred.
[32]
The cross-appeal was filed outside of the legal delays. I granted leave to the respondent to file the cross-appeal. I am of the belief that the respondent filed the cross-appeal as an afterthought.
[33]
Paragraphs 10 to 14 and 19 of the Cohen affidavit are long and extensive and I do not intend to reproduce the paragraphs in this decision except to give a brief description of what the paragraphs contain.
[34]
Paragraph 10 speaks of the volume of sales of PRLC's Clothing in the United States since 1980. Paragraph 11 states that the large majority of the above sales are sales of men's clothing to which appellant had applied labels or hung tags marked with the trade marks "Polo", "Polo by Ralph Lauren" and "Polo Player Design". Paragraphs 12 and 13 speak of advertising being the cause of part of the appellant's "phenomenal success" and speak of the various media which carry the appellant's advertising. Paragraph 14 speaks of the amounts of money spent on advertising from 1980 to 1990. Paragraph 19 speaks of the wide recognition of the word "Polo" and the reason for same.
[35]
As I have stated, the issue of relevancy should be left to the judge before whom the appeal will be pleaded. I am satisfied that the Senior Prothonotary was right in not striking paras. 10 to 14 and 19 of the Cohen affidavit as the facts contained in these paragraphs relate to the issue of determining whether what is stated is relevant to the appeal. The judge hearing the appeal will decide if what is alleged is relevant and give what weight he or she decides should be given to this evidence.
[36]
The cross-appeal is denied as it relates to the striking of paras. 10 to 14 and 19 of the Cohen affidavit.
[37]
As I have stated, the Senior Prothonotary allowed the cross-examination of the three appellant's affiants as it related to specific matters, those being found in paras. 8(1) to (5) and (11) to (14) of the Chantal Desjardins affidavit sworn on October 28, 1992.
[38]
Paragraph 8 of the Chantal Desjardins affidavit states:
"That the said affidavits are ambiguous, confusing and require clarifications as to various aspects, such as:
(1) The nature and the extent of each affiant's qualifications or knowledge;
(2) The public perception;
(3) The fashion industry;
(4) The circulation of magazines;
(5) The use of the trademarks by the appellant as well as distribution and licences;
(6) The appellant's corporate entity, activities and transactions;
(7) The corporate entity, activities and transactions of the appellant's distributors;
(8) The development of the appellant's corporate image;
(9) The relation between the trademarks in issue and sales;
(10) The relation between the trademarks in issue and advertising;
(11) The channels of trade;
(12) The retail market;
(13) The sport of polo;
(14) The activities of the retail stores;
(15) The registered users inscriptions."
[39]
I therefore assume, from a reading of the Senior Prothonotary's decision, that the Senior Prothonotary agreed that all three affidavits filed by the appellant in the present appeal, and which affidavits are by D. Jane Musset, Michael Belcourt and Victor Cohen are ambiguous, confusing and require clarification as it applies to (1) the nature and the extent of each affiant's qualifications or knowledge, (2) the public perception, (3) the fashion industry, (4) the circulation of magazines, (5) the use of the trademarks by the appellant as well as distribution and licences, (8) the development of appellant's corporate image, (12) the retail market, (13) the sport of polo and (14) the activities of the retail stores.
[40]
After reading the affidavits of Musset, Belcourt and Cohen, it is obvious that the Senior Prothonotary did not intend to allow a cross-examination of all three affiants on all of the above subject matters as the above subject matters are not mentioned by all of the affiants in their affidavits. I am satisfied that what the Senior Prothonotary meant by his decision was to allow cross-examination of each affiant to statements made by that particular affiant.
[41]
The issue is to determine if the Senior Prothonotary erred in allowing cross-examinations of the three affiants.
[42]
Counsel for the appellant conceded that the Senior Prothonotary was correct in allowing cross-examination of D. Jane Musset. He states that her affidavit evidence was filed as expert evidence containing opinion evidence and therefore she should be subject to cross-examination.
[43]
Counsel for the appellant submits that neither Cohen or Belcourt should be subject to cross-examination "in that no ambiguity or inconsistency was shown to exist in either of the Belcourt or Cohen affidavits" nor should the Senior Prothonotary have permitted cross-examination "on the basis of the Desjardins affidavit because the Desjardins Affidavit is deficient in not specifying any ambiguity or inconsistency in either the Belcourt or Cohen Affidavits".
[44]
There is no doubt that the Desjardins affidavit is deficient if one concludes that the Desjardins affidavit should have specified each and every instance where there is an ambiguous or inconsistent statement in each of the Cohen and Belcourt affidavits.
[45]
Counsel for the appellant seems to take this position as he submits that an appeal from a decision of a Registrar of Trade Marks is brought pursuant to s. 59(3) of the
Trade-marks Act
and rule 704 of the
Federal Court Rules
. He states that such appeals are dealt with summarily on affidavit evidence unless otherwise directed by the court. Counsel submits that cross-examination on affidavits filed in appeal from a decision of the Registrar of Trade-marks is only available by the leave of the court and that the onus of establishing that cross-examination is necessary lies on an applicant who seeks leave to cross-examine. He submits that the applicant, in this case the respondent, must show that special circumstances exist which require cross-examination and that an affidavit filed in support of a motion for leave to cross-examine under rule 704 should specify the reasons why cross-examination is required.
[46]
The appellant submits the following cases for my consideration:
1)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 225 (F.C.T.D.)
2)
Chocosuisse Union des Fabricants -  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ) (F.C.T.D.)
3)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 247 (F.C.T.D.)
4)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 331 (Associate Senior Prothonotary) (Aff'd) (1987), 15 C.P.R.(3d) 76 (F.C.A.)
[47]
In the case of
Remington Rand Corp.
(supra), Mr. Justice Rouleau, states, at p. 228:
"Section 59(3) of the
Act
provides that when an application is made under s. 57 by the filing of an originating notice of motion, the proceeding of the application shall be heard and determined summarily on evidence adduced by affidavit unless the court otherwise directs. Cross-examination is not permitted as a matter of course, unless there is some ambiguity in the affidavits filed, or some reason to conclude that cross-examination would provide evidence required for the proper disposition of the expungement application."
and at p. 229:
"A party seeking leave to cross-examine must show special circumstances for requiring cross-examination: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 21 F.T.R. 300; 21 C.I.P.R. 140 (F.C.T.D.). In determining whether to grant leave to cross-examine, the following principles apply: cross-examination should not be permitted in areas that are within the knowledge or capability of knowledge of the examining party; cross-examination under this rule should not become an examination for discovery; cross-examination might be permitted in areas of ambiguity and finally, it might be permitted to establish bias of an expert affiant:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 12 C.I.P.R. 22; 4 A.C.W.S.(3d) 113 (F.C.T.D.)."
[48]
In the case of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (supra) Mr. Justice Strayer, states, on p. 249 as to the issue of onus:
"The jurisprudence is clear that the onus is on an applicant for leave to cross-examine to show special circumstances why cross-examination is required. Normally such circumstances are not found to exist unless there are ambiguities in the affidavit in question or opinions are expressed therein the basis for which require exploration by the other party. Otherwise it is normally accepted that the way for a respondent to answer the appellant's affidavits is to submit its own affidavits which qualify or contradict the affidavits of the appellant: see e.g.,
Chocosuisse Union des  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 3 C.I.P.R. 113 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 63 N.R. 140 (F.C.A.)."
[49]
Counsel for the respondent submits that the approach adopted in the above mentioned cases can be referred to as "a meat carving approach" where one takes each paragraph and determines what must be cross-examined. Counsel submits that one must take a "global view". He states that if certain subjects need to be cross-examined, the whole subject matter should be open to cross-examination not only very specific matters.
[50]
I agree with the submission of counsel for respondent if he means that once the applicant shows the need for a cross-examination, that is, that a subject matter raised in an affidavit is ambiguous or confusing and requires clarification, then the cross-examination should be allowed on matters related to the issue of the appeal. It must not be forgotten that the onus of showing that the statements in the affidavit are ambiguous or confusing before cross-examination is allowed rests on the party requesting the examination. In order to do this, the applicant must indicate in her affidavit which parts of the affidavit of the affiant to be cross-examined are confusing or ambiguous. This Chantal Desjardins has failed to do as it relates to the Cohen and Belcourt affidavits.
[51]
Counsel for the respondent handed in a document wherein he breaks down the supposed areas of ambiguity or confusion as it relates to the Belcourt affidavit and the Cohen affidavit.
[52]
This is not sufficient. The applicant must show which paragraphs in the affidavit are confusing or ambiguous and why.
[53]
The present rule 704(6) (previously 704(7)) states that no person shall cross-examine any person on any affidavit filed under this rule without leave of the Court. Rule 704(3) now states that when filing a Notice of Appeal, from a decision of a Registrar of Trade-marks, the affidavit evidence must also be filed. The rule no longer allows a delay to file the affidavit evidence as previously was permitted. The change in the rule is an attempt to expedite hearings of appeals from decisions of Registrars or Hearing Officers.
[54]
This clearly indicates that special circumstances must be shown to the Court by an applicant to warrant a cross-examination of an affiant. Such cross-examinations cause delay. It is insufficient to simply state that an affidavit is ambiguous or confusing. This must be shown to the court before permission to cross-examine an affiant is allowed. I am satisfied that the respondent failed to indicate any ambiguity, confusion or inconsistency in the affidavit of Belcourt or Cohen.
[55]
The appeal of the appellant from the decision of the Senior Prothonotary is allowed as it relates to the cross-examination of Belcourt and Cohen only. Therefore, the cross-appeal of respondent as it relates to Cohen and Belcourt is denied.
[56]
In that there are mixed results on the appeal and cross-appeal, there will be no award as to costs.
Appeal and cross-appeal allowed in part.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sg
[End of document]