[1]
Pinard, J.
: This is a motion, dated the 23rd day of April, 1992, on behalf of Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, as represented by the Minister of Agriculture, "for an order pursuant to s. 18.4(2) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, and rules 6 and 327 that the within application be treated and proceeded with as an action". [Section 18.4(2) The Trial Division may, if it considers it appropriate, direct that an application for judicial review be treated and proceeded with as an action.]
[2]
The "within application" was filed on the 10th day of April, 1992, on behalf of the plaintiff, for the purpose of obtaining:
a) An injunction restraining the defendant Her Majesty The Queen as represented by the Minister of Agriculture and her agents, servants, officers, inspectors, and representatives and any other person or persons, having, or purporting to exercise jurisdictional powers conferred by or under the
Plant Protection Act
, R.S.C. 1990, c. 22, and regulations or anyone acting on their behalf from conducting the proposed aerial spray program of Foray 48B or its equivalent upon nonconsenting residents in the Greater Vancouver region.
b) A declaration that the proposed aerial spray program of Foray 48B or its equivalent upon nonconsenting residents of the Greater Vancouver region is unlawful.
c) Such further and other relief as to this Honourable Court may seem just.
[3]
The plaintiff's application is based upon the following alleged grounds:
"1. That the proposed aerial spray program being conducted by the defendant is without statutory authority in that s. 25 of the
Plant Quarantine Act Regulations
only authorizes such a treatment program if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the area to be treated is infested with a pest. There is no reasonable grounds to believe that the proposed spray areas are infested with a pest.
"2. That even if there is an infestation by a pest that s. 25 of the
Plant Quarantine Act Regulations
is invalid and inapplicable to authorize the proposed spray program insofar as it violates s. 7 of the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
in that it is in excessive response under the circumstances and constitutes deprivation of the right to security of person without being deprived thereof in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.
"3. The
Plant Quarantine Regulations
are invalid therefore the proposed aerial spray program is unlawful."
[4]
On April 14, 1992, the interim injunctive relief sought by the plaintiff was denied by Mr. Justice Strayer of this court. Hence, the first phase of the proposed relevant aerial spray program of Foray 48B for this spring has now been accomplished. In addition, the record establishes that the whole Asian Gypsy Moth Eradication Program, which is being jointly delivered and financed by both the federal government and the provincial government, began immediately after the initial detection of male Asian Gypsy Moths in 1991 and will continue "until eradication is complete". There is no certainty that this spring's aerial spray program, which is scheduled to be completed by the end of June, 1992, will be sufficient, together with trapping activities next fall of male Gypsy Moths, to insure the complete eradication of the Asian Gypsy Moths from the Vancouver area. Therefore, further aerial spraying of Foray 48B remains afterwards possible.
[5]
In support of the motion to have the application for an injunction and declaration converted into an action, counsel for the defendant submit that there will be many different issues of fact and law to be determined, and that in addition there will be a need for extensive cross-examination on the many affidavits filed by both parties. They further argue that it is important that the court should have the benefit of assessing the demeanour and credibility of witnesses under cross-examination, particularly the experts. They emphasize that the need for rule 482 respecting expert witnesses is quite apparent considering the massive affidavit evidence filed herein. I agree.
[6]
Traditionally, permanent injunctions and declarations are only granted after the trial of an action. Subsection 18.4(2) of the
Federal Court Act
, which came into force on last February 1, 1992, still allows the Trial Division of this court, if it considers it appropriate, to direct that an application for judicial review be treated and proceeded with as an action. It is also now well established that
Charter
cases ought not to be decided in a factual vacuum.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 270; 43 C.R.R. 1; 61 D.L.R.(4th) 385, Mr. Justice Cory of the Supreme Court of Canada stated at page 388:
"
Charter
cases will frequently be concerned with concepts and principles that are of fundamental importance to Canadian society. For example, issues pertaining to freedom of religion, freedom of expression and the right to life, liberty and the security of the individual will have to be considered by the courts. Decisions on these issues must be carefully considered as they will profoundly affect the lives of Canadians and all residents of Canada. In light of the importance and the impact that these decisions may have in the future, the courts have every right to expect and indeed to insist upon the careful preparation and presentation of a factual basis in most
Charter
cases. The relevant facts put forward may cover a wide spectrum dealing with scientific, social, economic and political aspects. Often expert opinion as to the future impact of the impugned legislation and the result of the possible decisions pertaining to it may be of great assistance to the courts.
"
Charter
decisions should not and must not be made in a factual vacuum. To attempt to do so would trivialize the
Charter
and inevitably result in ill-considered opinions. The presentation of facts is not, as stated by the respondent, a mere technicality; rather, it is essential to a proper consideration of
Charter
issues. A respondent cannot, by simply consenting to dispense with the factual background, require or expect a court to deal with an issue such as this in a factual void.
Charter
decisions cannot be based upon the unsupported hypotheses of enthusiastic counsel."
In
Re Danson and Attorney General of Ontario
(1990), 112 N.R. 362; 41 O.A.C. 250; 43 C.P.C.(2d) 165; 73 D.L.R.(4th) 686, Mr. Justice Sopinka of the Supreme Court of Canada, with respect to the need for facts, stated at page 696:
"A factual foundation is of fundamental importance in this appeal. It is not the purpose of the legislation which is said to infringe the
Charter
but its effects. If the deleterious effects are not established there can be no
Charter
violation and no case has been made out. Thus, the absence of a factual base is not just a technicality that could be overlooked, but rather it is a flaw that is fatal to the appellants' position."
[7]
In the last case, at pp. 696-697, Mr. Justice Sopinka referred to the following comments of Mr. Justice Beetz in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241; 87 C.L.L.C. 14,015; 38 D.L.R.(4th) 321, at p. 337 (D.L.R.):
"There may be rare cases where the question of constitutionality will present itself as a simple question of law alone which can be finally settled by a motion judge. A theoretical example which comes to mind in one where Parliament or a legislature would purport to pass a law imposing the beliefs of a state religion. Such a law would violate s. 2(a) of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, could not possibly be saved under s. 1 of the
Charter
, and might perhaps be struck down right away: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 88; 9 C.R.C. 133.
It is trite to say that these cases are exceptional
."
[8]
In the case at bar, the many factual and legal issues to be considered and determined by the court, including
Charter
issues, are extremely complex and, I find, not suitable for determination on a motion supported by affidavits as opposed to viva voce evidence. Many of the potential areas of factual dispute raised by the plaintiff in his originating notice of motion have been well stated in the written argument of the defendant:
1) The facts supporting the plaintiff's standing.
2) The facts surrounding the effect of the spray program on the plaintiff.
3) The existence of facts and conclusions derived therefrom supporting the Inspector's Report leading to the Minister's determination.
4) The origin and presence of Asian Gypsy Moths in British Columbia.
5) The threats, if any, posed by the Asian Gypsy Moth.
6) The reasonableness of the Inspector's belief with respect to the existence of an infestation.
7) The safety of the pesticide in question.
8) The safety risk, if any, associated with the aerial spraying program.
9) Facts which support the plaintiff's claim, how it can be said the proposed action offends the right to security of the person.
10) The factual underpinning that exists respecting the assertion that the spraying program is an excessive response under the circumstances and constitutes deprivation of the right to security of the person.
[9]
In my view, most of these issues cannot be determined on the basis of mere affidavit evidence without the benefit of discovery and cross-examination. Again, this is clearly a case where this court should have the benefit of assessing the demeanor and credibility of witnesses under cross-examination, particularly the numerous experts.
[10]
Counsel for the plaintiff agrees that the
Charter
issues, in this matter, require the determination of difficult factual questions which could best be done on the basis of viva voce evidence. He, therefore, does not object to the
Charter
issues being dealt with at a trial. However, while still recognizing the need for cross-examination on the many affidavits filed by both parties, he now requests that this court hear the plaintiff's motion with respect to the other issues as soon as possible after such cross-examination is completed. In my view, dealing with the
Charter
issues separately, in this case, would not be appropriate. I think it highly desirable that all the legal issues be determined at the same time in the same global factual context. Moreover, as it is unlikely that the cross-examination of the affiants of both parties would be completed before some three to five weeks, the plaintiff's motion with respect to the non-
Charter
issues could not then realistically be heard before sometime during the month of June. Under such circumstances, it is doubtful, considering the massive affidavit evidence already filed and the additional transcripts of oral evidence likely to be filed, that this court would be able to decide the matter before the completion of this spring's current aerial spraying program conducted under the responsibility of the defendant.
[11]
Consequently, I consider it appropriate that the plaintiff's application for judicial review be treated and proceeded with as an action. The plaintiff will be allowed 15 days from the date of this order to file and serve a statement of claim. After the defendant will have subsequently filed her statement of defence, directions can be sought from this court in view of accelerating the proceedings.
[12]
Finally, in spite of the plaintiff's blunt but understandable rejection of the defendant's suggestion that the pending application for interlocutory injunction be now dealt with, the plaintiff remains free to seek such an injunction in the future, if and when she believes that she can adduce sufficient evidence to justify such relief, provided however that new notice to this effect be given to the defendant and that paragraphs (2) to (5) of rule 321.1 be fully complied with.
[13]
A separate order is made accordingly.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/blk
[End of document]