[1]
Pinard, J.
: This is an appeal by the appellants McFadden, Fincham, Marcus & Allen from a decision rendered on October 23, 1989 on behalf of the Registrar of Trademarks, pursuant to s. 45 of the Trade Marks Act R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, wherein the Senior Hearing Officer decided that the trademark "PROMODE" ought not to be expunged.
[2]
The respondent Le Groupe Promodor Inc. has been recorded since November 18, 1983 as the owner in Canada of trademark Registration no. 285,115 for the trademark "PROMODE" for use in association with the following wares:
"Vetements Pour Homme Nommement: Veston Habit, Pantalon, Bas, Sous-Vetements, Cravate, Chemise, Gilet, Pochette, Soulier, Manteau, Impermeable, Chapeau, Casquette."
[3]
In response to a request from the appellants, the Registrar of Trademarks, on August 18, 1987, issued a notice pursuant to s. 45 of the Act, addressed to the respondent Le Groupe Promodor Inc. In response to that Notice, the latter furnished the affidavit of its President, Mr. Robert Morisset, along with Exhibits 1 to 13 thereto. Further to the filing of this evidence, the appellants filed a written submission to which the respondent Le Groupe Promodor Inc. responded in like manner.
[4]
On the basis of the evidence contained in Mr. Morisset's affidavit, including Exhibits 1 to 13 thereto, the Senior Hearing Officer for the Registrar of Trademarks found that the subject trademark "PROMODE" was not in use at the time of the notice issued pursuant to s. 45 of the Act, but held that special circumstances existed which justified the nonexpungement of the registration.
[5]
The appellants state essentially that in both fact and law, the Senior Hearing Officer erred in concluding that the circumstances described by Mr. Morisset in his affidavit constituted special circumstances which excused nonuse by the respondent Le Groupe Promodor Inc. of its registered trademark "PROMODE" before January 1988. Accordingly, the appellants state that the Senior Hearing Officer should have found that the requisite "special circumstances" did not exist, and further, should not have exercised his discretion to excuse nonuse of the mark, and finally, should have directed that the subject registration be expunged.
[6]
Consequently, the sole issue in this appeal is whether the respondent Le Groupe Promodor Inc. has satisfied the requirements of s. 45 of the Act and more specifically whether it has shown that the absence of use of its mark has been due "to special circumstances that excuse the absence of use".
[7]
The appeal is under s. 56 of the Act. Even though additional evidence could be adduced by affidavit beyond that adduced before the Senior Hearing Officer, no additional affidavits were adduced before this court.
[8]
The relevant provisions of the Trade Marks Act state as follows:
"2. In this Act 'trade-mark' means
(a) a mark that is used by a person for the purpose of distinguishing or so as to distinguish wares or services manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by him from those manufactured, sold, leased, hired or performed by others,
(b) a certification mark,
(c) a distinguishing guise, or
(d) a proposed trade-mark;
'use' in relation to a trade-mark, means any use that by section 4 is deemed to be a use in association with wares or services;
"4(1) A trade-mark is deemed to be used in association with wares if, at the time of the transfer of the property in or possession of the wares, in the normal course of trade, it is marked on the wares themselves or on the packages in which they are distributed or it is in any other manner so associated with the wares that notice of the association is then given to the person to whom the property or possession is transferred.
"(3) A trade-mark that is marked in Canada on wares or on the packages in which they are contained is, when the wares are exported from Canada, deemed to be used in Canada in association with those wares.
"45(1) The Registrar may at any time and, at the written request made after three years from the date of the registration of the trade-mark by any person who pays the prescribed fee shall, unless he sees good reason to the contrary, give notice to the registered owner of the trade-mark requiring him to furnish within three months an affidavit or a statutory declaration showing with respect to each of the wares or services specified in the registration, whether the trade-mark is in use in Canada and, if not, the date when it was last so in use and the reason for the absence of such use since that date.
"(2) The Registrar shall not receive any evidence other than the affidavit or statutory declaration, but may hear representations made by or on behalf of the registered owner of the trade-mark or by or on behalf of the person at whose request the notice was given.
"(3) Where, by reason of the evidence furnished to him or the failure to furnish any evidence, it appears to the Registrar that the trade-mark, either with respect to all of the wares or services specified in the registration or with respect to any of those wares or services, is not in use in Canada and that the absence of use has not been due to special circumstances that excuse the absence of use, the registration of such trade-mark is liable to be expunged or amended accordingly.
"(4) When the Registrar reaches a decision whether or not the registration of a trade-mark ought to be expunged or amended, he shall give notice of his decision with the reasons therefor to the registered owner of the trade-mark and to the person at whose request the notice referred to in subsection (1) was given.
"(5) The Registrar shall act in accordance with his decision if no appeal therefrom is taken within the time limited by this Act or, if an appeal is taken, shall act in accordance with the final judgment given in the appeal.
"56(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from any decision of the Registrar under this Act within two months from the date on which notice of decision was dispatched by the Registrar or within such further time as the Court may allow, either before or after the expiration of the two months.
"(5) On an appeal under evidence in addition to that adduced before the Registrar may be adduced and that Federal Court may exercise any discretion vested in the Registrar."
[9]
It is appropriate to remember that the onus is on the registered owner of the trademark to establish special circumstances excusing nonuse under s. 45 of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , McNair, J., of this court well described the purpose and scope of s. 45 (former s. 44) and also referred to most of the relevant decisions, at pages 293 and 294:
"It is well established that the purpose and scope of s. 44 is to provide a simple, summary and expeditious procedure for clearing the register of trademarks which are not bona fide claimed by their owners as active trademarks. The procedure has been aptly described as one for removing 'deadwood' from the register. The section does not contemplate a determination on the issue of abandonment but rather simply places on the registered owner of the trademark the onus of furnishing evidence of use in Canada or of special circumstances excusing nonuser. The registrar's decision is not one that finally determines substantive rights but only whether the trademark entry is liable to be expunged under s. 44 or not. If user is relied on then the evidence filed in response to the notice must 'show' the use or, at least, sufficiently relate the facts from which such use can be inferred. Mere statutory tracking in the nature of a bare statement that the registrant was currently using the trademark in the normal course of trade in association with the wares is insufficient to establish user unless coupled with facts that are descriptively corroborative of the same. Evidence of a single sale, whether wholesale or retail, in the normal course of trade may well suffice so long as it follows the pattern of a genuine commercial transaction and is not seen as being deliberately manufactured or contrived to protect the registration of the trademark. Evidence in response to a s. 44 notice should be forthcoming in quality, not quantity, and there is no need for justification for evidentiary overkill: see  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 34 N.R. 39 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.); and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.)."
[10]
In the present case, it appears that the Senior Hearing Officer based his finding that special circumstances existed excusing the absence of use of the trademark "PROMODE" on paragraphs 5 to 29 inclusive of Mr. Morisset's affidavit dated February 10, 1988.
[11]
Indeed, the President of the respondent Le Groupe Promodor Inc. cited and explained, inter alia, the latter's difficulties in getting its members together from different parts of Ontario and Québec for meetings; the cyclical nature of the fashion industry; and difficulties caused by the resignation of key personnel in March 1983 as factors beyond its control leading to the delay in use of the trademark "PROMODE". In addition, the time invested in the conceptualization of a special "PROMODE" collection, as well as money invested in the printing of badges and labels with the trademark "PROMODE" in 1984, and the sale of clothing to members in January 1988, are additional facts that were referred to in order to indicate a serious intention on the part of Le Groupe Promodor Inc. to use the trademark. Finally, the delay in use of the trademark was also attributed to a reasonable business decision to take time to carefully develop, as summarized in the Registrant's written response to the appellants' written submission to the Registrar: "une collection sérieuse et originale visant une clientèle précise".
[12]
The relevant part of the Senior Hearing Officer's decision reads as follows:
"In his affidavit, Mr. Morisset concedes in essence that the trade-mark was not in use as of the notice date and elaborates on the difficulties experienced by the registrant in establishing its use. He also declares that the mark was finally put to serious use in January of 1988 when the registrant company sold approximately $300,000 dollars worth of trademarked merchandise to its retail customers, which are in fact members of the group formed by the amalgamation of Mode Select Inc. and Merceries Elegance Inc.; both being also a grouping of wearing apparel retailers.
. . . . .
"Considering the fact that the Registrar has always interpreted the wording of s. 45(1) as a legislative indication that new registrations should not normally be challenged, by third parties for a period of three (3) years following registration and considering the fact that the Federal Court has on a few occasions indicated that commercial activities effected subsequent to the notice date can in some cases, be considered in s. 45 proceedings (e.g. Rainier 1) it seems to me that the absence of use in this case could be excused by the circumstances adduced by the registrant. The evidence indicates a clear and continuous intention on the part of the registrant company to establish use of the mark throughout the period under contention, but it was prevented from doing so by a series of circumstances mostly beyond its control. In my respectful opinion this trademark cannot be considered 'deadwood'.
"Therefore, by reason of the evidence filed in these proceedings, I have concluded that the subject trademark was not in use as of the Notice date, but that the special circumstances adduced are sufficient to excuse the absence of use during this extended period of introduction. Consequently, this registration ought to be maintained as it presently appears on the registrar."
1.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
[13]
Such finding, in my view, is in accordance with the meaning given to the words "special circumstances", in s. 45 (former s. 44) of the Act, by Pratte, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 489, at page 492 where he refers to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In the latter case, Cattanach, J., considered specifically the meaning to be given to "special circumstances" and said, at page 123:
"The word 'special' in the language of s. 44(3) 'that the absence of use has not been due to special circumstances that excuse such absence of use' is an adjective modifying the word 'circumstances' and the word 'special' as an adjective is defined in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 3rd ed., as meaning 'Of such a kind as to exceed in some way that is not usual or common; exceptional in character, quality or degree.' Put another way 'special circumstances' means circumstances that are unusual, uncommon or exceptional."
[14]
Furthermore, with regard to facts, this court should only interfere in a decision by (or on behalf of) the Registrar of Trade Marks if there is clear error in the decision or new evidence presented which would have caused the Registrar to reach a different conclusion.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 135, my colleague Strayer, J., in an appeal from a s. 45 decision of the Registrar of Trade Marks, defined the role of this court as follows:
"... the Court should be reluctant to reverse the finding of the Registrar or Chairman unless it is clearly satisfied that he came to the wrong conclusion on the facts or unless there is significant new evidence placed before the Court that was not before the Registrar."
[15]
Here, there is no clear error in the Senior Hearing Officer's consideration of all the facts and no new evidence was placed before the court that was not before the Senior Hearing Officer. Therefore, the latter's decision should stand.
[16]
For all these reasons, the appeal must be dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/dmh
[End of document]