[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
: This is a judicial review of a decision made by disciplinary chairperson Mr. Dean Fox on June 25, 1996 at Kent Institution, in Agassiz, B.C.
Facts And Background
[2]
The facts are not disputed. On April 18, 1996 Correctional Officers Roland Turgeon and Linda Barrett made a routine drug search of the unit in the Regional Health Centre, Matsqui ("RHC"), where the applicant's cell was located. The applicant's possessions included a 12 inch fan. Officer Turgeon picked the fan up, tilted it, and heard a clunk. His curiosity piqued, Officer Turgeon removed the base with a Phillips screwdriver and discovered a shank [see footnote 1].
[3]
The shank, approximately eight inches in total length, had a blade six inches long with tape wrapped around one end. The blade of the shank had a few spots of rust, some blemishes, and discolouration.
[4]
It should be noted, however, that, while it is not disputed that the fan could not be opened without a screwdriver, no screwdriver was found in the applicant's cell.
[5]
On April 18, 1996 the applicant was charged with being unlawfully in possession of a shank.
[6]
At the hearing Mr. McLarty testified that he had been charged in 1992, while incarcerated in Millhaven Institution, for being unlawfully in possession of the same shank, which was found in the fan in question. On that occasion, the applicant stated that he taped the shank inside the fan to prevent it from rattling. The charge ended in a stay of proceedings due to a mistake in paperwork. The fan and the shank were put in to the evidence locker. The applicant understood that the shank and the fan were put back in the evidence locker.
[7]
For the next couple of years the applicant spent time in higher security levels. He was given back the fan on March 8, 1995, when he was at Kent. He testified that after getting the fan back, he simply put it on his desk. He did not bother taking it apart. The applicant and his personal effects were transferred to the RHC, where he had a job as a mechanic. He remained there until the shank was discovered.
The Chairperson's Decision:
[8]
The chairperson found the applicant guilty because he did not believe his explanation. He made the following finding:
"THE CHAIRPERSON: ... I've got a real problem with your explanation, Mr. McLarty ... I just have a lot of trouble imagining that this shank wouldn't have been found in all of the time that the fan was in your possession and in particular the shank wouldn't have been discovered in there on another search or when the -- when your effects were transported to RHC."
He further stated that:
"THE CHAIRPERSON: ... But with this item rattling around in the bottom of a fan, I have trouble imagining that it wouldn't have been found if it had been in that fan for such a long time your possession and, as I say, in transport. And I also have a concern that you wouldn't have known it was there because, as the officer said, he lifted the fan up, turned it over and immediately heard this clunk or thunk and knew there was something in there."
He concluded as follows:
"THE CHAIRPERSON: ... I guess what I'm saying is that I don't accept your evidence, Mr. McLarty. I can't accept it in the circumstances in the evidence that's before me.
THE INMATE: Do you have anything that says any different?
THE CHAIRPERSON: I just can't accept it in the circumstances and I've outlined those to you. And so I reject your evidence and the evidence then is that there is possession of this item in your fan. I guess I would add one thing that I didn't mention a few moments ago. And that is that I have an enormous amount of difficulty that if an item was produced for an independent chairperson at Millhaven, he had to have look at it to --
THE INMATE: That's how it got untaped. I had it taped in there.
THE CHAIRPERSON: -- Right -- to have been examined and for the decision to have been made in the manner in which you described it, dismissing the charge. He would have had to have looked at it. In other words, it would have had to come out of the fan. I have a great deal of difficulty in imagining that staff would then put it back in the fan and put the fan back in your effects and then release them to you."
Analysis
[9]
In totally rejecting the applicant's version of events, the chairperson found him not to be credible. Although not explicitly stated, this did constitute a finding that the offence was committed beyond a reasonable doubt.
[10]
Disbelieving the applicant was tantamount to a total rejection of his evidence and was entirely within the purview of the chairperson. However, while the deference this court should give the chairperson in determining credibility and the facts is high [see footnote 2], there must nevertheless be enough evidence to prove the accused's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt:
it must be the only inference that can be drawn from the proven facts
.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  W.A.C. 223 (C.A.), McEachern, J.A., stated that:
"The balance of the Reasons for judgment, however, are devoted entirely to restating and rejecting the evidence of the accused. In my judgment, it is not jurisprudentially correct to infer guilt merely from disbelieving the evidence of the accused: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. C.A.). [at 227]
. . . . .
"it is legitimate to infer knowledge from mere physical possession in proper circumstances which inference will be displaced if an explanation is offered which raises a reasonable doubt or if, as in
Hess
, other inferences consistent with innocence may be drawn from all of the proven circumstances. It is this rational process which distinguishes inference from speculation or conjecture. At the end of the case, of course, the Crown must prove the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt, but once that was done, on the circumstances of this case, the burden of adducing an explanation that raises a reasonable doubt, or of extracting reasonable doubt from the evidence, rested upon the accused.
"The total rejection of the evidence of the accused is tantamount to the accused having given no evidence or offered no explanation, and it then became necessary to consider whether, on all of the evidence, an inference of knowledge may be drawn from the proven facts, or whether, in all the circumstances, a fair consideration of the evidence either leaves the scales in even balance, or tilts one way or the other. The answers to those questions, of course, indicate whether the Crown's case has been proven to the requisite degree, that is beyond a reasonable doubt."
[11]
This is in accordance with the rule enunciated by the Supreme Court of Canada in
R v. Cooper
, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 860; 14 N.R. 181; 34 C.C.C.(2d) 18, wherein Ritchie, J., wrote:
"It is enough if it is made plain to the members of the jury that before basing a verdict of guilty on circumstantial evidence they must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the guilt of the accused is the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the proven facts." (at 881)
[12]
The chairperson gave reasons for rejecting M. McLarty's testimony: he found it implausible in consideration of all of the facts before him [see footnote 3]. In this case, the facts which remain after the applicant's testimony is disregarded are the following: (i) a routine search revealed the shank hidden inside the fan in the applicant's cell, (ii) the fan could not be opened without a screwdriver, (iii) no screwdriver was found in his cell, and (iv) the shank was rusted and blemished in spots.
[13]
The chairperson had to be satisfied that guilt was the only reasonable inference to be drawn from these facts. I am of the view that the chairperson could not reasonably be satisfied. To conclude as he did, the chairperson had to speculate that it was not possible that the guards left the shank in the fan when they returned it to the exhibit locker. He also had to speculate that the applicant had turned over the fan and heard a rattle. The chairperson was entitled to disbelieve the applicant's explanation but he could not infer guilt on sheer speculation. Thus, in view of the lack of evidence of the applicant being in possession of the shank, the verdict was patently unreasonable.
[14]
For these reasons, the application for judicial review is granted and the decision of the chairperson is quashed.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/gs
Footnotes
1.	Copy of Transcript of Disciplinary Hearing, at 19-20 (Applicant's Application Record, Tab No. 2).
2.	The
Corrections and Conditional Release Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-44.6, as amended states that the person conducting the hearing must, on the evidence, find the accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. While not a privative clause, it mandates a legal finding on the facts. Implicit in this is that at the very least the reviewing court should be deferential to the finding of fact.
3.	See Copy of Transcript of Disciplinary Hearing, at 39-42 (Applicant's Application Record, Tab No. 2), and above excerpts on p. 4.
[End of document]