[1]
Dubé, J.
[Translation]: This application is seeking a writ of certiorari setting aside the decision of the respondent on March 25, 1991. That decision by the Canadian Human Rights Commission ("the Commission") was that it had considered the complaint filed by the applicant against the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ("the R.C.M.P.") on September 7, 1988 alleging discrimination based on employment disability and "that no further proceeding is justified".
[2]
The applicant has a B.A. in industrial relations from the University of Montreal. He went to an R.C.M.P. office in Montreal in the hope of finding employment. An official incorrectly told him that he first had to become and be a police officer for seven to eight years, which required an IQ test and a medical examination, before he could hold the position of "personnel officer", the type of position which the applicant seemed to desire.
[3]
The applicant accordingly filed an application for employment and in September 1987 his application was dismissed "due to the fact that you do not meet our criteria in terms of our medical requirements". On February 1, 1988, in answer to a request for particulars of medical problems on which the dismissal of the application was based, the chief medical officer of the R.C.M.P. provided the following information:
[4]
The reasons for dismissal on a medical basis are as follows:
1. Coarctation of the aorta operated on in 1978 with arterial hypertension secondary to effort;
2. Chondromalacia right knee;
3. Asthma.
[5]
The applicant subsequently filed a complaint with the Commission against the R.C.M.P. alleging he was a victim of discrimination based on disability contrary to ss. 7 and 10 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6 ("the
Act
"). Under s. 35 of that
Act
, Josée Plamondon was appointed to investigate. On his complaint form given to the investigator the applicant added the following two paragraphs:
"The medical reasons given by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police for denying me employment are a coarctation of the aorta operated on in 1978, arterial hypertension secondary to effort, chondromalacia in the right knee and asthma.
"I nevertheless consider that my health problems, which are completely under control at present, do not prevent me from being eligible to perform the functions of a staff relations officer with the R.C.M.P., a position for which I am qualified."
[6]
During this period the applicant did some research and ultimately found that the kind of position he was seeking with the R.C.M.P. did not exist. During July 1989, in an attempt to resolve the matter, the investigator asked the applicant to undergo a medical examination to determine whether he was really handicapped and sent him four consent forms. The applicant stated that he duly completed the forms authorizing the examination, but that the forms disappeared from the record. The investigator also suggested to the applicant on December 18, 1989 that he make another application for employment. He declined to do so.
[7]
It should be noted that the disabilities reported by the senior medical officer of the R.C.M.P. were not the result of a medical examination done by him, but were taken from information supplied by the applicant himself, who at some time in his life suffered from the disabilities in question. His argument was that he had now recovered. There is no evidence in the record, but counsel for the appellant said at the hearing, without any objection by counsel for the respondent, that the applicant is known in the area as an athlete who is in good condition and participates in many marathons.
[8]
In May 1990 the investigator Josée Plamondon was replaced by Anne-Marie Gingras. The latter filed her investigation report with the Commission on October 5, 1990. The following passages from her report are worth reporting:
"
Position Of Mis-en-cause
"The Royal Canadian Mounted Police told us that there was no staff relations officer position in Quebec and that people in the personnel office were referred by the Public Service Commission. It explained that its recruiting policy included a medical examination for each candidate, and that its decision not to hire the complainant was premature. It suggested that the complainant make a new application for employment.
"
Results Of Investigation
"The investigation showed that there was in fact no staff relations officer position at the offices of the mis-en-cause in Quebec. The fact that a personnel office clerk told the complainant he had to be a police officer before obtaining the desired position was probably due to his confusing that position with the one of 'division representative' (responsible like a union representative for taking action on grievances and communicating members' viewpoints to management). This individual is elected by the civilian and regular members or special constables. The complainant showed no interest in making a second employment application to the mis-en-cause.
"
Evidence Relating To Defence Of Mis-en-cause
. . . . .
"8. As regards the denial of employment as a police officer, the R.C.M.P. admitted that it should have been based on a complete medical examination and not on a quick assessment made after reading about the complainant's health problems. The mis-en-cause recognized that its decision not to hire the complainant was premature and not in accordance with its policy, and it suggested the complainant make a new application for employment, assuring him that the results would be in no way influenced by his first denial of employment. It wrote to us: 'The requirements of each category of member (regular, special or civilian member) will be explained to him in order that he may assess his own qualifications before the application process is put in motion.'
"9. The investigator Josée Plamondon contacted the complainant on December 18, 1989, to tell him of the contents of the R.C.M.P. letter (see preceding paragraph), suggesting that he make another employment application. In a note dated December 18, 1989, she wrote: 'J. Morisset says that he does not dare to apply for an R.C.M.P. position again'.
"10. Counsel for the complainant contacted a lawyer for the mis-en-cause in order to arrive at a settlement of the matter. The discussions were unsuccessful.
"11. We contacted the mis-en-cause in September 1990 and on the 17th learned that the complainant had still not made another employment application to the mis-en-cause; this was confirmed to us by the complainant.
"
Conclusion And Recommendations
. . . . .
"14. We recommend that the Commission dismiss this complaint because on the evidence the allegations of discrimination are without foundation."
[9]
The
Act
provides a procedure to remedy discriminatory acts in certain areas within federal legislative jurisdiction. The first stage of the procedural requirements is the filing of a complaint. If the complaint does not fall under one of the exceptions mentioned in s. 41, the Commission may either appoint an investigator under s. 43 or a Tribunal under s. 49. In the first case, the investigator prepares a written report for members of the Commission containing an account of the relevant facts obtained during the investigation and his conclusions. This is exactly what occurred in the case at bar.
[10]
The
Act
does not require that members of the Commission examine the complete record of the investigation. The
Act
does not provide for an oral hearing in the case of an investigation, but provides for written observations, unlike the investigation by a Tribunal, where the hearing takes the form of an adversary proceeding. The members of the Commission must decide based on the material before them whether the evidence provides reasonable justification for proceeding to the next stage (See
Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 385, at 898  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  employés de production du Québec et de l'Acadie
, supra, at 902 S.C.R. and
Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  they decided that there was no basis for proceeding to the second stage. The Supreme Court of Canada has held that this is a purely administrative decision (See
Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l'Acadie
, supra, at 899).
[11]
The
Act
does not require that the Commission's decision communicated to the applicant take a particular form and be accompanied by reasons when the complaint is dismissed. Under the provisions of s. 44(4), the
Act
provides that on receiving the report the Commission will inform the parties of the decision made in writing. The Supreme Court of Canada has already held in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; at 7 and 8 S.C.R., that the court should not intervene where a discretionary power has been exercised under the
Act
reasonably, in good faith, without reference to extraneous considerations and neither arbitrarily nor unlawfully.
[12]
In the case at bar the documents given to the member of the Commission by the investigator, in addition to the aforementioned investigation report, included a copy of the complaint form, the sequence of events in dealing with the complaint, the observations of counsel for the applicant and the observations of the R.C.M.P.
[13]
The applicant alleged that the absence from the record of the forms consenting to the medical examination, which he said he duly completed and returned to the R.C.M.P., resulted in an abuse of discretion by the Commission. There is no evidence that these documents were received by the R.C.M.P. or the Commission and no indication that they were deliberately destroyed by either one. In any case, in view of the applicant's peremptory refusal to make another employment application, I do not see how the forms in question would have added anything to the record. If his purpose was to obtain a medical examination without applying for employment, he could surely have taken that examination elsewhere.
[14]
There is accordingly no basis for issuing a writ of certiorari, since the Commission's discretion was exercised in accordance with the provisions of the
Act
and settled rules of precedent in administrative law. Of course, this decision applies only to the applicant's application for certiorari against the Commission. It does not in any way affect any claim for damages which the applicant feels he has against the R.C.M.P. as a result of the latter's error in providing false information through its employee.
[15]
The application is accordingly dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk