[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is a special case submitted by agreement of the parties for adjudication pursuant to Rule 475. On the basis of an agreed statement of facts the court is asked to determine whether an employment contract providing for the employment of the plaintiff by the defendant was lawfully terminated.
Facts
[2]
The agreed facts were essentially as follows. The plaintiff commenced employment with the defendant in the Department of Industry, Trade and Commerce in November, 1965. He attained the age of 65 years on December 14, 1981. Prior to that date, in May, 1981 after discussions between him and departmental officials the plaintiff's employment was extended for a period of two years commencing December 14, 1981. This decision was first conveyed to him orally by Mr. R.M. Hammond, Director of the Financial Services Branch of which the plaintiff was Assistant Director. He was subsequently shown a memorandum from the Chief of Personnel Administrative Services of the Department of Industry, Trade and Commerce to Mr. Hammond dated June 16, 1981, which stated in part:
"... we are pleased to inform you that Mr. Sheldrick's extension of employment beyond age 65 has been approved for a period of two years commencing December 14, 1981 to December 13, 1983, inclusive."
[3]
However, by a memorandum to him dated May 6, 1982, from the Deputy Minister, the plaintiff was advised that his employment with Industry, Trade and Commerce would cease on August 27, 1982. This letter specifically invoked subsection 28(11) of the Public Service Superannuation Regulations but did not elaborate further on the reasons for the termination. Such reasons were, however, given subsequently in a letter of October 18, 1982, from the Deputy Minister to the plaintiff. In expressing his regret for the termination of employment the Deputy Minister said this:
"... Unfortunately, the need to reduce our person-year complement as a result of the DREE/ITC merger left me no choice."
That redundancy was the real reason for Mr. Sheldrick's termination is further confirmed by the submission made to the Treasury Board by the Deputy Minister at that time with respect to having Mr. Sheldrick's retirement date deemed to be December 30, 1981, a measure which would be beneficial to him in respect of his pension. This memorandum which was put in as evidence stated in part:
"Mr. Sheldrick's case came to my attention when, in May, 1982, we began to get a clear picture of the scope of the person-year reduction exercise we would have to go through at DREE/ITC. With this realization we set about reducing our compliment [sic] of term employees and approved term extensions only when they were clearly justified by operational requirements. We also looked at Mr. Sheldrick's case and determined that the pool of persons available from the DREE and ITC financial services areas eliminated the operational need for his services. Accordingly, ... I informed him that ... his employment would end on August 27, 1982."
[4]
According to the Special Case, "the plaintiff agrees" that his employment during the extension of his service after age 65 was "a continuation of his employment as a civil servant". I take this to mean that the defendant also adopts this position. It is also common ground that the termination of the plaintiff's employment was made under subsection 28(11) of the Public Service Superannuation Regulations, C.R.C. vol. XIV, c. 1358. The defendant according to the Special Case claims that the employment of
"... the plaintiff was properly terminated in law pursuant to Section 28(11) of the Public Service Superannuation Regulations ..."
That is, the defendant relies solely on this subsection as the legal justification for the termination.
[5]
The plaintiff contends that the discussions preceding his retirement and the confirmation to him that his employment would be continued for two years amounted to a binding contract for employment for the following two years and he says that subsection 28(11) did not provide lawful authority for the termination of his employment. The parties therefore have agreed in the Special Case that:
"The question for the opinion of the court is whether the employment contract between the parties was improperly terminated in law by the defendant, and if so, whether interest as claimed is payable by the defendant."
The parties are also in agreement as to the damages which I should award should I find in favour of plaintiff. They are not, however, in agreement as to what interest, if any, should be payable either as prejudgment interest or postjudgment interest.
Conclusions
[6]
The relevant provisions of the Public Service Superannuation Regulations are subsections 28(2), (4), and (11). They provide as follows:
"28.(2) Subject to this section, a contributor and a deputy head cease to be employed in the Public Service upon attaining 65 years of age.
"28.(4) A contributor who has attained 65 years of age and is authorized to be paid salary computed at an annual rate that does not exceed the maximum annual rate to pay for a Senior Executive Officer I may continue to be employed in the Public Service until he attains 70 years of age if, prior to the date on which the contributor would cease to be so employed, the deputy head of his department, with the specific or general authority of the appropriate Minister, approves in the form approved by the Minister that the contributor continue to be so employed.
"28.(11) Notwithstanding anything in this section, the deputy head may, at any time, for reason of age only, terminate the employment of a contributor who has attained the age of 65 years, if he gives to the contributor at least 90 days notice of termination of employment."
By virtue of subsection (2) the plaintiff would have ceased to be employed at age 65. However, pursuant to subsection (4) his employment was continued for two more years by decision of the Deputy Minister. This is not disputed. The question remains then as to whether subsection (11) provided lawful authority for the termination of a period of employment to which the plaintiff was otherwise entitled pursuant to subsection (4).
[7]
The plaintiff contended that this regulation permitting the termination at any time of an extended period of employment could not be considered a term of the contract and therefore could not justify its termination. This argument was based on the contention that the plaintiff had no knowledge that his employment was being extended pursuant to the Public Service Superannuation Regulations and he was therefore not aware of this alleged power of termination. I am not persuaded that the state of the plaintiff's knowledge is determinative as to the application of general rules having the force of law which are applicable to all such contracts. I need not consider this further, however.
[8]
The plaintiff also contests the validity or applicability of this regulation: he says that it is ultra vires the Governor in Council, is inconsistent with the Canadian Bill of Rights, and contrary to section 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Counsel for the defendant objected to these issues being raised as they had not been "pleaded". I took the position that, whether or not in an ordinary action such matters would have to be pleaded pursuant to Rule 409, once the parties had reduced an issue to its statement in the Special Case they were bound by the generality of the issue as so defined by them by mutual agreement. As noted above, the issue as defined is whether the contract "was improperly terminated in law" and in my view that potentially puts in issue the interpretation and validity of the legislative provision specifically relied on by the defendant as legal justification for its actions. In turn, counsel for the defendant briefly argued that the plaintiff was estopped from challenging the validity of the regulations as he had taken benefits thereunder. In my view this is not an issue embraced by the mutually agreed question as to whether the contract "was improperly terminated in law" as the defendant, by agreeing to the question thus stated was accepting that the legality of its actions based on subsection 28(11) was in issue and that the plaintiff was not precluded by estoppel from challenging that legality.
[9]
Counsel for the defendant also appeared to be arguing that subsection 28(11) was only one source of authority for termination of the plaintiff's employment. He referred to the common law principle that service for the Crown is at pleasure and may be terminated for any reason whatsoever. This somewhat archaic view of public employment implies that servants of the Crown may be dismissed for any reason or for no reason. It must first be observed that the prerogatives of the Crown in this respect have been reduced to statute, in respect of the Government of Canada, by the Public Service Employment Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-32, section 24 which states as follows:
"24. The tenure of office of an employee is during the pleasure of Her Majesty, subject to this and any other Act and the regulations thereunder and, unless some other period of employment is specified, for an indeterminate period."
There is ample jurisprudence confirming that the discretion of the Crown to dismiss has been extensively eroded by a variety of statutes. It is sufficient to say for the present purposes that the Public Service Superannuation Regulations, section 28, provides the means by which the employment of a person such as the plaintiff may be extended beyond 65 and the means by which that employment may be terminated. This is the kind of regulation to which the general principle in section 24 of the Public Service Employment Act is expressly made subject. Apart from this clear meaning of the two provisions when read together, the defendant admits in the Special Case that its justification for the termination must be found in subsection 28(11).
[10]
The central issue then is whether that subsection authorized the action taken here. The answer to that will depend on what interpretation is to be given to subsection 28(11). That subsection permits termination of an employee who has been continued passed age 65 subject to two conditions: one is that termination must be made "for reason of age only", and the other is that the deputy head must give such employee at least 90 days notice of termination. The latter condition is readily understood, but the former is not. It appears to me that it admits of two interpretations. One, which the defendant appeared to be espousing, is that there need be no reason for termination other than that the employee is more than 65 years of age. As the subsection, by definition, only applies to persons past the age of 65, this would mean that their employment may be terminated at any time without any other justification. In short, by this view any one whose employment is extended past 65 pursuant to subsection 28(4) serves on sufferance and may be dismissed at the merest whim of the deputy head. The other interpretation which appears to me to be possible is that such a person may be dismissed for reason of incompetence attributable to age. This appears to me to be more consistent with what I take to be the purpose of subsections 28(4) and (11), namely that persons who are still able to perform their work may be allowed to continue to work after age 65 for a period of up to five years provided that their ability does not become impaired by age. This is not to say that such a person could not be dismissed for a good cause, such as fraud practiced upon his employer, but this would have to be done pursuant to other authority applicable to any one in the public service. It must be remembered always that here the defendant relies solely on subsection 28(11) as justification for the termination of the plaintiff.
[11]
The first possible interpretation which I set out above must be rejected for another reason. In my view it would amount to a denial of "equality before the law" and, according to the Canadian Bill of Rights, paragraph 1(b) and section 2, I must construe and apply federal law in a manner which will not abridge such a right. While the requirement of "equality before the law" has been held in a number of cases to be sufficiently met if a law which makes distinctions unfavourable to a certain class of persons has been enacted for a "valid federal objective" it has also been recognized that this test implies more than a mere requirement of validity of the federal law in terms of the distribution of powers. As was observed by McIntyre, J., (Dickson J. concurring), in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 406 S.C.R.:
"... The question which must be resolved in each case is whether such inequality as may be created by legislation affecting a special class - here the military - is arbitrary, capricious or unnecessary, or whether it is rationally based and acceptable as a necessary variation from the general principle of universal application of law to meet special conditions and to attain a necessary and desirable social objective."
The regulation in question here, if interpreted as advocated by counsel for the defendant, would mean that unlike any other public servant, an employee who had attained the age of 65 and whose employment had been continued could be dismissed at any time for no reason whatsoever. It appears to me that, in light of the observations of McIntyre, J., in the MacKay case supra there would be a valid federal objective for such a measure only if it were reasonably clear that it is a genuine requirement of the management of the Public Service that any one past the age of 65 should be subject to dismissal for any reason or no reason on 90 days notice being given. A good deal of guidance on this matter can be found in the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where the court was considering the validity of the imposition of mandatory retirement at age 60 on two firemen, in relation to the Ontario Human Rights Code, R.S.O. 1970, c. 318, section 4 which prohibits discrimination in matters of employment based on age. This section allows an exception, inter alia, "where age ... is a bona fide occupational qualification and requirement for the position or employment". The Supreme Court said that in determining whether some criterion such as age is a bona fide occupational requirement there is both a subjective and an objective element in the test. The subjective element involves the intention of the alleged discriminator. As for the objective element, according to the Supreme Court at [1982] 1 S.C.R. 208, this involves an examination to determine whether the job criterion in question:
"... is reasonably necessary to assure the efficient and economical performance of the job without endangering the employee, his fellow employees and the general public."
The court found that the evidence had not established that mandatory retirement at age 65 was "reasonably necessary".
[12]
In my view this "objective" test is analogous to the one to be used in determining whether "equality before the law" as protected by the Canadian Bill of Rights is denied by a federal law respecting employment. No argument or evidence was presented to me to demonstrate it to be reasonably necessary that a public servant who is permitted to continue to work after age 65 should, unlike his colleagues who have not reached that age, be subject to dismissal for any or no reason. I am therefore not prepared to construe and apply subsection 28(11) of the Public Service Superannuation Regulations in this manner.
[13]
I am satisfied, then, that the proper interpretation to give to subsection 28(11) is that it authorizes termination where an employee who is over 65 is unable to perform adequately his job for reasons attributable to age. That clearly was not the situation with respect to the plaintiff nor does the defendant suggest that it was. It is clear from the correspondence, and this is not denied, that the plaintiff's employment was terminated because of a redundancy created by the merger of two departments of government. Therefore his termination did not come within the criterion prescribed in subsection 28(11) and was not authorized in law.
[14]
The plaintiff contended that subsection 28(11) is contrary to section 15 of the Charter. It is clear that all of the events in question here occurred before section 15 came into operation on April 17, 1985, and therefore I cannot consider further that argument.
[15]
The plaintiff also contended that subsection 28(11) is ultra vires the Governor in Council and he cited in authority the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). In that case the Court of Appeal held invalid, as ultra vires the Governor in Council, another subsection of these regulations which purported to authorize a deputy head to terminate, at his discretion, persons between the age of 60 to 65. That provision is distinguishable from subsection 28(11) of the present regulations. The relevant statutory authority for these regulations authorized the Governor in Council to prescribe a general age for retirement but to provide certain conditions under which his employment might be continued beyond that age. Instead, by the subsection of the regulations in question in the Robertson case, the Governor in Council had purported to provide that notwithstanding the general retirement age of 65 a person's employment could be terminated
before
that age, by a decision of a deputy head. That is not what was authorized by the regulation-making power and the Court of Appeal so held. In the present case, subsection 28(11) is within the regulation-making power because it permits an extension
after
the normal age of retirement.
[16]
By agreement of the parties if I find for the plaintiff on the substantive issue, as I do, then he is entitled to judgment in the sum of $70,215.17 "together with interest, if payable". In my view interest is only payable on the judgment from the date thereof. By virtue of sections 35 and 40 of the Federal Court Act I am precluded from awarding prejudgment interest against the Crown unless such interest is stipulated by contract or provided for by statute. See, e.g.,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . While by virtue of section 3 of the Crown Liability Act, prejudgment interest may be awarded against the federal Crown in tort actions where such interest would be payable pursuant to the law of the province applicable to the tort in question, there is no such general authority with respect to actions for contract such as the present one. Counsel for the plaintiff was unable to direct me to any contractual stipulation or statutory authority providing for the payment of prejudgment interest in the circumstances of the present case. While by virtue of section 40 of the Federal Court Act it would be open to me to increase the rate of post-judgment interest beyond that prescribed in the Interest Act, counsel for the plaintiff did not make any specific request for this nor did I have the opportunity to hear submissions pro and con as to what a proper rate would be. I shall therefore make no special award in this respect.
Action allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]