[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: This is an application for an order first, to deem an action, commenced by Statement of Claim, to be a judicial review proceeding; second, that the resulting judicial review proceeding be allowed to proceed as an action; and third, that the Statement of Claim be amended to reflect events arising after the Statement of Claim was issued and to seek consequential additional relief.
Background
[2]
The Statement of Claim, filed July 20, 1994, sets out that at a Band meeting of the Beaver Lake First Nation, held July 6, 1994, the plaintiffs were wrongly impeached from their positions as Chief and as Councillors and a new election date was set for July 27, 1994. The impeachment resulted in the timely starting of the action.
[3]
On July 22, the plaintiffs applied for an injunction to prevent the upcoming new election from being held: Associate Chief Justice Jerome denied the injunction.
[4]
The plaintiffs' proposed Amended Statement of Claim brings events up to date by giving the July 27, 1994, election results and seeking amended relief, including a declaration that the election of the new Chief and Councillors of the Beaver Lake First Nation be declared a nullity.
[5]
The defendants sought, by motion of August 9, 1994, leave to file a Conditional Appearance, that motion being adjourned several times. In the interim, August 16, 1994, the plaintiffs filed a motion in the same terms as the plaintiffs' present motion, which in turn was adjourned by the Associate Chief Justice pending a determination of the defendants' motion for a Conditional Appearance.
[6]
Leave to file a Conditional Appearance was denied, with Reasons of February 10, 1995, the Associate Chief Justice pointing out that an Indian Band Council came within the jurisdiction of the Federal Court. The plaintiffs were then free to reset their August 1994 motion for hearing, which they did on March 7, 1995.
[7]
As a result, what appears to be a rather tardy motion, to rectify and to sort out procedural matters, is really the eventual hearing of a timely motion adjourned through no fault of the plaintiffs.
Analysis
Judicial Review Under The Act
And Rules:
[8]
Before various amendments bearing on judicial review were passed in 1990, persons seeking judicial review of the decision of a federal board, commission or other tribunal, under s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
, had the option, with two exceptions which required a statement of claim, of commencing proceedings for review either by statement of claim or by originating notice of motion, under what was then Rule 603.
[9]
One result of the amendments, which came into effect in February of 1992, and which I will refer to as the "1992 amendments", is that injunctive and declaratory relief, against a body such as the Beaver Lake First Nation, can only be obtained by an application for judicial review under s. 18(3):
"The remedies provided for in subss. (1) and (2) may be obtained only on an application for judicial review under s. 18.1."
[10]
Section 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
provides a thirty-day time limit within which to seek judicial review, the hearing of which, by s. 18.4(1), is to be without delay and in a summary way pursuant to the 1600 series of Rules.
[11]
Section 18.4(2) provides that:
"The Trial Division may, if it considers it appropriate, direct that an application for judicial review be treated and proceeded with as an action."
The test, for allowing judicial review to proceed as an action, is whether affidavit evidence might prove inadequate.
[12]
In the present instance, the proceeding, an action seeking injunctive and declaratory relief which, before the 1992 amendments to the
Federal Court Act
, would have been a correct option, but which now contravenes the
Act
. Further, unless either the action can be deemed an originating notice of motion, or the thirty-day limitation for commencing the proceedings, under s. 18.1(2) can be extended, the plaintiffs will not be able to obtain review leading to possible relief.
Submissions By Counsel:
[13]
Counsel for the plaintiffs submits that the court has the discretion to deem the action to have been commenced by originating notice of motion. He points out that the plaintiffs have dealt with the proceedings expeditiously and that, if they succeed on their motion, there will be no prejudice to the defendants.
[14]
Counsel for the defendants characterizes the error, of an action as opposed to an application for judicial review, as a fatal mistake, subject to the court's jurisdiction to extend time so as to allow an application for judicial review to be taken after the thirty-day limitation period has run.
Consideration Of Case Law:
[15]
While I have in mind the philosophy of the court, that rules and procedure as applied by the court ought to facilitate the normal advancement of cases, I have difficulty deeming the proceedings, which are in direct conflict with the
Act
, to be something which they are not. Rules of court are procedural. This court has the discretion to temper its Rules as may be appropriate and necessary in the interests of justice. But provisions in an act, the 1992 amendments to the
Federal Court Act
in this instance, have both a stronger and a different force and can affect both procedure and substance.
[16]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R. 1, the Federal Court of Appeal considered whether an application ought to be allowed to proceed as an action, for under the
Federal Court Rules
in force at the time, declaratory relief could only be sought by an action.
[17]
The Court of Appeal held that the trial judge, who had decided to allow the proceedings to continue as an action, the respondents not really objecting, in fact had only two options: he could either dismiss the application on the procedural ground that the proceedings ought to have begun as an action, without prejudice to bring an action within the prescribed time, "... or he may, on consent and not merely in the absence of objection, order that the proceeding be deemed to have been properly commenced ..." (p. 4).
[18]
The
Wilson
case took place against a background of legislation and Rules, which have since been amended. However, the case does show that the court, in the past, has taken a fairly hard line and all the more so given that, before the 1992 amendments, there was considerable confusion as to the procedure an applicant should take to seek declaratory remedies and judicial review. In contrast, s. 18(3) of the present
Act
is specific: declaratory and injunctive relief, against an entity such as the Beaver Lake First Nation, must be by way of judicial review.
[19]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , is another example of a hard line taken by a court, in this case the English Chancery Division, where the plaintiff had proceeded by way of an action, rather than an application. Mr. Justice Goulding held that the procedure was an impropriety and in the circumstances it was the duty of the court to put a stop at an early stage to an action which, if allowed to proceed, would by-pass the Rules (see p. 1395). He therefore decided that the action should be struck out as an abuse of process. Granted, while the area of law was the same, our
Federal Court Rules
are quite different. However the case illustrates that these sort of procedural errors are more than a mere technicality and ought not to be taken lightly.
[20]
Mr. Justice Paine, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), faced with a similar fact case, considered the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case and disagreed. The Court of Appeal applied the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case and was upheld by the House of Lords, both judgments, also reported, at [1983] 2 A.C. 237.
[21]
Lord Denning, in his reasons in the Court of Appeal decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , began by saying that while the issue looked as though it were merely a point of procedure, it brought into play some of the fundamentals of English administrative law (p. 251). Lord Denning's brief history of judicial review is interesting in that he traces its evolution; from an area of law with little remedy against wayward tribunals, to a well organized and comprehensive system of law, enabling the courts to properly review the decisions of tribunals and to quash them when things went wrong. He sums up his view as to following the specified procedures:
"Where a good and appropriate remedy is given by the procedure of the court - with safeguards against abuse - it is an abuse for a person to go by another procedure - so as to avoid the safeguards. (p. 254)."
Lord Denning felt that if a complaint were brought by an ordinary writ, without regard to the procedure of the court, it can and should be struck out as an abuse of process of the court.
[22]
The <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case again stresses the need for proper procedure, particularly where the procedure has been legislated. We now turn to two Federal Court cases decided after the 1992 amendments had come into force.
[23]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), Mr. Justice Nadon dealt with an application to strike out a statement of claim as disclosing no reasonable cause of action. The plaintiff had sought declaratory relief and a
writ of mandamus
against a decision of the Passport Office, not to issue a refugee travel document. The declaratory relief was sought by way of an action, rather than by a motion for judicial review.
[24]
Mr. Justice Nadon pointed out that the remedies in subss. (1) and (2) of s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
could only be obtained, as set out in s. 18(3) of the
Act
, by way of a judicial review application and not by way of a statement of claim.
[25]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), is a case similar to <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> an inmate objected to a transfer from a minimum security institution to a medium security institution, voicing the objection by way of statement of claim seeking declaratory relief and damages.
[26]
Mr. Justice Cullen, in striking out Mr. Zubi's statement of claim, referred to ss. 18(1) and 18(3) of the 1992 amendments to the
Federal Court Act
and pointed out that "It is clear from these sections that the 1992 amendments were intended to establish a clear procedure for seeking, inter alia, declaratory relief in this court" (p. 170).
[27]
In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, the defendant, in moving to strike out, stated that it had no objection to allowing a time extension within which the plaintiff might re-file his proceeding as an originating notice of motion. Mr. Justice Cullen, in coming to his conclusion in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> matter, felt that the proper course of action was to follow the procedure laid out by Parliament in the 1992 amendments. He therefore struck out the statement of claim, without leave to amend, but allowing the plaintiff, with the consent of the defendant, to move forward with a judicial review proceeding.
[28]
The <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> cases differ from the present case in that they are both concerned with striking out statements of claim. However, the statements of claim were struck out as nullities in that they could not succeed because the court could not grant the relief sought.
[29]
In considering both the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> decisions, it is clear that the objections made by the defendants, in the context of the 1992 amendments to the
Federal Court Act
and indeed Rule 1602(1), which requires that applications for judicial review be made by originating motion, are not merely procedural and technical, but important to the nature of the proceeding itself. Indeed, as Lord Denning pointed out in his decision in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, referred to above, judicial review, as contrasted with an ordinary action, has some important differences. (see p. 256 and following).
[30]
As Mr. Justice Cullen pointed out in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case (supra) the 1992 amendments require a party, seeking judicial review, to proceed by way of an application, not an action. He went on to indicate that this principle is tempered only by s. 18.4(2) of the
Federal Court Act
, which grants the court the discretion to treat a judicial review application as an action, in appropriate circumstances. However I believe the court does not have the converse discretion to treat an action as a judicial review proceeding.
[31]
In my view it is one thing, in the interests of justice, to temper the effect of Rule 1602, that applications for judicial review be made by originating notice of motion, but quite different to disregard s. 18(3) of the
Federal Court Act
, that the remedies of declaratory relief may only be obtained by judicial review. This is particularly so when the remedy of an extension of time within which to commence judicial review proceedings may be available to the plaintiffs. The application to deem the proceedings commenced by statement of claim to be an application for judicial review is therefore dismissed.
[32]
Having come to this conclusion, I do not need to consider either whether the proceeding should be allowed to continue as an action, or whether the amendments, picking up events which occurred after the date of the filing of the statement of claim, are proper amendments.
[33]
I thank both counsel for their good presentations and subsequent written submissions.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/saf
[End of document]