[1]
MacKay, J.
[orally]: The plaintiff applies for an Order, pursuant to s. 50(1)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7 as amended, to stay execution of an order for costs earlier made by the court. That order was a consequence of judgment rendered after a long trial of a patent action initiated by Mr. Dableh. The motion now seeks a stay pending consideration of the plaintiff's appeal to the Court of Appeal from the decision at trial.
[2]
The matter was heard in Toronto on August 23, 1994 and at the conclusion of the hearing I dismissed the application, with brief oral reasons then given. These reasons restate and amplify the reasons delivered orally.
[3]
Following a twenty-five day trial of the plaintiff's claims of infringement of his patent rights by his former employer, the defendant, my colleague Mr. Justice Muldoon found that while the validity of the plaintiff's patent could not be challenged by the defendant, infringement by the defendant was not established, and he awarded costs to the defendant. That judgment the plaintiff has appealed, though steps to perfect the appeal have not been undertaken.
[4]
The plaintiff also initiated actions in Quebec and in New Brunswick, against utilities in each province which are licensed by the defendant, Ontario Hydro, to use certain technical processes of the defendant which the plaintiff claims infringe his patent interests. In addition the plaintiff has commenced action in the Ontario courts against the defendant for alleged wrongful dismissal from his employment.
[5]
In accord with the Order of Muldoon, J., the defendant has taken steps to have costs taxed. Its claim for costs, now under consideration by a taxing officer of the court, is in the order of $100,000. The plaintiff now seeks to have costs, which are likely to be substantial when finally taxed, remain uncollected, that is that the Order for costs be stayed, pending determination of his appeal by the Court of Appeal. Unless a stay is granted it is said the plaintiff will be in bankruptcy and proceedings in his appeal and the other actions instituted to protect his rights will have to be abandoned.
[6]
The motion is opposed by the defendant. Counsel for both parties agree that this court's test for a stay, of its own orders or of proceedings of other bodies, is that set by Mr. Justice Beetz in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241; 18 C.P.C.(2d) 273; 38 D.L.R.(4th) 321; 25 Admin. L.R. 20, and the analogous test for an interlocutory injunction. For this court, the latter test is that set out by Mr. Justice Stone in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1 (F.C.A.). That test requires that there be a serious issue to be determined by the court, that there be evidence the applicant will suffer irreparable harm, not adequately compensated by damages, if a stay not be granted and subsequently it appears that the applicant's interest ought to have been protected by a stay or an injunction, and finally, that the balance of convenience in all the circumstances favours the granting of a stay.
[7]
In this case, presuming without deciding that the unsuccessful party in a trial judgment may be deemed to have presented a serious issue to the court by initiating an appeal, even without taking steps to perfect that appeal, there is, in my opinion, no evidence that the plaintiff will suffer irreparable harm if a stay of the order for costs not be granted and he should subsequently be successful in his appeal. The significance of costs taxed, when an order for costs is executed upon, as this may affect an unsuccessful party at trial, simply cannot constitute irreparable harm even if that results in personal bankruptcy of that party. Law suits are expensive and not merely in relation to costs taxed against an unsuccessful party. The risk of an adverse order for costs is ever present when litigation is begun. Moreover, if the plaintiff should be successful in his appeal it would be surprising if the order for costs made as a consequence of the judgment at trial is not varied to the benefit of the plaintiff. In these circumstances, he would be unlikely to suffer irreparable harm if he is now required by the defendant to pay costs taxed and he later is successful on appeal.
[8]
With no evidence of irreparable harm the plaintiff simply does not meet the test for stay. In the absence of that evidence, and with no evidence concerning the balance of convenience, despite reference of the plaintiff to the comparative "depths of the pockets" of the parties in this matter, there is no basis on which this court, as an exercise of its discretion, would grant a stay of execution of the order for costs made following trial.
[9]
In my view, no case is made out that in the circumstances of this case the interests of justice would be served by granting a stay. Justice serves the interests of both parties in litigation and the successful party at trial in one action is not to be barred from recovering costs awarded, simply because those costs may make it difficult for the unsuccessful party to seek relief in other actions involving directly or indirectly the actions of the successful party.
[10]
Counsel for the defendant also argued against the application herein, in light of jurisprudence concerning the posting of security for costs and tests developed in relation to the requirements of such security. There is no application before me pursuant to rule 1213 and no suggestion of appropriate security for costs. The plaintiff's motion can best be dealt with in light of the usual standard for considering a stay of an order of this court.
[11]
Though I find no basis for exercise of the court's discretion to grant a stay, and thus ordered that the application is dismissed, I did urge counsel for the defendant to invite her client to consider not executing upon the order for costs made at trial when assessed, pending the outcome of an appeal prosecuted in timely fashion by the plaintiff.
[12]
The defendant asked for costs of this application and appearance in the amount of $1,000. The court ordered costs in favour of the defendant, in an amount of $200.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/saf
[End of document]