[1]
Pinard, J.
[Translation]: This application for judicial review is from a decision on April 8, 1994 by a member of the Public Service Staff Relations Board, acting as an adjudicator of a grievance referred to adjudication pursuant to s. 92 of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-35.
[2]
The respondent is a Community Case Management Officer (WP-03) in the Parole Office in Laval, Quebec and an employee of Correctional Service Canada. On Tuesday, April 28, 1992 and Sunday, May 3, 1992, the respondent received telephone calls at her home from two fellow workers, who were officers of the Laval Parole Office on standby. During the course of these telephone conversations she agreed to provide them with information, despite the fact that she was thus being asked to work after working hours or on a day of rest. The telephone conversation of April 28, 1992 lasted for two minutes, and the call of May 3, 1992 took up 15 minutes of the respondent's time. As a result of these telephone calls the respondent claimed reporting pay under clause M-29.01 of the applicable collective agreement,
Social Welfare Programs
, concluded between the Treasury Board and the Public Service Alliance of Canada. On each of these two occasions the respondent claimed pay amounting to four hours' salary calculated at the overtime rate. This claim was denied and the employer agreed to pay the respondent only for 30 minutes' overtime under clause 19 of the said collective agreement. The respondent accordingly filed a grievance which was referred to adjudication. The adjudicator allowed the grievance and directed the employer to pay the respondent for the time during which she worked at the rate specified in clause M-29.01, which reads as follows:
"M-29.01 If an employee is
called back to work
(a) on a designated paid holiday which is not the employee's scheduled day of work,
or
(b) on the employee's day of rest,
or
(c) after the employee has completed his or her work for the day and has left his or her place of work,
and returns to work
, the employee shall be paid the greater of:
**			(i) the minimum of three (3) hours' pay at the applicable overtime rate of pay for each callback to a maximum of eight (8) hours' pay in an eight (8)-hour period. Such maximum shall include any reporting pay pursuant to clause M20.07 and the Reporting Pay Provisions of clause 19.04(c),
or
(ii) compensation at the applicable rate of overtime compensation for time worked,
provided that the period worked by the employee is not contiguous to the employee's normal hours of work.
**		(d) The minimum payment, referred to in M-29.01(c)(i) above, does not apply to part-time employees. Parttime employees will receive a minimum payment in accordance with M-39.11. (My emphasis)
[3]
The following passages from the adjudicator's decision should be set out:
"First, I consider that during the time when Miss Séguin did the work requested her home became her workplace. By requiring Miss Séguin to do work on the telephone from home the employer was not requiring her to physically return to her usual workplace and was agreeing that Miss Séguin's home would be her workplace for the length of the telephone call. I share the view taken by Miss Séguin's counsel that the Federal Court judgment in
Redden
, supra, can be relied on as a basis for saying that an employee's workplace can be elsewhere than at his usual physical location, and in the instant case I feel that the employee's home became her workplace.
. . . . .
"Additionally, though
Redden
dealt with a case of standby pay, the court appears to have recognized that it was not necessary for an employee to return physically to his usual workplace for it to be said that he had reported to work. It seems to me that the same reasoning is applicable here.
"I feel that although Miss Séguin did not leave home she was called back to work and returned to work.
"It seems to me that the words '[call] back to work' refer to the action by which the
employer indicates to the employee his intention
that he resume work.
"On the other hand, the words 'returns to work' refer to the
acceptance by the employee
of this call back to work.
"In the instant case, the employer's call back to work took the form of a telephone call and the employee's return to work occurred at the point when in answering the employer's call back to work Miss Séguin agreed to do the work requested and undertook to work on the telephone.
"In simple language, the call back to work is an act done by the employer and the return to work an act done by the employee.
"Accordingly, if in response to the employer's call back to work Miss Séguin had refused to do the work requested she could not claim to have returned to work. However, that is not what she did: in response to the employer's call back to work she set to work and in so doing returned to work.
"The English version of clause M-29.01 bears out this reasoning. The words 'If an employee
is called back
to work ... and
returns to work
' lay down two conditions: one condition is met by the employer, namely the call back, and the other by the employee, who returns to work.
"As I pointed out above, the employer did not ask the employee to physically return to her usual workplace. In so doing, it agreed by implication that the employee's home would be the place where she did the work requested; accordingly, it was not necessary for the employee to physically return to her usual workplace for it to be said that she had returned to work. It was sufficient that in response to the employer's call back to work the employee had accepted the call back by setting to work.
"In conclusion, I consider that Miss Séguin met the conditions of clause M-29.01."
[4]
On the one hand, the applicant disputed the adjudicator's interpretation of clause M-29.01 of the collective agreement at issue, submitting that this provision was not applicable because the respondent did not leave her house to do the work requested. The respondent, on the other hand, argued that the adjudicator's interpretation was correct and that in any case as his decision was not patently unreasonable this court is barred from intervening.
Analysis
[5]
This is a case where, in my opinion, judicial restraint must be exercised in dealing with the decision of the administrative tribunal in question. As to such restraint the Supreme Court of Canada said the following per Cory, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 961:
"In expressing the reluctance courts should feel in interfering in decisions of administrative tribunals, McLachlin, J., echoed the dicta of Dickson, C.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Writing for a unanimous court Dickson, C.J., stated at pp. 464-465:
'
A restrained approach to disturbing the decisions of specialized administrative tribunals, particularly in the context of labour relations, is essential if the courts are to respect the intentions and policies of Parliament and the provincial legislatures in establishing such tribunals
...
'A reviewing court, whether under s. 28(1)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
, or under the common law principles of judicial review, should not interfere with the decision of a statutory decision-maker in a case such as this unless the statutory decision-maker makes a mistake of law, such as addressing his or her mind to the wrong question, applying the wrong principle, failing to apply a principle he or she would have applied, or incorrectly applying a legal principle.' (Emphasis added.)
"In summary, the courts have an important role to play in reviewing the decisions of specialized administrative tribunals. Indeed, judicial review has a constitutional foundation.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In undertaking the review courts must ensure first that the board has acted within its jurisdiction by following the rules of procedural fairness, second, that it acted within the bounds of the jurisdiction conferred upon it by its empowering statute, and third, that the decision it reached when acting within its jurisdiction was not patently unreasonable. On this last issue, courts should accord substantial deference to administrative tribunals, particularly when composed of experts operating in a sensitive area."
and, proceeding to explain the meaning of the phrase "patently unreasonable", Cory, J., wrote the following:
"It is said that it is difficult to know what 'patently unreasonable' means. What is patently unreasonable to one judge may be eminently reasonable to another. Yet any test can only be defined by words, the building blocks of all reasons. Obviously, the patently unreasonable test sets a high standard of review. In the
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
'patently', an adverb, is defined as 'openly, evidently, clearly'. 'Unreasonable' is defined as '[n]ot having the faculty of reason; irrational ... not acting in accordance with reason or good sense'. Thus, based on the dictionary definition of the words 'patently unreasonable', it is apparent that if the decision the Board reached, acting within its jurisdiction, is not clearly irrational, that is to say evidently not in accordance with reason, then it cannot be said that there was a loss of jurisdiction. This is clearly a very strict test."
[6]
It is true that in that case the decision of the administrative tribunal in question was covered by a sweeping privative clause, which is not the case here. However, in that same year in
United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local 579 v. Bradco Construction Ltd.
, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 316; 153 N.R. 81; 106 Nfld & P.E.I.R. 140; 334 A.P.R. 140, the Supreme Court of Canada acknowledged that courts should exercise restraint in respect of arbitral awards which interpret a collective agreement, even where there is no privative clause. Sopinka, J., said the following at pp. 337 and 338  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
"In a number of past decisions, this court has indicated that judicial deference should be accorded to the decisions of arbitrators interpreting a collective agreement even in the absence of a privative clause. For example, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Estey, J., commented, at p. 275, with the rest of the court concurring on this point, that:
'the law of review has evolved, even in the absence of a privative clause, to a point of recognition of the purpose of contractually-rooted statutory arbitration: namely, the speedy, inexpensive and certain settlement of differences without interruption of the work of the parties. The scope of review only mirrors this purpose if it concerns itself only with matters of law which assume jurisdictional proportions.'
Although this passage might be taking to suggest that an arbitrator's decision on any question of law may be immune from review, I am of the view that it refers to questions of law in interpreting the collective agreement and not the interpretation of a statute or a rule of common law. I am uncertain as to what is meant by 'jurisdictional proportions' in this context as there is no privative clause requiring that the jurisdictional limits of the tribunal be ascertained in order to determine whether a particular decision is immune from review. I assume, however, that Estey, J., was merely following the language of
Canadian Union of Public Employees, local 963 v. New Brunswick Liquor Corporation
, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 227 ('
CUPE
'), and like cases of the time which did involve privative clauses, and that what he is referring to is the policy of deference with respect to the matters relating to the interpretation of collective agreements which is the stuff of the 'differences' to which he refers."
[7]
A bit further on, at pp. 340 and 341  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Sopinka, J., added:
"Once it has been determined that curial deference to a particular decision of a tribunal is appropriate, the tribunal has the right to be wrong, regardless of how many reviewing judges disagree with its decision. A patently unreasonable error is more easily defined by what it is
not
than by what it is. This court has said that a finding or decision of a tribunal is not patently unreasonable if there is any evidence capable of supporting the decision even though the reviewing court may not have reached the same conclusion (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 687-688), or, in the context of a collective agreement, so long as the words of that agreement have not been given an interpretation which those words cannot reasonably bear (
Bradburn
, supra, per Laskin, C.J., at p. 849). What these statements mean, in my view, is that the court will defer even if the interpretation given by the tribunal to the collective agreement is not the 'right' interpretation in the court's view nor even the 'best' of two possible interpretations, so long as it is an interpretation reasonably attributable to the words of the agreement. Or, as stated by Dickson, J., in
CUPE
, at p. 237:
'... was the Board's interpretation so patently unreasonable that its construction cannot be rationally supported by the relevant legislation and demands intervention by the court upon review?'
See also
PSAC No. 2
(reasons of Cory, J.)."
[8]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 1, at pp. 250 and 251, La Forest, J., also recognized the special consideration that should be given to an arbitrator's expertise regarding matters involving the interpretation of collective agreements:
"This court has stated in previous cases that courts should, as a matter of policy, defer to the expertise of the arbitrator in questions relating to the interpretation of collective agreements; see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . This development is traced in the dissenting reasons of Wilson, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 1340-1342. It is clear that an arbitrator has jurisdiction 'stricto sensu' to interpret the provisions of a collective agreement in the course of determining the arbitrability of matters under that agreement. In that case the arbitrator is acting within his or her 'home territory', and any judicial review of that interpretation must only be to a standard of patent unreasonableness."
[9]
Finally, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  B.C.A.C. 1; 75 W.A.C. 1, Iacobucci, J., considered the whole gamut of rules developed by the courts to determine the applicable standard of review. Accordingly, he wrote the following at pp. 589 to 591:
"From the outset, it is important to set forth certain principles of judicial review. There exist various standards of review with respect to the myriad of administrative agencies that exist in our country. The central question in ascertaining the standard of review is to determine the legislative intent in conferring jurisdiction on the administrative tribunal. In answering this question, the courts have looked at various factors. Included in the analysis is an examination of the tribunal's role or function. Also crucial is whether or not the agency's decisions are protected by a privative clause. Finally, of fundamental importance is whether or not the question goes to the jurisdiction of the tribunal involved.
"Having regard to the large number of factors relevant in determining the applicable standard of review, the courts have developed a spectrum that ranges from the standard of reasonableness to that of correctness. Courts have also enunciated a principle of deference that applies not just to the facts as found by the tribunal, but also to the legal questions before the tribunal in the light of its role and expertise. At the reasonableness end of the spectrum, where deference is at its highest, are those cases where a tribunal protected by a true privative clause, is deciding a matter within its jurisdiction and where there is no statutory right of appeal. See
Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 963 v. New Brunswick Liquor Corporation
, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 227;
U.E.S., Local 298 v. Bibeault
, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 1048, at p. 1089 (
Bibeault
), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
"At the correctness end of the spectrum, where deference in terms of legal questions is at its lowest, are those cases where the issues concern the interpretation of a provision limiting the tribunal's jurisdiction (jurisdictional error) or where there is a statutory right of appeal which allows the reviewing court to substitute its opinion for that of the tribunal and where the tribunal has no greater expertise than the court on the issue in question, as for example in the area of human rights. See for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ."
[10]
It should be noted that at pp. 591 and 592 the same judge also acknowledged that the existence of a privative clause was not conclusive in determining the applicable standard of review:
"Consequently, even where there is no privative clause and where there is a statutory right of appeal, the concept of the specialization of duties requires that deference be shown to decisions of specialized tribunals on matters which fall squarely within the tribunal's expertise. This point was reaffirmed in
United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local 579 v. Bradco Construction Ltd.
, [1993] 2 S.C.R. 316 (
Bradco
), where Sopinka, J., writing for the majority, stated the following at p. 335:
'... the expertise of the tribunal is of the utmost importance in determining the intention of the legislator with respect to the degree of deference to be shown to a tribunal decision in the absence of a full privative clause. Even where the tribunal's enabling statute provides explicitly for appellate review, as was the case in
Bell Canada
, supra, it has been stressed that deference should be shown by the appellate tribunal to the opinions of the specialized lower tribunal on matters squarely within its jurisdiction.
'On the other side of the coin, a lack of relative expertise on the part of the tribunal vis-à-vis the particular issue before it as compared with the reviewing court is a ground for a refusal of deference.'"
[11]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), my brother Cullen, J., of the Trial Division of this court found it sufficient to say that only decisions of this kind which are not supportable by the evidence are subject to judicial intervention:
"In my opinion, having considered the criteria referred to above and the cases from the Supreme Court dealing with the standard of review, I find that the decision of the arbitrator in the case at bar should be accorded considerable or significant curial deference, particularly since it concerns a matter squarely within the scope of the arbitrator's jurisdiction and special expertise. Although I was unable to come up with a pat phrase -- such as 'patently reasonable' -- to describe the kind of decision that demands judicial intercession, it is sufficient to say that only decisions not supportable by the evidence are subject to intervention."
[12]
In the case at bar the specialized nature of the administrative tribunal was not disputed: the decision was rendered by an adjudicator within the area of his expertise, namely the interpretation of a clause of a collective agreement. Although since June 1, 1993 the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, under which the adjudicator acted, no longer contains a privative clause that
Act
still does not provide for any appeal from the adjudicator's decision. The interpretation given to the clause in question by the adjudicator rested largely on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), by the Appeal Division of this court; in that case it was clause M-30.04 of the collective agreement which was being interpreted and the relevant provisions of that clause read as follows:
""M-30.04 An employee on standby who is required to
report for work
shall be paid, in addition to the standby pay, the greater of: ..." (My emphasis)
[13]
Although the particular circumstances of each case and the clauses interpreted differ somewhat the fact remains that in both cases the work of the person employed was done by telephone from home, the employer did not ask the person employed to physically return to the usual workplace, the person employed was able to perform the duties at home and those duties were part of the regular work. Additionally, referring to the French version of the clauses in question the language which has to be interpreted is identical: in
Redden
clause M-30.04 of the collective agreement uses the words "rentrer au travail" (report for work) and clause M-29.01 the words "rentre au travail" (returns to work). Although the adjudicative decisions are not unanimous regarding call-back there was at the time of the decision
a quo
a line of authority holding that the employee did not need to make the journey and be at his usual workplace to be regarded as "recalled to work" (see
Canadian Pacific Limited (Telecommunications Department) and Canadian Telecommunications Union, Division No. 1 of the United Telegraph Workers
, not reported, cited in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Man.), at p. 244).
[14]
In the case at bar, having in mind the law and the facts, I feel I must apply a definite standard of judicial review. Accordingly, without endorsing the particular interpretation adopted by the adjudicator, and while realizing that in future others may interpret clause M-29.01 in question differently, I intend to exercise great judicial restraint and refrain from intervening in an adjudicative decision which, within the limits of the jurisdiction conferred by law, interpreted a collective agreement in a sufficiently rational manner in reliance on the facts in evidence, and did so without infringing the rules of natural justice or procedural fairness.
[15]
The application is accordingly dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/saf