Relief Requested
[1]
Strayer, J.
: The appellant/applicant (hereafer "applicant") appeals the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks of May 31, 1992, allowing the opposition of the opponent/respondent (hereafter "opponent") and refusing the registration of the applicant's trademark Orchard Blends.
Facts
[2]
The applicant filed its application to register the trademark Orchard Blends on August 28, 1985, it being a proposed mark for use in association with "fruit juices, nonalcoholic beverages containing fruit juices and concentrates and other preparations for making the same, namely fruit flavoured crystals". The application was for proposed use. The opponent filed a statement of opposition on January 19, 1987, and an amended statement of opposition on April 29, 1988. It alleged three grounds of opposition: that the proposed mark is not registrable as clearly descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive of the applied for wares; that the applicant is not the person entitled pursuant to s. 16(3)(b) of the
Trade-marks Act
, because as at its filing date the proposed mark was confusing with the opponent's previously applied for trademark Welch's Orchard which had been applied for on October 23, 1984, for use in association with "fruit juices and fruit drinks", the application still pending at the time of the applicant's application; and that the proposed mark is not entitled to registration because it is not distinctive. In his decision of May 31, 1991, on behalf of the Registrar for Trademarks, D.J. Martin of the Trademarks Opposition Board allowed the opposition and refused registration. He found that the proposed mark is not clearly descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive of the associated wares. He found, however, that the applicant had not met the onus on it of establishing no reasonable likelihood of confusion. In applying the criteria in s. 6(5) of the
Trade-marks Act
he found that both the applicant's and the opponent's trademarks are inherently weak with little inherent distinctiveness and no proven acquired distinctiveness. He considered that the length of time that the respective marks had been in use was not relevant, presumably because there was little or no evidence of use of either mark. He also found that the wares and the trades of the parties are identical and that there was a high degree of resemblance between the marks. For these reasons he found that the applicant had not established the lack of reasonable likelihood of confusion. Having reached this conclusion he found it unnecessary to consider whether the applicant's mark is distinctive.
[3]
The applicant appealed that decision and the opponent argued that the member erred in not finding the applicant's trademark descriptive or deceptively misdescriptive. Some new evidence was filed.
Conclusions
[4]
I am entitled to determine whether the Registrar was wrong, but I must also have regard to the knowledge and expertise of the Registrar
in reaching the decision he did. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 67, at p. 68 (F.C.A.).) This is particularly important where no new significant evidence has been produced before the court on appeal. In this case I do not think that anything seriously bringing into question the decision of the Registrar has been filed on appeal. Considering all the circumstances and the new evidence, I am not satisfied that the Registrar was wrong in reaching the conclusions he did.
[5]
I agree with the Registrar that the proposed trademark Orchard Blends is not
clearly
descriptive of the applicant's associated wares. At best it is suggestive (See e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 67 (F.C.T.D.)) of fruit juices, but no more than that. In this respect I agree with the position taken by the applicant and reject the efforts of the opponent to have the Registrar reversed on this point.
[6]
With respect to confusion I agree with the Registrar that the applicant has not met the burden of proof on it to demonstrate that there is no reasonable likelihood of confusion. In this respect I believe the Registrar has correctly assessed the various criteria specified in s. 6(5) of the
Act
and I think that the additional evidence filed before me does not justify a different result.
[7]
The applicant had filed before the Member of the Opposition Board on affidavit of Shirley McDonald with state of the register evidence showing that as of the date of this application there were nine registrations of eight different owners of trademarks including the word "Orchard" for fruit juices (some including other natural products as well). About this affidavit the hearing Member said:
"... However, on my review of the McDonald affidavit, I cannot agree. First, it should be noted that the McDonald affidavit must be given diminished weight since Ms. McDonald did not provide copies of the registrations located nor did she provide complete particulars of those registrations. For example, she did not indicate the basis for registration. Thus, it may be that a number of the registrations are based on use and registration abroad rather than on use in Canada.
"Even if there were no deficiencies in the McDonald affidavit, it would establish at best that, as of the material time (i.e., August 28, 1985), there were nine registrations standing in the name of eight different owners for trademarks including the word 'orchard' for fruit juices and the like. Considering the relatively small number of registrations located and the absence of evidence of use of those marks, I am unable to make any significant inferences about the state of the marketplace regarding such marks as of the material time. In other words, the McDonald affidavit is insufficient to allow me to conclude that the word 'orchard' was in common use as a component of trademarks for fruit juices and the like."
A new affidavit of Shirley McDonald was filed in the hearing before me. It included the actual registrations, with their particulars, of the nine marks on the register prior to the date of the applicant's application and of a tenth of Orchards Hawaii Pog filed and registered after that date. An affidavit of another deponent was filed before me with respect to a few purchases in 1991 of products of third parties bearing the word "orchard" as part of their name. Excerpts from telephone directories were also exhibited to this affidavit showing the use of the word "orchard" in connection with fruit marketing businesses. A further affidavit filed on appeal exhibited a number of excerpts from government publications referring to orchards and orchard trees. I am somewhat mystified by these latter exhibits, but take them to demonstrate that the word "orchard" is not clearly descriptive of the fruit juices and similar products associated with the applicant's proposed trademark.
[8]
It should first be noted that by the very words of s. 16(3)(b) of the
Trade-marks Act
the relevant date for testing confusion with a trademark (like the opponent's) for which registration has previously been filed is the application date for the later trademark: in this case August 28, 1985. Thus the tenth trademark exhibited in the new McDonald affidavit is irrelevant. With respect to the other nine the evidence is not significantly different from that before the hearing member. The formal registrations do not assist me further in knowing what use was being made of these marks at the relevant date.
[9]
I have considered carefully the implications of the recent Federal Court of Appeal decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .] which has been issued since the present appeal was argued before me. Reversing my decision in that case, the Court of Appeal found evidence of the state of the register there to be highly relevant and held that (as I understand it), combined with other direct evidence of use, it demonstrated no likelihood of confusion arising from the appellant's trademark. I have also noted the recent decision of that court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 413, where it also relied on state of the register evidence.
[10]
I have concluded, however, that the hearing Member was correct in his conclusions that the register evidence in this case is not by itself sufficient to show that the state of the marketplace was such in August 1985 that the introduction of another Orchard trademark would not cause confusion with the opponent's trademark. I believe the
Park Avenue
and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> cases are distinguishable. In
Park Avenue
I take it there was other evidence of use by the registered trademark owners: Desjardins, J.A., states that these marks "were shown on the evidence to have been used by such owners ..." (Ibid, at 428 C.P.R.). In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> there were not nine (as in the present case) but over ninety registered trademarks using Nutri, the word in question, at the relevant time. The court also found that there was evidence that Nutri "has been generally adopted and used in the food trade in Canada" (Supra note 3 at 12) [para. 14 of N.R. report]. In my view there was insufficient evidence before the member or before me to demonstrate such use of Orchard in the food trade as in the words of Desjardins, J.A., in
Park Avenue
, to render that word "open to the trade to use". In this I see no reason to depart from the Member's conclusions on the facts.
[11]
With respect to the issue of distinctiveness, as the applicant's trademark has been properly found to be nonregistrable because of probable confusion I find, like the registrar, that it not necessary to embark on a further consideration of the inherent distinctiveness of the applicant's trademark.
[12]
The appeal is therefore dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: David C.R. Olmstead/slm
[End of document]