[1]
Muldoon, J.
: In this case Canadian National Railway Company (hereinafter: the applicant) filed a notice of motion on September 22, 1989, according to which it seeks the following orders:
(a) an order by way of prohibition to prevent the respondents Stephen Cole, Paula Tippett and Edward H. Fox, acting in their capacity as a Human Rights Tribunal, under the Canadian Human Rights Act, from inquiring into a complaint made to the Canadian Human Rights Commission by the respondent Michael Doyle;
(b) an order by way of prohibition preventing these respondents from entering into the said inquiry until final determination of the within matter by this court;
(c) an order that the respondent Commission acted beyond its authority in appointing the tribunal; and
(d) such other relief as this court may deem just.
[2]
The issues are joined by and on behalf of the tribunal and the Canadian Human Rights Commission (hereinafter: the respondents) but not by the respondent Michael Doyle (hereinafter: the employee or the complainant). His interests, then, have been, and are, represented only indirectly by counsel for the respondents. The case came on for hearing in Ottawa on November 20, 1989. The principal body of documented facts before the court and underpinning these proceedings, is defined and expressed in the affidavit and exhibits thereto of Marvin Blackwell, vice-president, Atlantic Region, of the applicant, in Moncton, New Brunswick.
[3]
The employee Doyle had been employed by the applicant in the role of brakeman/yardman since May 29, 1979, prior to December 1983, when he was diagnosed to be an insulin-dependent diabetic. On March 29, 1984, following an examination by the applicant's medical officer, the employee was restricted by the applicant from performing certain of the tasks of his job, such as flagging and mounting and dismounting moving vehicles. These restrictions ought to be viewed in comparison with the full range of the duties, responsibilities and working conditions of those who hold the position of brakeman/yardman, which are set out in Exhibit "N" to Blackwell's affidavit, as follows:
"
What does a Brakeman/Yardman do?
"The Brakeman (male or female) is a member of a train crew involved in train movements to various locations and is required to travel to distant terminals with the train. The Yardman (male or female) is a member of a yard crew involved in switching cars at specific locations, making up trains and servicing industries.
"
Duties and Responsibilities
"The Brakeman/Yardman:
- handles the coupling and switching of cars;
- gives and interprets signals specific to the train or yard movements;
- inspects the condition of equipment and passing trains; checks general yard conditions; takes appropriate safety measures as required.
- operates equipment such as radios, switches and uncoupling devices to facilitate train movement, train operations and car switching;
- displays flags and signals to protect the train in an emergency situation, as stipulated in the operating rules. This may require walking a prescribed distance ahead of or behind the train and remaining there for an extended period of time;
- works with others at train derailments;
- assists passengers on and off train, and ensures that baggage is safely stored;
- patrols passenger cars while in motion, to ensure that order is maintained;
- gives out information regarding train timetable, and announces stations.
"
Working Conditions
"The Brakeman/Yardman:
- works in accordance with established CN safety practices and regulations; must wear prescribed clothing, footwear and protective devices;
- is required to be groomed and dressed as prescribed when working on passenger trains;
- works under hazardous conditions;
- works outdoors in all weather conditions;
- works occasionally in isolation;
- works at different locations, depending on the work assignment;
- is often absent from home terminal for variable periods of time, when assigned to a train;
- works shifts (day, evening or night) on weekdays, weekends and statutory holidays for many years;
- works irregular assignments and hours for several years; is subject to working long hours;
- remains available for duty on an on-call basis 24 hours a day, throughout the year;
- undergoes training and periodic assessment;
- is subject to a probation period.
- is subject to layoff.
. . . . .
"
Who is Eligible?
"Any individual 18 years of age or over may be considered for the positions of Brakeman/Yardman.
"Once you have made the decision to apply for the positions of Brakeman/Yardman, you will be required to:
. . . . .
- take and pass both a medical examination and a physical performance test."
[4]
On March 27, 1984, the same day as that on which the employee was subjected to the medical recommendation imposing the work restrictions, his family physician composed and signed a brief note about the employee, Exhibit "B", stating:
"Under my care for insulin-dependent diabetes - no complication - should be employed as fit for any duty."
The following day, the employee, his local union chairman and an assistant superintendent of the applicant railway company had a meeting to determine work opportunities for the employee. As earlier above noted, it was on the following day thereafter, March 29, 1984, that the employee was advised by letter of the specifics of the working restrictions.
[5]
On May 7, 1984, the employee signed, and on May 17, 1984, the Commission received the employee's complaint form, Exhibit "C", in which the employee complained:
"that my employer is differentiating adversely against me by depriving me of my employment opportunities on the ground of my diabetes, contrary to sections 7 and 10 of the Canadian Human Rights Act."
[6]
Now, the material times for this litigation, as counsel on both sides agreed is the period between about December 3, 1983 when the employee's diagnosis was made, to May 17, 1984, when his complaint was received by the Commission. It thereafter took what seems to be a prodigiously long time, almost five years, for the Commission to get around to appointing the three named respondents as a tribunal under the Act, that is, until April 12, 1989, as revealed by Exhibit "K". Much has happened in that five-year span. It appears that there may be new techniques for monitoring the condition of insulin-dependent diabetics and, it also appears that in September 1988, the employee was restored to his former position and is now in training to become a locomotive driver.
[7]
These developments redound to the employee's benefit, but, since the material time is the span between December 3, 1983 and May 17, 1984, it is apparent, as counsel on both sides agreed, that the appointment of the tribunal will be legally justified or not upon the parties' knowledge of the control of diabetes and the events and jurisprudence arising out of the material times. That is not to say that litigation such as this, and the appointments of tribunals which sometimes generate such litigation, are to become fossilized relics in ancient stone in regard to what constitutes bona fide occupational requirements. The jurisprudence must clearly keep up with the advances of medical and other technological knowledge. With the genuine progress of such knowledge and techniques, it becomes obvious that some of the restrictive occupational criteria of today may be obviated by tomorrow's advances in knowledge and technique.
[8]
The material times herein, however, remain fixed for purposes of this litigation. So the Commission, in order to avoid exceeding its jurisdiction to appoint the inquiry tribunal must do so for proper reasons on legal grounds. Although it would be difficult for anyone to establish a literal excess, or loss, of jurisdiction in face of the power accorded under s. 49(1) of the Act ("The Commission may, at any stage after the filing of a complaint, appoint a ... Tribunal ...") yet, if the Commission seeks to have an inquiry into matters already clearly established and determined by law, or to harass an employer, or for some oblique reason of its, or its officials' own devising then it will be held to be abusing its powers. Such abuse of powers, being of the essence of unfairness and illegality, may be quashed or prohibited by this court, if so found. It ought to be noted that both sides conceded that no new techniques, other than those known to be practical by the Commission, the medical practitioners and the courts during the material times are to be regarded here.
[9]
The employee had been referred in October 1984, by his family physician to a medical specialist, Michael J. McGonigal, MB FRCP (C), of Saint John. This specialist wrote to the Commission on May 8, 1985, Exhibit "E", in response to a request for information of April 25, 1985. The three-page letter is too long to recite in full, but certain basic facts can be gleaned therefrom.
"... At that time [October 1984], I noted that Mr. Doyle had developed Diabetes around Christmas of 1983, and had been on Insulin since that time. I am not aware of his exact presenting symptoms or how high his initial blood sugars were.
. . . . .
"My impression at that time was that he was a very well motivated and well controlled Diabetic and felt that he would do very well.
. . . . .
"I have no reason to suppose that he will be particularly likely to develop weak spells or reactions during the course of his work
but clearly that possibility exists in virtually anybody who is taking Insulin.
. . . . .
[Referring to a paper on medical restrictions on train service employees, sent to the specialist by the human rights official]
. . . . . .
"On page five of this paper, the second paragraph, refers to patients who are on Insulin treatment but who have acceptable blood sugar controls, then a number of restrictions are advisable. These include not driving heavy vehicles or assigning of jobs which require large expenditures of energy in unpredictable periods of time or the assigning of jobs around power driven machinery. From
the description of Mr. Doyle's work, it seems that in fact he falls into these categories, in what his job entails. It may therefore be that he would be excluded from this form of occupation by virtue of his Diabetes
." (emphasis not in original text)
[10]
The above passages from the material before the court are cited for balance. In terms of objectivity, or lack of it, it is noted that those passages are conspicuously absent from the selection of quotations of Dr. McGonigal's letter cited in the Commission's investigation report, Exhibit "G", dated February 26, 1987.
[11]
The respondents here presented evidence to the court appended to the affidavit of Réal Fortin. The exhibits to Mr. Fortin's affidavit are voluminous. Among them are several papers on hypoglycemia in insulin-dependent diabetics, prepared by learned authors for publication in professional and academic journals. These exhibits were also exhibits and the transcript of proceedings at the tribunal hearing of Wayne Mahon's complaint which opened on June 3, 1985. Wayne Mahon's case was subsequently the subject of a s. 28 application to the Appeal Division of this court, somewhat deceptively indexed as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)]. It would more memorably be cited as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  notes the testimony of another medical specialist, Dr. Cornelius J. Toews. The transcript reveals an unfortunately not uncommon antagonism arising between the deponent and the cross-examiner, to be replaced by rather more calm objectivity on the deponent's part when questioned by the chairman (and sole member) of the tribunal. These are the passages worth reciting here, starting at p. 68 of the transcript, page 73 of the respondents' record:
"Mr. Chairman: Well, I guess I was also asking if he  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  was entirely careful in terms of his personal habits, if he still lived a reasonable lifestyle, whether there would not be a problem that he could not control in say, driving a taxi. That is the kind of question I was trying to ask or could it still be beyond his control in the sense of hypoglycemia coming on.
"The Deponent: You are asking me can I envisage a scenario where given his diabetes, length of diagnosis, so on and so forth could he get himself into a situation where he would not be able to take corrective action? Yes, it is possible.
"Mr. Chairman: Even though he was being attendant to his situation?
"The Deponent: Yes, it is possible. It is just reported. We know that. A person who sees a lot of diabetics knows this.
"Mr. Chairman: Even though he always took a chocolate bar?
"The Deponent: Yes.
"The Chairman: And even though he always regulated the balancing items?
"The Deponent: Yes.
"The Chairman: It just could be beyond his control in the given situation?
"The Deponent: Yes.
"Mr. Chairman: I suppose for that matter, obviously diabetics can drive cars but you are saying he could be driving a car down the street, and it is obviously very improbable, but he could have a problem suddenly come on that he could endanger the public?
"The Deponent: Yes.
. . . . .
"
Re-examination by Mr. Duval
. . . . .
"Q. From your examination of Mr. Mahon do you think that Mr. Mahon falls in that particular group of ten percent of diabetics prone to major reactions without prewarning?
A. No."
[13]
As noted, the transcript from which the above recited passages were drawn is the transcript of the Mahon case which was subject to judicial review in 1987 by the Appeal Division of this court.
[14]
In the meanwhile, and indeed on April 27, 1989, a review tribunal to whom the Commission had appealed a decision of a one-member tribunal concerning an insulin-dependent diabetic, rendered its decision. This was about two weeks after the appointment of the tribunal in the present case at bar, but some six and one-half months after the one-member tribunal of first instance rendered its decision in the matter of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  restriction placed upon Mr. Gaetz [an insulin-dependent diabetic] qualified as a bona fide occupational requirement and that the 'real risk factor' in this case is more than a possibility and is certainly more than a hypothetical one. I am satisfied that the present case falls well within the parameters of the Etobicoke and Bhinder cases."
All this was known to the Commission half a year prior to the appointment of the subject tribunal in this case of the employee Mr. Doyle. The cases referred to in the above recited passage are  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[15]
About two weeks after the appointment of the presently impugned tribunal in regard to Mr. Doyle's complaint, as above noted, the review tribunal upheld the first-instance decision in the Gaetz case. Citing the reasons of Mr. Justice Pratte in the Mahon case, and those of Mr. Justice McIntyre in the Bhinder case the review tribunal rejected the Commission's submission to the effect that the employer had a duty to test Mr. Gaetz to determine his specific suitability for continued employment prior to his discharge in August 1985, despite his condition. So it was that in late April 1989, holding that in the circumstances of Mr. Gaetz's job requirements and qualifications freedom from insulin-dependent diabetes and its risks was clearly a bona fide occupational requirement, the review tribunal dismissed the Commission's appeal. That which in many instances evinces virtue can, when pressed to excess, become a fault. It seems that in the case at bar the Commission is becoming persistent to a fault.
[16]
Section 15 of the Canadian Human Rights Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6 (formerly s. 14) provides:
"15. It is not a discriminatory practice if
(a) any refusal, exclusion, expulsion, suspension, limitation, specification or preference in relation to any employment is established by an employer to be based on a bona fide occupational requirement."
The Commission knows this. The Commission knows the applicant's position through correspondence and through the failed conciliation proceeding which preceded the appointment of the impugned tribunal. The Commission well knows that jobs requiring the employee to be physically active and/or mentally alert at critical but unscheduled times have, or had at the material time, a bona fide qualification for anyone employed therein, that he or she be free of insulin-dependent diabetes. That must be at least reasonably necessary to assure the efficient performance of the job's tasks without endangering anyone's personal safety. The tribunal of first instance and the review tribunal in the Gaetz case have made that proposition plain to the Commission. So has the Appeal Division of this court in the Mahon case, above cited. The Commission well knows the principles stated by both the greater and smaller majorities' opinions in the Bhinder case, above cited: "The test does not vary with the special characteristics and circumstances of the complainant" and "A working condition does not lose its character as a bona fide occupational requirement because, apart from paragraph 14(a) of the Act, it may be discriminatory" as well as "Applying the requirement to each individual with varying results would rob the requirement of its character as an occupational requirement and would ignore the plain language of the section, [which would become thereby] effectively read out of the Act". The Commission knows all this, yet it persists in abusing its powers by seeking to push on with a costly inquiry by a tribunal, and quite possibly also, a review tribunal.
[17]
Now, it is plain and true that Parliament has provided for human rights tribunals to make inquiries into matters of alleged occupational discrimination. Therefore the court heeds the salutary words of caution expressed by the then Associate Chief Justice Thurlow in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and by the same distinguished jurist in his later role of Chief Justice in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The court should be slow to pre-empt the Commission and a tribunal, in most circumstances, but rather, ought to permit the process to unfold as, in Parliament's enactment, it should. Even such a salutary rule may have an exception; and in this instance there is a salutary one. It resides in this: where the tribunal's decision, in order to be correct in law and evidence, amounts to a foregone conclusion, the inquiry should be prohibited, as here, because it will be useless, expensive, disruptive, inconvenient and abusive. What is clear to the court in this instance ought surely to be clear to the Commission and any tribunal.
[18]
The Mahon decision of this court's Appeal Division is as clear as can be, and in persisting in creating inquiries into matters already decided, at least for the material times, the Commission sadly trivializes the cause of human rights and thereby also abuses and exceeds its jurisdictional powers.
[19]
The three-judge court in the Mahon case was unanimous in the result, and two of the judges, Messrs. Justices Pratte and Hugessen, were unanimous in expression. This is not a judgment to be ignored as wrongly decided, as the respondents' counsel urged. Mahon was a Canadian Pacific trackman whose duties and working conditions may have been somewhat more arduous than Mr. Doyle's, but in obvious effect the lifting, pulling, standing, mounting and dismounting moving vehicles, coupling and uncoupling railway cars and locomotives in close proximity with moving trains and equipment in all types of weather conditions were, like the disease suffered by both men, quite indistinguishable. The Commission knows all that.
[20]
In that Mahon case, [1988] 1 F.C. 209, Mr. Justice Pratte wrote the unanimous majority expression. At p. 213, Pratte, J., reviewed the medical evidence, some of which is actually recited earlier herein, having been exhibited here by the respondents. At page 215, he characterized the tribunal's conclusions in this way:
"The Tribunal decided that the requirement that a trackman be not an insulin-dependent diabetic was not a
bona fide occupational requirement
. After referring to the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Tribunal concluded that, even if the refusal to employ unstable diabetics might be justified, the risks involved in employing a stable diabetic like Mr. Mahon were not sufficiently great to warrant the refusal of Canadian Pacific Limited to employ him.
"The Tribunal's decision, therefore, assumes that it is possible for an employer to readily distinguish, among insulin-dependent diabetics, those that are stable from those that are not. The applicant does not challenge that assumption. It attacks the Tribunal's decision on grounds that relate to the manner in which the Tribunal determined that the risks involved in employing stable diabetics as trackmen were not sufficiently great to warrant the refusal to employ them."
Then at pp. 221 and 222 of the Mahon case, Pratte, J., is reported in these significant passages:
"The decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [above cited] is authority for the proposition that a requirement imposed by an employer in the interest of safety must, in order to qualify as a bona fide occupational requirement, be reasonably necessary in order to eliminate a sufficient risk of damage. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , on the other hand, the Supreme Court upheld as a bona fide occupational requirement one which, if not complied with, would expose the employee to a 'greater likelihood of injury - though only slightly greater' (at page 584). The effect of those decisions, in my view, is that a fortiori, a job-related requirement that, according to the evidence, is reasonably necessary to eliminate a real risk of a serious damage to the public at large must be said to be a bona fide occupational requirement.
"The decision under attack, it seems to me, is based on the generous idea that the employers and the public have the duty to accept and assume some risks of damage in order to enable disabled persons to find work. In my view, the law does not impose any such duty on anyone.
. . . . .
"Once it had been found that the applicant's policy not to employ insulin-dependent diabetics as trackmen was reasonably necessary to eliminate a real risk of serious damage for the applicant, its employees and the public,
there was only one decision that the Tribunal could legally make
, namely, that the applicant's refusal to engage the respondent Wayne Mahon was based on a bona fide occupational requirement and, as a consequence, was not a discriminatory practice.
"I would, for these reasons, allow the application, set aside the decision under attack and refer the matter back to the Tribunal for decision on the basis that, in view of the findings it has already made as to the risks of hiring insulin-dependent diabetics as trackmen,
the only conclusion that can legally be drawn
is that the applicant's refusal to hire the respondent Wayne Mahon was based on a bona fide occupational requirement and, as a consequence, was not a discriminatory practice.
"Hugessen, J.: I agree." (emphasis not in original text)
[21]
It is in light of the foregoing passages, in the background of the confirmed Gaetz inquiry and the interpretations of s. 15(a) of the Act pronounced by the Supreme Court of Canada in its Etobicoke and Bhinder decisions, that it is clear that yet another inquiry into the same issues arising at or around the material times ought surely to be prohibited. It is an abuse of the Commission's powers and an excess of jurisdiction. Enough is enough. The applicant, moreover, conducted itself with utmost propriety. Because, according to the applicant's counsel, the appointed tribunal agreed to await the outcome of this litigation before embarking on the inquiry, the court does not need to prohibit it in that regard. The applicant's counsel also indicated that the applicant seeks no costs of this proceeding. So, because the Commission has acted beyond its jurisdictional authority, here, in appointing this particular tribunal, the respondents Cole, Tippett and Fox, and all others, acting in their capacity as a human rights tribunal under the Canadian Human Rights Act are prohibited from inquiring into the complaint made to the Canadian Human Rights Commission on May 17, 1983 by Michael Doyle, or into any similarly grounded complaint arising from events prior to Michael Doyle's installation in the job in which he is presently employed by the applicant railway company, without prejudice, of course, to any differently grounded complaint, which has already actually been formally lodged with the Commission by the complainant, Michael Doyle.
Application allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]