[1]
Simpson, J.
[orally]: The applicant is seeking a stay of the execution of a deportation order. The applicant is a citizen of Iran who arrived in Canada in 1986 and claimed refugee status. Since then, events have unfolded as follows:
[2]
In September, 1993 a conditional deportation order was issued. In April, 1994, the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "CRDD") refused the applicant's refugee claim; he then sought leave and judicial review. In August, 1994 the applicant married a Canadian citizen. In October/November, 1994 the applicant's request for leave to appeal the CRDD's decision was denied. Thereafter, at some point prior to September, 1995, the applicant received a negative Post Determination Refugee Claimant in Canada decision.
[3]
In September, 1995, the applicant applied for leave to seek landing from inside Canada pursuant to s. 114(2) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-3 (the "H&C Application"). This application was supported by his wife and, at the time it was made, the applicant was not aware that the deportation order was going to be executed.
[4]
On October 12th, 1995, the applicant received a letter calling him to a removal interview. On October 19th, 1995, he was advised in the removal interview that, even though his H&C Application was pending, the removal officer had no discretion and had instructions to conduct removal as quickly as possible. On October 24th, 1995, the applicant sought leave and judicial review of the removal officer's decision to proceed with removal expeditiously in spite of the outstanding H&C Application. The applicant will be removed to Iran tomorrow unless a stay is granted.
[5]
As a preliminary matter, I want to make some observations about the nature and status of applications based on humanitarian and compassionate grounds ("H&C applications"). There is no timetable either by legislation or by policy for their disposition and it appears that, in normal cases, an initial interview will not be held until approximately three months after an H&C application has been made. The respondent has taken the position that, although as a matter of practice it will render decisions on H&C applications prior to the execution of removal orders, it does not consider that an H&C application is a legal bar to a removal.
[6]
This evidence is found in Exhibit B to the affidavit of Donald May sworn on October, 1995 and filed on behalf of the respondent (the "May Affidavit"). Exhibit B is a memorandum dated September 18th, 1995 (the "Memorandum"). It is directed to Managers of Canada Immigration Centres in the Ontario Region and is sent by Ontario's Director General. It indicates that the underlying rationale for the respondent's legal position is that H&C applications remain alive after parties are removed, and, if the result is positive, a visa officer (under procedures yet to be established) will facilitate the party's return to Canada. The Memorandum concludes by saying that the entire issue of processing H&C applications is under review.
[7]
It is noteworthy that the text of the May Affidavit appears to contradict the Memorandum in that in paragraph 8 of his affidavit May denies the existence of a general policy to suspend removal pending the outcome of H&C applications.
[8]
With this background the issues before me are:
(1) Did the removal officer make a decision which is properly the subject of judicial review;
(2) If so, is there a serious issue to be decided;
(3) Is there irreparable harm; and
(4) Does the balance of convenience favour a stay.
Issue (1)
[9]
The removal officer was engaged in the execution of a pre-existing removal order. As noted, the evidence is contradictory about whether the respondent had a practice or policy of suspending removal to await the outcome of H&C applications. What is clear, however, is that removal officers have some discretion under the
Immigration Act
concerning, among other things, the pace of the removal once they become involved in making deportation arrangements. This is so because the May Affidavit indicates in paragraph 8 that removals are to be carried out as soon as "reasonably" practicable. This language is also found in s. 48 of the
Immigration Act
. In my view, this language covers a broad range of circumstances which might include a consideration of whether it would be reasonable to await a pending decision on a H&C application before removal. Accordingly, the removal officer does appear to have some decision-making power which is subject to judicial review.
Issue (2)
[10]
No affidavit has been filed by the removal officer. However, the applicant's affidavit indicates that the removal officer had been told that she was to deport people as quickly as possible and that she lacked any discretion. This evidence arguably raises a serious issue. It appears that the officer's discretion may have been improperly fettered by the directive she received.
Issue (3)
[11]
Normally, as Exhibit "B" to the May Affidavit points out, people who are removed pending a decision in an H&C application are not irreparably harmed. If the result is positive they can easily return to Canada. If a marriage is involved a Canadian spouse can endure a short separation or follow the deported spouse with the expectation that the couple will return to Canada together. There is no question that, on the facts of this case, the application for H&C relief will be sympathetically considered pursuant to the respondent's spousal policy which recognizes that the separation of spouses in genuine marriages entails hardship.
[12]
The difficulty in this case is that the applicant will be deported to Iran. I have been told that Canada has a visa officer in Tehran. However, given conditions in Iran, I have no confidence that the applicant will ever meet our visa officer. Further, if his H&C Application is successful, I have no reason to believe that he will be allowed to leave Iran and return to Canada even if we permit him to arrive here. Finally, it is inconceivable to expect the applicant's wife, who is a Canadian citizen, to follow her husband to Iran particularly as that country was her birthplace. I have, therefore, concluded that, on the unusual facts of this case, irreparable harm has been demonstrated.
Issue 4
[13]
In the circumstances of this case there is reason to assume that an H&C decision will be available shortly. Given that a deportation may, in this case, render a positive decision meaningless, I have concluded that the balance of convenience favours the applicant.
Conclusion
[14]
For all these reasons, an order will go staying execution of the deportation order against the applicant until after his H&C Application has been decided.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/saf
[End of document]