[1] Pinard, J.
[Translation]: By her application for judicial review the applicant is seeking to set aside a decision made on October 16, 1992 by Kal Malhotra, Chief of Appeals, Revenue Canada, in order to vacate in part only, and not entirely, the interest on the balance of her tax payable for the 1987, 1988 and 1989 taxation years.
[2] In principle a taxpayer's obligation to pay interest on his tax payable or on provisional instalments due results from the operation of the
Income Tax Act
, R.S.C. 1952, c. 148, as amended ("the
Act
"), and in particular s. 161(1) and (2):
"(1) Where at the time after the day on or before which a taxpayer is required to pay the remainder of his tax payable under this Part for a taxation year,
(a) the amount of his tax payable for the year under this Part
exceeds
(b) the aggregate of all amounts each of which is an amount paid at or before that time on account of his tax payable and applied as at that time by the Minister against the taxpayer's liability for an amount payable under this Part for the year,
the person liable to pay the tax shall pay to the Receiver General interest at the prescribed rate on the excess computed for the period during which that excess is outstanding.
(2) Interest on instalments. In addition to the interest payable under subs. (1), where a taxpayer who is required by this Part to pay a part or instalment of tax has failed to pay all or any part thereof on before the day on or before which the tax or instalment, as the case may be, was required to be paid, he shall pay to the Receiver General interest at the prescribed rate on the amount that he failed to pay computed from the day on or before which the amount was required to be paid to the day of payment, or to the beginning of the period in respect of which he is required to pay interest thereon, under subs. (1), whichever is earlier."
[3]
Additionally, s. 220(3.1), added by S.C. 1991, c. 49, par. 181(1), applicable to the 1985 and following taxation years, gives the Minister of National Revenue the following discretion:
"3.1 the Minister may at any time waive or cancel all or any portion of any penalty or interest otherwise payable under this Act by a taxpayer or a partnership."
[4]
In the case at bar the applicant, relying strictly on her good faith and ignorance of the
Act
, cited s. 220(3.1) of the
Act
above in an effort to require the Minister of National Revenue to cancel all the interest concerned.
[5]
As the court is here dealing with an administrative decision of a discretionary nature it simply needs to consider whether, through his statutory representative, the Minister fufilled his duty to act fairly towards the applicant. (The authority to take decisions under s. 220(3.1) of the
Act
has since March 11, 1992 been conferred on the Chief of Appeals, Revenue Canada, by s. 900(4)(b) of the
Income Tax Regulations
.) Good faith and ignorance of the law may certainly be relevant considerations in the exercise of such a discretion, but they cannot as such simply override the discretion.
[6]
In the case at bar the Minister's statutory representative, Kal Malhotra, cancelled part of the interest corresponding to the period of loss of the notice of objection dated March 26, 1990; additionally, as regards inclusion of the capital gain in the applicant's income for her 1987, 1988 and 1989 taxation years and processing of her objection file, the time periods for which the statutory representative refused to cancel the interest due were the results of the applicant's error in reporting her income for the said years. In my opinion, the Minister's statutory representative duly exercised in good faith and as part of an adequate decision-making process described in his affidavit the discretion conferred by s. 220(3.1) of the
Act
above, after giving the applicant several opportunities to present her arguments and after considering all the relevant facts.
[7]
As to guidelines No. 92-2, referred to by the applicant, it should be noted that such general guidelines are not to be elevated to the status of legislation, thereby limiting the decision-making authority in the exercise of the discretion conferred on it by an enabling
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 558 (S.C.C.), at 561). Having said that, the decision a quo seems to me to have been made in keeping with the spirit of the guidelines in question.
[8]
There is accordingly no basis for allowing this application for judicial review.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/slm