[1]
Walsh, J.
: On a motion heard in Toronto on March 3, 1986, defendant seeks for directions as to trial and more specifically that the trial of an issue be held relating to the validity of Canadian Patent No. 928,544 at issue in these proceedings having regard to the granting and issuance of Argentine patent no. 171,180 on September 10, 1969, before commencing the trial in respect of the other matters at issue herein. It was contended in argument that since this issue might decide the action for which plaintiffs have presented a motion setting down for trial anticipated to last 10 days, it would be in the interest of the parties and save the time of the court if this preliminary issue were disposed of first. Plaintiffs oppose this, stating that this will merely delay the setting down of the action for trial and that it is unlikely that defendant would succeed on this issue which is only one of many issues raised in the defence, the principal issues being obviousness and prior art. Defendant will be arguing at trial inter alia that plaintiffs' Canadian Letters Patent No. 928,544, filed December 4th, 1969, and issued June 19th, 1973, for an invention entitled Paper Forming Arrangement, is invalid and void in that
a) contrary to the provisions of s. 28(2) of the Patent Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-4, the application was not filed before the issue of any patent of the inventor or his legal representative for the same invention in any other country, having regard to the issue of Argentine Patent No. 171,180 on September 10th, 1969, or alternatively that
b) contrary to the provisions of s. 55 of the Patent Act the petition of the applicant in respect of the Canadian Letters Patent contained a material allegation which was untrue in that it stated:
"Your Petitioner requests that this application be treated as entitled to the rights accorded by s. 29 of the Act having regard to the application of which particulars are set out below, and represents that the said application, the first application, for patent for the said invention filed in any country by Your Petitioner or anyone claiming under Your Petitioner.
"Application for patent entitled 'Improved Paper Forming Arrangement U.S. Serial No. 795,954 filed February 3rd, 1969'."
whereas the first application for patent for the invention was in fact filed in Great Britain on January 24th, 1968, as No. 3724/68.
[2]
During the course of argument a table was submitted by defendant's counsel showing the history of the patent. While it was not filed as an exhibit but only used in argument, it indicates that U.K. Patent Application 3724/68 was filed on January 24th, 1968, with respect to provisional specifications, with complete specifications on January 23rd, 1969, the patent being issued under No. 1262091 on February 2nd, 1972. An Argentinian Patent 171,180 filed February 13th, 1969, issued September 10th, 1969, was based on the priority from United Kingdom 3724/68.
[3]
U.S. Application 795,954 filed February 3rd, 1969, was given as priority for Canadian Patent Application filed December 4th, 1969, which led to the patent in suit 928,544 issued June 19th, 1973.
[4]
In argument in answer to this chart plaintiffs' counsel points out the United Kingdom Application 3724/68 which was given as priority for Argentinian Patent 171,180 dealt with claims 2 and 3 only, whereas the Canadian Patent claim priority which gave as priority U.S. Patent No. 795,954 dealt with claims 1, 2 and 3. If they were for the same patent certainly Canadian Patent 928,544 filed on December 4th, 1969, omitted any mention of Argentinian Patent 171,180 issued prior to this filing on September 10th, 1969, and based on priority from U.K. 3724/68 basing its claim to priority from U.S. application 795,954 filed on February 3rd, 1969, and further without making any mention of the United Kingdom application 3724/68 for which complete specifications were filed on January 23rd, 1969, also prior to the Canadian application.
[5]
These defects in the Canadian Patent Application if in fact the same process is involved may well give rise to a serious legal argument as to the validity of plaintiffs' Canadian patent. In another action between the same parties dealing with patents for another section of the Paper Making Machine, a judgment reported in (1984), 78 C.P.R.(2d), considered at pages 20 and following the effect of erroneous statements in Canadian Patent Applications. Reference was made to the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in which Thurlow, J., as he then was, held at page 141 that an improper claim to convention priority based on the U.S. Application was not a material allegation on the petition which had rendered the patent void, as the inventor would still have been entitled to a patent even if he might not have been entitled to the benefit of an early filing date based on convention priority. A discussion then followed as to whether the wording of the form now used would change the result of this judgment.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], but the Trial Court was sustained on the misrepresentation issue. In that case however it was only s. 55 of the Act which was in issue and the arguments dealt with erroneous claims as to convention priority, whereas in the present case s. 28(2) is also invoked dealing with the failure to mention the Argentinian patent which had already been issued. It may be argued, however, that the Canadian Application filed on December 4th, 1969, was filed within twelve months of the application for the Argentinian patent on February 13th, 1969, which would appear to bring the Canadian Application within the exception of sub-paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of s. 28. These are not issues to be decided on the present motion, however, and are only referred to with a view to attempting to determine whether defendant would be likely to succeed if this legal issue were set down for hearing before the trial of the action on the merits.
[6]
It is of course always desirable in the interest of all parties if anything can be done without prejudice to either party to shorten the duration of a trial by virtue of preliminary decision. Rule 474 deals with setting down a preliminary determination of a question of law but the issue which defendant wishes to raise as a preliminary issue is not an issue of law but of mixed law and fact, even if it would dispose of the action should defendant succeed on it.
[7]
Rule 327 permits the court to direct the trial of any issue but deals with issues arising out of motions.
[8]
Rule 341 deals with special applications for judgment referring in sub-paragraph (b) to issues "in respect of which the only evidence consists of documents and such affidavits as are necessary to prove the execution or identity of such documents, without waiting for determination of any other question between the parties". This rule seems to have no application in the present case. In the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Rule 341 was discussed by Justice Thurlow, as he then was, at page 438:
"The scope and purpose of this Rule were recently discussed in the reasons of this court in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In general, procedure under it may properly be invoked only where on the admitted facts one party or the other is entitled to judgment and no fairly arguable question of law as to the right of that party to judgment remains to be decided or where the right of a party to judgment flows as a matter of law from the effect of documents."
Here the essential facts as to the identity of the patents referred to in the issue are not admitted.
[9]
Rule 473(1) requires the consent of all interested parties before special directions for the procedure can be given.
[10]
In the present case the issue which defendant now wishes to raise as a preliminary issue was never even referred to in the pleading but arose from admissions during the course of discovery.
[11]
Plaintiffs' counsel in opposing the motion referred to jurisprudence including the case of Central Canada Potash Co. Limited and Attorney General of Canada et al., [1974] 6 W.W.R. 374, in the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, in which although the Saskatchewan Rules permitted an order such as that sought by defendant, the judgment at page 376 referred to the judgment of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that the judge must have some evidence which will make it at least probable that the issue will put an end to the action. The plaintiff is not to be harassed at the instance of the defendant by a series of trials, each trial taking issue on every link of the plaintiff's case. That is not the meaning of the rule as I understand it, but it may properly be applied in such a case as that I have stated, where the judge has serious reason to believe that the trial of the issue will put an end to the action."
At page 377 the judgment refers to a decision in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , in which Macdonald, J., of the Supreme Court of British Columbia had before him an application that certain issues of mixed fact and law be tried before other issues in the action. He granted the order but the judgment of Chief Justice Culliton in the Central Canada Potash case, which refers to it, states:
"While the learned Justice granted the order, I think he properly set forth the principles to be followed in the determination of such an application. He said, in effect, that separate trials should be granted only in exceptional cases, and in cases where the issues to be tried separately are simple, and that there should be some evidence which makes it at least probable that the trial of the separate issue will put an end to the action.
"I think the principle is accepted by all courts that a piecemeal trial of an action must be avoided. It appears as well that courts are reluctant to have a separate trial of an issue if, in the disposition of that issue, all or most of the evidence will be called that would have been called to dispose of all the issues."
In the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  422:
"Experience has shown that seldom, if ever, is any advantage gained by trying some of the issues before the trial of the others is entered upon, and certainly in this case the result of adopting that course is most unsatisfactory.
"If the result of the preliminary trial in his case, whichever way it had resulted, would have put an end to the controversy, or if the trial judge had reserved to himself the further trial of the action in case a further trial should be necessary, it would have been different."
Again on the same page:
"It is far better, I think, that the erroneous steps which have been taken should be retraced, and that the case should go down to trial again, when all the questions of law and fact will be tried at the same time, and one judgment pronounced on the whole case."
In the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , dealing with an application to set down an issue of law for determination pursuant to Rule 474 I referred at page 119 in connection with delay in making the motion.
"Plaintiff points out, not without justification, that it is somewhat belated for defendants to seek the determination of the question of law after the pleadings have been completed and an application has been made for discovery of an officer of defendant companies."
In the present case proceedings were instituted in April 1983 and discoveries are substantially completed with the possible exception of a few outstanding answers, so that in fact plaintiff has set down a motion seeking a date for hearing, but it is only now that defendant seeks to determine as a preliminary issue the validity of plaintiffs' patent resulting from the statements in the application for same, which is only one of the issues in dispute, although admittedly if defendant succeeded on it, this might well result in the action being dismissed.
[12]
Rule 488 referred to by defendant in support of its motion has no bearing on the matter. We are not here dealing with two or more causes of action but merely with a variety of defences raised against one action for infringement of patent; it would not appear to be desirable to deal with it piecemeal, even though time would be saved if defendant's contentions on this issue were sustained. In any event there would most likely be an appeal resulting in further delay of the action for infringement. The case of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , can also be distinguished. In that case Justice Mahoney allowed the parties to apply under Rule 483 to set down a special case for hearing in lieu of trial. This was to be on the basis of an agreed statement of facts and issues.
[13]
In the case of Zwicker and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  I set down an action for decision by virtue of a preliminary question of law pursuant to Rule 474(1)(a), but the issue was a clear cut one as to whether plaintiff's claim was time barred by virtue of the provisions of s. 2 of the Statute of Limitations of Nova Scotia.
[14]
Applying this jurisprudence to the facts of the present case, it is by no means certain that defendant will succeed on the issue which it wishes to have decided as a preliminary issue, and even at the risk of requiring a full trial when the action might be disposed of at trial on this issue, it is desirable that this issue should remain as only one of many issues to be raised in this highly complex litigation and that the evidence and argument in support of it should be dealt with by the trial judge at that time. Defendant's motion will therefore be dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David C.R. Olmstead/klf
[End of document]