[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for judicial review, to set aside the decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board, Convention Refugee Determination Division, made on December 18, 1992, certified by the Registrar of the Board by notice of decision dated January 8, 1993, that the applicant is not a Convention refugee. The application was heard in Toronto on August 12, 1993, when decision was reserved. After consideration of submissions then made an Order
was
issued dismissing the application. These are written reasons for that Order, filed in accord with s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended.
[2]
At the time of his hearing by the board the applicant was 29 years old, a citizen of Iraq, of Kurdish origin, who arrived in Canada on April 1, 1992, and claimed Convention refugee status on the basis of his fear of persecution in his homeland because of his race, nationality, political opinion and membership in a particular social group.
[3]
The Board in its decision concluded for a variety of reasons that it was satisfied that there is a reasonable possibility that the applicant would be persecuted by Iraqi authorities should
he
be returned to territory under their control. However, it found that there was open to the applicant an Internal Flight Alternative ("IFA") if he were to return to territory in northern Iraq which is under the control of the Kurds, and thus it was not persuaded that he had good grounds for fearing persecution for one of the reasons stated in the Convention refugee definition in s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
. It is the finding that there is an IFA in the area within Iraq under control of the Kurds that gives rise to this application for judicial review.
[4]
The applicant agrees that he has no fear of persecution by his fellow Kurds. The issues here concern the Board's assessment of changed circumstances in Iraq and the stability and effective authority of the Kurdish regime on the ground in northern Iraq, findings crucial to its conclusion that an IFA exists. Those findings are said to be based upon misapprehension of some of the applicant's testimony, and failure to consider or to properly assess evidence before the Board. In particular it is said that evidence of instability of the Kurdish government, which the Board found to be a de facto government in northern Iraq though not recognized by any foreign government, and evidence of the inability of the Kurdish government to offer protection was ignored or improperly assessed, so that the Board erred in law.
[5]
The applicant cites James Hathaway on
The Law of Refugee Status
(Butterworths, Toronto, 1991) in relation to the IFA alternative (at p. 134), and in relation to a change in country circumstances (at pp. 200-203). Relying on the former reference it is here urged that evidence before the Board indicates that internal safety is unpredictable in the area in northern Iraq now controlled by the Kurds, and with reference to the latter, changes in country circumstances, it is urged that the change must be of substantial political significance, truly effective and durable, conclusions which it is urged the evidence before the Board here would not support.
[6]
In considering the IFA alternative the panel in this case made reference to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 81 (F.C.A.), at 90 where the court stated
"... there may be several established authorities in the same country which are each able to provide protection in the part of the territory controlled by them, protection which may be adequate though not necessarily perfect ..."
The Board here found such circumstances to exist within northern Iraq under Kurdish control. In doing so, it referred to the standard set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), that the Board must be satisfied on a balance of probabilities that there is no serious possibility of the claimant being persecuted in the part of the country where it finds an IFA exists, and that conditions in that part of the country are such that it would not be unreasonable in all the circumstances for the claimant to seek refuge there.
[7]
In applying the test of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the Board refers to testimony of the applicant, to his belief "that it would not be safe for him to return to northern Iraq as the situation remains unstable because of pressure on the area by Iraqi
forces
and by the Turkish authorities", factors which were taken into consideration by the Board, and it referred as well to documentary evidence supportive of its conclusion that the new Kurdish government appears to be stable. Its conclusion is that the applicant could return to "northern Iraq (Kurdistan)" without fear of persecution by the authorities there.
[8]
That conclusion rests on the Board's assessment of a change in circumstances in Iraq since the applicant fled. In relation to a change in country circumstances my colleague Mr. Justice McKeown in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) declined to adopt the test set out in academic writings, that is, that there be fundamental and significant change of proven durability. Rather he followed the principles enunciated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) and
Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at what got the refugee into trouble and look at the changes in conditions in the country that affect the refugee's particular situation and determine if there is a reasonable chance of persecution".
[9]
In my view that is the process that the Board followed in considering the claim of Mr. Tawfik in this case. Having found a change in circumstances, with some portion of northern Iraq under de facto control of an elected Kurdish government, the Board found that area provided an IFA for the claimant. Having considered the submissions of counsel and reviewed the record before the Board, in particular those portions referred to by counsel for both parties, I am not persuaded that the Board here ignored the evidence before it. Its decision may mistakenly represent evidence of the applicant in testimony about the threat of Iraqi action within territory in northern Iraq said to be under Kurdish control but it refers to documentary evidence as well. In so doing, its references are said to be selective, including portions which support its conclusions and ignoring portions which do not. Yet both supporting and nonsupporting references are often included in the same document, referred to by the Board, and in my view its conclusions from that evidence cannot be said to be unreasonable. There is no necessity for the Board to refer in detail to all of the evidence before it (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)). The Board is one with recognized expertise, and unless its conclusions of fact from all the evidence before it can be said to be capricious or perverse, this court may not intervene.
[10]
Had the difficult decision the Board was required to make been mine to make I might have reached different conclusions, but that is not the test in an application for judicial review. The test, so far as this case is concerned, is whether the Board erred in law, or whether its conclusions were erroneous findings of fact made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard to the material before the Board (ss. 18.1(4)(c) and (d),
Federal Court Act
. Generally the weight to be given to evidence is a matter for the tribunal's proper discretion. Unless that discretion can be said to be unreasonably exercised, this court will not intervene.
[11]
I am not persuaded that the Board ignored evidence before it, or that the assessment of evidence by the Board was unreasonable, or that its conclusions of fact can be said to be perverse or capricious or without regard to the evidence before it. In my view, the conclusions reached by the Board were open to it in the proper exercise of its discretion in considering the evidence before it.
[12]
Included in documentary evidence filed on behalf of the applicant is an affidavit of a solicitor concerning the decision of another board/panel, in another case based on evidence adduced before that panel, which concluded, at about the same time the decision here was reached, that an IFA did not exist for a Kurdish-Iraqi within northern Iraq. It is acknowledged that that decision is not binding on the panel in this case, which was required to make its own decision based on the evidence before it. Yet it is urged that it illustrates that different decision-makers may come to different and inconsistent conclusions in cases which at least on their surface appear to bear similarities. It is unfortunate if members of the Immigration and Refugee Board are left without some current information developed by the CRDD itself about changing country circumstances that would be of assistance to different panels in assessing the broad and underlying circumstances upon which any determination of changes in country circumstances or of the existence of an IFA must inevitably be based. Nevertheless, that does not assist the applicant in this case. The Board in each case must make its determination on the basis of the evidence before it.
[13]
Since I am not persuaded that the Board erred in law or that its decision can be said to be based on findings of fact made in a perverse or capricious manner, or without regard to the material before it, I dismiss the application for judicial review.
[14]
No questions were proposed by counsel in this case for certification for consideration by the Court of Appeal and no questions are certified.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Jocelyne M. Caissie/kaw
[End of document]