[1] McKeown, J.
: The issue is whether the Board erred in not providing the applicant with a proper opportunity to present his evidence on the past persecution and in not determining whether there was a well founded fear of past persecution.
[2]
In my view the Board did not provide the applicant with a full and fair hearing of his claim. I am in sympathy with the Board in trying to limit the amount of time applicable to any matter before it, but the Board must observe the principles of natural justice. The Board continually and repeatedly prevented the applicant from presenting his evidence relevant to persecution prior to 1990 in an organized fashion. Counsel was prepared to accede to this request if the Board agreed there was past persecution. The Board stated it accepted what was in the PIF of the applicant but refused to inform the applicant's counsel whether, in the members view, it constituted past persecution. Furthermore the Board reached no conclusion on whether there was past persecution in its decision. While I agree that the primary question in this matter is whether there was a well founded fear of future persecution, this cannot be decided in the matter before me without determining if there was past persecution.
[3]
In this case the definition of Convention refugee in s. 2 is important and ss. 2(2)(e) and 2(3). The Board has ignored s. 2(3).
[4]
As Noel, J., stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Authorities:
"The other issue with which the Board was confronted with was whether the applicant could have a well-founded fear of persecution as a result of his encounter with the L.T.T.E. The Board, in my view, failed to deal with this issue all together. The Board states in its reasons that the L.T.T.E. was harassing the claimant to deter him from becoming an informer. The issue, then, was whether these acts of harassments, taken cumulatively, constituted persecution, and whether the applicant had a reasonable prospective fear of persecution by reason of these acts. These questions were simply ignored."
It is not good enough for the Board to list a series of facts in their decision without determining whether the acts taken cumulatively constituted persecution and whether the applicant had a reasonable prospective fear of persecution by reason of these previous acts. Notwithstanding changed circumstances in Bulgaria, the facts prior to 1990 should not have been restricted to those set out in the PIF but should also include the relevant ones from the oral evidence. On the circumstances of this case there is reason to be concerned that the Board did not consider these other facts. It is also no answer to say that the Board allowed the applicant to put into evidence all evidence relating to past persecution when it is clear from the transcript that the Board members were not interested, constantly interrupted and prevented counsel from proceeding in an orderly fashion.
[5]
Although it is not necessary to this decision, the Board has misstated and ignored evidence relating to the implausibility of the two matters related by the applicant and dealt with at pp. 9 and 10 of its reasons. In particular the Board has ignored evidence that the UDF was not even founded at the time of the first physical attack and the Trade Union may have been formed only on the same day. There is documentary evidence which indicates the limited effectiveness of these two organizations which should be weighted by the Board. Furthermore the applicant's problems arose with the KDC, the State Security Police and not the local police.
[6]
The application is granted. The decision of the board dated January 6, 1992 is set aside and this matter is referred back to the Immigration and Refugee Board for redetermination by a differently constituted panel in accordance with the reasons herein.
Application allowed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/saf
[End of document]