[1]
Simpson, J.
: This application is for judicial review of the decision of a visa officer, (the "Officer") who was employed by the Canadian Consulate General in Buffalo, New York. Her decision is dated May 23, 1994, and it denied the applicant's application for permanent residence (the "Decision").
The Facts
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of India whose application for permanent residence as an assisted relative was received by the Canadian Consulate General in Buffalo, New York, on February 5, 1990. The applicant entered Canada in 1981 as a visitor, however he was discovered working illegally at a carwash. He then made a claim for Convention Refugee Status, which he later withdrew on his return to India. He entered Canada again in 1987 and has been living here since that time. In 1991, he made a second claim for Convention Refugee Status, which he also subsequently abandoned. The applicant worked legally as a machinist at a company in Mississauga, Ontario from 1988 until the company went bankrupt in 1990. Mr. Singh has not been employed since then. Because the applicant does not have permanent resident status, any employment opportunity he identifies must first be certified by the Canada Employment and Immigration Commission ("CEIC"). Certification is only available if there are no Canadians qualified for the position.
[3]
At the initial screening of the applicant's documents, the Officer awarded the applicant 63 points. As a result, he was invited to attend at the Consulate for an interview. It was held on June 8, 1992.
[4]
In her initial screening and at the interview, the Officer assigned the applicant the following points:
Factor
Initial Screening
Interview Results
Age
10
10
Occupational Factor
5
10
Specific Vocational Preparation
11
15
Experience
6
6
Arranged Employment
10
0
Demographic Factor
5
8
Education
9
9
English
7
5
French
0
0
Bonus
0
10
Personal suitability
n/a
0
TOTAL
63
73
[5]
The points awarded for occupational factor are predetermined according to the particular occupation and, as the demand for machinists in Canada apparently increased by the time of the interview, the applicant's score also increased from 5 to 10. As the applicant's employer had gone bankrupt, he lost the 10 points originally awarded for "arranged employment". However, he made up for this by having his uncle execute an Undertaking of Assistance, and he was thereby awarded 10 "bonus" points. However, at the interview, the applicant spoke English poorly and required his cousin's assistance. Accordingly, the Officer concluded that Mr. Singh's English skills were not good and she reduced his score from 7 to 5. The personal suitability factor is not assessed at the initial screening stage, however at the interview, the Officer chose not to award any points for this factor.
[6]
Following the interview, the Officer's notes indicate that the applicant was given 60 days to submit "updated letters of employment". In response, letters dated June 10 and June 11, 1992 were submitted. They offered the applicant a machinist's job on the condition that he had landed immigrant status or a valid work permit (the "Offers"). The Offers were not for positions which had been certified through the CEIC. This meant that the applicant could not accept them unless i) they were so certified or ii) he became a landed immigrant.
[7]
Although the applicant's interview was in June of 1992, the Officer's Decision was not made until May of 1994 and was not communicated to the applicant until October of 1994. During the 28 month period between the interview and communication of the Decision, the applicant's solicitor sent twelve letters to the respondent requesting information about the status of the applicant's file. The respondent replied twice with form letters indicating that the matter was proceeding "normally".
The Decision
[8]
The Officer communicated her Decision to the applicant by means of a letter he received in October of 1994. Her letter indicated that Mr. Singh had received the necessary 70 points. She then discussed the application of s. 11(3) of the
Immigration Regulations, 1978
, and informed the applicant that it allowed a visa officer to refuse to issue a visa, even though the applicant had accumulated sufficient points. The Officer stated that Mr. Singh had been in Canada for a substantial amount of time, but had not acquired reasonable language skills, had not sought substantial employment opportunities, and therefore did not appear to demonstrate the motivation, initiative, adaptability and resourcefulness required to successfully establish in Canada. She informed Mr. Singh that she was therefore denying his application, as he came within the inadmissible class of persons described in s. 19(2)(d) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the "
Act
").
The Issues
[9]
Against this background, the applicant raises the following five issues:
1. Did the duty of fairness oblige the Officer to reinterview the applicant in view of the two years which intervened between his interview on June 8, 1992 and the Decision of May 23, 1994 which he received in October 1994?
2. Did the Officer rely on an irrelevant factor when she gave the Offers little weight because they were not certified by CEIC?
3. Did the duty of fairness oblige the Officer, having undertaken to receive updated letters of employment within 60 days of the interview, to notify the applicant that she attached little weight to them because they were conditional Offers?
4. Was it reasonably open to the Officer to conclude from the applicant's failure to secure employment in the period from 1990 to 1992 that he was unmotivated when the Officer's notes do not indicate that any questions were asked about his job search efforts in that period?
5. On the facts of this case, was poor English an economic factor properly considered by the Officer in the exercise of her discretion under section 11(3) of the
Regulations
?
Issue 1
[10]
In my view, fairness requires that an applicant receive a timely Decision. What that means will vary with the circumstances of each case. I have no doubt, however, that a 2½ year delay between an interview and notification to the applicant of the Decision is unacceptable where there are no special circumstances which account for the delay.
Issue 2
[11]
In the exercise of her discretion, the Officer was directing her attention to the applicant's ability to successfully establish himself in Canada. This is a forward-looking exercise. In my view, to accord his Offers little weight because they were not certified by CEIC, was to apply an irrelevant consideration. The Officer accepted that the job Offers were bona fide. As such, they demonstrated that, once landed, the applicant had good employment prospects. The fact that he could not accept the Offers prior to landing was irrelevant.
Issue 3
[12]
The Officer's interview notes indicate that certified job Offers were not discussed. It was simply agreed that the applicant would send letters of employment to the Officer within 60 days of the interview. That he did, and, in the circumstances, it was incumbent on the Officer to notify the applicant if the documents he provided were insufficient to fulfil her requirements.
Issue 4
[13]
The Officer's notes disclose no factual basis for her conclusion that the applicant's failure to secure a job in the two years prior to the interview was caused by lack of motivation. She did not interview him about his job search efforts. Without information of this kind, she could not reach a well founded conclusion about his motivation.
Issue 5
[14]
The applicant had worked as a machinist for two years and had secured the Offers with poor English language skills. It was therefore clear that he could be employed with minimal spoken  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) at 362-363  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; revd. [1994] 1 F.C. 639; 164 N.R. 257, revd. (F.C.A.) at 650  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1995] 1 S.C.R. 725; 179 N.R. 70 (S.C.C.), it was held that by Robertson, J.A., in his dissent in the Court of Appeal that:
"In short, I am of the view that when deciding persons' ability to successfully establish themselves in Canada the determination criteria must be
restricted to matters relating to their ability to make a living
."
[15]
Justice Robertson's view was upheld by the Supreme Court of Canada. There will be cases in which languages skills will impact on an applicant's ability to make a living but, on the facts of this case, language did not appear to be an obstacle to the applicant's employment.
Conclusion
[16]
For all these reasons, the Officer's Decision will be set aside. The matter will be referred back for redetermination by a different visa officer. If the appropriate fee is paid within 30 days of the date of the order herein, the reconsideration is to take place at another visa office. At the reconsideration, the applicant is to be prepared i) to discuss and document his job search efforts since 1990 and ii) to demonstrate the "radical" improvement in his English described in his affidavit sworn on November 25, 1994.
Application allowed.
Editor: David Weir/sg
[End of document]