[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This application for a Writ of Prohibition came on for hearing at Toronto, Ontario, on January 13, 1986. At issue is the interpretation of s. 52 of the Immigration Act:
"52.(1) A removal order shall not be executed where
(a) the execution of the order would directly result in a violation of any other order made by any judicial body or officer in Canada; or
(b) the presence in Canada of the person against whom the order was made is required in any criminal proceedings and the Minister stays the execution of the order pending the completion of those proceedings.
"(2) A removal order that has been made against a person who was, at the time it was made, an inmate of a penitentiary, gaol, reformatory or prison or becomes an inmate of such an institution before the order is executed shall not be executed until the person has completed the sentence or term of imprisonment imposed or as reduced by a statute or other law or by an act of clemency."
[2]
The applicant has had an interesting and complex history, but for the purposes of this application, only one or two salient facts are relevant. A Deportation Order was made against the applicant on April 6, 1984. The Order was stayed for a five year period by the Immigration Appeal Board on March 25, 1985, and the stay was rescinded on December 4, 1985. On June 5, 1985, a Probation Order in respect to the same applicant was issued by His Honour Judge Lorenzo DiCecco at Owen Sound, Ontario.
[3]
The Minister has an obligation to execute any valid Deportation Order. The issue is whether s. 52 permits or compels him to defer that responsibility so as not to interfere with the terms of a Probation Order. I had occasion to consider this precise problem in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the conclusion that the Minister can only defer if the applicant is subject to a judicial order containing specific provisions which would be violated were the Deportation Order to be executed:
"To my knowledge, there have been two previous occasions on which judges of this court have dealt with this argument. In the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  dismissed a similar application for lack of evidence of any Court Order which would necessarily be violated by the execution of a Deportation Order. The record is sparse but it appears that the accused was released on bail upon an undertaking to appear at trial. It is not clear whether he was in custody and therefore whether a Judicial Release Order was ever executed. The appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal was dismissed without reasons.
"Subsequently,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Persaud also known as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  J., made a brief reference to the Locke decision and went on to distinguish the Persaud case since, in his view, there was evidence before him of an Order requiring the applicant to perform certain obligations which would be rendered impossible by execution of the Deportation Order. I agree with Mr. Justice Mahoney's analysis of the matter, although due to the special circumstances of the Persaud case, I am not bound by his decision. The Reasons to which I refer were issued on October 14, 1981, at which time Mr. Justice Mahoney ordered an adjournment of the matter to permit the parties to present further argument on whether what is now s. 52(1)(b) constitutes a complete answer to the applicant's case. The matter was never argued because by letter dated October 20, 1981, counsel for the Crown advised the court that the charges which formed the basis for the Release Order were dropped during the course of the preliminary hearing held on October 5th and 13th, 1981. Accordingly, Nadira Persaud was discharged and at Toronto, on November 9, 1981, upon consent, the Persaud motion was withdrawn.
"To repeat, however, I agree with the conclusion reached by my colleague and must find that the Order which is the subject matter of this application was executed by a duly constituted Provincial Judge and obliges the applicant to appear in court at Toronto on a specific date, which he would be unable to do if deported. It follows that the execution of the Deportation Order would directly result in a violation of an Order made by a judicial officer in Canada, as that language is used in s. 52(1)(a).
"The Crown also contends that since s. 52(1)(b) deals specifically with the presence in Canada of the applicant for the purpose of criminal proceedings, that case must be excluded from consideration in s. 52(1)(a). I am not satisfied that the argument sustains. First of all, the use of the word 'or' at the end of paragraph (a) compels me to conclude that Parliament intended subsections (a) and (b) to deal with different situations. Secondly, subparagraph (b) appears to have redundancy within itself since it requires both the presence in Canada of the person against whom the Order is made for the purpose of criminal proceedings as well as a stay of execution by the Minister. It seems to me rather fundamental that the Minister has the authority to withhold a Deportation Order or to stay its execution in more cases than those involving the presence of the intended deportee for criminal proceedings, either as an accused or a witness. This specific provision in subsection (b) must therefore be taken as an indication of Parliament's expectation that the Minister would defer his authority to deport to the larger role of the intended deportee in the administration of criminal justice. In any event, it is clear that the two subsections address different concerns. Subsection (b) may deal with an accused person or witness where no Court Order is involved. Subsection (a) addresses itself specifically to direct violation of an Order of a judicial body or officer in Canada. In the earlier decisions, there was no evidence of a Court Order containing specific requirements which the applicant would be prevented from fulfilling if deported."
[4]
I do not propose to repeat the full text of the standard form of Probation Order which was attached to the affidavit of the applicant. There are only four conditions attached to it which might come to the applicant's assistance in this submission. The first is that the applicant report to and be under the supervision of a Probation Officer or other person designated by the court. The second is that he abstain from the consumption of alcohol and drugs. The third is that he make reasonable efforts to find and maintain suitable employment. Fourth, he is not to enter the municipal limits of the City of Guelph at any time during the term of the Probation Order and further that he shall take treatment by way of drug therapy that is available while he is in custody and thereafter while on Probation at Brantford Referral Assessment Centre or whatever other treatment centre is recommended.
[5]
No Probation Officer has been designated by the court and nothing in any of the other conditions compels the presence of the applicant in Canada or his attendance in court at a specified time and place. Accordingly, the Probation Order does not meet the test which I laid out in the Williams decision and as a result, there is no obligation on the part of the Minister to defer in his responsibility to execute a valid Deportation Order against the applicant.
[6]
The application is therefore dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]