[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This matter is concerned with the result of a reference for an accounting of profits. I was appointed by the Associate Chief Justice to entertain this application rather than a referee in order to eliminate one level of appeal allowing for considerable savings in time and money to both parties.
[2]
Following my designation in the spring of 1992, I heard 17 motions in open court or by teleconference mostly relating to undertakings and questions and answers which arose during the course of discovery being conducted by both parties. I would like to note at this time that the parties appeared before this court on other interlocutory matters on at least 50 occasions between February of 1986 and the spring of 1992. As referee I attended for four days in Finland in order to arbitrate and help resolve the many accounting problems which had arisen. In late 1993 and early 1994, I entertained the formal reference which lasted 22 days including the adducing of evidence and final arguments.
[3]
This was undoubtedly a most expensive, lengthy and difficult reference and one which clearly underlines the pitfalls of granting the remedy of an accounting of profits other than in exceptional and appropriate circumstances and after due deliberation by the court. For example, before the 22 day session began it was revealed that both parties had already expended in excess of 2.1 million dollars in professional accounting fees alone. I will elaborate this view more fully as my reasons unfold.
[4]
The plaintiff Beloit Corporation is a large U.S. manufacturer of paper making machines; Beloit Canada Ltée/Ltd. is a wholly owned subsidiary and licensee for Canada of all patents held by the Beloit Corporation. Valmet Oy, the defendant, is a Finnish company headquartered in Helsinki and also manufactures paper making machines. It is somewhat more diversified than the plaintiffs as it owns or is the major shareholder in a number of subsidiaries in the United States and Canada which manufactures other items such as hoods and computer technology related to the paper industry. The parties are among the six or seven major producers of paper making machines worldwide.
[5]
This accounting of profits arose by reason of the defendant's infringement of the patent owned by the plaintiffs with respect to "the press section" of paper making machines. The patent deals primarily with the realignment of rolls and felts in the press section which improves dryness and strengthens the paper and as a result it can increase the speed of paper making machines from 3,000 to 4,000 feet per minute. At issue is the sale by the defendant of four paper making machines which included the infringing press section. The sales were made to Abitibi-Price, Crown Zellerbach, MacMillan Bloedel and Great Lakes Products Ltd. and occurred between 1979 and 1981. When manufactured and sold paper making machines are usually made up of four main sections:
1. The head box;
2. The forming section where the water and fibres are spread on a forming wire;
3. The press section, with which this action is concerned, where the mixture is pressed between rollers to remove water;
4. The drying section in which the partially dried paper then passes over hot drums to remove further water by evaporation rather than by pressing.
[6]
Though there are other sections such as calenders and winders, the evidence revealed that these items, though sometimes included in the make up of a paper machine, are generally sold as separate components.
History Of The Litigation
[7]
The plaintiffs commenced an action against the defendant on March 11, 1976, alleging infringement of their patent rights. In a Statement of Defence dated May 11, 1978, the defendant counterclaimed for a declaration of invalidity of the plaintiffs' patent.
[8]
In the main action, Walsh, J., was faced with determining which of the two competing patents was valid, the one owned by Beloit Corporation, filed November 26, 1973 and issued November 8, 1977, or the Valmet Oy patent filed December 1, 1972 and issued July 29, 1975, both of which refer to "a press assembly" in a paper machine. The plaintiffs alleged infringement of their Tri-Nip press section by the defendants' sale of its Sympress II press section. The trial lasted 14 days. In his decision, reported at 78 C.P.R.(2d) 1, Walsh, J., refers to the fact that Beloit has sold 68 Tri-Nip press sections worldwide since 1973, of which 23 were sold in the United States and 14 in Canada. During the same period, other competitors, including Valmet Oy, had sold worldwide approximately 51 press sections of similar configuration. Though he found the plaintiffs' patent appeared to have been invented somewhat sooner than the defendant's, he was also of the opinion both patents should have been put in conflict in the patent office and one or the other would necessarily have been struck from the register. In any event, his final conclusion was that both patents should be expunged.
[9]
Beloit Canada Ltd. launched an appeal and in a decision rendered February 10, 1986, reported at 64 N.R. 287; 8 C.P.R.(3d) 289, the Federal Court of Appeal found the plaintiffs' patent to be valid and infringed by the defendant. Hugessen, J., writing for the court, went on to state at p. 302 C.P.R.:
"plaintiffs are entitled to damages or an accounting of profits, as they may elect, and a reference shall be had for the determination thereof following such election unless the parties can otherwise agree;"
[10]
He also enjoined the defendant from manufacturing, using or selling infringing press sections. In its opening remarks the Court of Appeal also noted "this appeal concerns two patents granted for the same invention to two different parties" and it recalled that the patent office did not place the applications in conflict and a patent issued to both parties.
[11]
I feel it is important to note at this time what the Court of Appeal wrote at page 292 C.P.R.:
"What is claimed as novel and inventive in the Tri-Nip is the
combination of previously known elements
in the design of a high-speed press section consisting of:
1. Three dewatering nips before the first open draw;
2. A double felted first nip;
3. A pick-up felt F1 passing through the first two nips with no transfer of the web between the nips;
4. The first and second nips being on a common roll R1; and
5. The second and third nips being on a common roll R3." (My emphasis)
[12]
In March of 1984, the defendant, along with Canadian General Electric, incorporated a new company in Canada called Valmet-Dominion Inc. in which it retained 65% of the total issued shares. In October 1986, Teitelbaum, J., found both the defendant Valmet Oy, and Valmet-Dominion Inc. in contempt of the above-noted judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal [6 F.T.R. 241]. He was of the view that Valmet Oy, having been enjoined from manufacturing, selling or delivering in Canada the Sympress II press sections, was prohibited from doing so through its subsidiary Valmet-Dominion Inc. He further enjoined Valmet-Dominion Inc. from manufacturing, using or selling the infringing press section.
[13]
The Federal Court of Appeal set aside the trial judge's finding of contempt by decision dated February 1, 1988 and reported at 82 N.R. 235; 20 C.P.R.(3d) 1. It found that Valmet Oy had not induced its subsidiary to infringe the patent nor had it unduly influenced or controlled the decision making process of the subsidiary. Finally and more importantly, since Valmet Oy was in fact only selling the components, i.e., press rolls, to its subsidiary, it could not be infringing the patent. Mr. Justice Pratte wrote at page 14 C.P.R.:
"That patent was a combination patent, a patent for a new arrangement or disposition of the elements comprising a press section. Those elements were well known and everyone could manufacture and sell them without infringing the patent. Moreover, it is well established that there is no infringement of a patent in selling an article which does not in itself infringe the patent even when the vendor knows that the purchaser buys the article for the purpose of using it in the infringement of the patent."
[14]
Shortly after the Court of Appeal's decision upholding the validity of the plaintiffs' patent, discoveries of representatives of the defendant company commenced. A series of disputes arose between counsel with respect to the scope of the interlocutories. Counsel for the defendant went before the court seeking to limit the sphere of questioning. He further submitted that since the plaintiffs had been awarded "damages or accounting of profits as they may elect ...", but had not yet indicated what they intended to do, discovery should not proceed.
[15]
In a decision rendered by the Court of Appeal on June 2, 1987, it was held that no further discovery should take place until such time as the plaintiffs elected their remedy. This decision is reported at [1987] 3 F.C. 171; 80 N.R. 264; 16 C.P.R.(3d) 92.
[16]
On June 10, 1987, the plaintiffs filed with the court the following simple document:
"
Plaintiffs' Election
"In accordance with the judgment of the Federal Court of Appeal dated June 2, 1987, the plaintiffs hereby elect an accounting of profits."
[17]
No action was taken by the defendant to dispute the plaintiffs' election. However, subsequent to the filing of the document, numerous motions were brought by both parties, particularly the defendant, in an effort to have the terms of the reference defined. Such efforts appear to have been futile. Finally, an order was issued by Pinard, J., of this court dealing with certain areas of discovery. This was appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal.
[18]
In the interim, by decision dated March 23, 1990, and reported at (1990), 34 F.T.R. 229; 30 C.P.R.(3d) 281, Walsh, J., stayed further interlocutory proceedings since this court, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  be invalid. Accordingly, all matters were stayed until such time as the Court of Appeal made a final determination.
[19]
On June 4, 1991, the Federal Court of Appeal rendered a decision setting aside the trial judge's findings in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  to the Court of Appeal at which time the parties sought additional clarification with respect to production of documents and the scope of questions. Within the text of the Court of Appeal's decision dated September 10, 1992, reported at (1992), 144 N.R. 389; 45 C.P.R.(3d) 116, there were discussions as to what extent the defendant must provide information with respect to profits earned. Hugessen, J.A.,wrote at pages 119-120 C.P.R.:
"The motions judge reversed the senior prothonotary on this point and disallowed all questions in this category. While he did not say so expressly, he seems to have accepted the defendant's argument, strongly urged before us, that the plaintiff's only entitlement was to profits arising directly out of the sale of infringing press sections. In our view, he erred in so doing. We can see no reason in principle why a patentee, whose property has been wrongly appropriated through infringement, should not recover
all
the profits, direct and indirect, derived by the infringer from his wrongful infringement: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 20; 15 C.I.P.R. 115 (F.C.T.D., per Reed, J.). In the present case, the plaintiff is entitled to the profits resulting from the defendant's infringement. Questions as to whether any proportion of the profits earned by the defendant on the sales of noninfringing parts of paper machines was due to such machines having infringing press sections incorporated into them, and the amount thereof, if any, are difficult questions of fact. There may be similar questions arising out of the after sale provision of parts and services. All of these will, in due course, have to be determined by the experienced trial judge who has now been appointed as referee. To make that determination he will need a lot of information about those sales. The senior prothonotary's decision allowing certain questions in this category should allow plaintiff to lead evidence which will aid the referee in his task. That decision should not have been overturned by the motions judge and should be restored."
[20]
The court also held that Valmet should disclose all profits derived from the sale of the press sections, entire paper machines, profits from the activities of other related companies as well as financing or subsidies received by the defendant from the Finnish government. As a result of this decision the plaintiff embarked on a protracted and detailed discovery. Both parties became more belligerent and uncooperative. Some of the lack of cooperation and procrastination arose from tactical errors of counsel as well as from misleading advice provided by accountants. More details on these observations further are provided further on in these reasons.
The Issue And Arguments
[21]
The issue now before me is whether the plaintiffs are entitled to an accounting of all profits realized by the defendant on the sale of the four paper making machines or only those profits derived from the sale of the infringing press sections.
[22]
The plaintiffs approach their demands based on the principle the defendant has improperly received or withheld their property or profits and is required to restore them. It is argued the defendant has become a trustee of what rightfully belongs to the plaintiffs. According to the plaintiffs, their property, the trinip technology, was the driving force behind the infringing sales in question. Since the machines in question were sold as a unit and it is not possible to apportion the profit relating only to the infringing press section, the plaintiffs maintain they are entitled to all of the profits earned by Valmet Oy on the sale of the entire machines.
[23]
It is also submitted that, in calculating the net profit from the sale of the entire machines, the differential accounting approach should apply as opposed to the full cost accounting. That is, only direct production costs such as labour and material should be considered; all fixed costs such as depreciation of building and machinery, energy, municipal taxes, etc., which would normally be included in the cost accounting method, should not be considered. In addition, the plaintiffs claim other incremental revenues generated through the sales of related equipment, rebuilds, spare parts, maintenance, service and erection profits, government subsidies, foreign exchange gains, income from subsidiaries relating to these sales, increased marked shares, as well as prejudgment interest and earnings from positive working capital. This last item, as I understand it, is the earnings generated by available capital to the defendant company as advances are made by the purchasers less the direct costs incurred in the differential accounting approach.
[24]
The defendant submits that only those profits derived from the sale of the infringing press sections should be awarded to the plaintiffs. It argues there is sufficient evidence before the court to apportion amounts attributable to the press section from the entire machine and that in equity the plaintiffs should only be entitled to that profit. It is submitted the driving force behind all sales was in fact the improved wet end or Symformer that the defendant manufactured. Valmet is prepared to concede that in the calculation of net profit, the differential accounting approach should apply. However, it argues that while the plaintiffs may be entitled to remuneration from positive working capital, it should not be at the rate suggested or calculated by them. The defendant maintains that the positive working capital benefits should be allowed up to the termination of the contracts or when payment in full has been received from the purchasers and this should be in lieu of other interest that the plaintiffs are claiming. Only prejudgment interest from those dates forward should be allowed. All other claims, it is argued, would be inequitable and would amount to unjust enrichment for the plaintiffs.
The Evidence
[25]
Of the 22 days of reference, 17 were directed to the hearing of viva voce evidence. Six witnesses testified on behalf of the plaintiffs and 12 for the defendant. Most of the time was devoted to accounting experts for both parties who gave prolonged and detailed testimony. As well, they submitted lengthy reports and calculations.
[26]
Appearing on behalf of the plaintiffs were the accountants as well as Mr. Merle Hauser, a long time employee of Beloit Corporation who held many positions during the course of his employment and is presently Senior Vice-President responsible for corporate marketing worldwide. Mr. John Frisch, an independent expert knowledgeable in paper machines also testified on behalf of Beloit. The defendant called three senior executives of the Valmet Oy corporation, two managers of subsidiaries, one independent expert, Mr. Borjé Walshstrom, the accountants, and four retired executives who were directly involved in their respective companies acquisition of the paper machines from Valmet.
[27]
To begin, I shall deal with the accounting expertise and attempt to explain the need for such lengthy and protracted reports and analysis. This was an accounting of profits and it was the responsibility of the defendant to disclose, as best it could, all of the profits related to the sale of the machines and, as requested, all other incremental revenues relating to the sales. From the outset, there was a great deal of reluctance on the part of counsel for the defendant. It was not until he was ordered by the Court of Appeal in June of 1991 to provide more details that the discoveries made any progress.
[28]
Prior to that however, a counsel acting for the plaintiffs who is no longer involved in this matter, had travelled to Helsinki to initiate the discoveries but met with very little success. At his insistence the parties attended at the head office of the defendant rather than at the plant premises located some 200 kilometres away from the capital where relevant files and detailed documents would have been more readily available for examination. Hence, little headway was made. Discoveries were pursued in Montreal through Mr. Siiteri, a Valmet executive. He attempted to transport with him sufficient documents to provide the necessary information required by the plaintiffs. All these approaches met with little success. It became evident, and I so ordered, that it would be best for all parties to attend at the premises of Valmet's plant in Finland.
[29]
The Court of Appeal's decision in June of 1991, that the plaintiffs were entitled to "all the profits direct and indirect", derived by the defendant as a result of its infringement, obliged Valmet Oy to produce invoices and books of accounts that related to the sale of the paper machines with the infringing press sections. It also required the defendant to produce invoices on all transactions related to these purchases be it with respect to services rendered, spare parts sold, or any other dealings that may have generated a profit. Counsel for the defendant was reticent to provide such disclosure, apparently maintaining throughout that the plaintiffs were not entitled to any other productions except those relating to the sale of the infringing press sections. Reluctantly he produced documents concerned with the sale of the entire paper machine maintaining throughout that their relevance would eventually be decided on the reference. It was only after I was called upon to intervene and ordered production relating to incremental transactions that defendant's counsel agreed to comply.
[30]
Nevertheless, I find as a fact that it was extremely difficult, if not almost impossible, for Valmet to produce all detailed documents and so-called back-up invoices that were requested by the plaintiffs. This is not surprising given these machines were sold between 1979 and 1981; at that time both parties held patents; in 1984 this court found both patents invalid; it was not until 1986 that the Court of Appeal reversed this finding and not until June 1987 that the plaintiffs elected an accounting of profits.
[31]
More significant is the fact the trinip technology at this stage had met with worldwide use. There were no disputes with respect to patents or press section monopoly in any other jurisdictions. As Walsh, J., pointed out, there were 23 machines with trinip press sections sold in the United States and another 51 worldwide which had been built by Valmet Oy and other competitors. I was informed that Canada was the only jurisdiction where any challenges arose or in which a patent was upheld.
[32]
Furthermore, evidence was tendered that document retention requirements by both the Finnish government and generally accepted accounting principles prevailing in that country, compel preservation for six years. When the plaintiffs finally made their election for an accounting of profits, 12 years had elapsed from the beginning of the litigation and six years from the last recorded sale. I am nevertheless satisfied that during and following my attendance in Finland, the defendant company cooperated to the fullest in attempting to be of assistance to all accountants, counsel as well as to the referee.
[33]
I fully appreciate a great deal of time had to be devoted by the accountants for both parties to reconstruction of the books of account relating to the manufacture of the machines and many additional sales and services. Some of these difficulties were no doubt caused by defence counsel's initial reluctance to provide the material. On the other hand, a considerable amount of work which took the form of schedules and profiles prepared by the plaintiffs' accountants was uncalled for, particularly those dealing with subsequent sales of spare parts. They needlessly cast doubt on the veracity of the schedules prepared by the defendant's accountants concerning the sale of spare parts subsequent to the installation of the machines. Though it is true some of the details were late in being produced by the defendant, I am satisfied they are accurate and there was no reason for the plaintiffs' experts to question them. As a matter of fact, in cross-examination it was finally admitted that all had been disclosed. In addition, the plaintiffs spent considerable effort preparing what they referred to as a "profile of sales of spare parts" using internal records of sales by Beloit. It was the type of work requiring the expertise of a statistician but during cross-examination it became evident it was inaccurately prepared, a number of sales of items should have been deleted and the underlying principles applicable to gathering and interpreting the information were not adhered to. There is no doubt these inadequacies were a result of the so-called "profiles" being prepared by an individual who was simply not qualified to undertake such a project. I find them not only to have been a complete waste of time, but inadequate and unprofessional as well, and for those reasons totally reject them. I much preferred and find more accurate the estimates prepared by the defendant's accountant which were filed as Exhibits D-56 and D-56A.
[34]
The plaintiffs' accountants also provided schedules relating to the benefits earned from "positive working capital". Two schedules were prepared, one for profits derived from the press section and one for profits derived from the sale of the entire machine. However, this whole exercise was premised on a misinterpretation of law. The U.S. accountants acting for the plaintiff prepared these schedules on the basis of the prevailing Canadian investment interest rates rather than those in effect in Finland at the time. Properly instructed accountants should have been aware that jurisprudence is clear "
the plaintiffs are only entitled to the profits actually made, not to those which might have been made had the infringer used the invention differently or pursued a different line of business policy
" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). The evidence clearly indicates that although the defendant was paid in Canadian dollars, the funds were immediately transferred to the Finnish bank account and exchanged into Finland marks. There is no evidence the funds were invested in Canada. Accordingly, I find as a fact the monies were returned to Finland and were used by the company either as working capital or for debt reduction. The rate that should apply therefore would be the prevailing rate in Finland applicable to the borrowing of funds. This was considerably less than the prevailing investment rate in Canada.
[35]
A substantial amount of discovery and production time was also devoted to the question of "increased market share". The plaintiffs' U.S. accounting expert had attended on numerous occasions in U.S. courts to testify in many intellectual property disputes where increased market share was an issue. However, by statute, accounting of profits was eliminated as a remedy in the U.S. in 1946. Therefore, in U.S. courts, this issue of "increased market share" would be in the context of a client claiming damages rather than the remedy sought in these proceedings.
[36]
It is nevertheless apparent that accountants for both sides were able, without too much difficulty, to arrive at and agree upon the net profit, for the sale of press sections as well as entire machines, using the differential accounting approach. During my four day stay in Finland, I was most favourably impressed with the cooperation extended by Mr. Siiteri and a number of other executives of the Valmet Oy corporation responsible for producing documents and other assistance, as well as the professional approach and cooperation that prevailed between all accounts experts.
[37]
The next area of considerable discussion was with respect to the technology of the tri-nip configuration or three nips before the first open draw. During the period in which the four paper making machines in question were sold by the defendant, Beloit's Tri-Nip configuration and Valmet's Sympress II press section had been issued patents in Canada. The evidence revealed that both companies also possessed another configuration of three nips before the first open draw which was not involved in any dispute. Beloit's technology was referred to as the tri-vent and Valmet's similar assembly was referred to as the Sympress 0. It was submitted by the defendant that had it been aware the plaintiffs' Tri-Nip patent would prevail in Canada, it would have offered, as an alternative, the Sympress 0. That assembly, while still meeting the purchasers' requirements of increased speed, would not have constituted infringement of the plaintiffs' patent.
[38]
Mr. Hauser, a mechanical engineer employed by Beloit since 1961, was called as the main witness for the plaintiffs with respect to the technical aspects as well as the manufacturing of paper machines generally. He doubted very much that any of the four purchasers would have accepted the tri-vent or the Sympress 0 from Valmet in lieu of the tri-nip. Though he was aware of two or three installations where tri-vents had been installed and were functioning well, his evidence was that the technology had not yet been universally accepted in the industry. The witness also testified that paper machine manufacturers seldom consent to sell only one section when bids are being requested for the erection of an entire paper machine. No doubt, there are exceptions. Such components as calenders, winders, hoods and other auxiliary equipment can be easily excluded. From the evidence adduced, I find this to be a fact.
[39]
Mr. Hauser also stated that contracts for paper machines customarily include auxiliary equipment, operational spare parts, minor spare parts and erection and start-up services. His evidence was that normally once a supplier has installed a paper machine at a customer's premises he has a foot in the door and will more than likely end up supplying spare parts for a number of years. This, of course, would be the case provided the service is adequate and the spare parts are competitive in price and quality. I find this also to be a fact.
[40]
At this point, reference should be made to what is commonly referred to in the industry as "rebuilds". As I understand it, most paper producers expect a machine to have a life expectancy of 50 years. No doubt there is ongoing evolution and improvements in the industry. As well, new technologies are being developed with respect to the various functions of a paper making machine. In order to keep up with the competition, a paper producer may elect to rebuild either the forming section or the press section of an existing machine. In examination-in-chief, Mr. Hauser testified that the manufacturer who initially supplied a paper machine, would more than likely be favoured for extensive rebuilds. However, in cross-examination, he admitted that a paper producer could generally be expected to seek competitive bids for a major overhaul. Other independent witnesses agreed that competitive bids are the rule when dealing with rebuilds. I find this, on the evidence as a whole, to be a fact.
[41]
Evidence was also tendered by the defendant's witnesses who were involved in their company's respective purchases of the four paper making machines in question. They testified that not only was the cost of each section analyzed in detail, but the cost of materials and components specified in each builder's bid was also scrutinized. In that manner they were able to assess the quality of the materials and components that went into the construction of the machine, in addition to comparing prices of the sections and components used by the various bidders. As a result, the witnesses were able to determine if the price they were paying was competitive.
[42]
As previously stated, I am satisfied most manufacturers of paper making machines would not customarily be interested in manufacturing only sections for an entire new machine. Although each section is itemized with great particularity in the bids, a builder would not likely accept to supply any single section, such as the press section, for the price submitted in the complete bid. Generally, their margin of profit would have been attributed to the sale of the entire machine. The plaintiffs called Mr. Frederick S. Mallett, a chartered accountant who said he doubted it was possible to break down the selling price. In his affidavit, Exhibit P-32 in these proceedings, he wrote at paragraph 31:
"The documents referred to do not provide any breakdown of the selling price and hence do not specify particular revenue attributed to the press section."
[43]
This assertion was not left unchallenged by the defendant. It was obvious the plaintiffs had not shown Mr. Mallett a number of exhibits which were produced and which indicate, in some cases, the breakdown of components for these machines. Indeed, under cross-examination he admitted he had not previously seen these documents and may perhaps have changed his opinion. Mr. Mallett suggested he had read some of the leading cases that pertain to accounting of profits, mainly:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Court of Appeal's decision in this matter,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 207 (T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). It was his opinion, based on these decisions, that the differential accounting approach should apply. I take no objection with his opinion on this aspect. However, I do not accept his opinion with respect to the plaintiffs' entitlement to profit for the entire machine as opposed to only the press section, sales of spare parts and other incremental revenues. Those are questions of law to be decided by the court and as such do not fall within the expertise of the accountant witnesses.
[44]
I heard much evidence from accounting experts with respect to apportionment. It was suggested by the plaintiffs that, since paper machines were sold as a unit, a mathematical division between the entire paper machine and separating the press section costs from revenue was not possible. This assertion was primarily premised on the fact that manufacturers would not generally be inclined to sell only the press section when the purchase or sale of an entire machine was being considered. As I reviewed the evidence, I would like to refer to paragraphs 22, 23 and 24 of the affidavit of Mr. Pierre St-Laurent, which is Exhibit D-3 in these proceedings, where he wrote:
"22) The cost monitoring and recording system at Rautpohja, as it relates to the accumulation of costs associated with the production of a paper machine, is based on a project number or work number system. Under this system, each specific project, be it work performed for the manufacture of a new or rebuilt machine, larger machine components, spare parts or performance of warranty work, is assigned a unique project or work number. For a paper machine, each main section (i.e., headbox, wire section, press section, etc.) of the machine and major components within the sections (i.e., rolls, frames, etc.) are assigned specific subdivisions of that work number.
"23) Direct costs, such as employee wages, goods from inventory and purchases of materials and services, that are related to a project number are specifically identified and captured within the Company's cost monitoring and recording system as direct project costs of the respective project or work number. Engineering costs are also earmarked to each work number separately based on actual hours worked on the project. The details of these costs can be printed out by subsections of the project number on documents entitled cost sheets. In the present case, cost sheets for these project numbers, including those relating to the press sections, were filed as Exhibits 52D, 52E, 52F and 52G to the examination on discovery of Mr. Mikko Siiteri.
"24) Overhead costs are also reported separately within the cost sheets. These costs (i.e., workshop overhead, product group overhead and Rautpohja Works overhead) are identified according to different cost centers and are allocated to projects based on workshop and/or engineering hours required to complete each project."
[45]
Based on my personal observations while in attendance in Finland, I am satisfied and accept the veracity of this statement and I find as a fact that apportionment is possible.
Valmet Oy's Entry To The Canadian
Market
[46]
Prior to 1978, Valmet Oy's exposure in Canada was very limited. They had only two machines operating in this country; one in British Columbia, partly owned by a Finnish company and the other, owned by a Swedish company, located in Nova Scotia. Mr. Packer, presently Executive Vice-President for the paper machinery division of Valmet Oy, explained that Valmet had not focused on the Canadian market because of its content requirements as well as high customs duties. Its efforts were directed to developing a North American market in the United States and to that end it engaged an agent in New York.
[47]
Mr. Packer testified that in 1978, while in New York, he received a call from Abitibi-Price requesting a quotation on the headbox and forming sections for their newly acquired Stephenville mill in Newfoundland. He telexed a very brief quotation, having not given the matter much thought because he did not expect the defendant to be awarded the contract. Valmet Oy was then invited to do a presentation and was selected.
[48]
Mr. Newman McLenaghen, a former Senior Vice-President of Abitibi-Price, was in charge of all capital expenditures and purchasing during the period from 1978 to 1988. In the 1970's, his company had acquired the Stephenville mill which contained a Beloit-Walmsley linerboard paper machine. It was bought with the intention of converting it into a newsprint machine destined for export to the European market. Before commencing the conversion, Mr. McLenaghen travelled extensively throughout Europe visiting various paper mill installations as well as a number of his customers. He concluded the quality of the newsprint in the U.K. and Germany was superior to that produced elsewhere. He was also convinced these improved standards could only be met by using the defendant's forming equipment, referred to in the industry as the Sym-Former. The wire section of the defendant's machine produced a web in which the fibre retention was greater than the Bel Baie forming section of the plaintiffs' machine. This resulted in a sheet that was stronger and possessed, among other features, improved printing characteristics.
[49]
It was for this reason that Mr. McLenaghen requested the defendants to bid on the renovation of the Stephenville paper machine. Since the machine had originally been built by Beloit, they were invited to rebuild the press section. Interestingly, although they bought a tri-nip configuration press section, Beloit had initially offered tri-vent technology. Mr. Packer testified Abitibi-Price had looked to Beloit to rebuild the press section because they would be able to incorporate some of the original rolls thus reducing costs. Although this sale of a forming section by Valmet Oy is not at issue in these proceedings, it is noteworthy for its introduction of Valmet Oy to the Canadian market.
The Four Infringing Sales
Sale To Abitibi-Price
[50]
In 1979, Abitibi-Price requested quotes from a number of suppliers, including Beloit and Valmet Oy, for a complete newsprint machine for the Iroquois Falls mill. Mr. McLenaghen testified that based on their experience at Stephenville, Valmet's wet end package was very attractive in terms of quality, high retention and energy savings and Abitibi-Price was "pretty much decided to concentrate on the Valmet technology for at least the forming section of the machine". I note that in the Request for Quotation provided in Exhibit D-26:
"We require that the price for the forming section is separate from the price of the balance of the machine."
[51]
The quotation request did not stipulate a "press of your latest design incorporating triple nip concept". The witness testified many companies manufactured press sections incorporating this technology. But the defendant's Sympress II press section incorporated more design features than those claimed in the Beloit patent. For example, as admitted by Mr. Hauser, a Beloit Vice-President, Valmet's press rolls were stainless steel and hence more corrosion proof and the suction rolls were gun drilled, as opposed to Beloit's which were spiral drilled, resulting in smoother holes that were less likely to plug. A December 3, 1979, Beloit internal memorandum prior to its final presentation, which is Exhibit D-23, indicates:
"The customer has asked us to address ourselves specifically to suction shell design,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  impressed with gun drilled shells."
[52]
Abitibi-Price also preferred Valmet's dryer section. Its surface temperature was more uniform due to the steam and condensate system and it had a "cleaner back side" which made it easier to maintain. Once again Beloit's internal memorandum, Exhibit D-23, confirms:
"After seeing Varkaus, Abitibi have been raving about the sheet profile and moisture at the reel. They feel that a major contributor to the success in this area at Varkaus is the method of condensate removal. Steam enters from the rear on each dryer and condensate exists front and rear. In addition, the syphons are stationary, located front and rear and mounted over condensate removal grooves machined into each dryer.
"We should be prepared to go into this in detail and offer pros and/or cons or alternative thinking."
[53]
More importantly, this same exhibit confirms Mr. McLenaghen's evidence that the Sym-Former was a key factor in his company's decision to purchase from Valmet. According to the Beloit's internal memorandum, its Bel Baie forming section was "the most difficult area of the machine to sell to Abitibi" and "could cost us a potential order". The memo also identifies "areas of concern voiced previously" with respect to the Bel Baie namely streaking, retention, high Kraft user, limited drainage, sheet dryness, energy consumption and printing characteristics. Finally, a Beloit Lost Order Report dated April 21, 1980, Exhibit D-21, indicates the following:
"Customer has decided preference for Symformer ... Symformer pulled the press along with it ..."
Sale To Crown Zellerbach
[54]
On September 26, 1979, Crown Zellerbach purchased a high speed newsprint machine from the defendant based on the recommendation of Mr. James Christensen, Manager of the Crown Zellerbach mill at Elk Falls during the relevant time. He chaired the selection team for the purchase and calls for bids were issued to four preselected suppliers, Beloit, Valmet, Voith and Dominion.
[55]
Mr. Christensen testified that many paper mills in North America and Europe were visited in order to obtain first hand information on the characteristics of each supplier's machines by observing them in operation. He described how competing bids were compared and then scored in what he termed a "decision analysis".
[56]
According to the witness, Valmet's score was considerably higher than Beloit's. Valmet offered a superior service package as well as warranties for delivery, mechanical performance, production and paper quality. He stated Valmet was better able to demonstrate an operating ability more suited to his company's purposes, particularly in the forming section. On the other hand, Mr. Christensen found the plaintiffs' Bel Baie forming section to have poorer retention qualities resulting in a "dirtier operation". In addition, Crown Zellerbach had encountered delivery problems in past dealings with Beloit and were sceptical of the plaintiffs' ability to meet a proposed delivery schedule.
[57]
A Crown Zellerbach internal memorandum dated August 7, 1979 which appears as Exhibit D-32 corroborates Mr. Christensen's testimony. It states:
"The Valmet Symformer and Beloit Bel Baie II could meet our criterion for equipment delivery, production rate, efficiency, and quality.
"Based on our comparisons of these machines, we recommend the Valmet Symformer for the following reasons:
- Capital costs are close.
- Valmet has a better delivery.
- Bel Baie II has poor fines retention, which could result in higher sewer losses.
- Papermakers prefer Valmet former operations over the Beloit 'gap' former.
- Valmet machine is running higher moisture (9 + %) than Beloit machines (6-8%) visited.
- Valmet syphon and frame designs considered superior to Beloit for achieving uniform moisture profiles."
[58]
Although Crown Zellerbach was leaning towards Valmet, each supplier was invited to make a final presentation. Mr. Christensen described Valmet's presentation as very professional, neat and concise while Beloit's gave him the impression it was not interested in the contract. Indeed, Beloit Canada's President left the meeting shortly after it commenced. As Mr. Christensen states at paragraph 40 of his affidavit sworn November 17, 1993:
"It appeared to me at the time of the contract, that if Beloit had set out to try to lose the contract, they could not have done any better for not obtaining it. I have always been puzzled as to their motives for acting like they did."
[59]
On cross-examination, the witness admitted that some members of the selection committee favoured the tri-vent technology. However, he categorically denied the tri-nip press section was the "driving force" behind the purchase of this machine. He also confirmed that Valmet had disclosed there was a dispute over the patent, and hence the traditional "save harmless clause" was part of the contract.
MacMillan Bloedel
[60]
On August 29, 1980, MacMillan Bloedel purchased a fine paper machine from the defendant for its mill at New Westminster, British Columbia. Mr. Sidney Forstrom, former Vice-President of Manufacturing, pulp and paper group, for MacMillan Bloedel, testified he was personally involved in the selection process and, in fact, led the evaluation team. He, like others in the industry, travelled the world to visit machine builder factories as well as mills where machines, having similar characteristics to the one being contemplated for purchase, could be observed in operation. The purpose of these visits was to evaluate the overall capabilities of suppliers in such matters as machine technology, operating performance, capacity to meet MacMillan Bloedel's requirements, price and delivery. The evaluation team also considered the labour situation of the producing factories, their reputation, financing arrangements and follow-up service.
[61]
Unlike the two purchases previously described, MacMillan Bloedel was buying a machine to produce fine paper rather than newsprint. Mr. Forstrom testified the company did not require a wide machine nor a high speed machine; operating speed of 2,500 feet per minute would have met expectations. Four competitors tendered bids, including the defendant, and Beloit Italia. The witness stated he was disappointed neither of the plaintiffs had submitted a bid but he understood they were overbooked and having difficulty meeting delivery schedules.
[62]
In Mr. Forstrom's view, of the fine paper machines he inspected, the most impressive overall was the defendant's machine at Dorpen, West Germany. Other than the usual essential components, it had a Sym-former forming section and the press section was a Sympress II configuration. He favoured Valmet because its specifications included heavy duty stainless steel equipment which was sturdier and would operate with less vibration at higher speeds. In addition, the defendant's machine utilized a "gun drilling process" for the suction rolls resulting in quieter operation and improved quality of paper. The witness was also impressed with Valmet's style of catwalks, a factor which would contribute to a safer working environment. Indeed, Mr. Forstrom stated the defendant's machine featured a number of other advantageous characteristics. Furthermore, in comparing tenders, prices were more or less equal and all submissions included tri-nip technology in the press section.
[63]
Under cross-examination the witness was adamant that the press section was not the "driving force" or prime factor  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Bloedel's ultimate selection of the defendant's machine. Increased productivity was simply not the main criteria. In addition, there were concerns over the Beloit Italia bid. The company had only manufactured one paper machine in 1979. There were some doubts with respect to its overall capabilities, as well as misgivings over the labour climate at the Beloit Italia plant.
Great Lakes Forest Products
[64]
This contract for the construction of a fine paper making machine was awarded to Valmet on May 13, 1981. A long time employee of Great Lakes Forest Products, Mr. Mike Cebrowski, testified he was a member of the selection team involved in this purchase for the company mill at Dryden, Ontario, although he was not a key player.
[65]
However, his evidence is significant in two respects. To begin with, six suppliers submitted bids on the contract including the plaintiff Beloit Canada and the defendant. All bidders offered the tri-nip technology. Furthermore, during Mr. Cebrowski's testimony, a confidential Beloit memorandum dated February 20, 1981, was entered as Exhibit D-24 in these proceedings. This document is highly instructive as to why Great Lakes Forest Products awarded the contract to the defendant. The memorandum states in part as follows:
"On Tuesday, February 10, 1981, we were advised by telex from the mill informing us that they had decided
because of superior technology which best suited their requirements
to purchase the Valmet paper machine. In an effort to substantiate where our technology was weak, we spoke to Mr. Bob Chambers, who is Vice president of Engineering & Services for Great Lakes Forest Products, and were told the following:
1. Great Lakes Forest Products preferred the air padded sym-nozzle headbox over our headbox. They felt it would be easier to operate and make better formation. A recent Valmet headbox had just started up at Abitibi-Price Inc. at Fort William and was running very well.
2. Great Lakes Forest Products looked at paper off [sic] various machines and considered the sheet produced on the Sym-former to be superior to anything they had evaluated (i.e., it was the least two-sided). The evaluation of the Symformer was from sheet samples they were given after their visits to Nordland, Germany, which operates the Valmet machine. They were also impressed with the Valmet twin-wire fine paper machine at Nekoosa Paper Inc. at Ashdown, Arkansas. The Nordland machine was operating at 2700 FPM with 30% ash as a filler in the sheet. The size press is a two-roll unit, large rolls, operating at 2700 FPM with no splashing.
3. They felt the Valmet dryer section was superior in design as it ran very quietly and took up less space. The main features were the planetary gear train, and the stationary syphons sitting in the grooves inside the dryer cylinders. They also feel that this is a considerable energy saver.
4. Valmet had proposed steam boxes in the Tri-nip press. Great Lakes Forest Products considered this also a plus.
5. They also felt that the symformer,
utilizing a
shorter fourdrinier, savec building space which was a cost consideration for them. We offered the Bel Bond unit on a 49' foundation to couteract the Symformer.
6. We have presently going on in the Thunder Bay mill an order for a Converflo headbox, two Reels and two Super-L-Winders. These orders are approximately 2-3 months late. Bob Chambers feels that Beloit let him down and that we failed to inform him early enough of our late delivery. In addition, the Canadian content requirements were not honoured as we went offshore and had one reel built in Spain. This, of course, was done with their permission. Nevertheless, it was done."
Accounting Of Profits And
Apportionment
[66]
The remedy of an accounting of profits has its origins in the courts of equity and accordingly is a discretionary remedy which may be awarded should the circumstances of a particular case so warrant. There are very few patent cases decided in this court in which the remedy has been granted.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), the plaintiffs were granted the remedy without any objection from the defendant. In
Diversified Products Corp. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 207, an accounting of profits was awarded because there was no alternative method by which to ascertain the plaintiffs' loss.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 46, the remedy was granted after the trial judge determined the plaintiffs were not disentitled to the equitable relief because of delay.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Collier, J., refused the remedy, and made the following observation at page 220:
"A successful plaintiff is not entitled, as a matter of course or of right, to elect the method of determining the monetary compensation."
[67]
I agree entirely. There are numerous factors which may serve to mitigate against an award of an account of profits. For that reason, I remain committed to the view that the question of whether the remedy should be allowed is a matter within the equitable discretion of the court and is properly decided by a trial judge who is aware of all the circumstances of the litigation. It should not be allowed simply by reason of a plaintiff's election. As I stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 448, at p. 471 C.P.R.:
"The issue is not whether it is available, but whether an accounting of profits is an appropriate remedy in this case. It is certainly not a remedy commonly chosen by a patentee against an infringer because it is exceedingly difficult to handle. The complications of ascertaining how much profits have been made by the infringer in respect of an invention and how much of his profits are attributable to any one source, is an arduous task. It involves an expensive, time-consuming procedure which is rarely rewarded by the end result.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by litigants because of the difficulties it posed. He quoted the following passage from Lindley, L.J. [at p. 813], in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  electing, as he did in this case, to have an account of profits but I do not know any form of account which is more difficult to work out, or may be more difficult to work out than an account of profits ... The litigation is enormous, the expense is great, and the time consumed is out of all proportion to the advantage ultimately attained; so much so that in partnership cases I confess I never knew an account in that form worked out with satisfaction to anybody. I believe in almost every case people get tired of it and get disgusted.'
"The history of these actions, namely, their complexity and the inordinate length of time for which they have been ongoing, is sufficient reason, in my opinion to deny the plaintiff an accounting of profits. I cannot foresee that the intricate procedure which an accounting would involve here would be worth the time and expense that would undoubtedly occur."
[68]
In the present case however, the Federal Court of Appeal's judgment awarding "damages or an accounting of profits as the plaintiffs may elect" and the defendant's failure to contest the plaintiffs' subsequent election, left no alternative but to proceed with the accounting.
[69]
While both damages and accounting of profits are intended to provide compensation to a wronged plaintiff, the fundamental principles underlying the two remedies are substantially different. The primary reason for an award of damages is to make good any loss suffered by the plaintiff as a result of the defendant's misconduct. Quantification of the award is based on the losses suffered by the plaintiff; any gains realized by the defendant because of its wrongdoing are not relevant. Accordingly, where damages are sought, the onus rests on the plaintiff to establish not only that it has suffered a loss, but the amount of that loss as well.
[70]
On the other hand, an accounting of profits is based on the premise that the defendant, by reason of its wrongful conduct, has improperly received profits which belong to the plaintiff. The objective of the award is to restore those actual profits to their rightful owner, the plaintiff, thereby eliminating whatever unjust enrichment has been procured by the defendant. Quantification is based on the profits wrongfully gained by the defendant; any other losses suffered by the plaintiff are irrelevant. In cases of this nature, the onus is on the defendant to establish the amount of profit realized by its wrongdoing.
[71]
Furthermore, damages may be compensatory or punitive according to whether they are awarded as a measure of the actual loss suffered by the plaintiff or as punishment for outrageous conduct and to deter future transgressions by the defendant. While an accounting of profits might serve to dissuade a defendant from perusing its improper course of conduct, punishment does not play a role in its award. As an equitable remedy, its entire rationale is to redress wrongs, not to administer punishment.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C.), at p. 160, the court noted "the object of the inquiry was to compensate the plaintiff, and not to punish the defendants". Accordingly, if the plaintiffs intention in the present case was that "Valmet should be punished", as stated in cross-examination by Beloit's Senior Vice-President, Mr. Hauser, the proper remedy to seek would have been punitive damages. However, based on the evidence it is highly doubtful such a claim would have succeeded.
[72]
Despite the significant differences underlying the two remedies, the principles which apply with respect to the question of apportionment are the same. Apportionment becomes an issue when the defendant alleges that only certain of its activities infringe on the plaintiff's rights, and that damages or profits should be confined to those activities alone. If a patentee claims damages for infringement, the court will be called upon to ascertain what the patentee's lost profits were as a result of the defendant's activities. In the same manner, where the patentee elects an accounting of profits, the court will apportion any profits gained by the defendant which are attributable to its infringement of the plaintiff's patent. The onus is on the defendant to prove an apportionment should be made and its extent.
[73]
In the present case, the plaintiffs maintain they are entitled to all the profits realized by the defendant on the sale of the four paper machines in question, and are not confined to profits from the infringing press section alone. The jurisprudence is unequivocal that a patentee who elects an accounting of profits may indeed be so entitled.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), Lord Shaw held the patentee was entitled to its lost profits on the sale of the entire machine notwithstanding the fact its patent only related to a component of the machine. He stated at pp. 116-117:
"
I am convinced, upon the evidence in this case, that the merits of the respondent's patent, which have already been judicially affirmed, have been proved to be of considerable commercial interest and value
. I think it to be established first, that it was in the hope and prospect that it would be so, that it was copied by the appellants, the infringers; secondly that they thought it right to apprise consumers in general of their ability to supply by the infringing machines exact replicas of those made by the respondents, and accordingly to issue the Circulars and drawings to which reference will be made; thirdly, that consumers, being thus commercially apprised by the appellants of their power to supply machines containing a novel and useful merit, purchased such machines ...
I have made these observations, because in the present case I am convinced on the evidence that, from the point of commercial effectiveness and output, there can be no doubt of the value of the patented part to the machine as a whole
:" (Emphasis added)
[74]
The decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Laidlaw
was relied upon in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  respect to a mattress support for baby cribs. The defendant sold baby cribs which featured the patented mattress support and the plaintiff sought to recover all profits realized by the defendant from the sale of the entire cribs and not just those from the sale of the patented mattress support. Thurlow, J., stated at pp. 385-386:
"It will be observed that with respect to sales which the patentee has lost by reason of the infringement the questions as propounded by Lord Shaw are not qualified by any expression limiting the measure of damages to the loss of the profits attributable to the patented article itself. Where in the normal course of the patentee's trade the patented article is sold by itself this may well be the limit but where the patented article is not ordinarily sold by itself, as in the present instance, the damage may consist,
depending on the particular facts established by the evidence
, not merely in loss of profit attributable to the article itself but in the extent of interference with the patentee's trade measured by the loss of profit which it would have made, but for the infringement, in selling the articles in which he trades, that is to say, as applied to this case, cribs provided with patented posture supports." (Emphasis added)
[75]
Indeed, I made a similar statement in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 448 (T.D.).
[76]
There is no question however, that the individual circumstances of a particular case may render an apportionment of profits the only equitable solution. The test in determining if there should be an apportionment is based on the saleability, as a whole, of the product which contains the patented invention. The question for the court is whether the market demand for the defendant's product arose because of the infringed patent or whether it arose by virtue of the product's additional features. In other words, the inquiry is directed to "the value of the patented part to the machine as a whole", to use the words of Lord Shaw  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Laidlaw
.
[77]
This determination is a factual one to be made on the basis of all the evidence. The answer depends entirely on the particular circumstances of each case. The onus is on the defendant to adduce sufficient evidence to satisfy the court that consumer demand for its product arose by virtue of features other than the plaintiffs' infringed patent. If the defendant's evidence in this regard is inadequate, the court will not make an apportionment.
[78]
I am confirmed in this view by the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 116, wherein Hugessen, J.A., stated at pp. 119-120 C.P.R.:
"The motions judge reversed the senior prothonotary on this point and disallowed all questions in this category. While he did not say so expressly, he seems to have accepted the defendant's argument, strongly urged before us, that the plaintiff's only entitlement was to profits arising directly out of the sale of infringing press sections. In our view, he erred in doing so. We can see no reason in principle why a patentee, whose property has been wrongly appropriated through infringement, should not recover all the profits, direct and indirect, derived by the infringer from his wrongful infringement ...
'
Questions as to whether any proportion of the profits earned by the defendant on the sales of noninfringing parts of paper machines was due to such machines having infringing press sections incorporated into them and the amount thereof, if any, are difficult questions of fact
.'" (Emphasis added)
[79]
It is for this reason that I have not referred in detail to the evidence of the accounting experts called for both sides. Although I have not discounted their evidence, it simply has little relevance to the issue now before me. The testimony of the four witnesses who were involved in their respective company's purchase of the machines is far more relevant in the determination of whether the sales were a result of the defendant's infringement of the plaintiffs' patent or were a result of other features of the defendant's product.
[80]
Based on the evidence, I am unable to conclude that any of the profit realized by Valmet on the sale of the four paper machines in question was derived as a result of its wrongful infringement of the plaintiffs' patent. The facts clearly show there were numerous reasons why the defendant was successful in its bid for the sale of those machines. None of them, in my view, are in any way related to the infringing press section.
[81]
The evidence of those witnesses who were directly involved in the purchase of the four machines is unequivocal; the driving force behind the sale of all the machines was the Sym-Former, not the press section. The Valmet Sympress II press section had better design features than their competitors. The press rolls were stainless steel and more corrosion proof, the suction rolls were gun drilled as opposed to Beloit's spiral drilled and were smoother and therefore less likely to plug. In addition, the Sym-Former produced higher retention, less energy consumption and better printing characteristics. The plaintiffs' Bel Baie forming section was found to produce a dirtier operation. The evidence of these witnesses is confirmed in Exhibit D-23, Beloit's own internal memorandum of December 3, 1979, "Lost Sale Internal Memorandum".
[82]
Although the Sym-Former was the principal reason for preference of the defendant's machines, several other factors played a key role, none of which are related to the plaintiffs' patent. Crown Zellerbach was influenced in its decision to buy the defendant's product because of superior service on warranties and deliveries, mechanical performance and paper quality. It had encountered delivery problems with the plaintiffs in the past. Furthermore, the plaintiffs' presentation left officials of Crown Zellerbach with the distinct impression they were not interested in the contract. This evidence is confirmed in Exhibit D-32, the purchaser's internal memorandum dated August 7, 1979.
[83]
MacMillan Bloedel was not even concerned with the high speed capacity of the tri-nip technology. It purchased the defendant's machine because it felt Valmet's use of stainless steel equipment meant it would be acquiring a more durable machine than those manufactured by other bidders. The company was also impressed with the catwalk which contributed to a safer working environment. The plaintiffs did not even bid on the contract but rather had an inexperienced subsidiary, Beloit Italia, tender a bid.
[84]
Great Lakes Forest Products simply believed Valmet had superior technology. It preferred the defendant's headbox, thought a better sheet was being produced, preferred the defendant's dryer section design, as did Abitibi-Price, and considered the steam box in the tri-nip press section to be an advantage. The purchaser also had grave doubts about the plaintiffs' ability to deliver on time. Once again this evidence is confirmed  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 's own internal memorandum of February 20, 1981, Exhibit D-24.
[85]
Based on the facts, I am simply unable to conclude the plaintiffs' patented invention played any factor whatsoever in the defendant's sale of the four machines. Virtually all manufacturers who tendered bids were using the tri-nip technology featured in the plaintiffs' patent. Superior design, better construction, higher quality materials, better service on warranties and prompt delivery were the reasons cited by the purchasers for choosing Valmet's machines. Indeed, one need only examine Beloit's own internal memorandums to discover the actual basis for the defendant's successful bids. Contrary to what may have been alluded to by this court on previous occasions, now that the facts are clearly established, there is not one iota of evidence to indicate the plaintiffs' patent was the driving force behind the transactions.
[86]
In cross-examination of the witnesses involved in the purchase of the four machines, counsel for the plaintiffs, in an effort to establish their patent as the driving force behind the sales, engaged in a line of questioning based on sheer speculation and hypothesis, such as what the purchaser's position would have been if they could not have obtained the tri-nip technology. The witnesses had difficulty answering the questions posed and I was unable to ascertain the relevance of such questions since any answers given were based on conjecture and therefore of no value to the court in making its determination.
[87]
Accordingly, while there is no question the plaintiffs must be compensated for the defendants' infringement, it would be inequitable, under the circumstances, for them to be awarded all profits realized by the defendants on the sale of the four machines. They are entitled only to those profits realized from the sale of the press sections that infringed their patent.
[88]
It was strenuously argued by the plaintiffs that it is not possible to ascertain the exact price breakdown of the various sections of a machine nor of the materials and components within each section. Any prices quoted in bids, it is submitted, are not firm.
[89]
With all due respect, I am unable to agree. The component parts of a paper making machine have a price, in the same way as component parts of any machine have a price. The bids tendered for the four machines provide that type of price breakdown with great particularity. There were a number of other documents tendered as evidence - purchase orders, contracts and letters, as well as the affidavit of Mr. St-Laurent - which also contain a price breakdown of component parts, including the press sections. Indeed, Schedule 1 of the Joint Statement of Issues filed by the parties, without prejudice, contains the very type of price breakdown the plaintiffs contend cannot be made. It is not an impossible task therefore to apportion the cost and profit margin of a press section along with its auxiliary equipment and related spare parts as well as erection and start-up costs.
[90]
For all of these reasons, I am awarding the plaintiffs the following relief:
1. The profits derived by the defendant from the following items:
(i) Press Sections	$2,864,700
(ii) Change Orders four	$42,900
press sections
(iii) Erection and Start-up	$107,900
costs for press sections
only
These figures are obtained from Schedule 1 of the Joint Statement of Issues filed by the parties, without prejudice, at the hearing before me.
2. The interest derived by the defendant from positive working capital based on the prevailing Bank of Finland or similar institution borrowing rate, up to the time of payment in full of each contract. I am satisfied this is the appropriate rate of interest as the evidence clearly shows that although the defendant was paid in Canadian dollars, the funds were immediately transferred to its Finnish bank account and exchanged into Finland marks. There is no evidence the funds were invested in Canada.
3. Simple interest at the rate of 5% per annum on the outstanding amounts awarded, save and except the monies earned on positive working capital, from January 1, 1981 until the date of payment.
[91]
There are two final matters to be addressed. First, the defendant introduced a document showing its capital expenditures with respect to the construction of the four paper making machines. It sought to have these capital costs set off against any profit realized on the sale of the machines. I am not satisfied, based on the evidence, it is entitled to such a deduction.
[92]
Finally, I am not prepared, at this time, to make an award with respect to costs and disbursements. The parties are to submit further representations on these matters before any determination is made.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/gms
[End of document]