[1]
Rouleau, J. [TRANSLATION]
: This is an application for an order to appear on a charge of contempt of court laid pursuant to s. 355 of the Federal Court Rules. The applicant had previously filed an arbitral award in the Registry of the court pursuant to s. 159 of the Canada Labour Code, R.S.C. 1970, c. L-1. Under that provision, the filing and registration of an arbitral award in the Registry of the Federal Court gives it the same force and effect as a judgment obtained in the court. The applicant is here asking the court to enforce the conclusions of the arbitral award by the contempt of court procedure.
[2]
The arbitrator's decision was rendered on January 18, 1986, disposing of two grievances by the applicant union, Nos. 100-H-198 and 100-H-199, dated May 6, 1985. The conclusions of the award in favour of the postal workers' representative ruled as follows:
- rules that the employer in Montréal did not maintain a sufficient number of regular employees to meet service requirements based on predictable workloads and absences;
- orders the employer to revise the number of regular employees to ensure the presence of a sufficient number of regular employees to meet service needs based on predictable workload and absences;
- orders the employer to minimize as much as possible the use of casual employees by maintaining up-to-date eligibility lists to fill vacant positions required to meet service needs.
[3]
The applicant submitted that it was forced to file the award with the Registry of the court in view of the respondent's failure to comply with the award. As this failure continued, the applicant filed the motion at bar on the following grounds:
(a) though the aforesaid award concluded that there was an insufficient number of regular employees to meet service needs based on predictable workload and absences, the respondent has not hired any regular employees since January 18, 1986;
(b) though service needs increased for the period subsequent to January 18, 1986 because of a rise in the volume of mail and relative stability in the productivity and absenteeism of employees, the respondent not only hired no employees but again abolished 285 positions;
(c) for the period subsequent to January 18, 1986, though the total number of hours of overtime worked both by regular and casual assistants increased, demonstrating continued under-staffing, the respondent made no review of the increase in the number of its regular employees;
(d) though the award ordered the employer to minimize the use of casual employees so far as possible, the respondent has in some months used a number of assistants greater than that used in the period covered by the award filed.
[4]
For its part, the respondent answered the application by directly disputing whether the award could be enforced. If I have correctly understood the arguments of counsel for the Canada Post Corporation, the order to be enforced must be enforceable and not declaratory; he further submitted that the order must be clear and precise so that the court does not have to conjecture what it means; and finally, the conclusions of the award must be complete and not require reference to external facts in order to be understood. Counsel filed a number of decisions to support his arguments. A final argument put forward was that the courts have required the filing of affidavits to establish prima facie that the order has been infringed, which was not the case here.
[5]
I have carefully read the precedents submitted to me and considered the arbitral award at length, but have concluded that for several reasons I cannot do otherwise than dismiss the application at bar.
[6]
First, I consider that the award, or more precisely its conclusions, is indeed more declaratory than enforceable. The arbitrator's award is concerned primarily with weighing the facts and does not order that any specific action be taken to correct a situation detrimental to the applicant. The arbitrator found that the employer's conduct was reprehensible and contrary to its obligations under the collective agreement, and ordered it to observe those obligations. It is worth reviewing the early part of the arbitrator's award, which indicates the area covered by it (at pp. 1 and 2):
"
ARBITRAL AWARD
"Two grievances were referred to arbitration:
- Grievance (100-H-198)
The Corporation-employer in Montreal plans the use of casual employees rather than minimizing their use. This is prejudicial to the employees and the union, and violates the provisions of the collective agreement.
-
Redress sought
Pursuant to the collective agreement, the union requests that the Corporation-employer be ordered to minimize the use of casual assistants.
- Grievance (100-H-199)
The Corporation-employer in Montreal has not maintained a sufficient number of regular employees to meet regular service requirements based on predictable workloads and absences by maximizing the hiring of casual assistants in plants.
-
Redress sought
Pursuant to the collective agreement, the union requests that the Corporation-employer revise the number of regular employees to ensure the presence of a sufficient number of regular employees to meet service requirements based on predictable workloads and absences, minimize hiring of casual assistants by maintaining up-to-date eligibility lists to fill vacancies as they occur, and grant all other appropriate redress.
"These grievances were both based on the same evidence. At the start of the hearings, counsel for the employer filed a request for information in order to obtain details on the plants involved and periods of time over which the alleged violations of the collective agreement were committed.
"The plants involved were identified as:
- St-Laurent GPF (although the evidence later revealed that the grievances involved only St-Laurent LPP, not St-Laurent BHF);
- Laval LPP;
- Montreal Downtown LPP;
- Brossard SSPP.
"The
period of time
cited by the union
for purposes of proving the alleged violations
of the collective agreement was
January-June 1985
. The evidence shows that the period in question was a normal work period, as opposed to a peak (Christmas) or off-peak (summer) period." (My emphasis)
[7]
It can readily be seen from reading the early part of the award and its conclusions that the arbitrator granted neither more nor less than he was asked to do, and consequently there could be no possibility of compulsory enforcement of an award which is only declaratory.
[8]
The arbitrator ruled on events between January and June 1985, without specifying action to correct the violations alleged. He found that the respondent had not complied with the collective agreement at that time but he did not order corrective action that could be given effect. In my opinion, an order which only sets forth a general line of conduct is not sufficient.
[9]
The order must compel the person in question to perform actions or impose a specific constraint on him. General statements, as in the case at bar, are therefore to be regarded as more declaratory than enforceable; and a declaratory arbitral award is not capable of enforcement, as Addy, J., pointed out in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  entering into the merits of the case, I raised with counsel for the applicant the very fundamental question of whether the award, having regard to its very nature and substance, was actually capable of supporting any contempt of court proceedings.
"[5] It is on its very face clearly declaratory in nature and no such judgment or order is capable of sustaining, without more, any execution process nor a fortiori any contempt of court remedy. As stated by H.W.R. Wade in his text on Administrative Law (Oxford Clarendon Press 1977, at p. 500):
'... A declaratory judgment by itself merely states some existing legal situation. It requires no one to do anything and to disregard it will not be contempt of court. But by enabling a party to discover what his legal position is it opens the way to the use of other remedies for giving effect to it.'"
[10]
I therefore come to the second ground for dismissal of the application at bar, namely that the order is not precise. The order issued must be clear and precise. Otherwise, it would be impossible to determine whether someone subject to an order had exceeded it without holding as extensive a hearing as the one from which the issue originated. In the case at bar the arbitrator simply reproduced the wording of the collective agreement dealing with the subject-matter of the grievances. As worded, the order does not allow the court to establish exactly what the respondent had to do.
[11]
The applicant suggested that, to be in compliance with the order, the respondent should have hired more regular employees and reduced the number of casuals used. I disagree totally. At most, the award only orders the respondent to revise the number of regular employees and minimize the use of casuals. I cannot conclude that the respondent did not fully observe the order because it did not reduce the number of casual employees or hire enough regular employees when the said order lays down no specific guideline to this effect. Further, in the absence of specific evidence the arbitrator refused to rule on the identification of the number of regular employees to be hired by the respondent, as appears from the following passages from his award at pp. 29 and 30:
"... In addition, the conclusions indicate a need for a revision of the number of regular employees to ensure that sufficient numbers are employed.
. . . . .
"The arbitrator clearly does not have sufficient data to proceed with such an analysis in order to identify the exact number of regular full-time employees that should be added, although the evidence does indicate an insufficient number of regular employees. Consequently, the parties must attempt to establish the number of employees to be added, failing which the arbitrator will be forced to reopen the investigation."
[12]
The arbitrator suggested that the parties decide this matter by mutual agreement, and if not the investigation would be reopened. Where the order at issue contains no specific conclusions, it is not the court's function to determine what could not be determined in the award. The order here is therefore too vague and too imprecise for me to direct that it be implemented. As Cattanach, J., observed in IBEW Local Union, No. 529 v. Central Broadcasting Co., [1977] 2 F.C. 78, first at 93 and then at 96:
"... It is not the function of the Trial Division to anticipate what the Board may have meant as expressed in its order and to substitute what it thinks the Board may have meant to do, but did not do, by amending the Board's order accordingly. To do so would be to usurp the function of the Board.
. . . . .
"In my view the order of the Board is so vague, uncertain, imprecise, ambiguous and inexplicit as not to be capable of enforcement."
[13]
I would add that the order at bar is so imprecise that it is impossible for the court to determine what it means. The conclusions of the award could only be completely stated after a rehearing and the submission of substantial evidence. It is not for the court to clarify the meaning of an order by referring to additional facts and evidence. I think that the case at bar is similar to that of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where Collier, J., wrote, at 589, the following:
"In my view, subsection 159(2) does not clothe the Federal Court with the jurisdiction asserted on behalf of the applicant. Arbitrator Weatherill's order, by reason of the filing in the court, has the same force and effect as the judgment of the court. The proceedings that may be taken on the judgment are, as I viewed the matter, enforcement proceedings. But first there must be a coherent judgment to enforce.
"This court cannot provide that coherence. Rule 337(5) does not, to my mind, provide any assistance. That rule enables the court as 'constituted at the time of the pronouncement' to reconsider, on certain grounds, the terms of the formal order. It does not, as I see it, permit a judge of this court to hear evidence and, in effect, vary, or elaborate on the formal pronouncement of the arbitrator. Nor does it empower this court to refer the matter back to the arbitrator for further determination.
"The net result is that this court is powerless to assist the applicant."
[14]
Finally, to conclude on the point, I think it is important for the order to be precise and the motion for contempt of court to refer to specific actions by the respondent. This is necessary, first, so that the latter can make a reasonable attempt to comply with the order, and second, if it fails to do so, so that it can explain the reasons for its failure before any conviction for contempt is imposed. The respondent also has rights which must be observed. One of these is to know exactly what is being alleged against it. It is only when that has been done that the court will be in a position to decide whether it failed to comply. In the case at bar I consider that the order is so imprecise and vague as to justify the challenge to its enforcement by the respondent.
[15]
Parallel to this last point, the affidavit accompanying the motion must of necessity set forth the events or facts on which the said motion is based. The affidavit must be at least as precise as the motion, if not more so, with regard to the acts alleged: IBEW Local Union, No. 529 v. Central Broadcasting Co., cited above, at 86, and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at 525 F.C. In the case at bar the affidavit in support of the motion adds nothing more than the latter, except that the deponent had access to information regarding the volume of mail processed and the management of personnel, all information which was forwarded by respondent. In this type of proceeding, the affidavit must establish unambiguous proof that the order was infringed by the respondent. In the circumstances this would in any case have been very difficult or even impossible to do, in view of the imprecise wording of the award.
[16]
The application is dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk