[1]
Cullen, J.
: This particular application is an application for contempt of court proceedings and the party charged with contempt is the defendant Martin Herson (Herson).
[2]
An order was signed by the Associate Chief Justice on November 16, 1987, restraining those served with the order from, inter alia, selling or offering for sale in Canada watches bearing the trademark GUCCI, GC design, GREEN/RED/GREEN STRIPE design or GUCCI CREST design, during the term of the said order, and requiring them, inter alia, immediately to deliver up to the plaintiff's solicitors all watches within their possession, custody or control bearing the GUCCI trademarks, upon being served with the order.
[3]
It is alleged that Martin Herson was in contempt of this court in that:
(a) he was served with the said order on December 19, 1987, and refused to deliver up to the solicitors for the plaintiff those watches which the order required him to deliver up; and
(b) he sold watches in contravention of the order on December 20, 1987, at Pickering Flea Market in or near Pickering, Ontario.
[4]
It is further alleged that he is in breach of the judgment of November 30, 1987, of the Associate Chief Justice by selling and offering for sale watches bearing the trademarks GUCCI, GG design, GREEN/RED/GREEN STRIPE design or GUCCI CREST design on at least two occasions, namely December 19, 1987, at the intersection of Bay Street and Bloor Street in Toronto, Ontario and December 20, 1987, at the Pickering Flea Market, in or near Pickering, Ontario.
[5]
On January 18, 1988, the Associate Chief Justice signed an order requiring Martin Herson to appear before this court to hear proof of the acts with which he is charged; to urge any grounds of defence that he may have; and to show cause why he should not be condemned for contempt of court for disobeying the order of the Associate Chief Justice dated November 16, 1987 (supra), and the judgment against him dated November 30, 1987.
[6]
Counsel for the plaintiff called four witnesses:
(1) Mr. Max Grossberg, process server (Grossberg);
(2) Mr. Bruce Stratton, solicitor with the firm of Sim, Hughes, Dimock (Stratton);
(3) Mr. Anthony Lambert, solicitor with the firm Rogers, Bereskin and Parr (Lambert);
(4) Mr. Arthur Renault, solicitor with Sim, Hughes, Dimock (Renault).
[7]
Grossberg's testimony provided a clear indication that Herson was not prepared to be cooperative despite several attempts by Grossberg to contact him for the purpose of serving court documents. I accept without question that Grossberg attended at the residence of Herson on September 1 and 2, 1987, when he found no one home. On September 3, 1987, Grossberg telephoned Herson to arrange to meet Herson at the
front door
of old City Hall in the City of Toronto. Grossberg was at
that location
, Herson was not. Grossberg left a message on Herson's answering machine, and that Herson agreed to meet Grossberg at
midnight
on September 8, 1987. Prior to that Grossberg made other attempts to contact Herson without success, on one occasion leaving his business card for Herson's information. There was no doubt in the mind of Grossberg, as an experienced process server, that Herson was "avoiding service", "playing with me". This information, inter alia, is relevant to my decision on the subject of costs.
[8]
Stratton, in affidavit form and in oral evidence, was a credible and fair witness. I am completely satisfied that he served Herson personally with a certified copy of the order of the Associate Chief Justice dated November 16, 1987, and a copy of the notice of motion dated December 19, 1987.
[9]
Stratton's evidence is uncontradicted. On December 19, 1987, he attended at the intersection of Bay and Bloor Streets in Toronto to serve the Associate Chief Justice's order of November 16, 1987, on those street vendors selling or offering for sale watches marked with the GUCCI trademarks. He was with Mr. David Blackburn, an officer from the office of the Sheriff of the Judicial District of York (Blackburn), Lambert and others. On the northeast corner of the intersection several tables were set up upon which watches were offered for sale. The other details can be gleaned from Stratton's affidavit sworn January 15, 1988. A copy of the order was served on one of the vendors, and "I also explained the terms of the order to the man". Blackburn and Stratton began to count the watches which bore the GUCCI trademarks.
[10]
Lambert's evidence is that lawyers seeking to stop vendors selling counterfeit watches often cooperate with each other in this effort. Lambert knew Herson, having first met him in December 1986. His evidence is that he saw Herson "detach himself from the tables", and Lambert saw him putting watches in the trunk of his car which was parked in an alleyway. On this occasion Herson did not see Lambert. Lambert went back to the tables to get Blackburn and as Blackburn was busy counting counterfeit watches, Lambert asked Stratton to come with him. He was still loading the trunk and closed it. Both Lambert and Stratton in evidence state that Stratton spoke to Herson. It was at this point as they left the car and the alleyway, that Stratton served the documents referred to and told Herson he had a judgment requiring Herson "to deliver up" any counterfeit watches with GUCCI trademarks. Herson did not deliver up the watches in the trunk, nor permit Stratton to examine them. Stratton's evidence is as follows:
"Mr. Lambert and I approached Mr. Herson. I told Mr. Herson that I had a court order and that it obligated him to give me any watches bearing GUCCI trademarks. Mr. Herson quickly closed the trunk of the car, locked it, and began to walk down the lane to Bay Street. Mr. Lambert and I went with him. As we walked I served the order referred to in paragraph 2 above on Mr. Herson.
I explained the terms of the order to Mr. Herson
and repeated that he was prevented from selling counterfeit GUCCI watches and that he could come to the Federal Court in January in order to have the order reviewed.
I told him again that he was obligated to open the trunk of the car and deliver up to me all counterfeit GUCCI watches in his possession. He refused
. I explained that he could be held in contempt of the order in refusing to comply with the order." (Emphasis added)
[11]
This evidence in Stratton's affidavit is consistent with his comments earlier about a "vendor" (not Herson) to whom he "explained the terms of the order to the man".
[12]
Then, continuing in his affidavit and oral evidence, Stratton states:
"As we reached the corner of Bay Street and Bloor Street Mr. Herson called out to the vendor selling the watches from the suitcase who I had served with the order earlier. Mr. Herson called out 'Follow me. Come on, get out of here', or words to that effect. The vendor joined Mr. Herson and they both walked away from the intersection, leaving the counterfeit GUCCI watches on the table with Mr. Blackburn.
"I joined Mr. Blackburn, who had remained at the table counting watches. In total there were 56 watches bearing the GUCCI trademarks which were delivered up.
"After taking the watches from the suitcase I left the corner for approximately five or ten minutes. When I returned Martin Herson was standing behind the table on which the suitcase had been set up. He talked with the defendant Howard English who was selling watches from two tables set up beside the table with the suitcase.
Mr. English has sworn an affidavit herein in which he states that he is employed by Mr. Herson
.
"On returning to the laneway I discovered that the car into which Mr. Herson had been loading watches was gone. In light of the facts set out above I verily believe that the watches bearing the GUCCI trademarks being sold from the suitcase were being sold on behalf of Martin Herson and that Mr. Herson was supplying such watches to his employee from the car parked in the lane near the intersection of Bay Street and Bloor Street.
"The defendant Martin Herson was identified in the affidavit of Gordon McSevney filed herein sworn July 15, 1987, as having sold counterfeit GUCCI watches since as early as July 10, 1987." (Emphasis added)
[13]
The watches were collected, bagged, marked for identification and filed with the court. Exhibit No. 6 is an example of the counterfeit watches in the bag. In cross-examination Stratton conceded he had not seen the watches being put in the trunk nor did he have the opportunity of examining them in the trunk. He did, however, have "reasonable grounds" for believing that counterfeit GUCCI watches were in the trunk, and asked to see them and was refused.
[14]
One of the defendants, English, as indicated earlier, swore an affidavit that he was employed by Herson and "Herson supplied me with both the watches and the stands from which watches were sold. ... I displayed several dozen watches for sale. These watches typically included, at the beginning of each day, approximately five or six watches marked with one or more of the trademarks GUCCI, INTERLOCKING GC design, GREEN/RED/GREEN STRIPE design and GUCCI CREST design ... I was aware that these watches were not legitimate Gucci watches." English was not cross-examined on his affidavit and the defendant called no evidence to rebut the statements sworn to by English. In addition we had the uncontradicted evidence of Renaud, again given in affidavit form (no cross-examination of this affidavit) and orally:
"On December 20, 1987, at approximately 2:00 p.m. I attended at the Pickering Flea Market. With me were Sheriff Bain of the Judicial District of Durham, Constables Laval and Hooper of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and R. Scott MacKendrick, another solicitor employed by the solicitors for the plaintiff herein.
"In the Flea Market I saw three display cases set up from which three men were selling and offering for sale watches. I observed two of the men selling watches marked with the trademark GUCCI.
"At approximately 2:20 p.m. on December 20, 1987, I served one of the vendors, the defendant Martin Herson, with papers which purported to be:
(a) a certified copy of the order of the Associate Chief Justice herein dated December 14, 1987, a further copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit 'A';
(b) a copy of a notice of motion dated December 18, 1987, a further copy of which is attached hereto and marked as Exhibit 'B'; and
(c) a certified copy of the judgment dated November 30, 1987, a further copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit 'C',
by delivering to and leaving the said copies with the defendant Herson in his own proper person at his stand in the Pickering Flea Market, Ontario.
. . . . .
"I also served copies of the order and notice of motion described in paragraph 4(a) and 4(b) above on Shahrokh Elyasian at approximately 2:30 p.m. that day, December 20, 1987, by delivering to and leaving the said copies with Shahrokh Elyasian in his own proper person at his stand in the Pickering Flea Market.
"Now shown to me is the affidavit of Bruce Stratton herein sworn on January 15, 1988. Exhibit 'C' to that affidavit is a photograph showing two men. The man on the right hand side of that photograph is the man who identified himself to me as Shahrokh Elyasian. The man on the left hand side of that photograph is the man who identified himself to me as Martin Herson.
"
After serving the order on Mr. Herson and Mr. Elyasian I explained the terms of the order to them
.
"
Mr. Herson told me that the Gucci watches on display were owned by him and that Mr. Elyasian did not own the watches. During my attendance at the Pickering Flea Market on December 20, I saw Mr. Elyasian offer for sale and sell watches marked with the Gucci trademark
.
. . . . .
"
Mr. Herson delivered up to us 156 watches marked with the Gucci trademark
." (Emphasis added)
[15]
The 156 watches were bagged, sealed, marked for identification and filed with the court. One of the watches was removed from the bag as an exhibit of the contents marked Exhibit # 11.
[16]
In oral evidence Renaud added that he saw watch vending equipment and saw three people selling or offering for sale counterfeit GUCCI watches. He identified the three as Herson, Shahrokh Elyasian (Elyasian) and English at approximately 2:15 p.m. December 20, 1987. He stood and watched and it was clear that Herson and Elyasian "had control". One customer asked the price, was told $40.00 and moved on. Herson confirmed to Renaud that they were his watches. Renaud formed the opinion that Elyasian worked for Herson.
[17]
As indicated earlier, the defendant Herson called no evidence, did not give evidence himself and did not cross-examine on the affidavits filed.
[18]
I am satisfied on the evidence that Stratton did explain the documents served and that Herson was well aware that he was violating the terms of the judgment of November 30, 1987, and the order of November 16, 1987. However, I am also satisfied that Herson needed no such explanation in December of 1987. In a judgment on April 2, 1987, in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.I.P.R. 21 (F.C.T.D.), Herson was the defendant and it was determined he sold a counterfeit ROLEX watch on December 11, 1986. Rouleau, J.'s, words and the fine apparently made no impact and Herson did not learn from these words at page 24:
"I am satisfied that he could easily comprehend the order served on him November 15, 1986, and that he had to be aware that his course of conduct was completely indecent."
And later at page 25:
"Court orders must be obeyed in their spirit as well as to the letter of the law. The contempt powers given the court are to ensure smooth functioning of the judicial process and to advise the public at large that disobedience of a court pronouncement brings about swift and just retribution. It must be remembered that the primary purpose of imposing sanctions is to ensure compliance with orders of the court, and as I said in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1985] 1 C.N.L.R. 172 (Fed. T.D.), nothing should be allowed to interfere with the good order and administration of justice, or impair the dignity of the court.
"... and certainly Mr. Herson is no amateur in this field. He has had years of experience, he tells us he earned his living selling jewellery, so there's no doubt in my mind that he knew that what he was selling was counterfeit. This is total and blatant disregard. He knew of the undertaking and difficulties that Miss Michaels had encountered and he still continued to disregard the orders of this court."
DECISION
:
[19]
Upon hearing the evidence and reading the affidavits filed and paying particular attention to the crossexamination of the witnesses by Herson and upon hearing argument, I am satisfied that the plaintiff has met the test of establishing a prima facie case. The defendant has done nothing to counter the overwhelming evidence against him, nothing to displace the allegations and I therefore make a finding that Mr. Martin Herson is in contempt of the order of the Associate Chief Justice dated November 16, 1987, and of the judgment of the Associate Chief Justice dated November 30, 1987. Mr. Herson admitted that the watches at the Pickering Flea Market were his, and he was seen offering these counterfeit GUCCI watches for sale.
[20]
Because of the serious nature of this matter, the breach must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. No fairminded person, after reading the affidavits, hearing the testimony and listening to the arguments, could have come to any other conclusion than the fact that the allegations here have been proven beyond any doubt.
PENALTY AND COSTS
:
[21]
Mr. Herson is quite familiar with the seriousness of his misconduct - his contempt of the court order and judgment. He was admonished by Rouleau, J. (supra), in very strong terms. He has chosen to go blithely onward, regardless of the consequences he might face. This is not, as Herson would have us believe, games being played. The plaintiff is entitled to benefit from its trademarks and must use the court as the only avenue available to it to seek redress for violation of its trademarks. The witnesses were not unfair, but reported what they observed. They did not use any means of entrapment (e.g. setting up a sale) but relied on the conduct of Herson as they saw it. Herson is not being incriminated "for other people's wrongdoings, faults and distortions" as he also would like the court to believe. All he had to do was sign an affidavit agreeing to stop selling and then to stop. He chose to take his chances. It cannot be determined on the evidence that he is a "major player" although there was some suspicion of that voiced by a witness for the plaintiff when asked a direct question by Herson. But he has certainly been an active player, has ignored orders and has not learned from the Rolex case (supra) wherein Rouleau, J., stated: "Mr. Herson please stand up. You know, having the knowledge that you have of the jewellery business, this is absolute blatant disregard for commerce, for people who have spent thousands of dollars to develop products, to advertise them, it's disgraceful."
[22]
I hereby impose a fine of $5000.00. I will also order the defendant Martin Herson to pay to the plaintiff its costs of this action on a solicitor/client basis fixed at $2000.00. These sums must be paid within 30 days of the date of this order and failure to do so will result in six months in jail.
Application allowed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/mja
[End of document]