[1]
Denault, J.
: On April 17, 1998, in my capacity as a designated judge pursuant to s. 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
(the
Act
), I determined that the certificate issued by the Minister of Employment and Immigration and the Solicitor General for Canada pur­suant to s. 40.1(1) was reasonable [see 146 F.T.R. 223]. In the result, the applicant must be considered, pursuant to s. 40.1(7) of the
Act
, a person who has engaged or will engage in terrorism, or a person who is or was a member of an organization that there are reasonable grounds to believe is or was engaged in terrorism, or a person who there are reasonable grounds to believe will en­gage in acts of violence that would or might endanger the lives or safety of persons in Canada [see footnote 1].
[2]
Since the applicant was not removed from Canada within the 120 days con­templated by s. 40.1(8) of the
Act
, on November 2, 1998 he filed a notice of mo­tion for an order releasing him from deten­tion pursuant to s. 40.1(8).
[3]
On November 12, 1998, I examined, "in camera" and in the absence of the applicant and his counsel, the evidence or information presented to the Minister in relation to na­tional security or the safety of persons, pursuant to s. 40.1(10)(a) of the
Act
, and I approved and issued a statement sum­marizing the information pursuant to s. 40.1(10)(b). This document was served upon the applicant the same day.
[4]
At the outset of the public hearing on that day, applicant's counsel filed a motion for my recusation. She argued that I should not hear the application for release from detention because I had previously made a general finding that the applicant lacked credibility: she alleges that the "con­sideration by the same judge of whether to continue the detention of the applicant or to release him on conditions" [see footnote 2] would give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias.
[5]
The only issue is whether, in the cir­cumstances of the case, I ought to recuse myself from further involvement in the matter and have the motion for an order releasing the applicant from detention heard by another designated judge. There is no issue of actual bias.
[6]
Sections 40.1(8) to (11) of the
Immi­gration Act
provide for the following:
"40.1(8) Where a person is detained under subsection (7) and is not removed from Canada within 120 days after the making of the removal order relating to that per­son, the person may apply to the Chief Justice of the Federal Court or to a judge of the Federal Court designated by the Chief Justice for the purposes of this sec­tion for an order under subsection (9).
"(9) On an application referred to in sub­section (8) the Chief Justice or the desig­nated judge may, subject to such terms and conditions as the Chief Justice or desig­nated judge deems appropriate, order that the person be relased from detention if the Chief Justice or designated judge is satis­fied that
(a) the person will not be removed from Canada within a reasonable time; and
(b) the person's release would not be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons.
"(10) On the hearing of an application referred to in subsection (8), the Chief Justice or the designated judge shall
(a) examine, 'in camera', and in the absence of the person making the ap­plication and any counsel representing that person, any evidence or information presented to the Minister in relation to national security or the safety of persons;
(b) provide the person making the ap­plication with a statement summarizing the evidence or information available to the Chief Justice or designated judge in relation to national security or the safety of persons having regard to whether, in the opinion of the Chief Justice or the designated judge, as the case may be, the evidence or information should not be disclosed on the grounds that the dis­closure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons; and
(c) provide the person making the ap­plication with a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
"(11) For the purposes of subsection (10), the Chief Justice or the designated judge may receive and accept the evidence or information as the Chief Justice or the designated judge sees fit, whether or not the evidence or information is or would be admissible in a court of law."
"40.1(8) La personne retenue en vertu du paragraphe (7) peut, si elle n'est pas ren­voyée du Canada dans les cent vingt jours suivant la prise de la mesure de renvoi, demander au juge en chef de la Cour fédérale ou au juge de cette cour qu'il délègue pour l'application du présent ar­ticle de rendre l'ordonnance visée au para­graphe (9).
"(9) Sur présentation de la demande visée au paragraphe (8), le juge en chef ou son délégué ordonne, aux conditions qu'il estime indiquées, que l'intéressé soit mis en liberté s'il estime que:
(a) d'une part, il ne sera pas renvoyé du Canada dans un délai raisonnable;
(b) d'autre part, sa mise en liberté ne porterait pas atteinte à la sécurité na­tionale ou à celle de personnes.
"(10) À l'audition de la demande visée au paragraphe (8), le juge en chef ou son délégué:
(a) examine, à huis clos et en l'absence de l'auteur de la demande et du con­seiller le représentant, tout élément de preuve ou d'information présenté au ministre concernant la sécurité nationale ou celle de personnes;
(b) fournit à l'auteur de la demande un résumé des éléments de preuve ou d'in­formation concernant la sécurité na­tionale ou celle de personnes dont il dispose, à l'exception de ceux dont la communication pourrait, à son avis, porter atteinte à la sécurité nationale ou à celle de personnes;
(c) donne à l'auteur de la demande la possibilité d'être entendu.
"(11)	Pour l'application du paragraphe (10), le juge en chef ou son délégué peut recevoir et admettre les éléments de preuve ou d'information qu'il estime utiles, in­dépendamment de leur recevabilité devant les tribunaux."
[7]
As held by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  applied was set out by de Grandpré, J., in dissent, in
Committee for Justice and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  by reasonable and right minded persons, applying themselves to the question and obtaining thereon the required information ... [T]hat test is 'what would an informed person, viewing the matter realistically and practically - and having thought the matter through - con­clude. Would he think that it is more likely than not that [the decision-maker], whether consciously or unconsciously, would not decide fairly.'
"The grounds for this apprehension must, however, be substantial and I ... refus[e] to accept the suggestion that the test be re­lated to the 'very sensitive or scrupulous conscience'."
[8]
The Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  relative to the reason­able apprehension of bias, as stated by de Grand­pré, J., and immediately thereafter wrote: "Where the double participation in decision-making has been on the part of a judge, the principle has not seemed to pose any great difficulty." (p. 102). In support of that posi­tion, the Court of Appeal in
Arthur
referred to the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  who sat on an appeal relating to some of the prin­cipal questions in issue were barred by natural justice from sitting on the subsequent trial. Jackett, P., rejected that argument:
"In my view the correct view of the matter is that which, as I understand it, was adopted by Hyde, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; (1964) 2 C.C.C. 269; 41 C.R. 47 (Que. Q.B.), when he said that 'the ability to judge a case only on the legal evidence adduced is an essential part of the judicial process.'
In my view, there can be no apprehension of bias on the part of a judge merely because he has, in the course of his judicial duty, expressed his conclusion as to the proper findings on the evidence before him. It is his duty, if the same issues of fact arise for determination in another case, to reach his conclusions with regard thereto on the evidence adduced in that case after giving full consideration to the submissions with regard thereto made on behalf of the parties in that case
. It would be quite wrong for a judge in such a case to have regard to 'personal knowledge' derived from 'a recollection of the evidence' taken in the earlier cause. It is not reasonable to apprehend that there is 'a real likelihood' that a judge will so derelict in his duty as to decide one case in whole or in part on the evidence heard in an earlier case.
"If I may be permitted to say so, it seems to me that the real apprehension is that the judge who hears a case in which the same issues of fact arise as have recently been decided in the same court can hardly ig­nore the existence of the earlier decision for he cannot be unconscious of the possi­bility of apparently conflicting decisions creating an atmosphere of lack of con­fidence in the administration of justice. I should have thought, however, that a judge who participates in both of two such mat­ters is more likely to appreciate and ex­plain different results flowing from dif­ferent bodies of evidence or differences in presentation and argument than a judge who had no part in the earlier case. I do not say this to indicate that I have a view that the same judge should always try two such cases, but to indicate that, in my view, it is not necessarily prejudicial to the party who assumes the burden of pro­ducing a result in the second case that is apparently in conflict with the earlier decision." (My emphasis).
[9]
In
Arthur
, the Federal Court of Appeal also held that although the mere fact of a second hearing before the same adjudicator does not, in and of itself, give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias, the pres­ence of other factors indicating a predisposi­tion by the adjudicator relative to the issue to be decided at the second hearing may have that effect. As in the case at bar, the applicant there had argued that having pre­viously formed an opinion on the general question of his credibility, the same adjudi­cator should not hear an application involv­ing a similar issue. That argument was considered in­substantial. In dismissing the application, MacGuigan, J.A., writing for the court, concluded: "I am unable to detect any pre­disposition by the adjudicator on the ap­plicant's general credibility such as to amount to prejudgment of the result of the second hearing." [see footnote 7]
[10]
In
Nord-Deutsche Versicherungs  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Jackett, P., similarly concluded that there can be no apprehension of bias on the part of a judge merely because he has, in the course of his judicial duties, expressed his conclusion as to the proper findings on the evidence before him, having given full consideration to the parties' sub­missions with regard thereto.
[11]
Before deciding the issue of whether there may exist a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of a designated judge who, having previously determined that there was evidence and information that a person is a member of an inadmissible class of persons (i.e., involved in terrorism), later hears an application for the release of that person, an "informed person" must also properly con­textualize s. 40.1 of the
Act
.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  of s. 40.1 of the
Im­migration Act
, Madam Justice McGillis stated that in proceedings under that section of the
Act
, the competing interests of both the person involved and the state must be considered. She wrote (p. 692):
"An analysis of the scope of the principles of fundamental justice in proceedings under s. 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
must therefore be conducted in the context of immigration principles and policies, and with regard to the competing interests of the state and the person in question.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the individual had an interest in a fair procedure, the state had 'a con­siderable interest in effectively conducting national security and criminal intelligence investi­gations and in protecting police sources'."
[12]
There exists yet another important factor which must be taken into con­sideration by the "informed person". Any judge selected or designated to hear an application for the release of a person pur­suant to s. 40.1(8) is, subject to ss. 40.1(9) and (10), bound by the certificate previously issued pursuant to s. 40.1(4). Indeed, Parlia­ment has enacted s. 40.1(7) :
"40.1(7) Where a certificate has been reviewed by the Federal Court pursuant to subsection (4) and has not been quashed pursuant to paragraph (4)(d),
(a)
the certificate is conclusive proof that the person named in the certificate is a person described in subparagraph
19(1)(c.1)(ii), paragraph 19(1)(c.2), (d),
(e), (f), (g)
, (j), (k) or (l) or sub­paragraph 19(2)(a.1)(ii); and
(b) the person named in the certificate shall, notwithstanding s. 23 or 103 but subject to subsection (7.1), continue to be detained until the person is removed from Canada."
"40.1(7) Toute attestation qui n'est pas annulée en application de l'alinéa (4)(d) établit de façon concluante le fait que la personne qui y est nommée appartient à l'une des catégories visées au sous-alinéa 19(1)c.1)(ii), aux alinéas 19(1)c.2), (d), (e), (f), (g), (j), (k) ou l) ou au sous-alinéa 19(2)a.1)(ii) et l'intéressé doit, par dérogation aux articles 23 ou 103 mais sous réserve du paragraphe (7.1), continuer d'être retenu jusqu'à son renvoi du Canada." (My emphasis)
Consequently, a fully informed person, well aware of this requirement of the
Act
and of the certificate previously issued against an applicant, will undoubtedly appreciate the narrow parameters to be observed by the designated judge who is called upon to hear an application for an order releasing an applicant from detention.
[13]
Therefore I conclude that, in this case, there is no reasonable apprehension of bias relative to the application for release of the individual being heard by the same judge who conducted the reasonableness hearing pursuant to s. 40.1(4) of the
Act
. The motion for recusation is dismissed.
Motion dismissed.
Editor: Rodney A. Jordan/pdk
Footnotes
1.	Sections 19(1)(e)(iii) and (iv)(C), 19(1)(f)(ii) and (iii)(B), and s. 19(1)(g).
2.	Notice of motion, ground b).
3.	[1997] 3 S.C.R. 484; 218 N.R. 1; 161 N.S.R.(2d) 241; 477 A.P.R. 241
4.	[1978] 1 S.C.R. 369; 9 N.R. 115, at pp. 394-395
5.	[1993] 1 F.C. 94; 147 N.R. 288 (F.C.A.)
6.	[1968] 1 Ex.C.R. 443
7.	Op.cit. p. 106
8.	[1995] 3 F.C. 669; 100 F.T.R. 261, a decision upheld by the Federal Court of Appeal 201 N.R. 233. Leave to appeal was later denied by the Supreme Court of Canada 223 N.R. 72.
[End of document]