[1] Teitelbaum, J.
: Plaintiff filed into the Federal Court Registry a statement of claim on May 28, 1993 and served the said statement of claim on the defendant on May 31, 1993. A statement of defence was filed on August 3, 1993 and served on the plaintiff on August 5, 1993. A reply was filed and served on September 2, 1993. With consent, an amended statement of claim was filed and served on October 1, 1993. Paragraph 56 of the amended statement of claim reads in part:
"56. The plaintiff therefore claims in tort and contract as follows:
(a) damages in the amount of $35,000,000 for negligent misrepresentation, unlawful inference with economic relations and legitimate business expectancy, failure to negotiate in good faith, failure to evaluate tender bids in accordance with the terms of tender specifications and breach of contract;"
[2]
A request for particulars was made by the defendant by letter dated June 30, 1993. The plaintiff provided particulars in a letter dated July 19, 1993. The following are the particulars given to the defendant in the letter of July 19, 1993:
"A. Throughout the negotiation process, which commenced in March, 1991, for the renewal of the lease, representatives of our client, as identified in the statement of claim, dealt solely and exclusively with representatives of the Real Estate Division of P.W.C., also as identified in the statement of claim. Through October and November, 1992 the Real Estate Division continued to expressly indicate its preparedness to negotiate a final agreement acceptable to the Crown. At or about the same time, the Accommodations Branch of P.W.C., described by the defendant Minister as having an 'arms-length relationship' with the Real Estate division of P.W.C., knowing interfered, unfairly and unlawfully in the negotiation process and, after October 30, 1992, in the negotiated and legally enforceable contract between representatives of our client and P.W.C., by making the decision to proceed and then proceeding with a tender process for the process of leasing premises for the Atomic Energy Control Board.
"B. On November 26, 1992, P.W.C. forwarded to our client a Lease Tender Document which specified the 'provisions, requirements and standards to be included and maintained in the accommodation offered' and to be used in the preparation by our client of any tender offer which it might wish to make. In addition, the Lease Tender Document specified that all offers would be irrevocable ('must remain open to acceptance') up to and including March 1, 1993. Our client filed its bid in response to the invitation of P.W.C. an in accordance with the specified provisions as set out in the Lease Tender Document, including the irrevocability condition noted above. An explicit, written contract was thereby formed.
"C. The representations of P.W.C. through its representatives, clearly represented to our client, not only that P.W.C. was prepared to negotiate 'a final agreement acceptable to the Crown' but also represented the specific rental rates which would be acceptable to the Crown and to which our client must agree. The plaintiff relied upon those representations in accepting the department's final offer on rental rates, which acceptance constituted a contract. Only after the plaintiff had acted in reliance upon these representations did P.W.C. then advise that it had decided to repudiate the contract which had been negotiated and proceed to tender. All courses of conduct and statements made by P.W.C. and its officials prior to November 26, 1992 constitute misrepresentation. The statement of claim sets out to the best of our client's knowledge, all statements made and all courses of conduct undertaken upon which the plaintiff relied to its detriment."
[3]
In the statement of defence, the defendant pleaded, as follows, in respect of certain of the claims made in para. 56 of the statement of claim:
"8. In response to paras. 55 and 56 of the statement of claim the defendant ... says as follows:
. . . . .
d. In relation to the claim for unlawful interference with economic relations and business expectancy:
i. The statement of claim discloses no cause of action.
ii. There was no interference with any economic relations or business expectancy involving the plaintiff and any third party.
. . . . .
e. In relation to the claim for failure to negotiate in good faith, the claim discloses no cause of action known to law."
[4]
In that the defendant has pleaded in her statement of defence that in relation to the plaintiff's claim for unlawful interference with economic relations and business expectancy, the statement of claim discloses no cause of action and that there was no interference with any economic relations or business expectancy involving the plaintiff and any third party, and that in relation with plaintiff's claim for failure to negotiate in good faith, the statement of claim discloses no cause of action known in law, the defendant now brings a notice of motion for:
"An order striking out of subparagraph 56(a) of the amended statement of claim herein the following claims:
a) unlawful interference with the economic relations and legitimate business expectations;
and
b) failure to negotiate in good faith."
[5]
The grounds for this motion, as stated in the notice of motion are:
"The Grounds For The Motion are that the claims disclose no reasonable cause of action or are otherwise scandalous, frivolous, or vexatious, and the Deputy Attorney General relies on Rules 419(1)(a) and (c) of the
Federal Court Rules
."
[6]
At the hearing, counsel for the defendant abandoned the ground found in rule 419(1)(c) and relies only on rule 419(1)(a). Rules 419(1)(a) and (c) state:
"Rule 419(1) The court may at any stage of an action order any pleading or anything in any pleading to be struck out, with or without leave to amend, on the ground that:
(a) it discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence, as the case may be,
. . . . .
(c) it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious,"
[7]
As I have stated, the defendant has abandoned her claim pursuant to rule 419(1)(c) and relies solely on rule 419(1)(a).
[8]
The defendant, in her memorandum of fact and law, states the issue in the following manner:
"It is respectfully submitted that the issue in this motion is whether the claim for unlawful interference with economic relations and legitimate business expectations, as well as the claim for failure to negotiate in good faith, or either of them, should be struck out as disclosing no reasonable cause of action or as being otherwise scandalous, frivolous, or vexatious."
[9]
The plaintiff states the issue as follows:
"It is respectfully submitted that this honourable court is being asked to decide two issues:
(a) whether it is plain, obvious and beyond all doubt that the plaintiff's claims for unlawful interference with economic relations and legitimate business expectations and/or for failure to negotiate in good faith cannot possibly succeed, because no reasonable, arguable cause of action exists, and;
(b) whether either or both of the claims are so clearly futile that one or both have not the slightest chance of success at trial."
[10]
Both really say the same thing. There is a different emphasis by the parties as to what considerations should be given to the various elements in coming to a conclusion as to whether or not a pleading should be struck.
Striking Out - General Principles
[11]
The following, briefly, are the general principles to be applied in an application to strike for want of a cause of action.
[12]
The facts pleaded must be assumed to be true (except where patently ridiculous or incapable of proof). Only where it is plain and obvious that an action cannot succeed, and the court is satisfied that the case is beyond doubt, the statement of claim should be struck out and the action dismissed (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 1.)
[13]
In dealing with an application to strike, whether to strike the entire statement of claim or to strike part of the statement of claim, the court should, before the granting such an application, be satisfied, that, in the present case, the plaintiff, beyond all doubt, has shown no reasonable cause of action (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.R. 287; 18 D.L.R.(4th) 481; 12 Admin. L.R. 16, at p. 476.)
A) The Claim For Interference With
Economic Relations
Defendant's Submission
[14]
The defendant submits that in order to claim for interference with economic relations, there must be five elements present. According to the defendant, the five elements of this tort are:
a) a valid and enforceable contract between the plaintiff and a third party;
b) knowledge by the defendant of that contract;
c) an intentional act by the defendant inducing a breach of the contract;
d) wrongful interference by the defendant in inducing the breach; and
e) resulting damage to the plaintiff.
[15]
The defendant cites the cases of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C.J.).
[16]
The defendant submits that the plaintiff must plead facts which point to a specific tortious act which is independent of the breach of contract. The defendant states that to give rise to a separate claim for intentional inducement of breach of contract as well as a claim for breach of contract arising out of the same circumstances, there must be separate identities of interest (
Ontario Store  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Fed.C.A.)). The defendant, in paras. 17 and 18 of her memorandum of facts and law states:
"17. Even if liability is to be extended beyond contractual situations to include less tangible situations, such as economic relationships or business expectations, a separate tortious act by the defendant, and relationships or expectations as between the plaintiff and a third party with which that act interfered, must be established.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  expectations are pleaded, other than those concerning the plaintiff and the defendant. Even if such were pleaded, no separate wrongful act by the defendant interfering with such relationship is pleaded."
[17]
The defendant concedes, because the facts as pleaded must be considered as proven for the purposes of this application, that a valid and enforceable contract exists as between the plaintiff and the defendant but no such contract exists as between the plaintiff and a third party and for this reason alone the claim must be struck. Defendant submits that the defendant has two branches in the Department of Public Works but nevertheless there is only one defendant, Her Majesty the Queen.
[18]
The defendant submits that the plaintiff has not pleaded facts which point to a specific tortious act which is independent of the alleged breach of contract.
[19]
According to the defendant, because plaintiff cannot show a contract between herself and a third party and because plaintiff cannot show that there exists a specific tortious act inducing the breach of the contract, the claim for interference with economic relations must be struck.
Plaintiff's Submission
[20]
Plaintiff submits that the plaintiff's claim has set out sufficient facts with respect to the long standing legal relationship of landlord/tenant which has existed between the parties. Plaintiff submits that in the case before me, the defendant, as represented by the Accommodations Branch of Public Works Canada is a third party which knowingly interfered with the relationship and legitimate expectancy existing by virtue of the lengthy negotiations concerning renewal of the lease between the plaintiff and defendant as represented by the Real Estate Division of Public Works Canada.
[21]
Counsel for the plaintiff, in his oral submissions, states that a third party is not a requirement to have a cause of action for interference with economic relations and legitimate business expectancy.
[22]
Furthermore, the plaintiff, in paragraphs 11 and 12 of its memorandum of fact and law states:
"11. With respect to this tort, the unlawful interference with economic relations and legitimate business expectancy, may be either unfair or unlawful. Interference in the renewal of the lease by the Accommodations Branch at a point when negotiations as to terms of the renewal had been completed, and arbitrarily imposing a tender process, was patently unfair, and, assuming that an enforceable contract existed, was also unlawful.
"12. The novelty of applying this cause of action to this particular set of circumstances should not, at this point in the litigation, prevent the plaintiff from proceeding."
Discussion
[23]
I am satisfied that in order to have a cause of action resulting from a claim for interference with economic relations and legitimate business expectancy there must, as one of the elements required, be a valid and enforceable contract between a plaintiff and a third party and that the defendant caused the breach of the contract between the plaintiff and the third party.
[24]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  failure to pay for goods and services. Plaintiff also alleged that the defendant "B" an officer and director of the corporate defendant, intentionally induced breaches of contract between the plaintiff and the corporate defendant.
[25]
The defendant "B" moved to have a paragraph struck in the original statement of claim in which it was alleged that withholding of payment was done at the urging of the defendant "B". It was "Held":
"The plaintiff must properly plead the facts which set out all of the elements of the tort of intentional interference with contractual relations. The elements of this tort include: an enforceable contract; knowledge of the plaintiff's contract; an intentional act on the part of the defendant to cause a breach of the contract; wrongful interference on the part of the defendant, and resulting damage. To give rise to a separate claim for intentional inducement of breach of contract, as well as a claim for breach of contract arising out of the same circumstances, there must be separate identities of interest. Otherwise there is mere duplication under another label. A plaintiff must plead facts which point to a specific tortious act which is independent of the breach of contract."
[26]
On p. 44, MacFarland, J., lists the elements required for the tort of interference with economic relations and legitimate business expectancy. MacFarland, J., states:
"The issue in this motion is whether the plaintiff has properly pleaded facts which set out all of the elements of the tort of intentional interference with contractual relations. The elements of this tort include the following: (1) an enforceable contract; (2) knowledge of the plaintiff's contract; (3) an intentional act on the part of the defendant to cause a breach of that contract; (4) wrongful interference on the part of the defendant, and (5) resulting damage.
"I am of the view that to give rise to a separate claim for intentional inducement of breach of contract as well as a claim for breach of contract arising out of the same circumstances,
there must be separate identities of interest
, otherwise there is mere duplication under another label. It seems to me implicit in the definition." (Underlining is mine)
[27]
In the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sept. 15, 1989), a decision of the Ontario High Court of Justice, Mr. Justice Ewaschuk lists the elements required for the tor of interference with economic relations and legitimate business expectancy. He states at p. 9 of the decision:
"In order to succeed, Dufferin must establish that Greenbaum and Vogue committed the tort of unlawful interference with legitimate business expectancy. The elements of the tort are as follows: (1) existence of a valid business relationship or expectancy; (2) knowledge by the defendant of the relationship or expectancy; (3) intentional interference inducing or causing a termination of the relationship or expectancy by unfair or unlawful means (fair competition is permissible); (4) proximate cause; (5) resulting damages. See Prosser and Keeton on The Law of Torts, 5th Ed. (1984) at p. 1005 where they state that the origin of the tort is found in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and is a legitimate extension of the tort of inducing breach of contract."
[28]
In this case, as in the case of
Ontario Store Fixtures Inc.
, supra, two of the essential elements that must be present is an unlawful act and the interference of a third party.
[29]
From the reading of the plaintiff's statement of claim and for the purposes of the present application before me, I am satisfied that there is an allegation of an unlawful act. The question is by whom was this unlawful act? From a reading of the statement of claim the unlawful act was committed by the Accommodations Branch of the Department of Public Works.
[30]
I am satisfied that the Accommodations Branch of the Department of Public Works cannot be considered as a "third party". Both the Accommodations Branch of P.W.C. and the Real Estate Division of P.W.C. are as one. If a contract exists between the plaintiff and the defendant and as a result of the actions of the Accommodations Branch the contract was breached, the defendant is responsible for contractual damages, not for damages for interference with economic relations and legitimate business expectancy.
[31]
Therefore, para. 56(a) of the Amended Statement of Claim dated October 1, 1993, must be amended so that the words "unlawful interference with economic relations and legitimate business expectancy" are struck.
B) Failure To Negotiate In Good Faith
Defendant's Submission
[32]
The defendant submits that the law does not recognize a contract to enter into a contract and accordingly cannot recognize a legal obligation to negotiate. Defendant submits that there is no duty to bargain in good faith and where a contract under negotiation is not concluded, no action lies. Defendant submits the cases of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. H.C.J.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (P.E.I.T.D.), for my consideration.
Plaintiff's Submission
[33]
The plaintiff as part of its written submission on the issue of negotiating in good faith state, in paras. 13, 14, 15 and 16, the following:
"13. The plaintiff agrees with the general legal propositions that the law does not recognize a contract to enter into a contract nor a legal obligation to commence negotiations. In such circumstances, where there are no negotiations, the plaintiff agrees that there is no duty to bargain in good faith. However, none of these propositions of law are applicable to the facts of the case at bar.
"14. The plaintiff has pleaded inter alia, that negotiations towards the renewal of the lease had been entered into, had resulted in an agreement as to terms, and had therefore successfully resulted in an enforceable contract. It is of course not open to the defendant to dispute these pleaded facts.
"15. It is the respectful submission of the plaintiff that in the circumstances as pleaded, the law does recognize an obligation to act in good faith.
"16. In 1989, the Supreme Court of Canada addressed the broad duty of good faith in a commercial context as follows:
The institution of bargaining in good faith is one that is worthy of legal protection in those circumstances where that protection accords with the expectation of the parties.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 672"
[34]
As previously stated, all that is alleged in the statement of claim is taken as having been proven. Upon reading the statement of claim, the following are the facts as they apply to the negotiations:
1. Plaintiff and defendant, on August 24, 1983 entered into an agreement of lease for ten years commencing on September 1, 1983 and ending on August 31, 1993.
2. On March 1, 1990, plaintiff and defendant entered into a further agreement to lease additional space in the same building for a term of 3 years and 6 months to end on August 31, 1993.
3. Negotiations to renew the lease were initiated by the plaintiff in March 1991 more than two years in the advance of the expiry date. The negotiations were between representatives of plaintiff and representatives of defendant, namely Claude Séguin, Chief of Leasing and Gary Mahar, Senior Leasing Officer of the Real Estate Division of Public Works Canada. Plaintiff was so negotiating "on the understanding and belief that the Real Estate Division had the authority and mandate to negotiate a renewal of the lease, upon terms which would be acceptable to P.W.C.".
4. Numerous meetings took place. In a letter dated October 15, 1992, P.W.C. wrote to plaintiff stating in part:
"... if you are anxious to negotiate a final agreement acceptable to the Crown ... we would be prepared to meet with you at your earliest convenience. Please bear in mind however, that the department cannot entertain negotiations beyond 23 October 1992."
Plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed to expend the negotiation process beyond October 23, 1992.
5. On October 27, 1992, while negotiations between Plaintiff and P.W.C. were still ongoing and without notice to plaintiff, P.W.C. published in the Ottawa Citizen a request for information as to the availability of space for a term of 10 years effective September 1, 1993 located within the defined core area of the City in which plaintiff's building is located.
6. On October 29, 1992, plaintiff's representative orally agreed with Claude Séguin "to meet the rental rate which had been stipulated by P.W.C. on October 27, 1992". Mr. Séguin advised plaintiff's representative that he was prepared to recommend the renewal of the lease and that confirmation would be forthcoming "within a few days".
7. Plaintiff had met the requirements of P.W.C.
8. By letter dated November 26, 1992, Claude Séguin advised plaintiff that P.W.C. would not accept plaintiff's offer. No explanation was given.
9. Plaintiff in paras. 35, 36 and 37 of the amended statement of claim states:
"35. During the period from March, 1991 through November 1992 the plaintiff negotiated in good faith
for the renewal of the lease
which culminated in a decision to submit its best offer on rental rates in the belief that, having met P.W.C.'s terms, recommendation and approval of the renewal of the lease would be forthcoming. At no time during these twenty-one months did P.W.C. raise questions concerning other details of a renewed lease, such as security t=systems, swing space, fit-up or fit-up costs. The only serious item for proposal and counter proposal was an acceptable rental rate, and the plaintiff was responsive to P.W.C.'s concerns on that issue.
"36. At all material times, the plaintiff expressed an anxious desire to negotiate a fair and reasonable rental rate for the renewal of the lease and to that end continued to table revised proposals and to articulate the reasoning behind its positions, despite the threat of P.W.C. in the last months of negotiations to consider the option of a tender process if the plaintiff did not meet P.W.C.'s terms on the rental rate.
"37. Once P.W.C. entered into negotiations with the plaintiff for renewal of the lease, the plaintiff says that P.W.C. was obligated to negotiate in good faith, to make best efforts to reach an agreement, and not to withhold confirmation unreasonably. P.W.C. failed to meet these obligations when it refused to confirm an agreement for renewal of the lease once the plaintiff had met P.W.C.'s requirement on rental rates." (Underlining is mine)
Discussion
[35]
At this stage of the proceedings, I am not absolutely convinced that the plaintiff does not have a cause of action for the failure of the defendant to negotiate in good faith. If I take the facts alleged as proven, and I must do so for these proceedings, plaintiff alleges that there were ongoing negotiations to
renew
a lease contract which was to end on August 31, 1993. The words of Mr. Justice La Forest in the
Lac Mineral
case, supra, at p. 672  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  are worth repeating as I am convinced that they are most applicable in the circumstances of this case.
"The institution of bargaining in good faith is one that is worthy of legal protection in those circumstances where that protection accords with the expectations of the parties."
[36]
In the present case, the plaintiff, if I take the facts as proven, negotiated in good faith and had the expectation that P.W.C. would also negotiate in good faith for the renewal of the existing lease. This fact, the existence of a ten year lease, distinguishes the cases of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  bar. As a result, I am not absolutely convinced that plaintiff, at this stage of the proceedings, has no legal cause of action.
Conclusion
[37]
The application to strike is allowed in part. The words "unlawful interference with economic relations and legitimate business expectancy" found in para. 56(a) of the amended statement of claim are struck.
[38]
Plaintiff is hereby granted permission to amend its amended statement of claim within 15 days of today's date.
[39]
Costs in the cause.
Application allowed in part.
Editor: David Weir/saf
[End of document]