[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: This is the second of four actions, commenced this year by the plaintiff in the Edmonton Registry of the court, to be struck out pursuant to Rule 419. There are pending motions to strike out the other two actions.
[2]
The statements of claim in the two actions which have been struck out are similar in that they contain bald assertions, speculations and conclusions, include few if any facts and seek large damage awards.
[3]
I gave reasons for striking out the statement of claim in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  later to those reasons. These present reasons are to make clear to the plaintiff the reason for the award of costs against him and the term that the plaintiff may not file new actions until he has paid those costs.
[4]
The present statement of claim, filed July 20, 1995, by the plaintiff, refers to restraint of trade in the context of s. 50 of the
Competition Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-34 and tied selling under s. 77 of the
Competition Act
. It claims damages under that
Act
: one would assume that the reference is to s. 36 of the
Competition Act
which allows civil recovery of damages for any persons who has suffered loss or damage as a result of conduct contrary to any provision in Part VI of the
Act
. Section 50 is included in Part VI of the
Act
.
[5]
The pleadings are vague. The plaintiff does not explain his business or the position from which he makes his claim. The operative part of the statement of claim merely sets out that:
"4. The restraint of trade involves using mainframe software pricing to reduce the price of IBM compatible mainframe hardware.
"5. The plaintiff has knowledge of multiple incidents that have affected multiple deals, bids and companies and has involved the actions of the defendant in more than one province and across province.
"6. These illegal actions have reduced competition and significantly affected the market and a large number of bids and deals. The amount involved is in the millions of dollars.
"7. But for these actions the plaintiff would have realised a significant amount of income and business growth.
"8. The plaintiff has had conversations with the defendant including the Corporate Counsel. Counsel for the plaintiff has also had conversations with the defendant's Counsel. No satisfactory response has been forthcoming."
[6]
The statement of claim then concludes with claims for damage totalling $1,500,000 together with long-term business losses to be determined. However, the plaintiff sets out neither the nature of his business nor indeed that he has any connection with the computer industry.
[7]
Although the plaintiff had ample notice of this motion, he did not attend at the Edmonton Office of the court at 10:00 a.m. on August 16, 1995. The Registry staff attempted to reach him by telephone. The motion proceeded in his absence at 10:15 a.m., however, even some 20 minutes later, when the motion concluded, the plaintiff was not in attendance.
Analysis
[8]
As in the case of the plaintiff's earlier proceeding, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 481; 13 C.R.R. 287; 12 Admin. L.R. 16, at p. 451.
[9]
The usual approach is to take the facts pleaded as proven. The difficulty in the present instance is that the statement of claim contains few if any facts. I have kept in mind that the statement of claim should only be struck out if it is plain and obvious that the claim discloses no reasonable cause of action (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 321) and is hopeless with the outcome beyond doubt.
[10]
To begin, reliance on s. 77 of the
Competition Act
as a civil cause of action under which to claim damages is bad at law and cannot succeed. Section 77 is not contained in Part VI of the
Competition Act
and therefore does not give the plaintiff benefit from the purely statutory right of civil recovery, in s. 36 of the
Act
, allowed to a person who has suffered loss or damage as a result of conduct contrary to any provision in Part VI of the
Act
. Tied selling is not, in the absence of legislation, illegal. This is amply borne out by the case law.
[11]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1 (T.D.), at p. 55 the Honourable Mr. Justice Teitelbaum noted that "... abuse of dominant position in the
Competition Act
is not a criminal or even civil illegality. It is a reviewable practice under Part VIII of the
Act
and any proceedings relating to the practice are conducted before a civil administrative tribunal. There is no improper conduct until such time as the Competition Tribunal so finds." There is no indication in the statement of claim of any proceedings before the Competition Tribunal.
[12]
The practice of tied selling and the argument that it was a contravention of s. 77, under Part VIII of the
Competition Act
, which ought to allow a remedy, was considered by the Honourable Mr. Justice Hutchinson of the B.C. Supreme Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  conclusion that tied selling was not illegal in the absence of legislation to the contrary:
"12 The practices of 'exclusive dealing', 'market restriction' and 'tied selling', in the absence of legislation prohibiting them, are legitimate, are lawful and prima facie not contrary to public policy. Were they offences under Part VI and punishable by imprisonment or a fine, then they would be unlawful. However, as they do not attract such sanctions, those practices are not unlawful, and in the absence of some other culpability cannot be the foundation for a finding of unlawful means.
"13 The sections under Part VIII of the
Competition Act
deal with matters that are only reviewable by the Tribunal constituted under the
Act
and not by an ordinary court." (p. 88)
See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Action No. 1535, Court files 482/94 and 287/94, where the court pointed out that s. 75(1) of the
Competition Act
, which is the opening section of Part VIII and which deals with restrictive trade practices and refusal to deal, does not confer a cause of action which can be enforced in a court of common law or equity, but rather is an area which Parliament has assigned exclusively to the Competition Tribunal (see pp. 9 and 14).
[13]
The defendant has asked for the costs of this motion. The fact that a lay plaintiff misses the point that tied selling is not against the law unless there is legislation to the contrary and that s. 77 of the
Competition Act
is of no help is not something that I would hold against a plaintiff. However, the plaintiff, who began this action well after my reasons in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  balance of his statement of claim do not constitute a cause of action. Such pleadings may well, particularly given the prior caution, result in an award of costs. As the Federal Court of Appeal pointed out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 5385:
"The appellant seems unable to grasp that the bare assertions of his conclusions as to the nature of those actions are not the material facts which he must plead if the respondent is to be required to answer his complaints in a law suit. It follows that the statement of claim does not disclose a reasonable cause of action and that it was properly struck out."
[14]
Just as in the plaintiff's earlier action,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  plead if IBM Canada Limited is to required to respond with a defence. The statement of claim does not disclose a reasonable cause of action. It therefore ought to be struck out.
[15]
The statement of claim is vexatious and embarrassing in that it does not show sufficient facts to make it possible for the defendant to answer with a defence or for the court to regulate at trial. It is fundamentally both vexatious and embarrassing: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 236 (F.C.A.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  process of the court in that serious allegations have been made, but no facts have been pleaded. Such irrelevant allegations are an abuse of process and should be struck out: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.).
Possible Amendment
[17]
I have also considered whether the plaintiff might make any proper amendment to the statement of claim so as to set out a reasonable cause of action. That portion of the statement of claim seeking damages for tied selling is bad in law and thus no amendment would be of assistance.
[18]
Section 50 of the
Competition Act
, on which the plaintiff also relies, sets out three offences, being discrimination against a purchaser, selling in one area of Canada at prices lower than those charged elsewhere in Canada resulting in substantial lessening of competition or eliminating a competitor and finally, selling products at an unreasonably low price thus substantially lessening competition or eliminating a competitor.
[19]
The allegations in the statement of claim are vague, except to the extent of a bare allegation involving mainframe software and mainframe hardware pricing. No facts are set out. There is nothing to indicate the plaintiff's connection with the computer industry and any resulting claim for damages. Indeed, I am not able to see how the statement of claim might be amended to make the connection between a bare assertion of restraintive trade and the very substantial damages claimed. Thus the action is struck out without leave to amend.
Conclusion
[20]
As I pointed out to Mr. Ceminchuk in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  defendant and the court may understand the plaintiff' claim. This particular statement of claim contains no facts, only bare statements in the nature of assertions and conclusions. It is a claim which is not founded on any reasonable cause of action and which seeks arbitrary damages. It is vexatious and frivolous. The pleading is embarrassing to the defendant. Overall, it is an abuse of process.
"The Court of Appeal recently remarked, albeit in a slightly different context, that 'Courts are public institutions for the resolution of dispute and cost substantial public money. Court congestion and delay is a serious public concern.':
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A-634-93, at p. 7. That proposition was subsequently endorsed by the Chief Justice in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and that includes lay litigants, who bring actions which are forlorn and doomed, cannot expect the luxury of being allowed to continue proceedings of which nothing can come. To allow this action to proceed would not only be an abuse of process of the court, but also an abuse of the taxpayer. The statement of claim is therefore struck out."
These comments are again applicable.
[21]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the
Rules
, he ought not necessarily to be penalized, even for a fairly substantial error in his pleadings, in the first instance.
[22]
In the present instance, not only has the plaintiff produced a statement of claim that is without a cause of action and that is embarrassing, vexatious and an abuse of process, but also, the plaintiff had ample prior cautions as set out in my reasons of June 6, 1995, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the present action.
[23]
The defendant has had to go to considerable expense in order to strike out a proceeding that is without cause of action, is embarrassing, vexatious and abusive. The defendant shall therefore have costs in the amount of $250, together with airfare for counsel from Calgary, $244.56, a present going rate, for a total of $494.56. Moreover, the plaintiff may not commence any further actions in this court until those costs and disbursements have been paid.
Application allowed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/saf
[End of document]