[1]
Dubé, J.
: This patent infringement case involves two Canadian patents, nos. 739,756 and 782,348, relating to wood chipping machinery and cutting knife suitable for use in such chipping machinery. The inventor and former owner of such patents was George Standal ("Standal"), a former British Columbia millwright. The invention dates back to December 14, 1959, and Standal died on December 7, 1980. The plaintiff, Roderick W. MacDonald was appointed to carry on these proceedings. The second plaintiff, Standal's Patents Ltd., is a British Columbia Corporation carrying on the former interests of Standal.
[2]
The defendant Swecan International Ltd. ("Swecan") is a corporation formed under the laws of Canada in 1970 with a place of business at Lanorais in the Province of Quebec. The second defendant, Swecan Tools Co. Ltd. is a subsidiary of Swecan and has been inactive since 1978. The third defendant, Swecan Equipment Ltd. is also a subsidiary of Swecan; it declared bankruptcy on October 18, 1988.
1.
Chronology Of Events
[3]
Thirty years after the invention, it now becomes extremely difficult to present in a condensed and intelligible form the various events which have marked the long journey of the Standal litigations through American and Canadian courts. A condensed chronology of the most significant trials and tribulations might be of some assistance in establishing a proper perspective for the complex proceedings before this court.
[4]
On May 27, 1960, George Standal files his U.S. Patent Applications. On January 2, 1962, Standal issues a licence to an Oregon, U.S.A. company, Chipper Machine and Engineering Limited ("CM&E"). At that time Standal meets with Thomas Miles, a consulting engineer for CM&E and both discuss a prototype machine to embody the invention. On August 2, 1966, theE first Canadian patent (739,756) and on April 9, 1968, the second Canadian patent (782,348) are issued.
[5]
In 1968, Swecan begins the importation from CM&E of chipping heads and knives and builds a canter and dualhead edger. In 1972, CM&E launches a U.S. infringement action (as a licensee of Standal) against Filer Stowell for use of a two-piece knife. On December 25, 1972, the owner of CM&E, Al Maede, dies. On August 10, 1973, CM&E cancels the Standal licence. In 1974, Standal signs licences with knife and canter manufacturers, including Simond Saws and Forano of Quebec, and advertises that CM&E and Swecan are infringing the Standal patents.
[6]
On November 3, 1975, Mainland Industries Inc. (a Calgary-based affiliate of the Bow Valley Group) buys CM&E in Oregon. In 1976, Standal starts a British Columbia Supreme Court action against Mainland: the action goes dormant. During that period, from 1974 to 1980, Standal attends lumber shows and complains of infringers by advertising there. During the 1976-1978 period the various Standal licensees (including Forano) all cancelled their licences.
[7]
During the whole period, Standal continues to protest publicly the infringements of his invention: he pickets MacMillan Bloedel, runs Financial Post ad seeking "help". In the summer of 1980, the manager of Standal's Patent Limited, Dr. Lorne Rosen-blood, arranges to file disclaimers for the two Standal patents and launches separate Canadian federal court proceedings against Mainland and Forano and the instant action against Swecan. In August of that year George Standal is found to be terminally ill with cancer. He is examined for discovery in the fall and dies in December.
[8]
On October 2, 1981, Mainland U.S.A. (CM&E) launches a countersuit before a U.S. court in Oregon to cancel the U.S. patents. On May 7, 1982, Standal's Patent Ltd. counterclaims in the U.S. action. The evidence of Thomas Miles is taken by commission for both the U.S. and the Canadian actions by Mainland and Swecan. On October 15, 1985, the U.S. trial decision is released in favour of Standal. In 1986, Forano settles the Canadian cases, the U.S. Court of Appeal upholds the trial decision against Mainland and a U.S. suit against Bow Valley for fraudulent preference is begun before a court in Oregon.
[9]
In December 1987 the Oregon court releases a trial decision against Bow Valley for fraudulent preference. In March 1988, an action is commenced in Alberta against Bow Valley based on the U.S. judgment. On June 22 of that same year, notice is given to the defendant Swecan of the plaintiff's intent to resume the instant Canadian action. In July 1988 the actions against Bow Valley are settled.
2.
The Two Standal Patents
[10]
The first patent is for a chipper knife and apparatus. The second patent is for a chipper apparatus. The disclosures in both patents are the same, covering eleven pages of text and six pages of drawings. The disclosures reveal that the invention relates to a novel apparatus for squaring logs in preparation for sawmill processing. Up to the date of the invention, it was customary to square each log before cutting the conventional dimension lumber from it. According to the present practice (at the time of the invention), the outer portion of the log is either planed or cut by saws resulting in large quantities of sawdust which become waste. The cut edgings removed by saws may be slashed into chips for pulp, but this requires additional steps and handling. The invention, therefore, proposes to use a chipper to remove the rough edges of boards or logs. Such removal results in the production of chips usable in the production of wood pulp and at the same time produces a smooth finished plain edge.
[11]
As stated in the patent disclosure, the object of the invention is "to produce usable wood chips from logs and wanes by means of a revolving cutter head having adjustable and replaceable cutting knives which combine a shearing and cutting action to produce a smooth finished edge and reclaimable wood chips".
[12]
A further object of the invention is to provide "a chipper having two cutter heads trimming waste from both sides of a board or log simultaneously". It is also an object of the invention "to provide a highly adaptable chipper by making one or both cutting heads movable laterally so as to accommodate varying sizes of boards or logs".
[13]
The embodiment of the first invention is defined in six claims which read as follows:
"1. A knife adapted to be mounted on a cutting head, comprising a first rectangular blade portion having a beveled cutting edge along one boundary, a second blade portion formed integrally with said first blade portion at an angle thereto along one side of said first blade portion perpendicular to the cutting edge thereof, the inside angle between the said first and second blade portions being greater than 90o, said second blade portion including a beveled edge along one boundary thereof intersecting the beveled edge of the first blade portion to form a continuous cutting edge along one end of the knife, the respective cutting edges of said first and second blade portions terminating in a single plane.
"2. The combination with a cutting head having a face surface and an angular side surface intersecting said face surface and extending outwardly therefrom, the periphery of said face surface and side surface being provided with a plurality of angular openings intersecting at the joinder thereof; of a plurality of knives mounted individually within said openings, each knife comprising a first blade portion having a straight beveled cutting edge, a second blade portion formed integrally with said first blade portion at an angle thereto and having a straight beveled cutting edge intersecting the beveled cutting edge of first blade portion, the beveled cutting edges of the two portions terminating in a single plane and being located outwardly adjacent to the face surface and side surface of the cutting head respectively, and mounting means operatively connected between the cutting head and each of said knives to fix the position of each knife relative to said cutting head.
"3. The invention as defined in claim 2 wherein each knife is positioned on said cutting head with the outer end of the beveled cutting edge adjacent to the cutting head side surface leading the other end of the beveled cutting edge adjacent to the cutting face surface in the intended direction of movement of the knife on the cutting head.
"4. The invention as defined in claim 2 wherein said openings in the cutting head are wider than the thickness of the blade portions of the knives respectively, said knives being mounted at the back surface of said openings with respect to the direction of rotation of said cutting head, the area between the knives and the front surfaces of said openings constituting chip openings adapted to receive wood chips cut from stock by the rotating knives.
"5. The combination with a cutting head having a face surface and flaring side surfaces extending outwardly therefrom, the periphery of said face surface and side surface being provided with a plurality of angular openings intersecting at the joinder of the face and side surfaces; of a plurality of knives mounted individually within each of said openings, comprising a first blade portion having a straight beveled cutting edge, a second blade portion formed integrally with said first blade portion at an angle thereto and having a straight beveled cutting edge intersecting the beveled edge of first blade portion, the beveled edges of the two portions terminating in a single plane perpendicular to both of said portions, and mounting means clamped to the cutting head adapted to hold the knives in place with said beveled edges projecting beyond the cutting head face and side surfaces respectively.
"6. The invention as defined in claim 5 wherein said openings in the cutting head are wider than the thickness of the blade portions of the knives respectively, said knives being mounted at the back surfaces of said openings with respect to the direction of rotation of said cutting head, the area between the knives and the front surface of said openings constituting chip openings adapted to receive wood chips out from stock by the rotating knives."
[14]
As mentioned earlier, a disclaimer has been filed and recorded on April 18, 1980, with respect to the following parts of the invention:
"For claim 1 only, knives in which the sum of the lengths of the bevelled [sic] cutting edges of the two portions of the knife (as measured along the total cutting edge of the knife) is less than the length of either boundary of the knife perpendicular to the bevelled cutting edge thereof."
[15]
The patentee further disclaims:
"From claim 1 only, knives in which the bevelled [sic] surfaces of the first and second blade portions lie on the same side of the knife as the inside angle."
[16]
The embodiment of the second invention which deals with a chipper apparatus is defined in five claims that read as follows:
"1. A chipper apparatus comprising a frame, transverse guide means positioned parallel to one another on said frame, a pair of carriages slidably mounted on said guide means, said carriages being mounted on opposite sides of the frame, a pair of rotatable cutting heads each including a plurality of bent peripheral knives, said cutting heads being individually rotatably mounted on the respective carriages in opposed relation to one another, the axes of said cutting heads being substantially aligned with each other, individual drive means mounted on each carriage operatively connected to the respective cutting head mounted on the carriage, and means operatively connected to said carriages adapted to vary the transverse distance between said cutting heads.
"2. The invention as defined in claim 1 wherein said cutting heads are mounted on said carriages with their axes offset from the true lateral direction at an angle sufficient to provide clearance for the returning knives.
"3. A chipper apparatus as set out in claim 1 wherein each of said cutting heads is composed of a conical frustrum having mounted about the periphery thereof a plurality of projecting cutting knives, each knife having a bent cutting edge with one portion extending along the conical section of the head and the remaining portion extending along the inner face of the head.
"4. A chipper apparatus as set out in claim 1 where in each of said cutting heads is composed of a conical frustrum having mounted about the periphery thereof a plurality of projecting cutting knives, each knife having a bent cutting edge with one portion extending along the conical section of the head and the remaining portion extending along the inner face of the head, and feed means adapted to propel stock between said pair of cutting heads, said individual drive means being synchronized with the operation of said feed means whereby the knives are enabled to produce usable wood chips.
"5. An apparatus as set out in claim 1, wherein each of said cutting heads includes a circular inwardly facing crown adapted to guide boards passing between said cutting heads, said cutting heads each including conical sides flaring upwardly from the periphery of said crown, said knives being fixed in openings along the peripheries of said crowns and conical sides, each of said knives including a first beveled edge lying along the crown and projecting axially beyond the cutting head, and a second beveled edge formed at an angle to said first beveled edge lying along the conical sides and projecting radially beyond the cutting head."
[17]
A disclaimer has been filed and recorded on April 18, 1980, for the second patent with respect to the following parts of the invention, as follows:
"From claim 1 only (but not from any of the claims dependent thereon, which dependent claims continue to be limited by the language used in claim 1 but are not further limited by this disclaimer):
1) Chipper apparatus not having cutting heads with mutually opposed generally circular face surfaces and side surface portions sloping outwardly from the periphery of the associated face surface and away from the opposed cutting head.
"And the Patentee further disclaims
"From claim 1 only (but not from any of the claims dependent thereon, which dependent claims continue to be limited by the language used in claim 1 but are not further limited by this disclaimer):
2) Chipper apparatus not having bent knives, cutting edges of each of which lie along both a face surface portion and a side surface portion of the associated cutting head.
"And the Patentee further disclaims
"From the claim 1 only (but not from any of the claims dependent thereon, which dependent claims continue to be limited by the language used in claim 1 but are not further limited by this disclaimer):
3) Chipper apparatus in which bevelled surfaces of the cutting edges of each of the bent knives lie on the same side of the knife as the inside angle formed by the bend in the knife."
[18]
Figure 1 in both patents is a top plan view of a first embodiment of the invention with portions of the supporting framework broken away for clarity.
[Diagram omitted. See printed version.]
[19]
Figure 4 is a top view of a single knife.
[Diagram omitted. See printed version.]
[20]
Figure 7 is a top view of the face of a single cutter head.
[Diagram omitted. See printed version.]
3.
The Infringements
[21]
As mentioned earlier, prior to August 1973 rights under both patents were the subject of an exclusive licence issued by Standal to CM&E. Under that licence, Swecan commenced to import and to manufacture in Canada chipping machinery and chipping knives. In December 1975, portions of the assets of CM&E were acquired in the United States by Mainland Industries Inc. and thereafter Swecan continued to import from Mainland Industries Inc. (CM&E Division) and to sell in Canada chipping machinery and chipping knives.
[22]
It is admitted by the parties in an agreed statement of facts that Swecan ceased such importation prior to August 10, 1974, and that from July 1, 1974, onwards Swecan undertook the manufacture, or commissioned the manufacture of all items in suit on its own initiative. Swecan paid CM&E for the heads and parts that it imported prior to August 1973 and CM&E was paying royalties to Standal's Patents Ltd. It is also admitted that Swecan has never sold chipping apparatus under the CM&E designation but that Swecan's parts in respect of the knives and the knives holder arms are interchangeable with and will fit on CM&E machines. Of course, Swecan denies that the CM&E machines are an infringement of the patents in suit.
[23]
The parties also agree that Swecan has manufactured and sold bent cutting knives within the description of paragraph 1 of the particulars of infringement, except in respect of the following qualifications: the cutting edges on a portion of the knives do not qualify "as terminating or lying in a single plane". A second qualification is that some portion of the knives sold by Swecan had a cutting edge on the shorter portion ground-back by 1/8 inch, thereby offsetting the two portions of the cutting edge. The width of the offset is less than the width of the bevel.
[24]
The parties also agree that Swecan has manufactured and sold chipping apparatus within the description of paragraph 3 of the particulars of infringement, except in respect of the following qualifications:
"a) The Defendant disputes that its knife holder arms can be said to be deployed in the form of a 'truncated conic array' or 'conic array' as stipulated in paras. 3(1) and (3) of the Particulars of Infringement.
"b) The Defendant disputes that the knife holder arms constitute part of the face surface within the definitions of claim 2 of Patent 739,756, as alleged in para. 3(2) of the Particulars of Infringement, as amended.
"c) The Defendant disputes that the region between each of the knife holder arms can be said to constitute:
'an opening which intersects at an angle with corresponding openings lying along the circumference of the face surface to form an angular opening.'
as stated in paras. 3(3), (5) and (6) of the Particulars.
"d) The Defendants dispute that the knives installed in their chipping heads qualify under Claim 2 of Patent 739,756 as follows:
'the beveled cutting edges of the two portions (of the knife) terminating in a single plane.'"
[25]
In my view, the evidence at the trial indicates that Swecan has produced and sold knives and chipping machines which carry out precisely the functions taught by the inventor in his patents. Swecan has directly copied its knife and chipping head from the knives and chipping heads produced and developed by CM&E under licence from Standal.
[26]
It is true that Standal has avoided the one-piece bent knife but the chipping heads produced by Swecan, and originally produced by CM&E, carry their knives in precisely the same locations and with the same orientation as recommended by the inventor in the description of his preferred embodiments: the knives are inclined in the direction of rotation so that their outer ends lead their inner ends. Swecan's chipping heads have openings in front of the knives, as the CM&E design. The Swecan machines are provided with feed means by which logs and boards may be passed between the two chipping heads at a controlled rate of speed, synchronized with the rotation of the cutting heads so as to produce pulpable wood chips.
[27]
Progressing from that process, Swecan has perfected a faster log speed which it then patented. Clearly, Swecan has appropriated the pith and substance of the invention and all of its benefits. Moreover, in marketing the knives Swecan has publicly extolled its virtues. While still purchasing from CM&E, its publicity was boasting about the "patented" status of its knives: the patents were Standal's patents. As to CM&E, it continued long after the cancellation of the Standal licence to vaunt in its brochures the merits of its "unique, one-piece patented-knife".
[28]
In my view, the mere creation of a slight offset on the Swecan knife does not bring it outside the scope of claim 1 of the Standal patent which provides for: "the respective cutting edges of the said first and second blade portions terminating
in a single plane
". All the other characterizing features bring the Swecan knives within the reach of the Standal patent. On that score, I accept the list of features outlined by counsel for the plaintiffs:
" - there are two rectangular blade portions;
" - these two portions are joined integrally along one of their sides;
" - the join is at an inside angle of more than 90%;
" - a beveled cutting edge runs along one side of each blade portion, with the two beveled edges intersecting, at the join, so as to form a continuous cutting edge along one end of the knife;
" - the sum of the lengths of the beveled cutting edges of the knife is greater than the depth of the knife, as measured perpendicularly to the cutting edge;
" - the beveled surfaces of the knife lie on the outside of the knife at the bend."
[29]
It is true that, technically, because of the offset, the Swecan knife does not terminate perfectly on a plane but the degree of departure (1/8 of an inch) cannot be characterized as substantial. In fact, the two knives are so nearly similar that they fall within the doctrine of equivalents. The two knives perform the same function and obtain the same result in the same manner so as to be functionally equivalent. Therefore, the Swecan knife infringes.
[30]
I also find that the Swecan chipping heads infringe upon claims 2 to 8 of the first patent. These heads call for a plurality of knives mounted individually. Even with the presence of their offsets, Swecan's knives fall within the criteria of "the beveled cutting edges of the two portions terminating in a single plane".
[31]
Swecan denies that the knife holders are in the form of "a truncated conex array". In the case of the Swecan heads, the openings between knives are so enlarged as to run off the outer periphery of the head, the claims, however, do not impose any limit on the size of the openings between each knife. The conical frustum is more obvious in the case of the Standal head, but if one visualizes the Swecan head in full motion, then the openings blur into an imaginary solid truncated cone.
[32]
With reference to the Swecan canters and edgers, Swecan has admitted that they have all of the features defined in the patent, except for the reservations entered in respect of the knives and the chipping heads.
[33]
The plaintiffs called as an expert witness Edward Williston, an engineer consultant from Gig Harbour, State of Washington, U.S.A. who has been involved in the sawmill, lumbering and paper making industry since the second world war. In October 1985, he attended as an expert witness on behalf of Standal's Patents Ltd. in the trial aforementioned held in Portland, Oregon which held that the CM&E machines did infringe the U.S. patents of Standal's Patents Ltd.
[34]
He was asked, among other things, to compare the Swecan machines and knives to the Standal patent. As to the Standal patent calling for a knife terminating in a single plane and the 1/8 inch offset on the Swecan knife, his opinion was that both knives would perform equivalently. He said as follows in paragraph 63 of his affidavit:
"63. I am informed that some Swecan knives have the cutting edge on the narrower leg or facing portion cutback slightly from the plane of the edge on the longer leg. Such an arrangement does not explicitly fall within the language of Claim 1. However, such a knife would perform equivalently in the same cutting head as knives without this setback. The effect would be to cause the longer leg to protrude slightly further from its supporting arm, once the shorter leg is aligned with the plane of the face plate (actually, just slightly beyond). Knives of tool steel quality could tolerate a slight further extension of the longer leg from their backup support without any detrimental effects. I can see no specific advantage to such an arrangement."
[35]
As to the chipping heads, he asserted that claim 2 of the Standal patent lists a number of characteristics which "could equally describe the solid conical head carrying a series of bent knives (as in Standal), or a head carrying its bent knives on a conically-deployed array of knife-holder arms (the Swecan head). He added that the Swecan head in motion created the same type of a conical frustum as the Standal head.
"69. Once such a head commences to rotate, the bent knives follow a conical path that has the shape of the frustum of a cone. The knives sweep out the identical path whether supported in a solid conical head, or by a conical array of knife-holder arms."
[36]
The expert was provided with the particulars of infringement, compared the features listed with the knives and chippers produced by Swecan and concluded that, with one exception, "these particulars fairly describe the knives and chipper machines produced by that defendant". The exception is not consequential.
4.
The Alleged Invalidity Of The Patents
[37]
The defendant Swecan claims that the Standal patents are invalid on the grounds of lack of invention and novelty because of the previous existence of comparable equipment and prior art and also because the patents are "vague and ambiguous". Neither of the two patents are still in force, 17 years having elapsed from their issuance, the first one having expired on August 1, 1983, and the second one on April 8, 1985. The expiry, of course, would limit the damages recoverable to those dates, provided, of course, that the patents are declared to have been valid.
[38]
The defendants submit that George Standal did not invent the knife or the apparatus described in the patents as they were well-known to those skilled in the sawmill industry at the time. Swecan claims that a series of patents, previously issued, show all of the elements mentioned in the patents in issue. And also that similar apparatus from Stenson and Ross ("Beaver") and from Soderham Veskstader AB were already on the market prior to the date on which Standal pretended to have invented his knife and chipper, that is December 14, 1959.
[39]
The defendants called one expert witness, M.J. Brisson, a Montreal area mechanical engineer who worked for Forano Limited from 1950 to 1986 where he established a technical department for sawmill equipment. In the early 1960's Forano Limited was the Canadian representative of Soderham Verkstader AB, a Swedish company that manufactured equipment and apparatus for the production of usable wood chips from logs.
[40]
He testified in his affidavit that during the mid 1960's Forano Limited installed at Blind River, Ontario, a chipper apparatus emanating from Soderham Veskstader AB that had features comparable to the Standal knife. He does not state, however, that the apparatus was well-known in December 1959. He also points out in his affidavit that, at the same time Forano Limited installed its chipper at Blind River, an American company was selling a four-sided chipping apparatus under the commercial name of "Beaver" that boasted the same features, except insofar as the mounting of the cutterheads. According to him, the differences between the Forano Limited machine and claim 1 of the first Standal patent are as follows:
"9. The differences between the machine installed by Forano Limited at the Domtar sawmill at Blind River, Ontario, and the chipper apparatus described in claim 1 of the Canadian Letters Patent No. 782,348, issued on April 9, 1968, are, firstly, that the knives in the apparatus installed by Forano Limited were not bent but were milled to a shape equivalent to the bent knives shown in Canadian Letters Patent No. 782,348, and, secondly, the apparatus installed by Forano Limited had one drive means to operate both cutting heads;"
[41]
On the other hand, the expert Williston who testified on behalf of Standal goes on at length in his affidavit on the state of the art at the time of the invention. He described the machine produced by CM&E from the Standal patent as "one of the major innovations in sawmill equipment that arose in the 1960's". He then provides an extensive background to the events and situations in the sawmill and paper industries that preceded the activities of Standal and CM&E in 1960 and 1961. He describes how lumbermills in the past produced vast quantities of waste wood which were either disposed as slabs or simply burned: "approximately 50-65% of many logs, in the past, became converted into waste wood in the form of slabs, edgings and sawdust". In the 1950's a disc-type waste wood chipper was introduced that cut pulpable chips from waste wood pieces for medium quality paper applications. The wood had to be free of bark and then, because it was not held firmly as it fed into the chipper, it would produce irregular chips. His paragraph 30 bears reproduction:
"30. The possibility of producing pulpable wood chips by cutting such chips directly off the waste wood portions of a log had not been realized by 1960. It was, however, an idea of tremendous potential."
[42]
In his view, the Standal invention produced precisely that result.
[43]
Under s. 28(2) of the Patent Act no patent may be granted for an invention that has been patented or described in print in Canada or in any other country more than two years before the actual filing of the application, giving rise to the well-known defense of "prior art". Standal applied for his two patents on March 3, 1964. Swecan claims that prior to March 3, 1962, similar patents had been issued in the United States. Reference was more particularly made to the two Andrus patents, the Lynch patent and the Garland patent. Those U.S. patents are barely mentioned in the Brisson affidavit but the Williston affidavit deals with them in some depth.
[44]
The first Andrus patent (U.S. 2,966,182) described as "the Andrus blanker" showed "the knife blade sliding with its flat side against the freshly cut wood surface" which, according to Mr. Williston, is a "highly unsatisfactory arrangement". The bevel for such a blade being on the top, any wear at the tip produces "a ski tip" effect. Another disadvantage of such a configuration is that the knife is quickly consumed by sharpening: "this must have become apparent to Andrus because in his second patent (U.S. 3,011,535) the knife is shown in an upright orientation".
[45]
According to the Williston affidavit, the Lynch patent (U.S. no. 343,328) "shows a machine for flattening logs to produce two surfaces on the sides of logs". Two opposed heads are employed with knives held in a configuration similar to the Andrus patent. Because of the absence of a backup or supporting surface for the knife, the Lynch apparatus "would not work practically in making cuts of any substantial depth into a log".
[46]
The Garland patent (U.S. 641,202), relating back to 1900, is a machine for cutting railway ties. The apparatus "would remove slabs from both sides of a log leaving a ragged and broken finish". The straight knives in Garland are not "bent" and lack a finishing or cleanup leg. Having examined the drawings in Garland, Mr. Williston opines that "the knives mounted in the head appear to be purely radial". The designs do not suggest that the knives are slanted forward in the direction of rotation, as in the Standal patents.
[47]
Several other patents were looked at by the experts and discussed by counsel. Obviously, some elements of the Standal patent are to be found in each of the other patents but that is not sufficient to establish prior art. The Standal patent is a combination patent which necessarily implies that it includes the fruits of several previous inventions but produces a new and different result.
[48]
It must also be borne in mind that disclaimers were filed in respect of both Standal patents. The net effect of these disclaimers is to exclude the respective claims from "reading-on" the Lynch and the two Andrus patents. The ensuing result is clearly analyzed in the following paragraphs of the Williston affidavit:
"50. I have review [sic] the Disclaimer associated with Claim 1 of patent 782,348. In my opinion, without the Disclaimer, this claim would read-on the Lynch patent disclosure.
"51. Of the Disclaimer paragraphs, the first paragraph essential stipulates that to remain within Claim 1 a chipping apparatus must have:
(a) 'mutually opposed generally circular face surfaces', and
(b) 'side surface portions sloping outwardly from the periphery of the associated face surface ...'
Lynch does not disclose such features.
"52. The second paragraph of this Disclaimer essentially requires that to qualify within Claim 1, the chipping apparatus must have bent knives that have cutting portions which:
'... lie along both the face surface portion and a side surface portion of the associated head.'
Lynch does not disclose this feature.
"53. The third element of the Disclaimer excludes from the claim bent knives which have their bevel on the inside of the bend. I interpret the drawings in the Lynch reference as showing knives with bevels on the inside. This, therefore, excludes Lynch from the coverage of Claim 1, as Disclaimed.
- Patent 739,756
"54. I have reviewed the two paragraphs of the Disclaimer associated with Claim 1 of patent 739,756.
"55. The first Disclaimer has the effect of stipulating that, to fall within the claim, a bent knife must effectively be wider than it is deep. 'Width' as used here, means the total distance along the cutting edge.
"56. In my opinion this Disclaimer excludes this claim from reading-on the knives as depicted in both (Andrus I) and (Andrus II).
"57. The second portion of this Disclaimer excludes from the claim knives in which the bevel is on the inside of the bend. In my opinion, this excludes this claim from reading-on the knives depicted in Andrus I.
"58. There is an ambiguity in Figure 9 of Andrus II as to the location of the beveled surface. In one interpretation the bevel is on the outside of the bend along both portions of the knife. But allowing for drafting inconsistencies, the beveled portion of the short, upright leg might be depicted as being on the inside of the bend."
[49]
It is trite law that a registered patent is deemed to be valid and that the burden of establishing its invalidity is a heavy one. In my view, the defendants have not overcome that burden.
[50]
The defendants also attack the Standal patents on the ground that they are vague and ambiguous. They submit that a person skilled in the art of the sawmill industry would be obliged to experiment and go through trials in order to mount the knives in the slots of the cutting heads because the first patent would embody nothing more than a cutting head with specific knives mounted in a specific way. Moreover, the second patent would not properly describe the synchronization feature in claim 4. In his affidavit the expert Brisson states that "nowhere therein does it tell us how the synchronization specified therein is to be accomplished".
[51]
At first blush, it is not easy to fathom how the same patents that were attacked for being too obvious are now described as vague and ambiguous. The defendants did not put much stock on that argument and neither will I.
[52]
Consequently, I find both Standal patents to be valid and to have been infringed by the defendants.
5.
The Damages
[53]
I must now deal with damages. Under s. 57(1) of the Patent Act an infringer is liable to the patentee and to all persons claiming under him for all damages sustained by them. Damages in such cases are generally set on the basis of a "reasonable royalty", that is the royalty that would be negotiated between a willing licensor and a willing licensee. Customarily, a royalty is composed of two elements: the royalty base (usually the total sales of the offending items) and the percentage of the royalty to be applied to that base.
[54]
A valid starting point might be the royalty paid by CM&E for the licence signed by Standal in 1962. A second term of reference could be the judgment of the U.S. District Court for the District of Oregon, released on October 15, 1985, in respect of the two corresponding Standal U.S. patents.
[55]
First, the CM&E licence. A royalty rate of 5% was set on sales of chippers and parts (exclusive of motors and knives). The royalty on knives was established at 10%. The licence further awarded to Standal full title to all improvement patents that may be developed by CM&E. The licence was signed in 1962 before the invention was proven and before it was patented. Those rates of 5% and 10% were applied on September 28, 1973, in the licence to Simonds Canada and on September 18, 1975, in the licence to the Ellison Company. Even Forano, which was using a twopiece knife, was prepared to assume similar royalty rates, according to the evidence. All these licences were terminated because of the infringement by CM&E and Swecan.
[56]
Secondly, the U.S. Court having declared the Standal patents valid awarded damages at a "reasonable royalty of 10%". The royalty applied not only to chippers, canters, edgers and slabbers but also to parts, including knives (the knives were included as parts even though the claim to the knives was not in suit).
[57]
Consequently, I find that a royalty of 10% on all offending items would be equitable and reasonable.
[58]
The exact period over which the royalty should be payable must also be circumscribed. The defendants argue that the plaintiffs are estopped from claiming any damage at all because of their procrastination and acquiescence over the years in respect of Swecan using their patents. There is no merit in that argument as the old common law defence of laches has not been incorporated in any of the relevant statutes governing this case. Obviously, the period for claiming damages should last no longer than August 1, 1983, the date of termination of the first patent. The defendants make a strong argument to the effect that damages should not start prior to the recording of the disclaimers on April 18, 1980, and I find much merit to that position. There is also the impact of the respective provincial statutes of limitations: in Quebec, two years before the commencement of the action, or July 23, 1978; in Ontario, six years before the action, or July 23, 1974. I find, therefore, that damages ought to be limited to the period extending from April 18, 1980 to August 1, 1983.
[59]
The plaintiffs retained the services of David Solomon, a Montreal chartered accountant, to review the sales and invoices produced by the defendants in these proceedings during the period from May 2, 1978 to April 9, 1985. The accountant also reviewed the consolidated financial statements of Swecan for the fiscal years 1981, 1982, 1983 and 1984. A great quantity of records were not obtained from the defendants which the accountant would normally expect to have on hand so as to carry out an audit. In the absence of such records, he has endeavoured to construct an estimate of the total sales effected by Swecan for the period. The accountant noted in his affidavit (and in his oral evidence) that the invoices do not appear to be complete: "while sets of invoices do run chronologically, it is apparent that more than one set was being used simultaneously. For example, there are overlapping parallel sets of invoices" for some periods. Some invoice numbers are missing. From this he concluded that further sets of invoices may have existed that are not available to him.
[60]
The defendants say that they produced all the documents that were left after the sale of the company. In carrying out his analysis of the invoices, the accountant used a computer. He compared the available invoices with the total sales as reported by the financial statements and tabled the following result:
Period
Financial Statements
Invoices
Ratio
Sept. 1/80 - Aug. 31/81
5,298,444
2,512,617
2.11
Sept. 1/81 - Aug. 31/82
3,439,896
2,768,688
1.24
Sept. 1/82 - Aug. 31/83
3,175,843
1,864,958
1.70
Sept. 1/83 - Jul. 31/84
5,294,272
5,764,681
0.92
[61]
The accountant established an average correction ratio of 1.33. He then prepared a schedule listing the totals for all available invoices for all sales for the fiscal years from September 1, 1978 to April 9, 1985 (the expiry of the second patent), and factored in the 1.33 ratio. He was provided by the plaintiffs' counsel with a list of expressions covering the patented items.
[62]
Annexed to his affidavit is a "summary of sales invoice analysis for patented items only" for the years 1979 to April 9, 1985, and the bottom line is $18,373,378. Within that period, the totals for the relevant years (ending August 31 each year) are as follows:
1980 -
$3,328,767
1981 -
1,598,832
1982 -
1,668,998
1983 -
1,454,029
[63]
From these totals ought to be deducted 2/3 of the total for the year 1980 (up to April) and 1/12 of the total of 1983 (the month of August), for the following results:
1980 -
$1,109,589
1981 -
1,598,832
1982 -
1,668,998
1983 -
1,332,860
-
5,710,279
[64]
To that total ought to be applied the correction factor (1.33) for missing invoices, resulting in the sum total of
$7,594,671
.
[65]
Obviously, that sum total is not exact and, under the circumstances, cannot be. It was extremely difficult, if not impossible, for the accountant to decide which items were patented and which were not; again, because of the missing invoices, a correction ratio had to be factored in and projections had to be made. My preferred solution would have been to send the whole damage issue to a reference, but counsel appeared to favour a lump sum decision by the court.
[66]
In fixing a lump sum, I must consider that the defendants are, after all, as I have found, the guilty party, and that they have not shown much cooperation in providing documents to the accountant. On the other hand, I must also bear in mind that the plaintiffs themselves were guilty of procrastination in the prosecution of their action. Had they proceeded several years earlier, the task of the accountant and that of the presiding judge would have been made easier. With all these considerations in mind, I will apply a percentage of 10% to a royalty base of $7,600,000 and assess the damages at $760,000.
[67]
There remains the question of interest. Article 1056(c) of the Quebec Civil Code provides as follows:
"1056(c) The amount awarded by judgment for damages resulting from an offence or a quasi-offence shall bear interest at the legal rate from the date when the action at law was instituted."
[68]
The parties agree that the infringement of a patent is an offence or quasi-offence and the legal rate is 5% per annum. However, art. 1056(c) further provides that:
"There may be added to the amounts so awarded an indemnity computed by applying to the amount from such date a percentage equal to the excess of the interest rate fixed according to section 28 of the Act respecting the Ministère du Revenu (R.S.Q., c. 31) over the legal interest rate."
[69]
The parties have agreed that the schedule of permitted interest, under this latter provision, from April 1, 1980 to January 19, 1989, varies between 11% in 1987 to 19% in 1982. I, therefore, grant the interest accordingly, namely the base statutory rate of 5% plus the discretionary additional amount of interest agreed to under paragraph 48 of the Joint Statement of Facts and Law.
[70]
As to costs, counsel for the plaintiffs has asked that he be permitted to make special submissions within ten days after the rendering of judgment as provided under rule 344(7). He may apply for time and place of a hearing in due course.
Judgment for plaintiffs.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]