[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for judicial review pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act,
R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, as amended, by the applicants in regard to a decision of J. Barry Turner, a member of the Public Service Staff Relations Board ("PSSRB"), sitting as an adjudicator, dated February 16, 1993, denying the applicants' grievance. The applicants seek a writ of certiorari to set aside that decision and refer the matter back for redetermination.
[2]
The parties were agreed at the hearing of the grievance that the adjudicator's decision regarding the applicant Banton would also govern in the case of a similar grievance by the applicant Donald. That same understanding applies in this application for judicial review, brought on behalf of both applicants, though the facts relied upon, as in the case of the adjudicator's decision here questioned, are those concerning the applicant Banton.
[3]
Counsel for the parties were heard in Ottawa, March 21, 1994, when decision was reserved. I regret that decision has been delayed.
Background
[4]
The applicant, Windross Banton Jr., is employed as a Chief Officer SO-MAO-07 of the Canadian Coast Guard, aboard the CGS Sir Humphrey Gilbert, a vessel which operated at all relevant times on the "lay-day operational manning system". The specific terms and conditions of that system are set out in Appendix H of Collective Agreement 410/91 between the Canadian Merchant Service Guild, of which the applicant is a member, and the Treasury Board. For the record, I note that the applicant Michael Ian Donald is also an officer of the Canadian Coast Guard and a member of the same bargaining unit as the applicant Banton.
[5]
Under the lay-day operational manning system, the applicant Banton was normally scheduled to work a cycle of 28 consecutive days on board ship and 28 consecutive lay-days off, ashore. In this case, he worked 28 days from November 27 to December 24, 1991, as scheduled; but during his 28 scheduled lay-days off from December 25, 1991 to January 22, 1992, he was called in to work the last 14 days, from January 8 to 22, 1992. He took off the next 28 days, from January 23, as lay-days, ashore. He was compensated with his regular bi-weekly pay for the period from December 25, 1991 to January 22, 1992; and in addition, he received the cash equivalent of three lay-days for each of the 14 days worked from January 8 to 22, 1992. With respect to his lay-day bank under the collective agreement, for each of those 14 days that he worked, a lay-day was deducted and none was credited, so that at the end of that period, on January 22, he had no lay-days left in his bank.
[6]
The applicant disputed the amount that he was paid for working on his scheduled lay-days. His grievance was referred to adjudication pursuant to s. 92 of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-35, as amended. At the hearing, on January 5, 1993, he took the position that the words "earned lay-day pay" in clause (d) at page H-5 of Appendix H of the Collective Agreement meant that he should be compensated, as for other days worked, at the rate of one lay-day plus the three days' pay provided under clause (d) at page H-5 of Appendix H. That would be equivalent to an overtime rate equal to double-time-and-a-half, rather than time-and-a-half as the employer had interpreted it. In support of that position, he called Ken Herbert, Assistant Secretary Treasurer, Canadian Merchant Service Guild, Vancouver, the Chairman of the National Bargaining Committee for the Guild during the negotiations of Collective Agreement 410/91 with the Treasury Board, to present evidence of the negotiating history behind the relevant provisions of the Collective Agreement. Mr. Herbert's evidence included reference to what he had been told by representatives of the employer during the negotiations concerning the meaning and intent of the clause (d) at page H-5.
The Adjudicator's Decision
[7]
The adjudicator denied the applicant's grievance. In concluding his decision the adjudicator stated:
"My decision hinges on the meaning of the words 'earned lay-day pay' from Appendix H-5 (d) of the collective agreement. Granted there are various references throughout the collective agreement that were clearly pointed out by Mr. Brown, who bore the burden of proof in this case, to the interpretation of the word 'earned' in both English and French, but I am not convinced that its meaning is to allow an employee to earn additional lay-day pay when he or she is being paid for a lay-day.
"In this case the grievor had accumulated lay-days for the period worked between November 27, 1991 to December 24, 1991 and was being paid for them. The awarding of any additional income for the 14 days in question would therefore be contributing to the pyramiding of overtime, which is not contemplated by the provisions of the agreement discussed above."
Issues
[8]
The applicant raises two issues in this application. He submits that the adjudicator erred in law (1) by failing to consider Mr. Herbert's uncontradicted testimony with respect to the negotiating history of paragraph (d) at page H-5 of Appendix H of the Collective Agreement, and (2) in considering that the grievor's claim constituted a "pyramiding" of benefits.
[9]
For the respondent, the two issues are treated together in considering whether the adjudicator erred in a patently unreasonable manner, and thus exceeded his jurisdiction, in his interpretation of the clause in the collective agreement here in question.
Failure To Consider Evidence
[10]
The applicant submits that the adjudicator erred in law by failing to consider Mr. Herbert's uncontradicted testimony of the parties' intention behind paragraph (d) at page H-5 of Appendix H of the Collective Agreement, extrinsic evidence which was said to have disclosed a latent ambiguity in the collective agreement, and what the intention of the parties was concerning the words used in the agreement. It is urged that such a failure was indicated by the lack of reasons in the adjudicator's decision for disregarding that evidence.
[11]
Section 80 of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act Regulations (Can.)
PSSRB Regulations and Rules of Procedure
, SOR/90-771, specifically provides that the adjudicator's decision must contain four elements:
"80(1) The decision of an adjudicator or a board of adjudication shall contain
(a) a summary statement of the grievance;
(b) a summary of the representations of the parties;
(c) the decision on the grievance; and
(d) the reasons for the decision."
That provision (then s. 86) was considered by Jackett, C.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), who found that so long as the reasons, read as a whole, make clear the arguments made by the grievor, the legal principles and methods applied by the adjudicator and the adjudicator's findings against the applicant, the requirements of that provision were fulfilled. He stated at page 138-141:
"... I doubt that a mere deviation from the prescribed form that does not result in a possibly unjust decision will, of itself, be sufficient to invalidate an adjudicator's decision. I put aside those doubts, however, because, assuming that there is nothing in those doubts, in my view there has been substantial compliance with regulation 86 when the adjudicator's decision is read as a whole in the context of the whole proceeding. As it seems to me, reading the decision as a whole, it is clear that certain general arguments were put forward on behalf of all the grievors and the adjudicator clearly explained what principles he applied in the respective cases as a result of such arguments. ...
. . . . .
"... the adjudicator has made it perfectly clear what he has found against the applicant and what legal principles and methods he has applied in so doing.
"... As I understand it, the primary function of reasons is not to ensure that justice be done but is to attempt to make the parties (particularly the unsuccessful party) realize that the matter has been dealt with in an unbiased judicial manner and thus, by making decisions more acceptable, make it more probable that the process will serve its objective of substituting due process for anarchy ..."
[12]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at p. 377, Heald, J.A., generally commented upon the degree of detail required to be given in reasons. After concluding in that case that the application should be dismissed, he continued:
"... I wish to comment on the fact that the Commission's decision herein is lamentably sparse in the reasons which it gives in support of the decision. While probably amounting to formal compliance with the requirements of s. 34(1) of the [
Canadian Human Rights] Act
. I would express the hope that in future situations where the exercise of the Commission's discretion pursuant to s. 33(b)(iv) is engaged, the Commission will more fully articulate its reasons for the extension or the failure to extend, as the case may be. I do not mean to suggest that elaborate reasons need be given. In my view, all that is desirable is a simple and concise statement of the Commission's rationale for its decision."
I note that in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Stone, J.A., concurred with these comments and Madame Justice Desjardins specifically dissented, holding that in that case, the Commission had failed to fulfill its responsibility to state its reasons for decision.
[13]
Considering that the Supreme Court stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 885, that the adjudicator's reasons "are not to be read microscopically" in a judicial review application hearing, I would agree with the respondent's submission that the adjudicator's reasons in this case, containing a summary of Mr. Herbert's testimony and a simple and concise statement of the rationale for his decision, substantially complies with the requirements of s. 80, i.e. the adjudicator's decision reviews the background of the applicant's grievance and summarizes the evidence adduced, including that of Mr. Herbert, as follows:
"Mr. Ken Herbert, Assistant Secretary Treasurer, Canadian Merchant Service Guild, Vancouver, was also Chairman of the National Bargaining Committee for the Guild during the last round of negotiations. He testified that his members agreed to the new lay-day system in order to get 'better time off', and that the clause in Appendix H-5(d) was a new one added by the Treasury Board. He said they did have discussions with the employer about the meaning of the clause and that he thought 'earned lay-day pay was for hours of work on that day'."
[14]
Counsel for the applicants urges that the second sentence of the preceding passage clearly indicates the adjudicator did not properly understand the evidence of Mr. Herbert, but counsel relies on the third sentence, the key issue raised by the Herbert testimony, as the matter of significance said to be ignored by the adjudicator. The adjudicator then summarized the arguments made by both parties and, having traced those arguments, he determined that he was not persuaded that the meaning of the term here in question "is to permit earning additional lay-day pay when he or she is being paid for a lay-day". He added that awarding additional income, other than provided under the clause in issue, would be contributing to the pyramiding of overtime, which was not provided by the agreement.
[15]
The decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R. (2d) 183 (F.C.A.), cited may be distinguished. In that case, Heald, J.A., noted that the reasons given by the Board made no references at all to the uncontradicted documentary evidence on the record which supported the applicant's testimony; whereas, in this case, the adjudicator summarized Mr. Herbert's evidence in his reasons. I would also agree with the respondent that the fact that the adjudicator did not expressly address Mr. Herbert's testimony, at least to accept or reject it, in relation to the applicant's argument, is not evidence that the Adjudicator ignored that evidence in arriving at his decision, even if, ultimately, it was not given great weight. Thus, I conclude that the adjudicator has not erred by failing to have regard to the totality of the evidence before him.
The Standard For Judicial Review
[16]
In determining the issue of whether the adjudicator erred in law, a general consideration to be borne in mind is that deference by the court to the determinations of an adjudicator is supported, if not required, by the special role Parliament has assigned to the work of the Public Service Staff Relations Board and adjudicators appointed by the Board. That role is particularly emphasized by s. 101 of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, a broadly worded privative clause protecting the adjudicator's decisions from appeal or judicial review which provides:
"101(1) Except as provided in this Act, every order, award, direction, decision, declaration or ruling of the Board, an arbitrator appointed under s. 63, or an adjudicator is final and shall not be questioned or reviewed in any court.
(2) No order shall be made or process entered, or proceedings taken in any court, whether by way of injunction, certiorari, prohibition, quo warranto or otherwise, to question, review, prohibit or restrain the Board, an arbitrator appointed under s. 63 or an adjudicator in any of the proceedings of the Board, arbitrator or adjudicator."
[17]
That special role, and the expertise of those charged with responsibility under the
PSSR Act
in the resolution of differences arising in labour relations in the public sector is now well settled. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 673, per Cory, J., at pp. 967-968  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and per L'Heureux-Dubé at p. 978  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and
Canada (Procureur général) v. Alliance de la Fonction publique du Canada
, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 614; 123 N.R. 161, per Sopinka, J., for the majority at p. 628  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , agreeing with the standard of review as expressed by Cory, J., in dissent at pp. 659-663  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). In my view, that same standard of review applies in this case to the adjudicator's interpretation or application of the collective agreement between the parties, as a matter clearly within his jurisdiction under s. 101 of the
PSSR Act
, and not subject to the normal standard for judicial review. The burden is on the applicant to demonstrate that the adjudicator has erred in a manner warranting intervention of the court. In terms as settled for decisions of the PSSR Board by the Supreme Court decisions referred to, the applicant must persuade the court that the adjudicator's decision was patently unreasonable, i.e. not simply wrong, but clearly irrational.
[18]
Paragraph (d) of Appendix "H", page H-5, the paragraph here in question reads as follows:
"(d) Notwithstanding Article 30 Hours of Work - Overtime Compensation 4,
when an officer is required to report for work during a normally scheduled lay-day period or remain at work beyond the officer's scheduled crew change date,
the officer shall receive in addition to the officer's earned lay-day pay, the cash equivalent of 3.00 lay-days for each day worked during the scheduled lay-day period and a lay-day will be deducted from the officer's lay-day bank."
[19]
In this case, the applicant was compensated with his regular bi-weekly pay for the period from December 25, 1991 to January 22, 1992; in addition, he received the cash equivalent of three lay-days for each of the 14 lay-days worked from January 8 to 22, 1992. He grieved the amount that he was paid for each day worked during his scheduled lay-days, arguing that he should have received 1.00 lay-day in addition to the officer's lay-day pay, in effect double time and a half, on the basis that a lay-day is defined under paragraph (b) as "a day off work with pay"; paragraph (c) provided that "for each day worked ... an officer shall earn 1.00 lay-day in addition to the officer's Lay-day pay"; and that the words "earned lay-day pay" in paragraph (d) must refer to what the officer earned on the day that he was called in to work. Put in temporal terms, in argument before me, counsel for the applicants submitted that "earned lay-day pay" referred to pay to be earned for working on a lay-day, in addition to regular pay for a lay-day already earned by previous service; it did not mean, as the employer would have it, the regular pay already earned for a lay-day by previous service.
[20]
The employer argued before the adjudicator that the words "earned lay-day pay" in paragraph (d) at page H-5 is the pay that an officer would have been paid if he had been at home on his lay-days and he referred to the presumption against pyramiding of overtime.
[21]
The adjudicator denied the grievance on the basis of his finding that the meaning of "earned lay day pay" in paragraph (d) did not allow an employee to earn additional lay-day pay when he or she is being paid for a lay-day. In his opinion, an awarding of any additional income for the 14 days in question would constitute the pyramiding of overtime, a result which was not contemplated by the provisions of the agreement.
[22]
The applicant submits that the adjudicator erred in law by applying the presumption against pyramiding of benefits, a presumption which, it is submitted, arises only when, absent a specific provision in a collective agreement specifying how certain hours of work performed are to be compensated, an employee then seeks to recover payment for the same work under two different provisions. It is urged that since the issue in this case was the interpretation of one provision, paragraph (d) of Appendix "H", page H-5 of the Collective Agreement, the adjudicator has erroneously characterized the issue as one of pyramiding of benefits and thus, decided the case on the basis of a wrong principle.
[23]
I note that the adjudicator acknowledged in his reasons, that his task was to "decide under Appendix H-5 (d) whether or not Mr. Banton is entitled to 14 days earned lay-day pay at the grievor's lay-day rate of pay for the lay-days that he worked between January 8 and January 22, 1992" (p. 3) and that in rebuttal to the presumption against pyramiding, counsel for the grievor had argued that the grievor was seeking payment of his "earned lay-day pay", not "two benefits for the same work".
[24]
I am not persuaded that the adjudicator's interpretation of the clause in question, (d) at page H-5 of Appendix H, is patently unreasonable. In order to interpret the words "earned lay-day pay" in that provision, it must be read together with other provisions in the Collective Agreement relating to the lay-day system which read as follows, at Appendix "H", pages H-1 to H-3:
"General
(a) Subject to operational requirements, the Employer will operate the selected vessels on a lay-day system. Under this system, all days will be considered as working days and there will be no days of rest.
(b) 'Lay-day' means a day off work with pay to which an officer becomes entitled by working on board a vessel for a number of days. A lay-day is not considered as a day of authorized leave with pay.
(c) The workday will consist of twelve (12) hours of work per day. For each day worked or for each day on which an officer is on authorized leave with pay other than compensatory leave and vacation leave with pay, an officer shall earn 1.00 lay-day in addition to the officer's Lay-day pay.
(d) An officer will be compensated at the applicable annual rate of pay as described in Appendix 'A3', 'B3' or 'C3' of the Ships' Officers Collective Agreement. In order to maintain the officer's weekly rate of pay, the officer must either:
(i) work,
(ii) be on lay-days, or
(iii) be on authorized leave with pay.
In the event that an officer does not work and is neither on lay-days nor on authorized leave with pay, his regular pay shall be deducted by an amount equal to his lay day rate of pay for each day's absence.
(e)(i) It is recognized that lay-days are intended to be taken as time off work with pay. Normally, lay-days shall be paid in cash in cases of termination of employment or permanent appointment to a position which is not on a vessel operating on the lay-day system, or is not within the same department or region. However, at the request of the officer and with the concurrence of the Employer, lay-days may be converted into compensatory leave. [...]"
[25]
Considering that paragraph (a) provides that everyday, including a lay-day, is considered as a "working day" and that an officer is paid his regular pay for the entire cycle of 28 days on board and 28 lay-days, in my opinion, the applicant was correctly paid his regular pay and an additional cash equivalent of three lay-days for each day worked during his scheduled lay-days.
Conclusion
[26]
Since I am neither persuaded that the adjudicator failed to consider Mr. Herbert's uncontradicted testimony with respect to the negotiating history of paragraph (d) at page H-5 of Appendix "H" of the Collective Agreement, nor that his interpretation of the collective agreement, in particular the clause here in question, was patently unreasonable, I conclude that the applicant has not made out a case warranting intervention by this court by an Order setting aside the decision of the adjudicator.
[27]
For these reasons, this application for judicial review is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: David Weir/saf
[End of document]