[1]
Tremblay-Lamer, J.
: The respondents, in the persons of Wolfgang Droege, Gary Schipper and Kenneth Barker, appeared before me on a charge of contempt of court pursuant to rule 355 of the
Federal Court Rules
for breaching the order of Joyal, J., dated October 14, 1993.
I The Facts
[2]
These proceedings have their origins in a complaint made by Rodney Bobiwash of the Native Canadian Centre of Toronto and filed with the Canadian Human Rights Commission alleging that certain telephonic messages delivered via hot line by the respondents were contrary to s. 13(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6. The complainant alleged that these messages were likely to expose persons identifiable on the basis of their ethnic origin to hatred and contempt. The Commission launched an investigation and, on the basis of the evidence before it, appointed on May 26, 1992, pursuant to s. 49(1.1) of the
Act
, a Tribunal to inquire fully into the matter.
[3]
Shortly thereafter, the Commission petitioned this court for an order prohibiting the respondents from delivering further hot line messages in the nature of those complained of until the conclusion of the Tribunal's inquiry. This application was heard by the Associate Chief Justice and, on consent of the parties, an order, dated September 29, 1992 and amended January 19, 1993, was granted. It forbade the respondents from conveying, by telephonic means, messages which promote hatred against persons because of their creed, colour or ethnic background until the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal had ruled on the complaint before it.
[4]
Subsequently, the Commission had reason to believe that the respondents were defying the court's order. It instituted proceedings against the respondents for contempt of court and the matter came on for trial before Joyal, J. In his decision dated October 8, 1993, Joyal, J., dismissed the charge on the ground that the messages communicated through the Heritage Front Hotline were not substantially similar in form and content to those identified by the Associate Chief Justice in his order.
[5]
Having concluded that the order facing the respondents was not fulfilling the purposes for which it was intended, Joyal, J., proposed to amend it. Pursuant to the discretionary powers conferred upon him by s. 44 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, he drafted the following injunction:
"The respondents, The Heritage Front and Wolfgang Droege, by themselves or by their servants or otherwise be enjoined from hereinafter operating what is commonly called a hot line, i.e. a means of telephonic communication for the purposes of delivering on their behalf or on behalf of others any message which is directly or indirectly or inferentially of a nature to indicate or inform on the position of the said respondents 'or of anyone else' on any issue of political, economic, racial, religious or social character.
"The within Order shall operate until the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal has ruled with respect to File No. T-41854 and T-41855 or until otherwise varied or vacated by this court."
[6]
Following the issuance of this order, the Commission alleged in a Statement of Particulars that between October 15, 1993 and November 8, 1993, Wolfgang Droege, the Heritage Front, Gary Schipper, Kenneth Barker and Equal Rights for Whites deliberately and repeatedly disobeyed the order by playing messages on the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline of the kind described by Joyal, J.
[7]
On October 21, 1993, the Commission presented an ex parte motion requesting the issuance of a Show Cause Order. This motion was granted and, following an adjournment on November 30, 1993, was made returnable before me on March 15, 1994 in Toronto, Ontario.
II The Law
1) The Injunction Of Joyal, J.
[8]
The jurisdiction of the Federal Court to grant an injunction in the circumstances at bar was confirmed in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). In his judgment, Muldoon, J., concluded that, by virtue of ss. 25 and 44 of the
Federal Court Act
and s. 57 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, the prerequisites for jurisdiction outlined by the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 641, at 766, were satisfied. [See footnote 1].
[9]
It is important to point out that the order granted by Joyal, J., which is the subject of these proceedings
was not appealed or otherwise challenged by the respondents following its issuance
. Consequently, they may not now allege that it is unconstitutional as a defence to the charge of contempt. Adopting the rationale of O'Leary, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) that:
"The duty of a person bound by an order of a court is to obey that order while it remains in force regardless of how flawed he may consider it or how flawed it may, in fact, be. Public order demands that it be negated by due process of the law, not by disobedience."
[10]
Dickson, C.J., in his judgment,
Taylor and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 942, was in complete agreement with this reasoning, re-emphasizing that an order whose legitimacy has not been directly attacked and which has not been found to be void cannot be challenged collaterally in a contempt proceeding. McLachlin, J (dissenting in part), enunciated the rule as follows at p. 975:
"The commission of the offence of contempt does not depend on the validity of the underlying law but on the existence of a court order made by a court having jurisdiction."
[11]
I should like to emphasize at this point that, contrary to the submission of counsel for the respondents,
this is not a case involving the right to free speech or the right to be politically incorrect. The only question to be resolved in these proceedings is whether the respondents violated an order duly granted by this court
.
2) Contempt Of Court Proceedings
i) Why It Is Important To Obey
An Order Of The Court?
[12]
The fundamental principle underlying the law of contempt is to ensure that the administration of justice is free from interference caused by improper conduct of any sort. The deliberate disobedience of a court order represents a defiance of judicial authority which depreciates and makes a mockery of our system of justice.
[13]
As McLachlin, J., pointed out at p. 931 in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  A.R. 241; 14 W.A.C. 241:
"Both civil and criminal contempt of court rest on the power of the court to uphold its dignity and process. The rule of law is at the heart of our society; without it there can be neither peace, nor order nor good government. The rule of law is directly dependent on the ability of the courts to enforce their process and maintain their dignity and respect. To maintain their process and respect, courts since the 12th century have exercised the power to punish for contempt of court."
[14]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.), Wood, J., rightly emphasized that respect for court orders is necessary not to protect the sensibilities of the judiciary are but rather in order to preserve the integrity of the justice system itself. He stated at p. 548 that:
"The breach of an order of this court is not a crime against the judge who issued it, it is an attack upon the institution itself - that institution which alone stands between the rule of law and anarchy. The inherent jurisdiction of this court to punish for contempt does not exist for the purpose of preserving judicial vanity. It is the sole device by which the court can ensure its own continued effectiveness in the struggle to preserve the rule of law. Thus it is that the more serious the contempt the more serious the threat to the rule of law."
ii) Who Can Be Found Guilty?
[15]
Rules 355(1) and 355(4) of the
Federal Court Rules
set out the following:
"(1) Anyone is guilty of contempt of court who disobeys any process or order of the court of a judge thereof, or who acts in such a way as to interfere with the orderly administration of justice, or to impair the authority or dignity of the court. In particular, any officer of justice who fails to do his duty, and any sheriff or bailiff who does not make a return thereof or, in executing it, infringes any rule the violation whereof renders him liable to a penalty, is guilty of contempt.
. . . . .
"(4) No one may be condemned for contempt of court committed out of the presence of the judge unless he has been served with a show cause order ordering him to appear before the court, on the day and at the hour fixed to hear proof of the acts with which he is charged and to urge any grounds of defence that he may have. The show cause order issued by the judge of his own motion or on application must be served personally, unless for valid reasons another mode of service is authorized. The application for issuance of the show cause order may be presented without its being necessary to have it served."
[16]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 1 (F.C.A.), Pratte, J., enunciated the following principles on the law of contempt at p. 10:
"(1) As rule 355(1) makes clear, a person may be guilty of contempt of court either by disobeying an order of the court or by obstructing or interfering with the course of justice.
"The only person who may disobey an order of a court is the party to whom that order is addressed. However,
a third party who knowingly aided and abetted a party to disobey an injunction may be found guilty of contempt
, not because he breached the injunction, but rather, because he acted in a manner that
interfered with the course of justice
.
. . . . .
"(3) A court injunction must be complied with strictly in accordance to its terms. However, the defendant against whom an injunction is pronounced is enjoined from committing the prohibited acts whatever be the method he may use in committing them. It follows, that
a defendant will be in breach of the injunction pronounced against him not only if he himself contravenes the order of the court but also if the order is breached by his agent, workman, servant or another person acting for him
..." (my emphasis)
Marceau, J., added at p. 17 that:
"1. Considering what has to be proved, it is well-established that
the activity said to have constituted contempt must be one clearly covered by the prohibition, which implied that it be expressly or by necessary inference mentioned in the order
. Because of this prerequisite, I do not think that the trial judge was entitled to find, as he did, that the commission of a certain action, although not covered by the injunction was nevertheless contemptuous as being contrary to the 'spirit' thereof."
[17]
In the case at bar, the respondents Gary Schipper and Kenneth Barker were not named in the Show Cause Order. However, it is clear from the judgment  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Oy
that a third party may be found guilty of contempt if he or she knowingly aided and abetted a party to disobey an injunction.
iii) Burden Of Proof
[18]
As McLachlin, J., stated at p. 942 in
United Nurses of Alberta
, a "contempt proceeding is a criminal proceeding, and the full protection availing an accused on a criminal trial are available". This is further confirmed by the fact that rule 355(2) provides for a sanction that includes the possibility of imprisonment.
[19]
With respect to the burden of proof to be discharged in this context, McLachlin, J., stated at p. 933 that the accuser must:
"prove that the accused defied or disobeyed a court order in public (the 'actus reus'), with intent, knowledge or recklessness as to the fact that the public disobedience will tend to depreciate the authority of the court (the mens rea). The Crown
must prove these things beyond a reasonable doubt
. As in other criminal offences, however, the necessary mens rea may be inferred from the circumstances. An open and public defiance of a court order will tend to depreciate the authority of the court. Therefore,
when it is clear the accused must have known his or her act of defiance will be public, it may be inferred that he or she was at least reckless as to whether the authority of the court would be brought into contempt
."
iv) Knowledge And Mens Rea
[20]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Sopinka, J., stated at p. 225 that "the common law has always required personal service or actual personal knowledge of a court order as a precondition to liability in contempt". This is not an issue in the present case since Joyal, J., read his order in open court in the presence of the three respondents.
[21]
With respect to the mens rea requirement, Dickson, C.J.C., for the majority in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 93; 220 A.P.R. 93, ruled that an intent to bring a court or judge into contempt is not an essential element of the offence; knowledge is the proper prerequisite for liability.
III Analysis
1) Incidental Issues
[22]
During the course of the hearing, a number of issues arose both of a procedural and substantive nature. I will comment on three of these, namely the question of adjournment, the right to counsel and the introduction of collateral evidence in order to challenge testimony given in cross-examination.
i) Adjournment:
[23]
By order of Rouleau, J., dated November 30, 1993, the present show cause was adjourned peremptorily to March 15, 1994 and three days were set aside for the hearing. At the end of the second day, it became apparent that the period of time that had been allocated would prove insufficient. I raised this concern with counsel for both sides and indicated my intention to conclude the proceedings, if possible, the following week. Counsel for the respondents stated that they would be unable to attend due to "previous engagements" and requested an adjournment which I refused to grant. [See footnote 2].
[24]
On the question of adjournments, Pigeon, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , stated the following at p. 125:
"It is true that a decision on an application for adjournment is in the judge's discretion. It is, however, a judicial discretion so that his decision may be reviewed on appeal if it is based on reasons which are not well-founded in law. This right of review is especially wide when the consequence of the exercise of discretion is that someone is deprived of his rights, whether in criminal or in civil proceedings."
[25]
Pigeon, J., addressed the particular fact situation before him and came to the following conclusion at p. 124:
"There is nothing in the record which could legally support the presumption that counsel's absence was a premeditated scheme in complicity with the accused. It was the first time the case was being called and there was nothing to justify such inference rather than mere suspicion. The accused has the right 'to make full ... defence personally or by counsel' (s. 577(3),
Criminal Code
).
An adjournment necessary for the exercise of this right may be refused only for a reason based on established facts
." (my emphasis)
[26]
The principle factor that a judge is required to consider in exercising his or her discretionary power with respect to adjournments in criminal or quasi-criminal proceedings is the need to ensure a fair trial. However, concerns such as the general conduct of the accused or his/her solicitor, the efficiency of the proceedings and the general circumstances of the case should also be taken into account.
[27]
I recognize the obvious tension between the need for strictness in the face of last minute requests for adjournments in order to ensure the efficient flow of proceedings and the requirement for safeguarding the right of an accused, whose liberty is at stake, to present an adequate defence. In my opinion, however, and I agree with the decision of Osler, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. C.A.), conduct of the accused and his or her solicitor which is dilatory or motivated by the desire to delay the proceedings tips the balance in favour of refusing an adjournment.
[28]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , one of the grounds of appeal was that the magistrate had refused to adjourn the trial to enable the accused to procure counsel. The accused was subsequently charged, tried and convicted on the same day without proper representation. Osler, J.A., speaking for the court said:
"
Obviously there must be cases in which such a refusal would be quite proper - for instance, if the application were made merely for delay
and so the matter is one quite within the jurisdiction of the court or Magistrate trying the case, a matter in the discretion of such court or Magistrate." (my emphasis)
[29]
After considering the circumstances at bar, I exercised my discretion to refuse the adjournment for the following reasons. First, when the question was discussed before me, counsel for the respondents were unable to offer any compelling reason for their inability to attend or point to any significant threat to their clients' rights. A bare statement by counsel that he or she has other commitments is not sufficient. Second, given the context, the safety of witnesses was a driving concern in favour of a speedy resolution of the hearing. Finally, the general conduct of counsel for the respondents evidenced an effort on their part, in my estimation, to cause delay and to interfere with the efficient conduct of the proceedings.
ii) Right To Counsel
[30]
Counsel for the respondent Mr. Barker failed to appear in court when the hearing was reconvened the following week, stating that he had "other business" to attend to. At the outset of proceedings, counsel for Mr. Droege indicated that Mr. Barker's counsel was not in attendance but that Mr. Barker would be representing himself for the day and would not be seeking an adjournment. On the basis of these statements, this court continued the hearing. However, just as Mr. Barker was due to cross-examine Rodney Bobiwash, a witness appearing on behalf of the Commission, he invoked his constitutional right to counsel. I decided not to accede to this request and he proceeded with his questioning.
[31]
While the right to retain and instruct counsel has been explicitly enshrined in the
Charter
pursuant to s. 10(b), this guarantee is restricted to situations of "arrest or detention". Although the
Charter
does not in express terms provide for such a right
at trial
, it can be inferred from the provisions of s. 7, which protects individuals from deprivations of their liberty not in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice, as well as s. 11(d), which guarantees a "fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal".
[32]
With respect to the nature of the protection afforded by s. 7, the oft-quoted statement by Lamer, J. (as he then was), in
Reference Re Section 94(2) of the Motor Vehicle Act (B.C.)
, [1985] 2 S.C.R. 486; 63 N.R. 266; 48 C.R.(3d) 289; 23 C.C.C.(3d) 289; [1986] 1 W.W.R. 481, bears repeating. He stated at p. 503 that:
"the principles of fundamental justice are to be found in the basic tenets of our legal system. They do not lie in the realm of general public policy but in the inherent domain of the judiciary as guardian of the justice system."
[33]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1990] 5 W.W.R. 1; 57 C.C.C.(3d) 1; 77 C.R.(3d) 145; 49 C.R.R. 114; 47 B.C.L.R.(2d) 1, McLachlin, J., concluded at p. 163 that these "basic tenets" include the common law confessions rule, the privilege against self-incrimination and the
right to counsel
.
[34]
With respect to the protection enshrined under s. 11(d), Lamer, J. (as he then was), in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.(3d) 193; [1987] 3 W.W.R. 699; 38 D.L.R.(4th) 508; 33 C.C.C.(3d) 1; 28 C.R.R. 122; 13 B.C.L.R.(2d) 1, commented at pp. 284-285:
"The trial is a key part of the administration of justice, and
the fairness of Canadian trials is a major source of the repute of the system
and is now a right guaranteed by s. 11(d) of the
Charter
." (my emphasis)
[35]
Since the fairness of a criminal hearing is predicated upon the opportunity of every accused to make a full and complete defense, this includes the right to be represented by counsel if the accused so desires. As Wilson, J., explained in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 241; 66 C.R.(3d) 297; 45 C.C.C.(3d) 296; 38 C.R.R. 252; 55 D.L.R.(4th) 673, at p. 546, the availability of legal assistance is crucial in preventing "the citizen from being overborne by the much greater power of the state".
[36]
I would like to emphasize, however, that this right is not unlimited in its scope and application. Situations will arise in which the conduct of the accused or counsel for the accused is such that it can be said that the right to be represented has been implicitly waived. [See footnote 3]. In the circumstances at bar, I found that Mr. Barker's sudden and unjustified reversal with respect to representation demonstrated a desire to delay the proceedings and it was on this basis that I refused his request.
[37]
As stated earlier, it is not sufficient for counsel to absent themselves merely because they have "other business" to attend to, thereby paralyzing the proceedings. In a show cause hearing involving several respondents, it is difficult to accommodate the schedules of all counsel involved, especially when a hearing extends beyond its anticipated length. It is therefore incumbent upon counsel to ensure that someone will be on hand to represent their client should they be unable to appear themselves.
[38]
However, upon careful consideration of the rights of the respondent Mr. Barker and the fact that he did, later in the day, object to appearing unrepresented, I have decided, in the interests of safeguarding the fairness of the proceedings, to give
no weight
to the oral testimony of Mr. Bobiwash, the only witness who was questioned. This is true with the exception, of course, of the fact itself that a message was left on Mr. Bobiwash's machine. This is not contested by the respondents.
[39]
The discussion of La Forest, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 258; 47 C.C.C.(3d) 289, with regard to the scope of judicial discretion to exclude evidence is instructive in relation to my decision. He stated at pp. 531-532 that:
"
the trial judge may exclude admissible evidence if its prejudicial effect substantially outweighs its probative value
; see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  where it is referred to in a dictum by Martland, J., at pp. 292-293, but
is simply one of the fundamental postulates of the law of evidence
." (my emphasis)
[40]
The testimony of Mr. Bobiwash was offered to confirm the allegation that Mr. Schipper, a member of the Heritage Front, left a recorded message on Mr. Bobiwash's answering machine implicating him in the activities of Mr. Barker and the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline. This message corroborates evidence given by Ms. Hategan, a witness called by the Commission, to the same effect.
[41]
In cross-examination, Mr. Bobiwash was questioned mainly about his activities and relationship with anti-racist movement. Since this does not have much probative value in relation to the present charge, I therefore find that the potential prejudicial effect of admitting his testimony, given the circumstances in which it was given, constitutes a sufficient basis upon which to exclude it.
iii) Motion To Quash The Subpoena
Of Sergeant Dolby, Investigating
Officer With The Waterloo
Regional Police Force
[42]
Counsel moved before me to quash the subpoena of Sergeant Dolby, who was the officer charged with investigating a firebombing of a Jewish woman's home in Kitchener. His testimony was sought by the respondents to establish a pattern of fabrication on the part of Ms. Hategan in order to discredit the evidence she provided at this hearing. Counsel for the respondents submitted that Ms. Hategan was so biased and negatively predisposed toward their clients that she swore numerous affidavits alleging, among other things, that Mr. Droege and Mr. Barker conspired to set up a hot line under a different name to defeat the intent of Joyal, J.'s injunction and that the Front was responsible for such destructive acts as the firebombing in Kitchener. As a result, they argued, it was necessary to introduce evidence to challenge the basis of Mr. Hategan's allegations in order to draw the appropriate inferences regarding the weight to be given to her testimony.
[43]
In considering these submissions, I was aware of the well-known rule of evidence that a party is not entitled to introduce extrinsic evidence to contradict the testimony of a witness given in cross-examination that relates to a collateral matter in the proceeding. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 267, at 274-276 (S.C.C.)). However, as the judgment in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ont. C.A.), demonstrates, the characterization of evidence as substantive or collateral depends on its relationship to the central issue being tried. In that case, the accused was charged with incest. His daughters were asked in cross-examination whether they had read in magazines about fathers having sexual relations with their daughters and they testified that they had not. They were shown a magazine called "True Experience" containing a story entitled "My Daughter's Lies Sent My Husband to Prison". The daughters answered that they did not remember seeing it. The trial judge interjected, observing that, surely this was cross-examination with respect to a collateral matter. On appeal, Martin, J., noted at p. 506 that the cross-examination with respect to whether the daughters had read the article did not relate to a collateral matter. He stated further that:
"The purpose of the cross-examination was to endeavour to show that they had fabricated their testimony with respect to their allegations against the appellant. The cross-examination accordingly did not relate to a collateral matter but related to the truthfulness of their testimony on the very issue before the court."
[44]
In my opinion, the allegation of a pattern of fabrication on the part of Ms. Hategan related to the truthfulness of her testimony on the very issue at stake in this hearing and was thus substantive in nature. Consequently, the respondents were entitled to introduce
relevant
extrinsic evidence to challenge that allegation.
[45]
It was on this basis that I agreed to hear the evidence of Sergeant Dolby under reserve, contingent on a subsequent ruling with respect to its admissibility. I have since decided that it is admissible because it is relevant to the truthfulness of Ms. Hategan's testimony on the central issue to be determined in this hearing.
iv) Motion To Quash The Subpoena
Of Joy Malbon And Andrew Mitrovica
[46]
Later in the course of these proceedings, counsel also requested that I quash the subpoenas of Ms. Malbon and Mr. Mitrovica. The admissibility of their testimony was contested for the same reason that the subpoena of Sergeant Dolby was challenged, so I need not restate the arguments of counsel. The individuals in question were a reporter and a producer, respectively, for the CTV television network who, in the course of CTV news broadcasts which aired December 12th and 15th, 1993, interviewed Ms. Hategan concerning her involvement with the Heritage Front.
[47]
After hearing the submissions of counsel in this instance, I was not satisfied that the testimony of Ms. Malbon and Mr. Mitrovica was relevant. The reason for this is the admission made by Ms. Hategan in cross-examination that she had no direct knowledge of the incident in Kitchener. She merely stated that, having had the depth of contact that she did with the Heritage Front, she felt that it could have been responsible. Given the fact that Ms. Hategan admitted before this court that her implication of the Heritage Front in the incident was nothing more than an opinion, the testimony of the reporter and the producer with respect to what Ms. Hategan might have told them would be of no assistance in determining the material issues at stake.
[48]
Counsel for the respondents submitted that this evidence was useful in demonstrating bias on the part of Ms. Hategan, and therefore constituted an exception to the collateral fact rule. However, the introduction of evidence for such a purpose is contingent upon the denial of the witness that he or she is not biased or partial.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Sask. C.A.). At no point was Ms. Hategan questioned about any negative predisposition she might have toward the respondents and, therefore, the requisite denial did not take place. Consequently, I ruled that the subpoenas represented an abuse of process and quashed them with costs.
IV Evidence And Discussion
[49]
This case essentially turns on credibility. In assessing the credibility of witnesses, a number of factors must be taken into account. As stated by Riddell, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.C.):
"the credibility of a witness in the proper sense does not depend solely upon his honesty in expressing his views. It depends also upon his opportunity for exact observation, his capacity to observe accurately, the firmness of his memory to carry in his mind the facts as observed, his ability to resist the influence, frequently unconscious, of interest to modify his recollection, his ability to reproduce in the witness-box the facts observed, the capacity to express clearly what is in his mind - all these are to be considered in determining what effect to give to the evidence of any witness."
[50]
Since the evidence given by the various witnesses over the course of this hearing was often conflicting and contradictory, it is useful to begin with a review of the facts which are undisputed and not controversial.
A) Undisputed And Uncontroversial
Evidence
Verna Morell - Bell Canada
[51]
Ms. Morell provided records from Bell Canada which indicated that Mr. Kenneth Lloyd Barker was the subscriber for telephone number 416-406-3416 on which the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline played the impugned messages. This number was connected on July 28, 1992 at a cost of $363.50. The number was subsequently changed on November 9, 1993 to 416-699-4868 and finally disconnected on January 2, 1994. The billing records for telephone number 416-406-3416 have been filed as Exhibit A-5.
Cathy Berndt - Legal Secretary With
The Canadian Human Rights
Commission
[52]
During the course of her duties, Ms. Berndt was instructed to monitor, record and transcribe messages played on the Heritage Front Hotline and the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline. She began the task on February 3, 1993. Since that time she has monitored, recorded and transcribed 146 messages on the Heritage Front Hotline and 146 messages on the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline. Ms. Berndt testified that on a number of occasions between October 4, 1993 and November 3, 1993, she called the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline at 416-406-3416 (later 416-699-4868) and heard the impugned messages. The transcript of these messages as well as those heard on the Heritage Front Hotline has been filed as Exhibit A-2.
[53]
On the basis of her work monitoring both hot lines, Ms. Berndt affirmed that the voice on the Heritage Front Hotline and that on the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline were one and the same and belonged to the respondent, Gary Schipper. For his part, Mr. Schipper does not dispute this fact.
Rodney Bobiwash - The Complainant In
The Canadian Human Rights
Tribunal Proceedings
[54]
As I mentioned previously, I will give no weight to the oral testimony of Mr. Bobiwash with the exception of noting the undisputed fact that Mr. Schipper left a message on his answering machine. The message was to the effect that Mr. Schipper was going to help Mr. Barker with the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline.
Witness X - Employee Number 010208
With The Canadian Human
Rights Commission
[55]
I granted the request of the Commission to keep the name of this witness confidential because I was satisfied that her name was not relevant to the content of her testimony and that the respondents would not be prejudiced.
[56]
Witness X testified that she found a Heritage Front flyer a few weeks prior to this hearing in the ladies' washroom of a night club. This flyer was filed as Exhibit A-10 and contains the name of the Euro Canadian Freedom Front and the telephone number 631-4118 written by hand.
[57]
I do not find this evidence to have much probative value as it indicates the number of a hot line other than the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline. It does not identify the respondents personally or implicate them in the activities of the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline.
B) Evidence In Dispute
Elisse Hategan - Former Member
Of The Heritage Front
[58]
Ms. Hategan joined the Heritage Front in 1992 and was involved with the group in a number of capacities - writing articles, speaking to the media and so on. She was personally acquainted with Wolfgang Droege, Gary Schipper, Kenneth Barker and Gerry Lincoln and was privy to a great deal of information about the activities of the Front through her attendance at meetings and discussions with these and other members. In August 1993, Ms. Hategan became disenchanted with the aims and tactics of the Front and left the organization. Her testimony is central to the Commission's case against the respondents in the present proceedings.
[59]
Ms. Hategan testified that when proceedings against the Heritage Front were initiated and it appeared that, in all likelihood, its hot line was going to be disconnected, Wolfgang Droege decided to operate it under a different name. This idea was discussed at a meeting held at Mr. Lincoln's house which Ms. Hategan attended. The name Ken Barker, a new and active supporter who was eager to help, was mentioned as the person who would be in charge of the project. He was approached at the end of this meeting and he agreed to start the line, calling it the "Equal Rights for Whites Hotline". In anticipation of this event and in order to avoid being accused of breaching the order of Joyal, J., Mr. Barker signed a formal resignation. Ms. Hategan stated that in a subsequent telephone conversation with her, Mr. Barker confirmed the fact that he agreed to set up a hot line and that Mr. Droege had given him the money to pay the necessary fees since he was unemployed with two kids to support at the time.
[60]
Ms. Hategan stated that she had spoken on several occasions with various individuals, including Mr. Droege and Mr. Schipper, about the proceedings against the Heritage Front and the Equal Rights for Whites Hotlines. On October 20 or 21, 1993, she testified that Mr. Droege called her from Mr. Lincoln's residence and told her that he would not cease operating a hot line no matter how many times the Human Rights Commission shut it down. He also said that the Commission would waste a great deal of the taxpayers' money trying in vain to stop him and that hot lines were going to be started in Toronto, Ottawa and maybe Montreal that would all be connected but set up under different names. In this particular case, Mr. Droege stated that the Heritage Front Hotline and the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline were one and the same. [See footnote 4].
[61]
Finally, Ms. Hategan confirmed the fact that the voice on both the Heritage Front and Equal Rights for Whites Hotline was that of Mr. Schipper. She stated that Mr. Schipper was heavily involved in the operation of the hot lines and that soon after his arrival, messages were being recorded on a daily basis. [See footnote 5]. Ms. Hategan also related a conversation that occured in November of 1993 between herself and Mr. Schipper in which he said that he was "moving around" and "hiding" to avoid service of court papers related to these proceedings. [See footnote 6]. He also expressed concern over the possibility that the Commission might connect Ken Barker to the Heritage Front through him and also informed her that they were considering drawing up resignation papers that would pre-date the inception of the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline. [See footnote 7].
[62]
The cross-examination of Ms. Hategan was intensive and thorough. She was candid about her attitude toward the Heritage Front, recounting that initially, she was an ardent supporter of the Front but how as she grew older, her views changed until she could no longer countenance its policies. Throughout the questioning she remained calm and patient, was consistent in her responses and never contradicted herself. Her forthright demeanour and manner of expression left no doubt in my mind that she was credible. Such was the strength of her oral and affidavit evidence that neither Mr. Droege's testimony nor that of any other witness could refute or even seriously challenge it.
[63]
Based on the evidence of Ms. Hategan alone, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the respondents the Heritage Front and Wolfgang Droege, with the assistance of Ken Barker and Gary Schipper, established a hot line under the name "Equal Rights For Whites" in direct violation of the order of Joyal, J., dated October 8, 1993 and are thus in contempt of this court.
[64]
Counsel for the respondents emphasized before me the danger of declaring their clients guilty of contempt on the basis of the testimony of a single witness without some form of corroboration. [See footnote 8]. They asked that I caution myself with respect to the weight to be given to such testimony in the same manner that a jury should be warned. [See footnote 9]. After reviewing all the factors which might impair the value of Ms. Hategan's testimony, I have decided to accede to their request, not because I believe that her testimony is not trustworthy, but in order to further safeguard the rights of the respondents. Upon reviewing the remainder of the evidence, I am satisfied that it contains sufficient material to corroborate Ms. Hategan's testimony.
Mervin Witter - Regional Director Of
The Ontario Office Of The Canadian
Human Rights Commission
[65]
Mr. Witter testified that on October 8, 1993, following the hearing before Joyal, J., he overheard the respondent Wolfgang Droege say to his counsel that he would continue playing messages on the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline. Counsel then told him that he could not by law do that. [See footnote 10].
[66]
Mr. Witter is trained as a police officer and is in the habit of recording his observations so that he does not have to rely solely on his memory should the need to recall any details arise. His notes were filed as Exhibit A-8.
[67]
I found Mr. Witter to be a very credible witness whose testimony withstood cross-examination and corroborated Ms. Hategan's statement that Mr. Droege was planning to operate another hot line in the event the Heritage Front Hotline was shut down. Mr. Droege's evidence on the same topic was imprecise and did not raise a reasonable doubt as to the truth of what Mr. Witter said.
Wolfgang Droege - Respondent,
Leader Of The Heritage Front
[68]
Overall, the evidence given by Mr. Droege was vague and inconsistent. He was unable to recall many important events and conversations. In direct examination on Ms. Hategan's affidavit [see footnote 11], for example, he was unable to refute any of her evidence, stating that he could not remember several of the meetings he was said to have had with her.
[69]
Mr. Droege made several inconsistent statements which were contradicted by the evidence of his co-respondents. For example, Mr. Droege testified that he monitored the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline and occasionally expressed his concern to Mr. Barker that the messages being broadcast might tar the image of white-rights activists. [See footnote 12]. Mr. Barker denied ever receiving such calls. [See footnote 13].
[70]
As for the contradictions in Mr. Droege's testimony, he stated, for example, that it was ludicrous to say that he had the foresight in July of 1992 to attempt to circumvent the order of Mr. Justice Joyal which was issued a year and a half after the Equal Rights for Whites Hotline came into existence. [See footnote 14]. However, in cross-examination, he admitted that he was served with an application for an injunction against the Heritage Front in June of 1992. [See footnote 15].
[71]
Also, Mr. Droege testified that he did not financially support hot lines in other cities and that they were paid for by local people. [See footnote 16]. In cross-examination, however, he admitted that he paid the bills and was still the subscriber for the Heritage Front Hotline in Montreal. [See footnote 17].
[72]
On the basis of these and other inconsistencies, as well as on the basis of his general demeanour and vagueness, I conclude, as a finding of fact, that Mr. Droege is not credible and I give no weight to his evidence.
Kenneth Barker - Respondent
[73]
Mr. Barker testified that although he was not an "official" member of the Heritage Front, he did attend meetings and volunteered to do such things as write letters, distribute leaflets and so on. He stated that he started the new hot line of his own accord in July of 1992 in order to express his own opinions on immigration, affirmative action and other policies of the government. Around the time Mr. Droege was served with the application of the Human Rights Commission that would lead to a cease and desist order against the Heritage Front, Mr. Barker testified that he asked Mr. Schipper, who was "the voice" on the Heritage Front Hotline, to write the occasional message for his line. However, apart from Mr. Schipper's contribution, Mr. Barker insisted that his hot line had nothing to do with the Heritage Front. In fact, Mr. Barker claimed that he "took a lot of flak" from members of the Heritage Front for opening his hot line. He said that they were concerned about the potential legal consequences of such an action on members of the Heritage Front and were generally opposed to his starting what they perceived to be a rival organization. [See footnote 18].
[74]
I do not find Mr. Barker's testimony to be plausible. As stated, he admitted that he is a member of the Heritage Front, going so far as to state, in cross-examination, that he would do anything for the group outside of breaking the law. [See footnote 19]. It is doubtful that his activities would go unmonitored or would otherwise be unrelated to this organization.
[75]
Further, Mr. Barker testified that on the day prior to the opening of the hot line, he paid Bell Canada a $200 deposit by obtaining a cash advance on his Canadian Tire credit card and that, in total, he spent $363.50 of his own funds setting it up. Being a seasonal worker and father of two small children, it is unlikely, in my opinion, that he would have the necessary disposable income to do this. My doubt is reinforced by the fact that Mr. Barker did not put into evidence an account statement issued by Canadian Tire which could have corroborated his story.
[76]
In addition to these inconsistencies, Mr. Barker was vague and imprecise concerning an incident that occurred in 1992 surrounding an attack on his daughter at her school. Following the attack, Mr. Barker was in contact with Mr. Droege and Mr. Lincoln who offered to write a letter to the school which Mr. Droege subsequently delivered. On the day in question, Mr. Barker was seen near the school with Mr. Droege at a time when Mr. Barker was not supposed to be in his presence. Counsel for the Commission pressed Mr. Barker to explain the reason for that contact and its nature, but for the most part Mr. Barker stated that he remembered little about the event.
[77]
Overall, I found Mr. Barker's demeanour over the course of these proceedings to be quite telling with regard to his credibility as a witness. During the first few days of the hearing, he at times sat motionless and attempted to stare me down. However, once on the witness stand, he never once looked in my direction when answering questions, preferring to face the courtroom and exchange glances and nods with Mr. Droege. I determine, therefore, that Mr. Barker was not credible and will disregard his evidence entirely.
Gary Schipper - Respondent
[78]
Mr. Schipper has never denied being a member of the Heritage Front, and was introduced as such in a CTV interview. During his examination-in-chief, he testified that his participation in the hot line was limited to being "the voice" in the messages. However, on cross-examination, he admitted that his responsibilities included a wider range of activities. He explained that he was the gatekeeper of the hot line and was responsible for returning messages left on the line, among other things.
[79]
Mr. Schipper testified that he knew that Mr. Droege and Mr. Barker had been served with court papers and denied that he was trying to avoid service himself. However, affidavits filed with the court indicate that process servers attempted to serve him at his present address but were unable to find him. As a result, the applicant was forced to make a motion to this court allowing it to serve Mr. Schipper at Mr. Doan's office, who is his solicitor.
[80]
As with Mr. Barker, Mr. Schipper's demeanour significantly undermined his credibility. He was also vague in his responses to questions and, claiming to have a poor memory, could not recall such things, inter alia, as his previous criminal convictions and the access code used to retrieve messages left on the hot line. I therefore give no weight to his testimony.
Gerry Lincoln - Member Of The
Heritage Front
[81]
Mr. Lincoln testified that he was not involved in any discussion or decision with respect to circumventing Mr. Justice Joyal's injunction. His main responsibility was publishing the Heritage Front's magazine called "Up Front".
[82]
Mr. Lincoln recalled a late night meeting with Mr. Droege and Ms. Hategan in the summer of 1992 but said that he was not present when they discussed the hot line. He testified that when meetings were held in his home, he usually went to another room to work on his computer. The evidence of Mr. Lincoln on this point does not, therefore, undermine that given by Ms. Hategan.
[83]
Mr. Lincoln was asked if he wrote the letter with respect to the attack on Mr. Barker's daughter. He answered in the affirmative and stated that he mailed it. [See footnote 20]. The following exchange took place during the hearing:
"Q: Did you mail it out to him?
A: I imagine I did. He didn't have a fax machine so I would have mailed it. Yes.
Q: Yourself?
A: At that time? Yes.
Q: You never had anyone deliver it to him by hand, did you?
A: I don't think so. No. No. That was all straight mail."
[84]
This statement directly contradicts the testimony of Mr. Barker [see footnote 21], who maintained that Mr. Droege delivered that letter personally.
[85]
In my assessment, Mr. Lincoln was not a credible witness. In attempting to protect his leader and associate Wolfgang Droege, he lied about the delivery of the letter and was generally vague in his responses. I therefore give no weight to this self-serving evidence.
Sergeant Dolby - Investigating Officer
With The Waterloo Regional
Police Force
[86]
Ultimately, the evidence of Sergeant Dolby did not support the respondent's allegation. Though in nature it was relevant, in substance it failed to establish any pattern of fabrication or raise a reasonable doubt as to what Ms. Hategan had told this court about the firebombing in Kitchener, especially since she admitted to having no personal knowledge of it.
[87]
His testimony revealed that Ms. Hategan had done nothing in the way of a formal complaint against the Front or its members. Also, the Sergeant's interest in the organization with respect to the firebombing stemmed not from any interview conducted with Ms. Hategan but rather from second-hand information to the effect that some reference to the incident was made by her during a CTV interview. In the end, the investigation was inconclusive and the police still have not identified the parties responsible for the attack.
V Conclusion
[88]
Freedom of expression in a democratic society includes the right to criticize government as well as the right to be politically incorrect. However, it does not include the right to deliberately disobey a valid order of the court which is not under attack. In my opinion, to tolerate such action jeopardizes the very integrity of our Canadian judicial system upon which
all
citizens depend and to which
all
have a right. It is the duty of the courts to ensure that deference to their process is not undermined in any way. The rule of law must be maintained; in order to do so it is essential that respect for the authority of the courts is enforced. I have no sympathy for unscrupulous fanatics who deliberately attempt to subvert that authority.
[89]
After careful consideration of the testimony of witnesses as well as the documents submitted, I conclude that the evidence is beyond a reasonable doubt that the respondents, the Heritage Front and Wolfgang Droege, deliberately disobeyed the order of Joyal, J., dated October 8, 1993 and are thus in contempt of this court pursuant to rule 355 of the
Federal Court Rules
. The evidence is also beyond a reasonable doubt that Kenneth Barker and Gary Schipper interfered with the administration of justice by aiding and abetting Wolfgang Droege and are thus in contempt of this court.
[90]
Consequently, the respondents Wolfgang Droege, Gary Schipper and Kenneth Barker shall appear before me at a time and place stated in my Order.
[91]
The application shall be allowed.
Application allowed.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/clh
Footnotes
1. The three requirements are: 1) a statutory grant of jurisdiction by Parliament; 2) an existing body of federal law that is essential to the disposition of the case and that nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction; and 3) the law on which the case is based must be a "law of Canada" within the meaning of s. 101 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
.
2. I did, however, agree to adjourn the hearing on a particular day because one of the respondents was due to appear in another court on an unrelated matter.
3. The case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , is instructive. It dealt with the loss of the right to a trial by jury. Gonthier, J., stated at p. 1425 that "an accused who, for no legitimate reason, fails to appear or to remain in attendance for his jury trial has no one to blame but himself for the consequences he must bear pursuant to s. 526.1(1)(a) of the
Criminal Code
.
4. Transcript, vol. I at p. 43.
5. Transcript, vol. I at p. 20.
6. Transcript, vol. I at p. 47.
7. Transcript, vol. I at pp. 47-48.
8. Transcript, vol. VIII at p. 151.
9. It should be noted that the common law rule requiring corroboration for particular categories of witnesses was eliminated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1983] 1 W.W.R. 193; 27 C.R.(3d) 304; 136 D.L.R.(3d) 89; 67 C.C.C.(2d) 1, in favour of a judicial discretion to warn which is exercised in appropriate circumstances.
10. Transcript, vol. IV at p. 72.
11. Transcript, vol. VI at pp. 132-162.
12. Transcript, vol. VI at pp. 114-115, 117.
13. Transcript, vol. VIII at pp. 55-56.
14. Transcript, vol. VI at p. 166.
15. Transcript, vol. VII at p. 6.
16. Transcript, vol. VI at p. 87.
17. Transcript, vol. VII at pp. 52-53.
18. Transcript, vol. VIII at p. 21 and p. 53.
19. Transcript, vol. VIII at pp. 70-71.
20. Transcript, vol. X at p. 93.
21. Transcript, vol. VIII at p. 94.
[End of document]