[1]
Rouleau, J.
: The individual respondents, having reached the maximum age applicable to their rank and having been released from the Canadian Armed Forces, filed complaints with the Canadian Human Rights Commission alleging discrimination on the basis of age contrary to ss. 7 and 10 of the Canadian Human Rights Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6; these sections refer to discriminatory policy and practice relating to employment.
[2]
Upon receipt of the complaints, an investigator was assigned the task of probing into the matters and submitted reports to the Commission pursuant to s. 44 of the Canadian Human Rights Act. The majority of these reports identified two issues:
1. First, is s. 15(b) of the Canadian Human Rights Act contrary to s. 15 of the Charter (individuals cannot be discriminated against because of age);
2. If so, secondly, does the compulsory reitrement age provided for in Regulations under the National Defence Act which impose compulsory retirement, constitute a bona fide occupational requirement within s. 15(a) of the Canadian Human Rights Act.
[3]
Subsections 15(a) and (b) provide as follows:
"15. It is not a discriminatory practice if
(a) any refusal, exclusion, expulsion, suspension, limitation, specification or preference in relation to any employment is established by an employer to be based on a bona fide occupational requirement;
(b) employment of an individual is refused or terminated because that individual has not reached the minimum age, or has reached the maximum age, that applies to that employment by law or under regulations, which may be made by the Governor in Council for the purposes of this paragraph;"
[4]
As a result of these reports the Commission concluded, without giving reasons, that these questions should be referred to a human rights tribunal for determination.
[5]
By this application the Attorney General of Canada seeks an order of certiorari to quash the decision of the Commission referring the matter to the tribunal. The applicant submits that the Commission erred in law and it exceeded its jurisdiction. It is suggested that although no specific reasons were given as to why they decided to refer the complaints to a tribunal, it is apparent that in order to do so the Commission must have determined that s. 15(b) of the Canadian Human Rights Act was contrary to s. 15 of the Charter. If not, the complaints could not constitute discrimination and there would have been no basis for forwarding the matter to the tribunal for determination.
[6]
The applicant submitted the following in support of its application for certiorari quashing the Commission's decision:
1. It argues that the Canadian Human Rights Commission does not have the authority to declare a section of its enabling legislation as being contrary to the Charter, further, that the Commission ought to have provided reasons. It was argued by the applicant that the cases of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 384 (F.C.A.) and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.R.(2d) 129 (Ont. C.A.), were wrongly decided. Both the Federal Court of Appeal and the Ontario Court of Appeal found that a board has the power to declare statutory provisions contrary to the Charter. In the alternative, the applicant submitted that this Court should distinguish these decisions, arguing that the Human Rights Commission is an administrative tribunal, not quasi-judicial, and therefore does not possess the requisite authority to determine Charter issues.
2. Further, should I find that the Commission does have the jurisdiction to make such a determination, the applicant argues that it erred in law by presuming that s. 15(b) of the Canadian Human Rights Act was contrary to s. 15 of the Charter. The applicant contends that the distinction made in s. 15(b) cannot be based on any of the grounds enumerated in s. 15 of the Charter nor on any analogous ground, as set out in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 1. Rather, the applicant submits, and I quote, "The distinction in s. 15(b) is between individuals whose minimum or maximum age of employment is prescribed by regulation or by law and individuals whose minimum or maximum age of employment is not prescribed by regulation or by law. The distinction is not based either on one of the grounds enumerated in s. 15 of the Charter or on an analogous ground as discussed by the Supreme Court of Canada  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ."
It behooves me to understand the subtlety of this argument but I assume that what the applicant suggests is that s. 15(b) is restricted to, and can only be invoked as an exception, where the employment conditions are prescribed by law or regulation. Therefore, s. 15(b) would not apply in the absence of legislated regulations. Thus, I should conclude that the absence of any law regulating the maximum age of employment would remove it from the exception, and leave it open to attack as discriminatory. What counsel therefore argues is that the exception created by s. 15(b) is not encompassed within the protections afforded in s. 15 of the Charter. I am satisfied that the fact that there are regulations cannot by itself remove it from the protection of the Charter, since we are dealing with age vis-à-vis employment; these Regulations could ultimately be declared unconstitutional. It is beyond me how this could not be considered age discrimination, which may be found to infringe one of the basic tenets of s. 15 of the Charter.
3. Finally, the applicant submits that the Federal Court, Trial Division, has the jurisdiction and should review the Commission's determination made under s. 44(3) of the Canadian Human Rights Act, which implies that it must determine whether there is a reasonable basis for proceeding to the next stage (Syndicat des Employés de Production du Québec et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 385 (S.C.C.)). This jurisprudence surely suggests that this court may intervene, but it does not indicate that the Trial Division of the Federal Court should impose its views or decide the ultimate issue in this application.
[7]
The respondent did not dispute the jurisdiction of the Federal Court, Trial Division, to entertain the Attorney General's motion, however, they suggested that the Human Rights Commission has the power to question the constitutional validity of its enabling legislation; further, that there was a valid issue to refer to the Tribunal for determination. He went on to add that the Canadian Human Rights Act was predominant legislation, and that in order for any branch of government to override its provisions it required a notwithstanding clause; the Queen's Regulations under the National Defence Act had not included such a provision, and therefore the issue should be considered at least controversial in light of the wording under s. 15(b). I have great misgiving in entertaining this suggestion. It appears to me that the wording of s. 15(b) is clear and concise, that the proper Regulations respecting age would create an exception and could be treated as nondiscriminatory; there are no precise words to indicate to me that a notwithstanding clause is required in the regulations. The legislation itself (s. 15(b)) provides the exception without any other stipulation.
[8]
I am satisfied that the Trial Division of the Federal Court does have the jurisdiction to review the Commission's decision as to whether or not to refer these questions to a tribunal. In the Syndicat case, supra, the Supreme Court of Canada made it clear that such decisions are not reviewable by the Federal Court of Appeal under s. 28 of the Federal Court Act, since they are not required to be made on a judicial or quasi-judicial basis. However, they added that an administrative decision of this nature is subject to review under s. 18 of the Federal Court Act.
[9]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 1, is also authority for the proposition that a court may intervene to prevent an administrative body from proceeding when it is perceived that an absence of jurisdiction has either arisen or may clearly be foreseen; this, provided that the question of jurisdiction is purely a question of law, and no fact-finding is required by the tribunal in the exercise of the function. Otherwise, the court must wait until the requisite fact-finding has been carried out.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], the applicant was seeking
prohibition
to prevent the tribunal from inquiring into a complaint, suggesting that the Commission acted beyond its authority in appointing a tribunal. Mr. Justice Muldoon granted the orders sought, on the basis that to proceed would be wasteful and abusive in light of a certain decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in identical circumstances. There is therefore no doubt that I have jurisdiction to grant the orders sought should I be satisfied that they are warranted.
[10]
Turning to the applicant's first submission, I consider myself bound by the Federal Court of Appeal decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -Gadoury, and, although not binding, but highly persuasive, the decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal in Cuddy Chicks. Both of these determined that inferior tribunals have the authority to hear and determine Charter issues arising in the context of applying or interpreting legislative provisions. Leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada has been granted in both cases, but until such time as judgment is rendered I am not at liberty to conclude that they have been wrongly decided.
[11]
I am not persuaded by the applicant's alternative submission in its initial argument that Tétrault-Gadoury and Cuddy Chicks are distinguishable from the case at bar. The applicant relied upon the Supreme Court's conclusion in the Syndicat case, supra, for the proposition that the Commission's decision under s. 44 is an administrative one; it submits that this finding is restrictive and does not allow the Commission to question its legislative authority. As I read Syndicat, it ruled only that the decision of the Commission under s. 44 is an administrative decision not required by law to be made on a judicial or quasi-judicial basis. It cannot lead me to the further conclusion that the Commission is unable to question whether that section of its enabling legislation may or may not be contrary to the Charter.
[12]
The decisions  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -Gadoury and Cuddy Chicks, as I understand them, are to the effect that, where a tribunal is required, as part of its statutory functions, to apply or interpret legislation, it also has the authority to declare such legislation contrary to the Charter. This Commission must apply the provisions of the Canadian Human Rights Act to determine if there is sufficient evidence of discrimination to warrant a referral to a tribunal. In so doing, they must be satisfied that their legislation is not contrary to the Charter, as was enunciated in the Tétrault-Gadoury and Cuddy Chicks decisions. This is further reinforced by the specific authority granted under s. 41(c) of the Canadian Human Rights Act, to determine its own jurisdiction.
[13]
The applicant suggested that the Commission does not possess the "judicial" tools to determine a Charter issue. This may be said of many tribunals, but they are still required to apply and interpret legislation as set out  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -Gadoury and Cuddy Chicks. May I also add that the Commission's decision was not determinative of the ultimate issue. They were referring the matter to the tribunal for analysis. In this respect it is interesting to note the findings in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  application by way of reference under s. 28(4) of the Federal Court Act seeking a determination as to whether certain sections of the Canadian Human Rights Act violated s. 15 of the Charter. The majority of the Court of Appeal refused to determine the matter on the basis that it would not be dispositive of the issue. In concurring, Marceau, J.A., but for different reasons, also held the application was invalid. He added that he was of the view that a reference of this kind should be submitted to a Tribunal, which could put before the Court findings of fact on which the decision was based. He also found very interestingly, that the Commission exceeded its jurisdiction by referring the matter to the Court for a ruling on the constitutional validity of certain sections of its Act. This reinforces my belief that the Commission has followed the proper route in leaving the matter to a tribunal for determination.
[14]
Another issue raised by the applicant as to the impropriety of the Commission's determination was the lack of debate before them, and the absence of any reasons given for their finding and referral. I once again refer to the decision in the Syndicat case, in which the Supreme Court of Canada made it quite clear that a Commission's decision under s. 44 in referring a matter to a tribunal is purely administrative, and not subject to the rules of natural justice. I find this argument by the applicant inapplicable. There is no requirement for the Commission to provide reasons. The tribunal's finding will require explanation; may I suggest that in light of this reasoning the present application could be considered untimely.
[15]
The applicant's final submission was that the Commission erred in law in deciding that s. 15(b) of its enabling legislation contravened the Charter. If upheld, s. 15(b) of the Canadian Human Rights Act would preclude a referral to a tribunal, and require that the complaints be dismissed, since s. 15(b) would prevent the actions complained of from constituting discrimination (see Re Alberta Human Rights Commission and the Queen (1986), 71 A.R. 253; 27 D.L.R.(4th) 735 (Alta. C.A.)).
[16]
There can be little doubt that the Commission must have concluded that s. 15(b) was contrary to the Charter, or in the least, determined that it was questionable. However, to interfere with the conclusion of the Commission at this stage and not allow the matter to proceed without the benefit of complete fact-finding and argument would be a premature interference.
[17]
The applicant's submission effectively asks this Court to determine the ultimate issue: whether s. 15(b) offends s. 15 of the Charter. However, at this stage, this is not my function. The Commission has requested that its Tribunal review this exact question. They are the body that should make that finding. My only function is to determine whether the Commission had the power to make such a referral, and whether they erred in law in so doing.
[18]
I must be satisfied that there was a reasonable basis for the Commission to refer the questions to a tribunal, otherwise it could constitute an error of law. A cursory review of the authorities would indicate to me that any regulation or statute dealing with age discrimination in the area of employment can bring the issue squarely within s. 15 of the Charter, and requires greater analysis than those provided by the investigator's report and the non-reasoned decision of the Commission.
[19]
The applicant stated that the distinction drawn in s. 15(b) did not come within the enumerated grounds of discrimination in s. 15 of the Charter, or an analogous ground as set out in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Counsel argued that, to constitute an "analogous ground", the class which claims they are being treated differently must comprise a "discreet insular minority". In support, she relied upon  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 115. Two other cases which were subsequently brought to my attention, also dealing with this issue are the decisions by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], and Rudolph Wolff & Co. Ltd. and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], both rendered March 29, 1990. In my view it is not necessary that there be a "discreet insular minority" which is being discriminated against in order to constitute "analogous grounds". I am not convinced that the basis for differential treatment under s. 15(b) of the Canadian Human Rights Act are terms of employment prescribed by law/regulation; I believe it can safely be said that the deciding factor is
age
, which is one of the enumerated grounds in s. 15 of the Charter. What s. 15(b) does is to exempt from the parameters of prohibited age discrimination those circumstances where the maximum or minimum age of employment is prescribed by law or regulation. It is similar to s. 15(a), which exempts from discrimination on the basis of what constitutes a bona fide occupational requirement.
[20]
There have been several cases decided in which similar mandatory retirement schemes have been held to be contrary to s. 15 of the Charter, although not in the context of a provision identical to that found in s. 15(b) of the Canadian Human Rights Act. In Harrison and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the British Columbia Court of Appeal determined that a section of the B.C. Human Rights Act, providing that discrimination on the basis of age was confined to persons between the ages of 45 and 65, violated s. 15 of the Charter. The Court applied the decision of the British Columbia Court of Appeal  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , which was upheld on appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada.
[21]
The same result was reached by the Nova Scotia Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 225 A.P.R. 91; 41 C.R.R. 105, regarding similar human rights legislation. Many other courts have held compulsory retirement schemes to be in violation of human rights legislation.
[22]
The Ontario Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.R.(2d) 1, upheld under s. 1 of the Charter a provision in the Ontario Human Rights Code similar to that at issue in Harrison and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Harrison, McKinney, and two other cases involving challenges of compulsory retirement schemes were argued before the Supreme Court of Canada in May, 1989; judgment is still pending.
[23]
I am satisfied that, as the law currently stands, the Canadian Human Rights Commission has the authority to declare a section of its enabling legislation contrary to the Charter, and considering the decisions which have found similary limiting provisions to be in violation of s. 15, the Commission's actions, in the circumstances, were more than reasonable. Although there may remain an argument that the legislation is justifiable under s. 1, this question will require further evidence and argument, which will be available to the investigating tribunal.
[24]
The Commission's determination at this point is merely preliminary; allowing the complaints to proceed to the next stage, that of full investigation and fact-finding by a Human Rights Tribunal, is essential. The Commission need only have a reasonable basis for questioning the constitutional validity of the provision in question; the tribunal will look into the matter more closely, and upon its final determination, appeal proceedings may then be taken by any interested party. The tribunal may also consider whether the provisions of the Queen's Regulations and Orders constitute a bona fide occupational requirement under s. 15(a) of the Canadian Human Rights Act.
[25]
This application is hereby dismissed. Costs to the respondents.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slg
[End of document]