[1]
Denault, J.
[Translation]: Bridgestone/Firestone Inc. has appealed a decision of the Registrar of Trademarks refusing to register the mark "Lemans" in association with automobile tires. Rather, the Registrar allowed the opposition by Automobile Club de l'Ouest de la France (A.C.O.) which argued, inter alia, that the mark which it was sought to register was not distinctive, by reason of its resemblance to the marks "Le Mans" and "Les 24 Heures du Mans" which it uses interchangeably to designate an automobile race held every year since 1923 in Le Mans, France.
[2]
Of the three arguments made by the respondent in its opposition, the Registrar rejected the one based on s. 38(2)(c) of the
Trade-marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, that is, that the appellant was not the person entitled to registration under s. 16(1)(a) of the
Act
. In addition, the Registrar did not make a decision as to the argument based on s. 38(2)(b) of the
Act
, that is, that the appellant's trademark was not registrable. However, the Registrar accepted the argument raised by the opponent based on the fact that the appellant's mark "Le Mans" was not distinctive at the time the statement of opposition was filed (April 21, 1987), in that he believed that a substantial number of Canadians had some knowledge of the Le Mans race and its association with automobile technology. Since the appellant had failed in its duty to prove the distinctive nature of its mark, its application for registration was refused.
[3]
Counsel for the appellant contended that he had identified four errors in the Registrar's decision, and in particular one relating to the date that is relevant in assessing the evidence. Given that this court had decided in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 418 (T.D.), that the relevant date in determining whether a mark is distinctive is the date when the Registrar makes his decision, the appellant used this appeal to demonstrate the distinctive nature of its mark between the date when the statement of opposition was filed (April 21, 1987) and the date of the registrar's decision (January 31, 1994), and thus to supplement its evidence as permitted by s. 56(5) of the
Act
. (Properly speaking, this cannot be called an error by the Registrar since the decision in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is dated February 4, 1994, which was subsequent to the decision of the Registrar on January 31, 1994.) The respondent also adduced additional evidence.
[4]
Before beginning our analysis of the decision a quo and of the additional evidence that was adduced, it is important to review certain principles in this field. Although the
Act
permits additional evidence to be adduced, and the court may exercise any discretion vested in the Registrar (s. 56(5)), the courts have held that where such an appeal essentially turns on a question of fact, the court must hesitate to reverse a decision of the Registrar, a qualified person, unless it is satisfied that his decision contains an error or that the additional evidence might lead to a contrary decision [see footnote 1]. There is no doubt that the party who is seeking to register a trademark has the onus of proving that it is distinctive, while the party who opposes registration must first prove the facts on which the opposition is based [see footnote 2].
[5]
Given that the purpose of the appeal is primarily to ask the court to decide that when the mark "Lemans", which the appellant is seeking to register, is used in association with automobile tires, it is distinctive under the provisions of s. 2 and s. 38(2)(d) of the
Act
, I shall consider that issue first. In the decision a quo, the Registrar properly quoted a passage from a judgment of this court in
Motel 6  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), in which Addy, J., held:
"A trademark can neither distinguish nor be adapted to distinguish the services of a person if another person has used the mark in a foreign country and it has become known in Canada as the latter's mark in respect of similar services. On the issue of lack of distinctiveness of a mark, although it must be shown that the rival or opposing mark must be known to some extent at least, it is not necessary to show that it is well-known or that it has been made known solely by the restricted means provided for in s. 5, supra. It is sufficient to establish that the other mark has become known sufficiently to negate the distinctiveness of the mark under attack."
[6]
The appellant contended that the Registrar's analysis of the evidence was incomplete and that, in assessing the distinctiveness of the applicant's mark under s. 38(2)(d) of the
Act
, the Registrar failed to take into account all the circumstances, including those set out in s. 6(5) of the
Act
. In effect, it argued that the concepts of distinctiveness and confusion always go together, even in the case of a statement of opposition under s. 38(2)(d). On this point, it contended that while it is sufficient that the opponent's mark be known in Canada, as this court held in
Motel 6 Inc.
, that rule does not settle the entire matter, and that mark must be known to the point that the mark becomes nondistinctive; to do this, it claimed, all of the circumstances must be assessed, including those set out in s. 6(5), and in the case at bar the Registrar failed to do so.
[7]
I find that as reasonable as the appellant's argument may appear, it must not operate to increase the burden of proof on the opponent. In
Motel 6 Inc.
, Addy, J., clearly held, relying in that respect on the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 7  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , that the distinctiveness of a mark which is challenged by an opponent could be negated if the opponent succeeded in proving that its mark was sufficiently known. In this case, the Registrar concluded that the opponent's mark was sufficiently known, and he did not err, in his analysis of the evidence, in considering the fame of the Le Mans automobile race, making the connection between that race and innovative automobile technology, the tires sold by the appellant, and lastly, the degree to which the marks resembled each other. In a word, I am not satisfied that the Registrar's analysis did not take into account all the circumstances of the case, as required by s. 6(5) of the
Act
.
[8]
We must now determine whether, in view of the additional evidence supplied by the parties, the appellant in particular has succeeded in proving that its mark is distinctive, as it is required to demonstrate. That evidence is not persuasive. The appellant's witness Klarer established that the appellant had sold what was in fact a very modest number of tires; if we believe the brochures illustrating those tires, they bore the mark "Le Mans", written as two words, as the opponent writes it, rather than the mark "Lemans", written as a single word, as it claimed in its pleadings. The witness also admitted, in his statement, that the appellant had not advertised these tires, as that job was left to the vendors. The evidence given by the witness Dufour concerning his search of the federal trademarks register served at most to demonstrate a connection among several marks and automobile racetracks, while on the other hand that evidence confirmed the existence of a relationship between tires and automobile racing circuits.
[9]
The additional evidence adduced by the opponent further establishes the considerable fame of the "24 heures du Mans", both in Canada and worldwide, and the technical progress that has come about as a result of that race in the field of automobiles in general, and tires in particular. A list of the numerous papers on this subject and articles that have appeared in Canadian daily newspapers and other publications referring to the Le Mans automobile race or to the "24 heures du Mans", particularly between January 1985 and April 1994, prove that the opponent's marks are well-known in Canada.
[10]
In his memorandum, counsel for the appellant further contends that the Registrar [translation] "erred by failing to recognize that if he were not satisfied that there was a probability of some association being made in the mind of the typical Canadian between the applicant's products and the opponent's services, he should have concluded that the applicant's mark had not lost its distinctiveness". After analyzing all of the evidence adduced by the parties, I find that there is evidence to establish that it is probable that such an association exists in that it has been shown that there is a close relationship between automobile racing and the tire industry. To see this, we need only look to how tire manufacturers frequently give their various models of tires names that are reminiscent of famous races or racetracks.
[11]
Lastly, the appellant contended that the Registrar had erred in suggesting, although he had doubts, that the average Canadian would assume that the appellant's tires were approved or licensed by the opponent. On the contrary, I find that the Registrar did not make the "suggestion" imputed to him by counsel for the appellant: he simply wrote "... I am in a state of doubt whether the typical Canadian purchaser of a car tire sold under the mark 'Lemans' would likely assume that the tire was approved or licensed or sponsored by the opponent". In any event, having regard to the additional evidence produced in this appeal, even if selling tires is not, prima facie, directly associated with an automobile race, it is likely that the consumer might think that the organizers of that race had approved, licensed or sponsored the use of this trademark by a tire manufacturer or that, at the very least, there was a business relationship between them (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 7 (T.D.), at p. 12  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[12]
Having regard to the conclusions reached by this court, we need not examine the other grounds of opposition argued before the Registrar.
[13]
The appellant having failed in its duty to prove the distinctiveness of the mark "Lemans", its appeal is dismissed with costs.
Judgment
[14]
The appeal is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/nmg
Footnotes
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 293 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 76 (T.D.), at p. 84  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 359.