Introduction
[1]
Morneau, Prothonotary
[Translation]: The case at bar concerns a motion by the defendants China Ocean Shipping (Group) Co. and Guangzhou Ocean Shipping Company (collectively: Cosco) asking the Court to determine whether it is plain and obvious that the in rem portion of the action of the plaintiff Paramount Enterprises International Inc. (Paramount) relating to the arrested ship and cargo should be struck out under paragraph 419(1)(a) [see footnote 1] of the
Federal Court Rules
(the
Rules
) on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of action pursuant to the joint operation of paragraph 22(2)(i) and subsection 43(2) of the
Federal Court Act
(the
Act
). The parties are in agreement that these are the provisions of the
Act
that apply here.
Facts
[2]
The statement of claim in the case at bar is relatively short, and it is appropriate to reproduce it here in its entirety.
"STATEMENT OF CLAIM IN
REM AND IN PERSONAM
(Filed this 9th day of May, 1997)
PLAINTIFF BRINGS SUIT IN REM
AND IN PERSONAM AND DECLARES:
1. By and in virtue of a contract of Charterparty in the 'Conlinebooking' form dated on/about March 10, 1997 and entered into at Exton, Pennsylvania (the 'Conlinebooking'), Plaintiff Paramount Enterprises International Inc. ('Paramount') undertook to carry and Defendants Beston Chemical Corporation ('Beston') and China North Chemical Industries Corporation ('Nocinco') undertook to ship a cargo of 1000 metric tons net explosive content of palletized cargo consisting of 500 metric tons prilled TNT and 500 metric tons flaked TNT UN0209 1.1D. (the 'Cargo'), from Tianjin-Xingang, China with discharge at Grande Anse, Quebec, Canada, the whole subject to the terms of the Conlinebooking;
2. On March 12, 1998, Beston asked Paramount to modify the Conlinebooking so that a related company to Nocinco, China Xinshidai Company ('Xinshidai'), would appear as merchant on the Conlinebooking, which Paramount complied with, Nocinco and Beston remaining responsible thereunder to arrange for and otherwise deal with this shipment of the Cargo in compliance with the Conlinebooking;
3. In accordance with the Conlinebooking, Paramount positioned the nominated vessel 'Len Speer' for arrival at Xingang on/about the 10-12 April 1997;
4. Notwithstanding the terms of and the obligations of Beston and Nocinco and/or Xinshidai pursuant to the Conlinebooking, Nocinco advised Paramount on the 25th March, 1997 that the Cargo would not be shipped on the M.V. 'Len Speer' and carried by paramount but that, instead, the said Cargo would be carried by Defendant China Ocean Shipping (Group) Co. ('Cosco');
5. Notwithstanding Paramount's strong objections to the announced nonperformance by Defendants Beston and Nocinco and/or Xinshidai of their obligations under the Conlinebooking and repeated demands that these Defendants honour and fulfil their obligations thereunder, in breach of the conlinebooking, illegally and without colour of right, the said Cargo was released to Cosco and/or Guangzhou Ocean Shipping Company ('Cosco Guangzhou'), a related company forming part of the Cosco group, and shipped on board for carriage as aforesaid by the Defendant vessel M.V. 'An Xin Jiang', a vessel under the registered ownership of Cosco Guangzhou and forming part of the Cosco fleet;
6. As a result of Beston and Nocinco and/or Xinshidai's breach of the Conlinebooking contract, Paramount has suffered and continues to suffer financial losses, notwithstanding Paramount's efforts in mitigating the damages arising from these Defendants' breach of contract;
7. At present, Paramount estimates that its losses amount to approximately United States dollars $125,000.00, which Paramount is entitled to claim and hereby claims against Defendants Beston and Nocinco and/or Xinshidai;
8. Further or alternatively and without prejudice to the foregoing, Defendants Cosco and Cosco Guangzhou are equally liable to indemnify Paramount, jointly and severally with the other Defendants herein, as a result of their wrongful and illegal interference with the Conlinebooking, of which Cosco and/or Cosco Guangzhou had full knowledge and knowing or being deemed to have known that their said interference would cause damages to Paramount;
9. At all material times, Defendants Beston and/or Nocinco and/or Xinshidai were the owners and/or the beneficial owners of the said Cargo and, as such, Plaintiff is entitled to exercise its rights in rem against the Cargo which is the subject of this action;
10. Further, Paramount invokes its contractual lien on the Cargo pursuant to the Conlinebooking for all amounts due by Defendants Beston and Nocinco and/or Xinshidai as a result of their breach and illegal nonperformance of their contractual obligations thereunder;
11. At all material times herein, Defendant Cosco Guangzhou was the owner of the Defendant vessel 'An Xin Jiang' and, as such, Plaintiff is entitled to exercise its rights in rem against the vessel 'An Xin Jiang', which is the subject of this action;
12. Plaintiff invokes all applicable Federal law, including Canadian Maritime Law, as well as United States Law, as applicable pursuant to the Conlinebooking;
13. Plaintiff's action is well-founded both in fact and in law.
WHEREFORE, MAY IT PLEASE
THIS HONOURABLE COURT:
GRANT the present action;
CONDEMN Defendants jointly and severally in rem and in personam to pay the Plaintiff the Canadian equivalent of the sum of United States dollars $125,000.00 (approximately $175,000.00) together with pre-judgment and post-judgment interest at the Bank of Canada Canadian chartered bank prime commercial rate compounded semi-annually from March 10, 1997 until payment, the whole with costs including investigation expenses, experts' expenses and reports and such other and further relief as this case may require;
ORDER the appraisement and judicial sale of the Cargo of about 500 metric tons prilled TNT explosives and 500 metric tons flaked TNT UN0209 1.1D. now loaded on board the vessel 'An Xin Jiang' in satisfaction of Plaintiff's claim in principal, interest and costs as aforesaid together with such other relief as this case may require;
ORDER the appraisement and judicial sale of the vessel 'An Xin Jiang', her equipment and gear in satisfaction of Plaintiff's claim in principal, interest and costs as aforesaid together with such other relief as this case may require;"
[3]
Thus, it can be seen from paragraphs 1 and 2 of the statement of claim that on about March 10, 1997, Paramount and three of the defendants, namely Beston Chemical Corporation Inc. (Beston), China North Chemical Industries Corporation (Nocinco) and China Xinshidai Company (Xinshidai) (the contractual defendants), entered into a Conlinebooking charter party, that is, an agreement for the carriage of goods, namely dynamite, on a ship, namely the "Len Speer".
[4]
Paragraphs 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the statement of claim allege that the contractual defendants breached their obligations under the Conlinebooking charter party by causing the cargo of dynamite to be shipped to Grande Anse on a ship, the "An Xin Jiang", belonging to Cosco, thereby causing losses to Paramount assessed for now at $175,000.
[5]
Paragraphs 8 and 11 further accuse Cosco of wrongful interference with the Conlinebooking charter party. This delict is alleged to have caused damage and, on this basis, paragraph 11 indicates that Paramount considers itself entitled to exercise its rights in rem against the "An Xin Jiang" since - and it is likely trying here to repeat the key words of s. 43(2) of the
Act
- it considers that ship to be the subject of its action (Paramount's first proposition).
[6]
In addition, paragraphs 9 and 10 seek the exercise in rem, against the cargo, of Paramount's rights resulting from the breach of the Conlinebooking charter party by the contractual defendants. Here again, Paramount concludes that this cargo is the subject of its action (Paramount's second proposition).
Analysis
General Principles
[7]
In my view, these two propositions by Paramount must be analysed essentially and primarily on the basis of paragraph 22(2)(i) and subsection 43(2) of the
Act
. The text of these provisions, and of the provisions related thereto, are reproduced here in both official languages.
"22.(1) The Trial Division has concurrent original jurisdiction, between subject and subject as well as otherwise, in all cases in which a claim for relief is made or a remedy is sought under or by virtue of Canadian maritime law or any other law of Canada relating to any matter coming within the class of subject of navigation and shipping, except to the extent that jurisdiction has been otherwise specially assigned.
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), it is hereby declared for greater certainty that the Trial Division has jurisdiction with respect to any one or more of the following:
. . . . .
(i) any claim
arising out of
any agreement relating to the carriage of goods in or on a ship or to the use or hire of a ship whether by charter party or otherwise;
43(2) Subject to subsection (3),
the jurisdiction conferred on the Court by section 22 may be exercised in rem against the ship,
aircraft or other property
that is the subject of the action
, or against any proceeds paid into court." (Emphasis added)
[8]
As indicated by the very text of the provisions quoted supra, and as was noted in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) (
Choko Star
), at page 261, s. 22 of the
Act
confers the basic jurisdiction over Admiralty matters on the court, and subs. 43(2) concerns the exercise in rem of that jurisdiction.
[9]
These two statutory provisions must necessarily be read together.
[10]
Accordingly, for the purpose of subsection 43(2), it is my view that an action in rem cannot be brought against just any of a defendant's ships or cargoes but must, according to para. 22(2)(i), be limited to the ship or cargo covered by the agreement on which the plaintiff's action is based.
Paramount's first proposition
[11]
It is not in dispute that the basis for Paramount's action against Cosco's ship, the "An Xin Jiang", is delictual (or extracontractual, which is now the proper term).
[12]
Counsel for Paramount raised a number of arguments to justify its action against the "An Xin Jiang".
[13]
It was argued that it is common in maritime law for a ship to be recognized as having its own personality and that it can be contended in the case at bar that the "An Xin Jiang" should be regarded as having committed the alleged interference. On this basis, it is the ship that is the subject of the action.
[14]
I cannot accept this argument. Even if it were conceded for discussion purposes that the "An Xin Jiang" should be regarded as having committed the interference, Paramount alleges that the interference was with the Conlinebooking charter party, which concerned the "Len Speer". The "An Xin Jiang" cannot therefore be the ship that is the subject of the action.
[15]
In my view,
Choko Star
, supra, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), (
The Ship 1201
), to which I was referred on this argument, are not applicable to the case at bar. In
Choko Star
, the court had to determine whether the Choko Star had participated in the performance of the contract at issue in such a way as to justify the argument that it was not unreasonable to consider the ship to be the subject of the action. This question therefore arose in the context of an agreement and one ship - not two ships as in the instant case. The question in
The Ship 1201
was similar: whether a tug had in fact commenced to fulfil the terms of a contract to tow a ship to a sufficient extent that it was not frivolous to consider that ship to be the subject of the action. As there was a definite connection in each case between the agreement and the ship, the actions were allowed.
[16]
In those decision, the case before the court concerned a single ship. Here, the court is being asked to determine whether there is a factual connection not between the Conlinebooking charter party and the "Len Speer", but between the charter party and the "An Xin Jiang". The latter ship is not part - not even on paper - of the equation between an agreement on which the action is based and the ship to which the agreement applies. It cannot therefore be the subject of the action.
[17]
Counsel for Paramount further submitted that, according to the case law, his client can take advantage, on a delictual basis of course, of an agreement to which it is not a direct party.
[18]
Here, the agreement referred to is apparently that between the three contractual defendants and Cosco to charter the "An Xin Jiang".
[19]
It should be noted at the outset that the statement of claim does not refer expressly to this agreement. Paragraph 5 of the statement of claim merely mentions that "... the said cargo was released to Cosco ...". Even if all the allegations in the statement of claim were taken to be true for the purposes of this motion, the wording of paragraph 5 is in my view insufficient for me to hold that there is in fact an agreement.
[20]
On the other hand, the courts have recognized that it is not inconceivable for a party to an agreement for carriage by sea to bring an action against the ship and its owners even if the owners are not direct parties to the agreement. Such an action is of course one in delict.
[21]
It now appears settled that paragraph 22(2)(i) of the
Act
permits this result (see, to this effect,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), (
Bosca
) at page 179, which itself refers to the decision of the House of Lords in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  P. Lemos
), which established that the English counterpart of para. 22(2)(i) permits such a claim).
[22]
In the case at bar, even if it were admitted for discussion purposes that there is an agreement between the three contractual defendants and Cosco, Paramount, unlike the owners of the ship, is not a party to that agreement. Thus, the dynamic of
Bocsa
and
The Antonis P. Lemos
is not present, which means that those decisions cannot be considered to permit Paramount to avail itself of an agreement to which it is not a direct party.
[23]
In my view, it is therefore plain and obvious that, in so far as Paramount's action in rem relates to the "An Xin Jiang", it discloses no reasonable cause of action within the meaning of paragraph 419(1)(a) of the
Rules
.
Paramount's second proposition
[24]
As mentioned supra, paragraphs 9 and 10 of the statement of claim seek the exercise in rem, against the cargo, of Paramount's rights resulting from the breach of the Conlinebooking charter party by the contractual defendants. Here again, Paramount concludes that this cargo is the subject of its action.
[25]
However, Paramount's action is once again based on the Conlinebooking charter party. It seems to me that in the context of this agreement, the facts as presented do not disclose a sufficient connection between Paramount and the cargo to permit Paramount to exercise any kind of right to follow in respect thereof.
[26]
It can be seen from the statement of claim that Paramount never had possession of the cargo. Thus, Paramount never carried it, and even less so on board the "Len Speer". In the circumstances, it can most certainly not be said in respect of the cargo that there was a commencement to fulfil the terms of the contract within the meaning of
The Ship 1201
or a participation in the performance of the contract within the meaning of
Choko Star
.
[27]
Counsel for Paramount admitted that he was not relying here on a maritime lien, despite the reference in paragraph 10 of the statement of claim to a "contractual lien". In support of the arrest of cargo where there is no maritime lien, Paramount referred me to only one decision, that in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
[28]
In that case, some stevedores brought an action in rem against the cargo they had loaded onto a ship, on the ground that they had not been paid in full for their services. The Court refused to strike this action since it was possible to consider that there was an underlying cause of action in personam against the owners of the cargo and, accordingly, a cause of action in rem. The court was not required to rule on any question of connection, probably because there was in fact a connection, as the cargo had been handled by the stevedores.
[29]
In my view, it is therefore plain and obvious that, in so far as it relates to the cargo, Paramount's action in rem discloses no reasonable cause of action within the meaning of paragraph 419(1)(a) of the
Rules
.
[30]
This motion by Cosco must accordingly be allowed, as I conclude that it is plain and obvious that the in rem portion of the action of the plaintiff Paramount relating to the arrested ship and cargo must be struck out under Rule 419(1)(a) on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of action.
[31]
The incidental relief sought by Cosco in this same motion, namely to quash the warrant for the arrest of the "An Xin Jiang" and its cargo and to return for cancellation the bank letter of guarantee furnished by Cosco to avoid the actual arrest of the ship and its cargo, will accordingly be granted.
[32]
On the day set for the hearing of this motion, a number of other motions were also returnable in the same case. It was agreed with counsel for the parties that I would dispose of those motions in accordance with the result on the instant motion. I will do so in the order accompanying these reasons.
Motion granted.
Editor: Giovanni A. Merlini/vem
Footnotes
1.	Although Cosco's notice of motion also refers to paragraphs 419(1)(c) and (f), the parties' arguments were limited to paragraph (1) of Rule 419(1).