[1]
Pinard, J.
: This is an application pursuant to s. 44 of the
Access to Information Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1 (the "
Act
"). The applicant asks for a review of a decision of the respondent to release certain records which have been requested from the latter by a competitor of the former.
[2]
The respondent has taken a number of positions as to whether the information in question should be released. After advising the applicant of the request for these records, the respondent first advised the applicant, on December 20, 1994, that the records would not be released in that the respondent agreed with the arguments that the applicant had presented for withholding the records pursuant to paragraphs 20(1)(b) and (c) of the
Act
. Almost one year later, the respondent advised the applicant that:
"In view of the information that has been made public as a result of the court case involving the Crown and the Bitove Corporation, we are unable to continue supporting the exemption of the attached records. I am therefore writing to inform you that it is our intention to release the records to the applicant."
[3]
Subsequently, on November 23, 1995, the respondent advised the applicant that it would, for the time being, not be taking any action regarding the disposition of the records as the matter was under review. Finally, by letter dated December 1, 1995, the respondent advised the applicant that the records in issue would be released, hence the present application.
[4]
At the hearing before me, counsel for the respondent confirmed that notice of this application, pursuant to s. 44(2) of the
Act
, has indeed been given to the person who requested access to the records. That person has not appeared as a party to the present review. Furthermore, the respondent has not filed any affidavit in opposition to this application. In fact, counsel for the respondent confirmed orally what he wrote to counsel for the applicant, on August 16, 1996:
"... My instructions are to take the position that if the applicant is able to satisfy the court that the continued exemption of the documents in issue is justified, then sobeit. The respondent will not be actively arguing in favour of release, and will be quite happy to abide by any order that might issue."
[5]
In support of this application, the applicant now relies only on paragraphs 20(1)(b) and (c) of the
Act
.
[6]
The question therefore is whether the information should not be disclosed pursuant to paragraphs 20(1)(b) and (c) of the
Act
.
[7]
The purpose of the
Act
is defined as follows in s. 2:
"2(1) The purpose of this Act is to extend the present laws of Canada to provide a right of access to information in records under the control of a government institution in accordance with the principles that government information should be available to the public, that necessary exceptions to the right of access should be limited and specific and that decisions on the disclosure of government information should be reviewed independently of government.
"2(2) This Act is intended to complement and not replace existing procedures for access to government information and is not intended to limit in any way access to the type of government information that is normally available to the general public."
[8]
The
Act
contains two types of exemptions, mandatory and discretionary.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 276-277  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A., Heald, J.A., as he then was), the general intent and purpose of the
Act
, in the context of these exemptions, has been interpreted as follows:
"... The general intent and purpose of the
Act
, as expressed in section 2 supra, includes a clear intention by Parliament to provide a means whereby decisions respecting public access to public documents will be reviewed 'independently of government.' (Subsection 2(1), supra.) Then in section 48, it is provided:
'48. In any proceedings before the court arising from an application under section 41 or 42, the burden of establishing that the head of a government institution is authorized to refuse to disclose a record requested under this Act or a part thereof shall be on the government institution concerned.'
This section places the onus of proving an exemption squarely upon the government institution which claims that exemption.
"The general rule is disclosure, the exception is exemption and the onus of proving the entitlement to the benefit of the exception rests upon those who claim it. Section 46 must also be considered. It reads as follows:
'46. Notwithstanding any other Act of Parliament or any privilege under the law of evidence, the court may, in the course of any proceedings before the court arising from an application under section 41, 42 or 44, examine any record to which this Act applies that is under the control of a government institution, and no such record may be withheld from the court on any grounds.'
In my view Parliament enacted section 46 so that the court would have the information and material necessary to the fulfillment of its mandate to ensure that the discretion given to the administrative head has been exercised within proper limits and on proper principles. Judicial deference to the exercise of discretion by an administrative tribunal must, necessarily, be confined to the proper limits of the tribunal's power of decision. The determination of those proper limits is a task for the court. As was stated by Lord Wilberforce in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.), at page 208:
'The courts, when they decide that a "decision" is a "nullity", are not disregarding the preclusive clause. For, just as it is their duty to attribute autonomy of decision of action to the tribunal within the designated area, so, as the counterpart of this autonomy, they must ensure that the limits of that area which have been laid down are observed ...'"
[9]
It is with these principles in mind that I have reviewed the information at issue and considered the above exemptions. In addition, with respect to paragraph 20(1)(b), I have taken into account the thorough analysis made by my colleague Mr. Justice MacKay in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[10]
Indeed, I have unsealed all the relevant documents and examined all of them. The records in issue relate predominantly to the negotiation of an amendment to a lease between the respondent and the applicant with respect to goods and services provided at Terminals 1 and 2 at the Lester B. Pearson International Airport in Toronto. Certain of the information relates to the applicant's lease with a private lessor at Terminal 3 at the same airport. The information consists of records of meetings, including minutes of negotiating meetings, as well as detailed financial reports, including sales information and projections. I have paid particular attention to documents paginated as 52, 53, 56-70, 131, 158, 202 and 203 which were more specifically referred to by Craig Litchin in his confidential affidavit filed herein. In light of all the evidence, including the uncontradicted affidavits of Craig Litchin filed herein, I am satisfied that all of the information relating to Terminals 1 and 2 has been provided to the respondent in confidence and only as a result of the contractual relations between the applicant and the respondent. This information would not be and is not available to anyone other than the respondent and the applicant. The information relating to Terminal 3 is also confidential to the applicant. All of the information sought to be disclosed by a competitor of the applicant is otherwise maintained within the strictest confidence within the applicant. It is all information the nature of which would be of great assistance to the applicant's competitors to determine precisely how and where the applicant negotiated its contractual arrangements with the respondent, how it conducts its affairs at Lester B. Pearson International Airport and how it directs its sales efforts at that airport. To provide a competitor of the applicant with that information would allow a competitor a direct insight into its plans and strategies, something that has taken years of work for the applicant to determine. With the exception of those documents that were filed with the Ontario Court (General Division) in the litigation between the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Goodman (Third Party), Court File No. B31/94A, none of the other documents have been made public. They have all been maintained in confidence and are inherently of a confidential nature.
[11]
In the circumstances, I am of the view that the applicant has successfully discharged the burden of establishing that the records requested under the
Act
contain the kind of information described in paragraphs 20(1)(b) and (c) of the
Act
. Furthermore, it being established that in fact very little if any of the information in issue had been disclosed to the public by virtue of the documents filed with the Ontario Court (General Division) as stated above, I am of the view that the respondent ought not have changed its position in its letter dated December 20, 1994 to the applicant that:
"... We support your arguments for withholding the records, pursuant to paragraphs 20(1)(b) and (c) of the Act."
[12]
Consequently, it will be ordered that none of the documents requested under the
Act
in this matter shall be disclosed by the respondent. All the confidential material which was ordered to be maintained in a sealed envelope by my colleague Mr. Justice Muldoon, in this case, shall continue to be maintained in a sealed envelope until further Order of the court, after the expiration of the time limit for filing an appeal. In the event that an appeal is taken against my decision, the documents will have to be dealt with at the direction of the Court of Appeal.
Application allowed.
Editor: Jana A. Andersen/sg
[End of document]