[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This is an application pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
for an order in the nature of certiorari quashing the decision of the Canadian Human Rights Commission dated February 11, 1993.
[2]
On September 4, 1981, the plaintiff was hired by Canadian National Railway to work as a gang labourer. She injured her right knee at work on May 20, 1987, and subsequently underwent two operations. In July of 1988, Ms. Lukian applied for a light duties position with CNR, but was advised that since her medical restrictions were permanent, there were no light duties available for her. One year later, the plaintiff applied for a position with the defendant as a locomotive attendant cleaning diesel units. She was not offered the employment on the grounds the problem with her knee and her continuing obesity disqualified her from doing full-time labour.
[3]
In March of 1990, the plaintiff filed a complaint with the Canadian Human Rights Commission claiming discrimination against her by the respondent on the ground of disability, contrary to s. 7 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6. In April of 1990, the Workers Compensation Board prepared an assessment of her physical capabilities and determined that, although she was not able to return to her previous job as a gang labourer, she was capable of performing the job as a locomotive attendant cleaning diesel units, if CNR was willing to accommodate her by eliminating the need for performing the sanding task which required some kneeling and squatting. The defendant was not prepared to do so.
[4]
The Commission designated Harold Burden to investigate the plaintiff's complaint in accordance with s. 43(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
. His report was submitted to the Commission and provided to the plaintiff's solicitor who then made written submissions in response. Thereafter, for reasons which are not entirely clear, the defendant requested the Commission to conduct a further investigation into the complaint. Another investigator, Myrna Nerbas, was designated as investigator and her report was provided to the Commission as well as to the plaintiff's solicitor who again made written submissions in response.
[5]
The plaintiff's complaint was considered by the Commission on February 8, 1993. The material before the Commission included the investigation report of Myrna Nerbas and the plaintiff's response thereto, but did not include the first investigation report of Mr. Burden nor the plaintiff's response to that report. On February 11, 1993, the Commission rendered its decision pursuant to s. 44(3)(b)(i) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, that considering all the circumstances of the complaint, no further proceedings were warranted and the plaintiff's file was closed.
[6]
The plaintiff now seeks to have that decision set aside on the grounds the Commission failed to take into account relevant considerations by rendering its decision without regard to Mr. Burden's investigation report and the plaintiff's submissions made in response. The defendant maintains the investigation conducted by Ms. Nerbas was a continuation of the one commenced by Mr. Burden. As his investigation was never completed, there was no necessity for the Commission to consider it. Furthermore, it is argued the
Canadian Human Rights Act
allows the Commission to either accept or reject the investigation report and does not require the tribunal to examine the contents of an investigation file.
[7]
Subject to ss. 40 and 41 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, the Commission is required to deal with any complaint filed before it. In accordance with s. 43(1), one option the Commission may follow is the designation of an investigator to investigate the complaint. Thereafter, an investigation report is submitted to the Commission containing the investigator's findings. Although the Commission is free to adopt or reject the report, it is required to take certain action upon receiving it. Section 44 of the
Act
provides as follows:
"44(1) An investigator shall, as soon as possible after the conclusion of an investigation, submit to the Commission a report of the findings of the investigation.
"(3) On receipt of a report referred to in subsection (1), the Commission
"(a) may request the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel to appoint a Human Rights Tribunal in accordance with section 49 to inquire into the complaint to which the report relates if the Commission is satisfied
(i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is warranted, and
(ii) that the complaint to which the report relates should not be referred pursuant to subsection (2) or dismissed on any ground mentioned in paragraphs 41(c) to (e); or
"(b) shall dismiss the complaint to which the report relates if it is satisfied
(i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is warranted, or
(ii) that the complaint should be dismissed on any ground mentioned in paragraphs 41(c) to (e).
"(4) After receipt of a report referred to in subsection (1), the Commission
"(a) shall notify in writing the complainant and the person against whom the complaint was made of its action under subsection (2) or (3);"
[8]
Generally, when Courts are called upon to review the exercise of an administrative tribunal's discretionary power, they will be reluctant to interfere since tribunals, by virtue of their training, experience, knowledge and expertise, are better suited than the judiciary to exercise those powers. Provided the Commission's decision is within the discretion given to it, the Court will not interfere with the manner in which it was exercised, unless it can be shown the discretion was exercised contrary to law. What the law requires is the Commission to consider each individual case before it, to act in good faith, to have regard to all relevant considerations and not be swayed by irrelevant ones, and to refrain from acting for a purpose contrary to the spirit of its enabling legislation or in an arbitrary or capricious manner.
[9]
The factors to be taken into account by an administrative tribunal when exercising its decision-making powers may, in some cases, be discerned by examining the enabling legislation. In the present case, it is true the Commission is free to adopt or reject the finding of an investigator as set out in his or her report and is not required to examine the complete record of an investigation. Nevertheless, once it designates an investigator under s. 43(1) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, it is my view the Commission is bound to consider the resulting report since that document is indisputably relevant to the question before it of whether the circumstances of the case warrant further action.
[10]
Furthermore, I do not agree that Mr. Burden's investigation was incomplete, and the second investigation by Ms. Nerbas merely a continuation. The evidence shows Mr. Burden submitted a report to the Commission in accordance with s. 44(1) and the report was sent to the plaintiff's solicitor who then made submissions to the Commission in response. As that report and the plaintiff's submissions were germane to the question which the Commission had to decide, it was not entitled to render its decision without having regard to them.
[11]
For these reasons, the application is granted with costs. The decision is set aside and the matter will be returned to the Commission so that it may render its decision in light of all relevant evidence including the report of Mr. Burden and the plaintiff's reply thereto.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis\ldl
[End of document]