[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for judicial review and for an order setting aside the decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (the "tribunal"), dated April 6, 1993, wherein it determined that the applicants, Luis Eduardo Gutierrez ("the principal applicant") and Doris Nelva Da Cunha ("the dependent applicant" or "wife") were not Convention refugees.
[2]
The tribunal found the principal applicant is excluded from the definition of Convention refugee under s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended (the
Act
), by reason of s. F(a) of Article 1 of the
United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
on the basis that there was serious reason to believe that he had committed a crime against humanity.
[3]
At the hearing of this application, counsel for the applicants noted that since the time of the tribunal's decision some of the issues here raised, regarding the exclusion clause, had been considered by the Federal Court of Appeal in
Moreno and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , A-746-91, September 14, 1993, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , A-1043-91, October 4, 1993, and by the Trial Division of the Federal Court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), 93-A-292, November 26, 1993. [See footnote 1.]
Background
[4]
The applicants, citizens of Uruguay, arrived in Canada in May 1991 and subsequently claimed to be Convention refugees on the ground of a well-founded fear of persecution in Uruguay because of political opinion and membership in a particular social group. In his PIF, the principal applicant stated that he left Uruguay because of the systematic persecution that he suffered at the hands of the police, and that he was afraid that if he were to return, he would be arrested for being a deserter.
[5]
The principal applicant had voluntarily joined the Minister of Defence in October 1982. He began working as an administrative soldier responsible, amongst other duties, for the transmission of orders to security officials to mount surveillance on dissidents. He found the work unsatisfactory for he did not like to be in a position of passing on orders that resulted in difficulties for others and he requested, and was granted, a transfer to the Ministry of the Interior on October 1, 1983. There he signed an agreement to work for a two year period and he worked at a police station as a driver responsible for driving officers to meetings and transporting detainees. After experiencing some trouble with his superiors in connection with the electoral campaign for a return of democracy, he was transferred upon a friend's request in January 1985, to work at the police hospital in an administrative position and as a driver. He had no problems at the hospital until April 1989, when the authorities began to harass him for signing a referendum against the Impunity Law. He then requested a discharge from the forces in mid-April 1989 and in February 1990, but was denied both times. He remained at the hospital until he and his wife left the country in May 1991.
[6]
He alleges that he was continually harassed by his commissioner and other officers throughout his time in the forces, and that he had been placed in detention on several occasions: for 15 days in September 1983 for asking for a transfer to the Ministry of Interior; for three days in 1984 for openly refusing to vote for the Colorado party during the electoral campaign; for three days in April 1989 for "neglecting to care for his firearm and uniform", and last, for one week in February 1990 for failing to obey his supervisor's orders. He further alleged that he was mistreated by the commissioner and other officers each time that he was in detention.
[7]
In his PIF, he mentioned that while serving as a driver at the Ministry of Interior he had witnessed the officers beating the detainees while arresting and transporting them, and that he had transported "people who were badly hurt and in need of medical attention from the police station to clandestine detention centres" instead of a hospital. In one particular incident on August 24, 1984, two police officers loaded a package containing what the applicant believed to be a body into his van and ordered him to drive to a desolated military property in the outskirts of Montevideo. Upon arrival there, the officers told him to wait in the van, then they unloaded the van and returned after about an hour. On their trip back to the station, the applicant asked the officers what had happened to the man. The officers laughed and said that someone had gotten carried away during interrogation. The applicant did not say anything further at that time but the next day he spoke to his supervisor about the matter. He was told to forget about the incident for his own good. Later that same day, the officers confronted him and told him to be very careful of what he said or he would also end up at the place where they had disposed of the package from his van.
[8]
He transferred to the police hospital in 1985 and became involved in union activities. After the union held a two day strike, the commissioner called him and three others to the police station regarding their participation in the union. Subsequently, at the beginning of June, that year, two officers came to his home and threatened him. Near the end of that month, while on his way home, he was pulled into a car inside of which there were three officers, including the two officers that he had driven to dispose of the body nearly a year before. After driving for about half an hour, the officers stopped the car at a desolated area, pulled the applicant out of the car, kicked him, taunted him, then pointed their guns at his head and pulled the trigger. He fainted. The guns were not loaded. When he awoke he walked to the road and got a ride home. A week later, he received an anonymous phone call threatening him that next time it would be for real.
[9]
After that incident, the principal applicant did not have any problems with the authorities for some time but they began harassing him again in April 1989, after he signed a referendum against the Impunity Law, a law exonerating military personnel responsible for human rights violations. On April 17, the applicants' home was raided while they were away. The door had been forced open, furniture overturned, many household items were broken, all the electrical equipment and the applicant's revolver and uniform, had been taken. When they reported the incident to the police, the principal applicant was arrested for "neglecting to care for his firearm and uniform". On his last day in detention, the commissioner took him into his office to tell him that he was a useless officer, an enemy of the state and a subversive, and that his days were numbered since they knew that he had signed the referendum.
[10]
In subsequent months, they received at least four anonymous phone calls threatening the principal applicant's life. The applicants decided in late 1989 to leave the country. After the same officers who had earlier conducted the mock execution came to harass him at his office in October 1990, they obtained passports, and when they had collected enough money to purchase plane tickets, they left Uruguay on May 2, 1991.
The Decision Of The
Refugee Division
[11]
The Refugee Division determined that both applicants were not Convention refugees on the basis that s. F(a) of Article 1 [see footnote 2] of the 1951
United Nations Convention
applied to the principal applicant, upon whose claim his wife's claim was dependent. The Minister did not participate in the hearing and the tribunal considered the matter on the evidence presented to it. The tribunal did not make any express finding as to whether the principal applicant's claim to refugee status had merit, nor did it comment directly upon his credibility.
[12]
After reviewing the evidence from the principal claimant's PIF and oral testimony, the Refugee Division drew certain inferences, among them; that he was aware that the surveillance work he was involved in as a clerk at the ministry of Defence could lead to the persecution of the individuals concerned; that he was aware of acts of brutality by the police against individuals and he knew that the military regime wanted to have its brutality hidden, and that he helped in the transportation of what he believed was a corpse. Applying the principles set out by Mr. Justice MacGuigan in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 173 (F.C.A.), the Refugee Division concluded:
"... A comment made by the Federal Court in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> could well apply to the male claimant:
'He could never be classed as a simple on-looker, but was on all occasions a participating and knowing member of a military force, one of whose common objectives was the torture of prisoners to extract information ... he was an integral, albeit reluctant, part of the military enterprise that produced those terrible moments of collectively deliberate inhumanity.'
"He may not have been a willing participant and the knowledge of what he was involved in weighed on his mind. But he did not distance himself from it. We do not accept his argument that he could not distance himself from it. If he could desert the police in 1990, as he claims he did, he could have well deserted the forces at an earlier date. We have been given no reason why he did not do so. We, however, have been given a reason why he stayed on. His wife, in her testimony, stated:
'He was there because that was a means of, or a source of income, of a livelihood to him.'
"As there are serious reasons for considering that he committed a crime against humanity, by aiding and abetting those who tortured political prisoners, we determine that he falls under the ambit of Article 1(F)(a) and that accordingly, the Convention shall not apply to him."
[13]
Turning to the dependent claim of the applicant's spouse, the Refugee Division noted that she had adopted her husband's evidence as her own in her PIF. It found:
"... There is nothing in the husband's narrative, however, that the wife faced any threat in Uruguay sufficiently serious as to be classified as persecution. The husband writes of four anonymous calls in the months prior to their leaving, 'in which my life was threatened'. A few lines later, he states '... I told my wife I could not continue living in fear'. In her oral testimony, the wife stated that these anonymous callers threatened her as well. We do not believe this, not only because she omits so significant a matter from her PIF but also because of the evasive and unsatisfactory way she testified on this matter. ... The wife's testimony was also not consistent as to when these four calls were received. At one point, she states that they started in 1989 and then contradicts herself at the end of her examination by saying that none of these four calls came in 1989."
[14]
Based on its finding that she was not under any threat of persecution, the tribunal concluded that she did not have good grounds to fear persecution in Uruguay.
The Issues
[15]
Three issues are raised by the applicants.
(1) Did the Board err in law in that it misapplied the test for the application of Article 1 F(a) of the Convention, by misconstruing the evidence before it?
(2) Did the Board err in law in that it failed to consider the totality of the definition of Convention refugee, with respect to the first applicant?
(3) Did the Board err in law in that it failed to consider the totality of the evidence before it, when determining the claim of the second applicant?
Did The Tribunal Err In Law
In That It Misapplied The
Test For The Application Of
Article 1 F(a) Of The
Convention By Misconstruing
The Evidence Before It?
[16]
Whether the tribunal erred in law in determining that "there are serious reasons for considering that [the principal applicant] committed a crime against humanity, by aiding and abetting those who tortured political prisoners" may be divided into two sub-issues: (a) whether it misapplied the test for complicity under Article 1 F(a) as set out by MacGuigan, J.A., in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, and (b) whether it misconstrued the evidence before it.
(a) The Test For Complicity
[17]
The fact that the Minister did not participate in the hearing does not affect the question of whether there was sufficient evidence, regardless of the source, from which the panel could find, as a question of fact, that there were "serious reasons for considering" that the claimant has committed an international offence [see footnote 3]. In my opinion, the tribunal was correct in considering the definition of Convention refugee, including the exclusion clause, on the basis of the evidence presented to it, including evidence introduced by the applicant.
[18]
The applicants submit that the panel erred in stating the test in its finding that there were serious reasons for considering that the principal applicant "committed a crime against humanity by aiding and abetting those who tortured political prisoners". It is said that the record does not show that the principal applicant had any close association to the principal actors, nor does it show that he acted in any way to encourage the international crimes committed.
[19]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at pp. 17-18, Linden, J.A., noted that the importance of making precise findings with respect to the crimes which the Board finds that the claimant has committed:
"... Given the seriousness of the possible consequences of the denial of the appellant's claim on the basis of section F(a) of Article 1 of the Convention to the appellant and the relatively low standard of proof required of the Minister, it is crucial that the Refugee Division set out in its reasons those crimes against humanity for which there are serious reasons to consider that a claimant has committed them. ..."
[20]
The matter was referred back for redetermination in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, when Jerome, A.C.J., found that the tribunal had erred by failing to identify the specific crimes which the applicant was considered to have committed.
[21]
In this case the tribunal carefully analyzed the facts by reference to the principles set out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In my opinion, even in the light of the later decisions, the panel did not err in the formulation of the principles that it adopted, nor in the applicant of those principles to the facts of this case. The reasons adequately identified the specific crimes against humanity in which the tribunal considered the applicant to have been implicated.
(b) The Evidence Of Complicity
[22]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, Reed, J., summarized the principles set out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,
Moreno
, and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> to be applied in determining whether a claimant falls within Article 1 F(a) as follows:
. . . . .
"2. An individual who has been complicit in (an accomplice to) an act which is physically committed by another is as responsible for the offence as the person who physically committed the act. Thus, if there are serious reasons for considering that an individual has been complicit in the commission of an international offence that individual will be excluded from obtaining refugee status by operation of Article 1(F).
"3. In order to be complicit in the commission of an international offence the individual's participation must be personal and knowing. Complicity in an offence rests on a shared common purpose.
"The <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,
Moreno
, and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> cases all deal with the degree or type of participation which will constitute complicity. Those cases have established that mere membership in an organization which from time to time commits international offences is not normally sufficient to bring one into the category of an accomplice. At the same time, if the organization is principally directed to a limited, brutal purpose, such as a secret police activity, mere membership may indeed meet the requirements of personal and knowing participation. The cases also establish that mere presence at the scene of an offence, for example, as a bystander with no intrinsic connection with the persecuting group will not amount to personal involvement. Physical presence together with other factors may however qualify as a personal and knowing participation.
"As I understand the jurisprudence, it is that a person who is a member of the persecuting group and who has knowledge that activities are being committed by the group and who neither takes steps to prevent them occurring (if he has the power to do so) nor disengages himself from the group at the earliest opportunity (consistent with safety for himself) but who lends his active support to the group will be considered to be an accomplice. A shared common purpose will be considered to exist. I note that the situation envisaged by this jurisprudence is not one in which isolated incidents of international offences have occurred but where the commission of such offences is a continuous and regular part of the operation."
Essentially then, three prerequisites must be established in order to provide complicity in the commission of an international offence: (1) membership in an organization which committed international offences as a continuous and regular part of its operation, (2) personal and knowing participation, and (3) failure to disassociate from the organization at the earliest safe opportunity.
[23]
In this case the applicants urged that in finding the principal applicant to have been a "personal and knowing participant", the Refugee Division erred in law by misconstruing the evidence before them. It is urged that the principal applicant had never been physically present to directly witness any incidents of persecution and that he did not share a common purpose with the military forces, that while he voluntarily joined the armed forces as a government employee in 1982 it was for purely financial reasons, that his knowledge of the commission of any international crimes was limited to second hand information and his relationship to the organization, having been continually persecuted and disciplined by the authorities, was in the nature of being adversarial. The fact that the principal applicant did not desert the forces until early in 1991 is said to be irrelevant because there was a significant change in April 1985 so that thereafter the country was under a civilian democratic government. For all these reasons, his connection to the commission of international offences was said to be too tenuous to be characterized as "personal and knowing participation".
[24]
After reviewing the PIF and the transcript of his oral hearing, in my opinion, there was evidence before the panel upon which it could reasonably conclude that "there were serious reasons for considering that the principal applicant was a knowing and personal participant in certain persecutorial acts amounting to a crime against humanity". It found that (1) he was "a member of a military force, one of whose common objectives was the torture of prisoners to extract information"; (2) he was a "personal and knowing participant" in persecutorial acts by transporting detainees to "clandestine detention centres" and in one incident, transporting what he believed was a corpse, and he was one who, though of low rank, was aware that his work involved secret activity which lead to persecution of individuals, though admittedly that knowledge "weighed on his mind"; and (3) he could have, but did not, distance himself from the organization at the earliest opportunity.
[25]
In this case, there was evidence that the applicant was a member of the military and police organization, from October 1982 until early 1991, in which the secret persecution of prisoners was "a continuous and regular part of the operation".
[26]
There was evidence that the principal applicant was physically present at the scene of the persecutorial acts on numerous occasions and had, albeit in a low-ranking position, aided those directly involved in secret persecutorial activity. While serving initially as a clerk in the army he knew that persons whose names he passed on for surveillance were later persecuted and indeed it was this knowledge that made him uncomfortable in his work. Later as a driver, he knew that he transported people who were badly hurt and in need of medical attention from the police station to clandestine detention centres and that he transported a corpse on the one occasion.
[27]
As Madame Justice Reed stated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, it is not necessary for the applicant to directly participate or witness the torture or murder of detainees so long as there was awareness or knowledge that international offences were being committed. Here the principal applicant's situation in terms of his physical presence at the scene of the persecutorial acts was akin to that of the applicant in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> in that he knew that atrocities were being committed and he was not a mere bystander.
[28]
It appears from the jurisprudence that the Board may consider several factors in determining whether the applicant disassociated himself from the organization: (1) the period of time that the person was a member of the organization, (2) the earliest possible date that the person had an opportunity to leave the organization, (3) the consequences that the person would have exposed themselves to for speaking out against the commission of international offences, for failing to respond to orders, or for desertion, and (4) the circumstances in which the person left the organization.
[29]
In order to disassociate oneself from the organization, the person must leave the organization at the earliest safe opportunity. In
Moreno
, supra, the applicant, who had been forcibly conscripted into the Salvadoran army in early January 1988, deserted at his first opportunity on May 5, 1988, while on his second leave of absence. Robertson, J.A., found that he did not have a shared common purpose with the persecuting group and had disassociated himself. The appellant in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, was a long-term member. He became involved with the LTTE in 1978, and was associated with the organization in various positions of leadership until he was expelled in December 1988. Linden, J.A., found that the appellant did not leave the LTTE even though he had several chances to do so. The applicant in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, was also a long-term member. He had been placed in the army by his uncle at the age of 13 in 1978 and had served in various positions of leadership until he voluntarily left in 1988 to spend more time with his family.
[30]
Although <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> dealt with situations in which the person had served the organization in various positions of leadership, a person in a low-ranking position may also be found to have shared a common purpose with the organization if he continues in the organization after becoming aware that international offences are being committed by those involved in it, and does not take the earliest opportunity to leave the organization.
[31]
In this case, it is clear from the evidence that the Board reasonably concluded that the principal applicant could have, but did not, make any attempt to desert the forces at a date earlier than 1991. In my opinion, the facts of this case are substantially similar to those in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the applicants in both cases were members of the organization for lengthy periods of time and had been physically present on a number of occasions at the scene of persecutorial acts. Here even though his conscience bothered him, he continued to play an active part in the military forces which committed international offences. He was aware of the torturing and killing of detainees at the police station, yet the only time that he spoke out against such acts was when he spoke to his supervisor about the transportation of the body in 1984.
[32]
Counsel for the applicants urged that similar to the circumstances in
Moreno
, supra, there was nothing that the principal applicant could have done to stop the commission of international offences. In my opinion, however, that case may be distinguished on its facts, in particular, the applicant in
Moreno
had deserted at his first opportunity after serving for only four months. The applicant in this case did not form the intention to desert the army until late 1989, though prior to that time, he had requested transfers and discharges. The penalty that he faced for desertion under police rules would have been imprisonment. Even after the change to a civil democratic government in April 1985, and the expiration of his early contract with the Ministry of Interior in October 1985, he did not request a discharge until 1989, though he was entitled to do so, in large part, he testified, because his faith that the problems would be resolved with democracy established in the country. Even after he decided in late 1989 to desert the police he continued to work for them until early in 1991.
[33]
When he finally deserted in 1991, his reasons for leaving were at least as much related to the harassment that he suffered at the hands of the authorities as they were to his opposition to following orders which required him to participate in the commission of international offences, unlike the applicants in
Moreno
, <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> and
Jose Adan  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In my view, it would not have been unreasonable to conclude that the applicant in this case never actually decided that he would not participate in the incidents constituting international offences.
[34]
Thus, in my opinion there was ample evidence upon which the tribunal could find that the applicant could have deserted the forces at an earlier date than 1991 but had not done so. It is implicit in the panel's reasons that it inferred that the principal applicant had shared a common purpose with the forces in committing international offences, and hence concluded that "there are serious reasons for considering that he committed a crime against humanity".
[35]
In argument, counsel for the principal applicant urged that the tribunal ought to have considered the comparatively tenuous involvement of the applicant in any international offences with the serious persecution he would face if he were returned to his home country. The balancing of those factors was rejected specifically by Mahoney, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  written arguments, the applicant urged that failure to balance these factors constitutes a violation of s. 12
Charter
rights, but that argument was not pursued when this matter was heard.
Did The Tribunal Err In Law
In That It Failed To Consider
The Totality Of The Definition
Of Convention Refugee With
Respect To The First Applicant?
[36]
Counsel for the applicant submits that the panel erred in its application of the test for Article 1 F(a) of the Convention by failing to deal with the question of inclusion before proceeding to apply the exclusion clause. The Court of Appeal has since disposed of this issue in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, where the applicant raised a similar argument. Mahoney, J.A., found that the Refugee Division had not erred in law when it proceeded directly to a finding that the applicant was to be excluded by reason of Article 1 F(a) without considering whether the appellant met the inclusionary requirements of the definition of Convention refugee.
[37]
Thus, it was not an error in law for the tribunal in this case to apply the exclusion clause to the principal applicant without making any explicit finding with respect to inclusion, that is, whether his claim to refugee status was well-founded. Since the tribunal found that the exclusion clause applied to the principal applicant, it was then unnecessary to consider the merits of his claim.
Did The Tribunal Err In Law
In That It Failed To Consider
The Totality Of The Evidence
Before It, When Determining
The Claim Of The Second
Applicant?
[38]
Counsel for the applicants submitted that having determined that the principal applicant was excluded under Article 1 F(a) without considering the issue of inclusion, the panel then erred by assessing the wife's dependent claim on the basis of persecution directed against her personally. It is said to have failed to consider that harassment and persecution of family members may give rise to a well-founded fear of persecution, and that the tribunal ignored evidence of systematic persecution which supported the principal applicant's well-founded fear of persecution and the wife's testimonial evidence that she opened the door for two officers threatening them in their home in 1985, and that she had collected signatures for the referendum along with her husband in 1989.
[39]
It appears unnecessary to make an assessment of the merits of the principal applicant's claim in every case where it is determined the applicant is excluded by reason of Article 1 F(a), as a prelude to considering a claim dependent upon that of the principal applicant. It is sufficient if the tribunal assesses the dependent claim on its own merits, taking into account the circumstances on which the principal claim was based. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, counsel for the applicants made the same argument as was here advanced. Madame Justice Reed found that the approach taken by the tribunal in assessing the spousal claim fully met the concerns expressed by the Court of Appeal in
Moreno
. She stated at pp. 11-12:
"... The wife's claim was assessed independently but by reference to the factual situations which her husband had asserted in his claim. The dependent claim was assessed on its own merits. The circumstances on which the principal claim was based were taken into account in doing so. I do not think the panel committed any error of law in proceeding as it did."
[40]
In my opinion, the reasons of the tribunal in this case demonstrate that the dependent claim was assessed on its own merits. The tribunal considered the totality of the evidence, including the wife's total reliance in her PIF on the narrative statement from her husband's claim, and found that there was "nothing in the husband's narrative ... that the wife faced any threat in Uruguay sufficiently serious as to be classified as persecution". Moreover, it did not find her evidence credible based on omissions from her PIF of significant facts, and "the evasive and unsatisfactory way she testified on this matter". It found her testimony contradictory. It concluded that she was under no threat of any kind and "has no good grounds to fear persecution in Uruguay".
[41]
I am not persuaded that its process of considering the wife's claim was an error in law, nor that the tribunal's findings in regard to her credibility constitute reviewable error.
Conclusions
[42]
To summarize, I conclude on the first issue that the tribunal did not err in the formulation of the test, nor in its application, in determining that the applicant was complicit in a crime against humanity. In this case, it was reasonably open to the tribunal, from the oral and written evidence of the applicants, to conclude there were "serious reasons for considering" that the claimant has committed an international offence. Regardless of the particular terminology used by the tribunal in relation to complicity, its reasons adequately identified the acts in which it reasonably concluded that the principal applicant was a "knowing and personal participant". There was evidence, mainly from the principal applicant himself, that he voluntarily joined the organization and remained a member for nine years, he had knowledge that secret persecution of prisoners was "a continuous and regular part of the operation", he was physically present and had participated by assisting those involved in committing international offences, and had not disassociated himself from the organization at the earliest opportunity. On the second issue, I conclude that it was not an error for the tribunal to consider the application of the exclusion clause to the principal applicant without making an explicit finding in regard to the merits of inclusion, that is, on the merits of his claim aside from the exclusion under Article 1 F(a). Finally, on the third issue, the tribunal considered the evidence, including relevant evidence of the principal applicant, concerning the wife's dependent claim to refugee status, and it negatively assessed her credibility in determining that she was also not a Convention refugee. That conclusion, in my view, was not based on any reviewable error.
[43]
For these reasons, this application is dismissed.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/nmg
Footnotes
1. I note that the application of the exclusion clause, Article 1 F(a) has also been dealt with in other recent cases by the Federal Court Trial Division:
Aden
, unreported, A-1133-92, November 9, 1993,
Canada (Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , IMM-3156-93, January 20, 1994, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> -A-171, February 4, 1994; and even more recently, after hearing of this case, in two cases by the Federal  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , A-443-93, May 26, 1994, and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , A-48-91, May 26, 1994.
2. Relevant statutory provisions include s. 2(1) of the
Act
which provides:
"2(1) ... 'Convention refugee' means any person who
(a) by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion, ...
(b) has not ceased to be a Convention refugee by virtue of subsection (2),
but does not include any person to whom the Convention does not apply pursuant to section E or F of Article 1 thereof, which sections are set out in the schedule to this Act. ..."
Section F of Article 1 provides in part:
"F. The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
(a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes. ..."
3. Mr. Justice MacGuigan in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, described the activity set out in Section F of Article 1 of the
United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
as "international offences". That terminology was adopted by Madame Justice Reed in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . I adopt that terminology for the purpose of these reasons.
[End of document]