[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is an appeal launched by Knirps International GmbH ("Knirps") from the decision of the Chairman of the Trademarks Opposition Board dated September 30, 1988, rejecting Knirps' opposition to the registration by S.R.O. Apparels (Canada) Inc. ("S.R.O. Inc."), of the trademark "M'otto Red Dot" (design), TMA 526,757, which is as follows:
[Trademark symbol omitted. See original source.]
[2]
Knirps' opposition is based on its ownership of the following marks: "The Red Dot" (TMA 160,369, registered Jan. 3, (1969), "Red Dot" design (TMA 202,755, registered Nov. 1, 1974), "Red Dot" (TMA 197,831, registered March 1, 1974) and Circle Design (TMA 158,783, registered Oct. 18, 1968). These marks, hereinafter referred to collectively as the "Red Dot" trademarks, are used in association with umbrellas, including umbrella accessories such as frames, runners, notches, cases, zipper pulls and handles. The Red Dot and Circle designs are hereby reproduced:
[Trademark symbol omitted. See original source.]
[3]
The respondent applied for the trademark "M'otto Red Dot" on August 13, 1984, to be used in association with sportswear, namely tops, pants and jackets. It was published February 27, 1985; on March 27, 1985, Knirps filed their opposition, alleging that this would create confusion with above-noted marks owned by Knirps; that the respondent was not the person entitled to registration by reason of Knirps' prior use of these marks; finally, that the respondent's mark was not distinctive. Each of these three issues are in fact concerned with one question, that is, whether the marks of the parties are likely to cause confusion.
[4]
At the hearing of the opposition, the Chairman noted that the respondent's "M'otto Red Dot" mark had not become known to any measurable extent before opposition proceedings were commenced. On the other hand, the evidence submitted by Knirps established that the Circle Design and "Red Dot" marks, used since 1961, had become known to some extent in Canada in association with umbrellas; the Circle Design was, however, almost always used in association with the word Knirps, thus diminishing the extent to which it would be perceived by the average consumer as distinguishing Knirps' wares in the marketplace.
[5]
He also determined that there was no similarity between the appellant's and respondent's wares. As to channels of trade, although they may be sold through the same stores, he stated that he had no reason to conclude that the wares of the parties would be sold in close proximity.
[6]
The chairman did find some similarity in sound between the "M'otto Red Dot" and the "Red Dot" marks, although they did not seem to suggest any particular idea in common. As to resemblance, he found some similarity, since the respondent's mark incorporated the entirety of two of the appellant's marks, the "Red Dot" and Circle design. However, he decided that the dominant feature of the respondent's mark is the stylized version of "M'otto, with the words "red dot" appearing as relatively significant when the mark is considered in its entirety.
[7]
The chairman therefore concluded that the respondent had discharged the legal burden upon it to establish that there would be no reasonable likelihood of confusion, and rejected the opposition.
[8]
On appeal from the Chairman's decision, Knirps submit that he erred in his evaluation of the evidence, and of the criteria set out in s. 6(5) of the Trade Marks Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, particularly:
(a) In deciding that there was no similarity between umbrellas, their accessories, and sportswear;
(b) In considering that in spite of the similarity in sound and appearance of the marks, and even though the respondent had entirely incorporated two marks of the appellant in their mark "M'otto Red Dot", there was no possibility of confusion.
[9]
The appellant argued that their "Red Dot" marks are unique and nondescriptive, and therefore have inherent distinctiveness. Further, their wares have been widely advertised and distributed throughout Canada since 1961, with emphasis on the "Red Dot" designs and words, thereby leading to an association in the minds of the consumer between these marks and the appellant company. In contrast, they submit that the respondent's mark is not distinctive, since it incorporates two of the appellant's trademarks in their entirety, nor had it been extensively advertised or marketed in Canada as at the date of opposition.
[10]
The appellant further submits that the wares of the two parties are of the same general class, being sold in the same channels of trade and displayed often in close proximity; as well, they target the same market. The appellant also sells a line of rain wear and sportswear although I note that this is not set out in the trademark registrations. They argue that in this era of franchising and licensing it is quite likely that consumers may believe that the respondent's products emanate from the appellant.
[11]
Finally, the appellant submits that the respondent's mark is similar in appearance to their "Red Dot" marks, since they use these very words, and have drawn the "o" in red. The appellant argues that this is the very aspect that is distinctive of their marks.
[12]
The points raised by the respondent are, firstly, that although the first "o" in "M'otto Red Dot" is lined for colour, the colour red is not claimed as a feature of their trademark; secondly, they note that the onus of proving that the Registrar reached the wrong conclusion is on the appellant, who in this case has brought no new evidence before the court -- the respondent, on the other hand, has tendered new evidence relating to the existence on the trademark register of several marks using the words "Red Dot" or design; thirdly, the respondent submits that the appellant has erred in looking only at the "Red Dot" portion of the trademarks of both parties, rather than considering the marks as a whole; further, that the "Red Dot" portion of the marks is inherently weak. They point out that the Knirps "Red Dot" mark is used in conjunction with the name "Knirps", either in dotting the "i", surrounding the name, and so on; as well, the primary aspect of the respondent's mark is the words "M'otto".
[13]
In reviewing the evidence, I conclude that the appellant has not been able to satisfy me that the Chairman of the Opposition Board erred in his determination that there is no likelihood of confusion between the marks of the parties. In my mind, the most important factor in the present case is the need to look at the respective trademarks in their entirety. When one does this, it becomes clear that the appellant's mark is used in conjunction with the name "Knirps" rather than as an independent mark. It is unlikely that the average consumer would associate either the words "Red Dot" or the circle design with the appellant company, outside of its association with the name "Knirps". The "red dot" portion is an inherently weak mark, being used in association with many other products as well. There is little doubt that the red dot used by the appellant has not acquired any element of distinctiveness peculiar to them.
[14]
Similarly, I do not find that the respondent's use of the words "Red Dot" in their trademark is in any way likely to cause confusion with the appellant's mark, since the dominant feature of the mark is the words "M'otto"; further, the colour red is not claimed as part of the trademark.
[15]
It is by now trite law that in order to determine the likelihood of confusion between two marks it is not proper to dissect them into their component parts in order to subject their similarities or differences to rigorous scrutiny ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)). Rather, the court is to place itself in the position of the average consumer who has a vague recollection of the first mark, and determine whether such a person would be likely to be confused as to the source of the product upon seeing the second mark. (Fox, Canadian Law of Trade Marks (3rd Ed., 1972), pp. 167-189;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 136). This test has not been satisfied.
[16]
The situation in the present case is similar to that in a very recent decision rendered by Mr. Justice Dubé in the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  decision of the Registrar that "Winchester Gold" for beer was not confusing with "Golden" or "Molson Golden", the word "golden" being an inherently weak mark, descriptive of the wares and frequently appearing on the Register [see 32 F.T.R. 152]. It was noted therein that in making a comparison, the first portion of a trademark deserves enhanced significance (referring to  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 137 (F.C.T.D.), and that one must look to the trademark as a whole and as used by the parties, rather than limiting oneself to a comparison, as in that case, of "Gold" and "Golden".
[17]
In light of the foregoing, the decision of the Chairman of the Trademarks Opposition Board is upheld and the appeal is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]