[1]
Walsh, J.
: This appeal heard in Vancouver is from the decision of a Citizenship judge, dated December 28, 1989 whereby appellant's application for citizenship was refused under s. 5(1) of the
Citizenship Act
on the ground that there were not sufficient indicia to establish that residence was maintained and that applicant's residential base was not severed when she moved back to Hong Kong in November 1985, as she had no longer retained a place of abode and residential base as required under the concept of "residence in law".
[2]
Section 5(1)(c) requires that a person who has been lawfully admitted for permanent residence has not ceased to be a permanent resident pursuant to s. 24 of the
Immigration Act
, and has within four years preceding the date of his application accumulated at least three years of residence in Canada.
[3]
Section 24(2) of the
Immigration Act
provides that when a permanent resident is outside Canada for more than 183 days in any 12 month period he shall be deemed to have abandoned his place of permanent residence unless he satisfies an immigration officer or an adjudicator that this was not his intention. In the present case, there is no immigration issue, the sole question being whether applicant accumulated three years of residence during the four year period preceding her application on June 20, 1988. For her frequent trips out of Canada she has a re-entry visa.
[4]
The appeal is, however, a trial de novo at which the applicant Anita Leung testified at length, corroborated by the testimony of her friend Agnes Lau and the court was assisted by the comments and jurisprudence cited by the amicus curiae, M. MacLean. It may be said that the Citizenship judge Angela Kan appears to have given very thorough and complete study of the matter, including the relevant jurisprudence as appears from her reasons set out in a letter to applicant dated December 20, 1989 in the Citizenship file.
[5]
At the outset it may be said that Mrs. Leung would be an outstanding citizen and the only ground for refusing citizenship at the date of her application is the technical one dealing with her period of residence.
[6]
She is a public relations consultant with a doctorate degree in Chinese literature from Hong Kong University, and, in addition to fluent English speaks Mandarin and Cantonese. Her parents are now dead, she has no brothers or sisters or children and is now separated from her husband. She came to Canada a few times from 1982 to 1984 to investigate business possibilities here, visiting firms in Toronto and Halifax as well as in Vancouver. Both she and her husband had lived in England for three years and also two years in the United States and have visited other countries in Europe and South-East Asia so were used to living abroad. He was a lecturer at the University in Hong Kong and had relatives there and while willing to take up residence in Canada with her was less enthusiastic about the prospect so they mutually agreed to separate amicably and still see each other when she returns to Hong Kong.
[7]
She has a very close friend from her school days, living in Vancouver, Agnes Lau, a graduate of University of British Columbia in 1974. In 1979, applicant was in Canada for several months. She and her husband translated Hamlet into Chinese and her friend's husband was the producer. Actors were brought from Hong Kong. Her friend and husband own the Overseas Chinese Voice, a Chinese radio station in Vancouver.
[8]
She established residence in Canada February 6, 1985. She had incorporated a company, Anita Leung International Communications Ltd., in Canada on November 28, 1984. Her first major contract, however, was with the Hong Kong Stock Exchange in 1985 as head of its International and Corporate Affairs Division and she developed good contacts with the Vancouver Stock Exchange.
[9]
Necessarily her work involved considerable time spent in China, where she would develop the contacts of persons who wished to establish businesses in Canada and advise them of immigration and other requirements here and assist them in getting established in Canada. She also did public relations work for Canadian businesses in Hong Kong and was very involved with the Canadian Commission in arranging Canada Day in Hong Kong. At the request of the Commission, she made arrangements there for Mayor Harcourt of Vancouver's visit to Hong Kong in the summer of 1985. She also arranged for the Royal Architectural Society's exhibit in Hong Kong after an earlier showing of it in Vancouver. She arranged for an exhibit of paintings by an artist, member of the Canadian consular corps in Hong Kong and at the U.B.C.'s Asian Centre.
[10]
She recruited Canadians in Canada to work for the South-East Asia Stock Exchange in Hong Kong. She has established an "Outstanding Career Award for M.B.A. Studies" - for Hong Kong businessmen to study at the School of Business Administration at the University of Toronto. She writes a weekly column in Chinese for the Overseas Chinese Voice in Vancouver and in a Hong Kong newspaper the
Ming Pao Daily
discussing cultural differences and problems in adapting to Canada. She has published these columns in a book.
[11]
She organized an exhibition and conference for the Hong Kong Stock Exchange for 400 people in New York with satellite connections. She was arranging another one in England for 1988 but the stock exchange crash in the autumn of 1987 resulted in this being cancelled. Her contract with the Stock Exchange concluded in December 1988.
[12]
One of her major clients now is the Aberdeen Centre in Richmond, B.C., which is a shopping centre directed specifically to Chinese, the stores featuring certain items not available elsewhere, imported from Hong Kong and the Orient.
[13]
She found that the 911 emergency number was of little use to elderly Chinese who frequently spoke only that language and could not give their address or the nature of the emergency in understandable English to the person answering the call, so arranged a special hook-up between the police and the Chinese radio station Overseas Chinese Voice with which she is connected, so that the police could immediately transfer a call in Chinese to the station which would take the necessary information and relay it back to the 911 number in English - a service which has proven very useful.
[14]
The station also organizes Overseas Chinese Tours for Chinese visitors to Canada which she advertises in Hong Kong.
[15]
She is a public relations consultant for Winco, a Hong Kong paper products company which imports large quantities from the United States. Through the Royal Bank they are hoping to establish a plant in Canada and conducting a feasibility study and she is assisting them in obtaining the necessary information. This work is done in Canada. This now takes one-quarter of her time. She has also worked for the Cultural Minister of Quebec, Canadian Pacific Airlines, and the Hong Kong Bank of Canada which sponsored her book.
[16]
She has bank accounts in Canada and an S.I.N. number acquired after landing. She and her company file Canadian Income Tax returns. She has also published some 25 books which are printed in Hong Kong, but as she points out can be written anywhere and faxed to the publishers. She has a British Columbia driver's licence.
[17]
As previously stated, she would obviously be a very desirable and useful citizen. The problem is that for the period from February 6, 1985 to June 20, 1988, the relevant period, she was out of Canada 1,063 days, in Hong Kong, England, Australia and New York.
[18]
As she puts it in her letter to the Citizenship Court on June 20, 1988, "I have followed a business strategy that required me to work outside of Canada in order to provide me with better opportunities in Canada. I have not abandoned Canada as the place of my permanent residence."
[19]
I turn now to the physical evidence of her residence in Canada. She is no longer a member of any business organizations in Hong Kong, having resigned from her social clubs there. When she goes back to Hong Kong she rents a furnished apartment during her stays there. In addition to her bank accounts in Canada, she does have an account in Hong Kong into which her income from the Stock Exchange contract and her newspaper income there is paid.
[20]
In October or November 1984, she bought a house in Vancouver where she lived until November 1985. Some of her furniture is still stored in a room there. She then rented it and moved in with her dear friend Agnes Lau and her family where she has a room of her own and keeps all her personal belongings. She explained that in the Chinese culture she considers Agnes Lau as a sister. The Lau children call her "Auntie" and she is treated by Agnes Lau's parents as if she were their own child. She has an office, and also for her company at the premises of the Lau business the Overseas Chinese Voice and has two part-time employees who work for her from their homes.
[21]
When the Lau family moved in Vancouver she continued to live with them and have her mail re-directed there. She permanently separated from her husband in 1986.
[22]
Agnes Lau, her friend, corroborated appellant's evidence in all material respects, a room in her home is kept for appellant who keeps clothing there and comes and goes as a member of the family. Any important documents addressed to her there are put in a file in the office.
[23]
The residential requirements section of the
Act
which is the issue here has given rise to extensive jurisprudence, but since the facts in each such case differ there is no need to examine it at length, but only to consider the principles which have been established.
[24]
In the frequently cited case of
Re Papadogiorgakis
(1979), 88 D.L.R.(3d) 243 (F.C.T.D.), Thurlow, A.C.J. (as he then was), points out at page 248 that temporary absences whether on business or vacation or even to pursue a course of study, even though the absence may be more or less lengthy do not justify a conclusion that the person has ceased to be a resident. He quotes the statement of Rand, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  that it is "chiefly a matter of the degree to which a person in mind and fact settles into or maintains or centralizes his ordinary mode of living with its accessories in social relations, interests and conveniences at or in the place in question".
[25]
In
Re Roberts
(1979), 92 D.L.R.(3d) 76 (F.C.T.D.), it was held by Grant, D.J. (headnote): "The effect of these provisions is that where a person has been admitted to Canada as a permanent resident, but leaves Canada for extended periods of time in the course of his employment, he does not lose his status if he can show that he did not intend to do so, the possession of a returning resident permit being prime facie proof thereof. Moreover, he can count his time abroad towards his residency requirement."
[26]
In
Re Lau
(1990), 34 F.T.R. 81 (F.C.T.D.), a decision of Justice Dubé on February 16, 1990, a liberal interpretation is made: A judgment I rendered in
Re Kleifges
(1978), 82 D.L.R.(3d) 183 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 189 is quoted to the effect that: "For an applicant who would very obviously make an excellent citizen the provisions of the
Act
should be given a liberal interpretation so as to make the granting of citizenship to him possible, rather than a narrow and restricted interpretation."
[27]
A stricter interpretation is given in other cases. In
Re Blaha
, [1971] F.C. 521 (before amendments to the
Act
, but still applicable as a general statement), Justice Pratte stated at p. 525: "Parliament wishes to ensure that Canadian citizenship is granted only to persons who have shown they are capable of becoming part of our society."
[28]
This was referred to by Justice Muldoon in
Re Lee
(1989), 24 F.T.R. 188 (F.C.T.D.), judgment dated December 20, 1988, where he states at page 11: "As Pratte, J., indicated, Parliament intended that the applicant for citizenship demonstrate that he or she has actually resided among Canadians and in effect thrown in his or her lot with us in some Canadian community."
[29]
A review of the facts in these and a number of other cases leads me to conclude that when an applicant who has established a residence in Canada, even if only a rented room, leaves Canada, even for extended periods, to complete studies abroad, because of business transfers, or, as in the case of missionaries or people in the foreign service, temporary postings abroad, this does not constitute abandonment of residence and the periods so spent abroad can be counted to fulfill the residence requirements of s. 5(1) of the
Act
, but when on the other hand, the absences are for purely personal reasons and of a voluntary nature they cannot be so counted.
[30]
That is what is troubling, when applied to the facts of this case. Actually, applicant spent far less time in Canada between 1985 and her application for citizenship in June 1988 than in the period before 1985. When she established her public relations business in Canada in 1984 she clearly intended to live here, but the opportunity for employment with the Hong Kong Stock Exchange for three years from 1985-1988 was too good an opportunity to miss and certainly the contracts so made would be helpful to her in developing her business in Canada. Nevertheless, as an examination of the contract shows, she was clearly not being employed as a nonresident employee. Most of her duties would require her presence there, although she did some public relations work for the Exchange in Canada, New York and Great Britain. This was a choice she made, and no doubt a wise one, but must be considered as a voluntary absence from Canada during that period. The contract terminated at the end of 1988, and, although she is still doing some work for the Exchange, it appears that since then she has spent more time in Canada and made more business connections here, but that is not the period in question.
[31]
Furthermore, as she points out, the books she writes, which might be considered as a second occupation, can be written anywhere but she has voluntarily chosen to do most of this work in Hong Kong where her publishers are located and which is more convenient for her.
[32]
I believe it is fair to say that she is very hard-working and versatile and alert to business opportunities in the public relations field wherever they may be found. The nature of her activities in promoting closer ties between the Chinese and Canada of necessity requires spending much time in the Orient. Many Canadian citizens, whether Canadian born or naturalized must spend a large part of their time abroad in connection with their businesses, and this is their choice. An applicant for citizenship, however, does not have such freedom because of the provisions of s. 5(1) of the
Act
.
[33]
Some of the cases referred to by the Citizenship Court judge in her letter of December 20, 1989 explaining her decision, set out this argument.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Justice Joyal expresses it saying: "I fail to see that the respondents become in any way interwoven into the fabric or otherwise developed the kind of relationship with Canadians or their institutions within the meaning contemplated by the Parliament in its statute.
[34]
In
Re Calderwood
(1989), 21 F.T.R. 105 (F.C.T.D.), he expressed it even more strongly, saying: "residence" should not be construed as enabling an applicant to adopt Canada as merely a flag of convenience -- regard must be had for the spirit of the statute".
[35]
In
Re Anguist
, T-1893-83, Justice Muldoon writes: "Parliament intended that the applicant for citizenship demonstrate that he or she has actually resided among Canadians and, in effect, thrown in his or her lot with us in some Canadian community."
[36]
Applicant is perhaps unfortunate in that she has no family in Canada who remain established here during her absences. Her friends the Laus serve as a family but it cannot be said that it is she who has established them in Canada, but rather the converse. She was also unfortunate in that the representative she had retained for the citizenship hearing did not turn up and it proceeded without much of the material she wished to present, which is now before the court in her appeal. It appears, however, that the Citizenship judge had sufficient information and examined the application very thoroughly. The evidence presented at the hearing of the Appeal is merely an elaboration of the facts presented at the initial hearing.
[37]
I have no doubt that with the increased development of her business in Canada since the 1988 citizenship application, and conversely the diminution of her activities in Hong Kong, applicant will spend more time in Canada, nor do I have any doubt that it is her intention to make Canada her home. If she applies again in two years she will by then most probably have the necessary residential requirements, but at present I believe the law must be applied.
[38]
It is tempting to say as I and others have in the past that she will make such a desirable citizen that she should be granted citizenship now without being required to wait; but that would be failing to apply the law on the facts of this case. There is fortunately no immigration problem. She remains a landed immigrant and there is little doubt that her returning resident visas will continue to be renewed, so she will not be seriously inconvenienced in her work or her life, nor prevented from making necessary business departures from the country as required from time to time. To attain citizenship however she must cease to have an ambivalent relationship with Canada and establish that her principal abode is here by spending more time here than on visits to the Orient in connection with her Canadian business activities as a public relations consultant here.
[39]
The appeal must therefore be dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]