[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: On May 3, 1995, the defendant filed a motion to have the plaintiff's action, which is an appeal of a Tax Court decision involving the 1982 through 1987 taxation years, struck out on the grounds that the plaintiff was not prosecuting his action with due dispatch, relying on
Federal Court Rule
440. The defendant requested that the motion be dealt with in writing.
[2]
By letter of May 10, 1995, the plaintiff, due to unspecified "personal circumstances" requested an oral hearing.
[3]
Leaving aside that an oral hearing of a motion intended to be dealt with in writing pursuant to rule 324 cannot be requested merely by a letter, but ought to be dealt with by a formal motion (see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  have decided to deal with the plaintiff's request, initiated by the May 10, 1995, letter and followed by a letter of May 23, 1995, at this point, rather than have both sides expend further time on the issue of an oral hearing.
[4]
On May 17, 1995, one of our Registry Officers, on my direction and in response to Mr. Karlsson's May 10, 1995, letter requesting the oral hearing, advised Mr. Karlsson that he must have a valid reason for an oral hearing, not just that he could not, by reason of his personal circumstances, oppose the defendant's motion in writing.
[5]
The response to this, the May 23, 1995, letter, is that the plaintiff requests "... an oral hearing due to personal and health reasons. It will be easier for us to explain our position at an oral hearing rather by a written representation. We enclose a copy of a letter from Dr. Clifford Chan-Yan dated June 25/93. "A serious illness", we feel is more than just "reason of his circumstances" to oppose this motion in writing.
[6]
Dr. Chan-Yan, who appears to specialize in internal medicine and nephrology, writes, in his letter of two years ago:
"To Whom It May Concern:
This letter is to inform you that Mr. Risto Karlsson is being seen by me for investigation and treatment of a serious illness. This may entail him not being able to work fully for several months."
[7]
To begin, a request for an oral hearing, of a motion intended to be disposed of in writing, must "... be supported by some substantial reasons for concluding that, in the circumstances of the particular case, the applicant cannot adequately present his application in writing":
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at 724.
[8]
In the present instance, there is nothing in the plaintiff's material to explain the personal reasons or to show the relevance of his health in requesting an oral hearing of the motion, as opposed to having the motion dealt with in writing.
[9]
For the most part motions that are dealt with in writing pursuant to rule 324 are straightforward motions which do not raise complex issues. The defendant's motion and material sets out that there has been inordinate delay on the part of the plaintiff, that the delay has been to the prejudice of the defendant and that it is for the plaintiff to show that the delay is excusable. An oral hearing of such a straightforward motion is not granted merely on request, but rather the respondent to the motion must give a valid and relevant reason for an oral hearing.
[10]
There are a number of instances in which, pursuant to rule 324(3), the court will agree to a request by a respondent for an oral hearing including that the matter is complex (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.)); where the issues raise questions of public interest that are novel so that oral argument would be a great assistance to the court (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  witnesses and full legal argument is required (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  concluding that the applicant cannot adequately present his application in writing (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  if the matter is urgent and can be disposed of more expeditiously if an oral hearing is directed, or if so many people are interested in the matter that to present it as contemplated by rule 324 would prove cumbersome, or if the motion raises a question on which the court desires to hear oral submissions from counsel.
[11]
In the present instance Mr. Karlsson who, from his material in the file, appears to write well enough, has not convinced me that there is a valid or special reason for an oral hearing. To require an oral hearing of this straightforward motion would be to add to the time and expense of all concerned. Mr. Karlsson's request for an oral hearing is denied.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Kelli A. Simmonds/slm
[End of document]