 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Mactavish, J.
May 11, 2004.
Counsel:
Hart Kaminker, for the applicants;
David Tindale, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Hart Kaminker, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicants;
Morris Rosenberg, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary.
[1]
Mactavish, J.
: This application for a stay of removal arises out of a negative Pre-removal Risk Assessment or "PRRA", which determined that the applicants would not be at risk of persecution if they were returned to Pakistan.
[2]
The applicants are Shia Muslims. They claim that the principal applicant was targeted by Sunni extremists because he played an active role within his religious community. The applicants further submit that state protection was not available to them in Pakistan. The PRRA officer found that while there was sectarian violence within Pakistan, nevertheless adequate state protection was available to the applicants.
[3]
The applicants submit that this finding was patently unreasonable in light of the overwhelming documentary evidence before the PRRA officer with respect to the situation facing members of the Shia minority within Pakistan. According to the applicants, Pakistani police forces are notoriously corrupt, and have repeatedly been implicated in human rights abuses and extra-judicial killings. The applicants cannot be expected to rely on police forces of this nature for protection from Sunni extremists. Further, the applicants say, the fact that the police are able to act with impunity demonstrates that the Pakistani government is not really in control of the situation within that country.
[4]
In order to grant the stay of a removal order, the onus is on the applicants to establish each of the elements of the tripartite test in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). In order to succeed, the applicants must establish that there is a serious issue to be tried with regards to the underlying matters, that they will suffer irreparable harm if the stay is not granted and that the balance of convenience favours the granting of the stay. The test is conjunctive. That is, the motion cannot succeed if the applicants fail to meet one part of the test.
[5]
Having carefully reviewed the PRRA report, and having considered the applicants' submissions, I am not persuaded that a serious issue arises here. Decisions of PRRA officers are to be given significant deference. Where there is nothing unreasonable in the PRRA decision, there will be no serious issue. In this case, the PRRA officer clearly considered the applicants' submissions as well as the recent documentary evidence with respect to ongoing human rights abuses in Pakistan. What the applicants are asking the Court to do is to re-weigh the evidence that was before the PRRA officer. While the applicants may not agree with the PRRA decision, they have not demonstrated that it was arguably perverse or patently unreasonable.
[6]
As the applicants have failed to establish the existence of a serious issue, the motion is dismissed.
ORDER
[7]
THIS COURT ORDERS
that
1. The motion for a stay is dismissed.
[End of document]