[1]
Lutfy, J.
: The appellant is the owner of the trademark "007" and "Gun" Design and other marks associated with "James Bond", the fictional character created in Ian Fleming's novels and adapted for movies. The respondent seeks to register: (a) "007"; (b) "007 Pizza & Subs" and Design; and (c) "007 Submarine" and Design as trademarks for its restaurant business. This appeal is from the decision of the Registrar of Trademarks rejecting the appellant's opposition to the proposed registration.
The Decision Of The Registrar
[2]
The respondent applied for the registration of its trademarks to cover the following wares:
(1) sandwiches, submarine sandwiches, coffee, milk, tea, flavoured and unflavoured non-alcoholic uncarbonated and carbonated beverages; natural juices, mixtures of natural juices;
(2) pizzas, panzerotti and pastas; napkins, tablecloths, sandwich and pizza wraps; novelty items, namely pencils, buttons, calendars and thermometers; clothing, namely hats, caps, t-shirts, sweatshirts, shorts, pants, skirts, dresses, swimsuits, sweatpants, socks, scarves, ties
and the following services:
(1) restaurant services, namely the selling of submarine sandwiches;
(2) restaurant catering services, namely the selling of pizzas, panzerotti and pastas.
The respondent subsequently disclaimed the words "Pizza, Subs and Submarine" apart from the trademarks. The respondent claims use of its trademarks since July 15, 1989 concerning the sandwiches and beverages and the restaurant selling of submarine sandwiches. The trademarks are intended to be used for the other wares and services. The applications were filed in January 1991.
[3]
The opposition to the proposed registration raises two principal grounds: (a) the respondent is not entitled to registration because the trademark "007" had been previously used and made known in Canada; and (b) the respondent's trademarks are not distinctive from those of the appellant. [See footnote 1].
[4]
The Registrar concluded that the respondent's trademarks are distinctive and not confusing, principally because of the wide disparity in the wares, services and trades of the parties. He also found the appellant's evidence lacking, particularly with respect to the establishment of the use of its trademarks in Canada prior to the material date. In making his findings, he ruled inadmissible certain reply and hearsay evidence.
The Court's Standard Of Review
And Significant New Evidence
[5]
This court may intervene if the appellant demonstrates that the Registrar erred in the interpretation of the law or in the assessment of the facts. [See footnote 2]. The restraint often exercised in reviewing the decisions of specialized tribunals may not necessarily apply where evidence, in addition to that adduced before the Registrar, is filed with this court pursuant to s. 56(5) of the
Trade-marks Act
[see footnote 3]. Where significant new evidence which was not before the Registrar is filed, a broader scope of review will be available upon appeal. [See footnote 4]. As Mr. Justice Joyal stated recently, "[t]he usual result is that the proceeding takes on the flavour of a trial de novo." [See footnote 5].
[6]
The appellant's bald assertions of its ownership of the trademarks are supplemented in this appeal by evidence of their registration under the appellant's name in several countries in Europe and in Australia, Japan, Taiwan, Mexico and the United States. In particular, the appellant filed the registration in the United States of its trademarks "007" and "James Bond 007" with respect to a wide-ranging list of goods and services.
[7]
The Registrar received general information concerning 15 motion pictures based on the "Bond" character. The appellant is the joint owner of the copyright in these films with United Artists Corporation. In appeal, the appellant established that these movies grossed over seventy million dollars in Canada between 1962 and 1987.
[8]
The evidence in this court is that many television stations throughout Canada have made and continue to make available these films for viewing. The affiant's assertion that the films were shown on these broadcasting outlets is on the record. It is not necessary, in my view, to establish the number of viewers for each individual broadcast, even if this information were available. Canadian broadcasting outlets acquired rights with respect to these films. I accept the evidence that the films have been and are being shown in Canada from time to time within the periods indicated.
[9]
Similarly, the appellant's evidence concerning the video rentals of the same fifteen movies is more significant than the information filed with the Registrar. It is now clear that the "James Bond 007" with the "Gun" Design are identified with the trademark (
tm
) symbol on the sleeve packaging for each of the videos. This trademark is registered by the appellant in various countries, including the United States. The same is true of the trademark "007" with the "Gun" Design. The element "007" appears in the credits of at least ten of the fifteen films. References are made to "007" either orally or in the credits in each of the films. Throughout the films, where "James Bond" is speaking with senior officials of the secret service, the character is invariably referred to as "007". Brochures accompanying a collectors' set of certain of these films show the "007" and "Gun" Design trademark in addition to the appellant's joint copyright in the "007 Gun" logo with United Artists Corporation. There is no evidence that any party other than the appellant has rights in the trademark.
[10]
Finally, the evidence includes additional media references to the appellant's trademarks from magazines with important circulation within Canada. In my view, the appellant's use of data from the Audit Bureau of Circulations is appropriate for the limited purpose of establishing that
Maclean's
,
Newsweek, Time
and
People
magazines have a broad readership in Canada. I see no merit in an objection to hearsay evidence concerning general information with respect to which a court could just as well take judicial notice. The media stories are from magazines better known in Canada than the ones before the Registrar. These newspaper articles constitute evidence that the trademarks are widely referred to in Canada. [See footnote 6].
[11]
In summary, I have no hesitation in concluding that the additional information filed on appeal constitutes new significant evidence, relevant to the issues before the Registrar, which allows this court the latitude of substituting its view for his.
Entitlement To Registration
[12]
The respondent will not be entitled to registration: (a) if the appellant's trademarks were used or made known in Canada prior to the respondent's first use of its marks in July 1989; and (b) if the parties' trademarks are confusing. Where the respondent's use of trademarks is proposed for other wares and services, the material date is January 1991 when its applications were filed. This framework is set out in ss. 16(1) and 16(3) of the
Act
. The concepts of use and making known are set out in ss. 4 and 5 of the
Act
.
[13]
On the first point, I am satisfied that "James Bond 007" with the "Gun" Design and "007" are trademarks which were used and made known in Canada prior to the respondent's first use. I have viewed the videotape of extracts from the movies. The trademarks are seen and heard on the films. The evidence concerning: (a) the revenues of seventy million dollars prior to 1987 from the distribution of the 15 films featuring the "James Bond" character, also known as agent "007"; (b) the availability of the movies through television broadcasts and video rentals; and (c) the publicity generated by the print media, establishes both the use and the widespread recognition of the appellant's trademarks. It may have been preferable if the appellant had filed evidence of video rentals of these movies prior to 1993. The evidence of the availability of these video rentals in 1993 and in 1996 establishes the ongoing use of the trademarks. Even without taking judicial notice of the availability of the video rentals prior to 1991, my conclusion with respect to the use and publicity concerning the appellant's trademarks would be the same.
[14]
The respondent challenges whether the presence of the trademarks in the movies and on the video jackets constitutes use, particularly where credit is given to two or more persons. [See footnote 7]. In this case, the trademark symbol is placed adjacent to "007" with the "Gun" Design. That trademark is registered by the appellant in various jurisdictions. In addition, the other side of the video sleeve packaging indicates that copyright in the "Gun" symbol logo is owned by the appellant and United Artists Corporation. Similarly, copyright in the films is attributed to the appellant and the United Artists Corporation. Different information is being communicated with respect to different rights. There is no indication in the evidence that the rights in the trademark reside with more than one party.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  conclusion where the opponent to the registration of a trademark was also relying on its prior use in films through television and video rentals:
"The appellant adduced evidence indicating that it had used its trademark 'The Pink Panther' in association with several movie titles. In my view, the functional use of these titles does not derogate from the fact that that trademark was used to associate the films with the appellant's predecessors, indicating that the films were from the same source. The respondent's suggestion that different individuals and corporations were credited with direction and production of various films does not, in my view, indicate a variety of origins for the films. Nor am I persuaded, as the respondent urged, that use of the trademark in the title of a movie is not use as a trademark, for in my view, the authorities cited for this do not support such a conclusion: See
Walt Disney Productions v. 468108 Ontario Ltd.
(1984), 2 C.P.R.(3d) 472 (T.M. Opp. Bd.), and
Science & Health Trade Mk,
[1968] R.P.C. 402 (Ch. Div.). In any event, the evidence adduced indicates the appellant's use of the trademarks was more than mere use of the trademark in the film titles.
. . . . .
"In my opinion, the films themselves also demonstrate a connection to the trademark.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 32 F.T.R. 274; 19 A.C.W.S.(3d) 911 (T.D.), the court stated that the televising of the Miss Canada Pageant would cause viewers to associate the 'Miss Canada' name, a trademark, with the pageant. Similarly, in this case, I am of the view that the showing of the appellant's films and cartoons, by television or through home video rentals, would lead viewers to associate the films and cartoons with the trademarks."
[15]
On the second issue of confusion between the trademarks, I have reached a conclusion different than that of the Registrar. The relevant criteria in determining whether the competing trademarks are confusing are set out in s. 6 of the
Act
, particularly s. 6(5). [See footnote 9]. The Registrar appears to have focussed principally on one of these criteria in determining that the trademarks were not confusing because of the wide disparity in the nature of the wares and services of the parties. In my view, this approach is too narrow.
[16]
The nature of the wares and services will be a less important factor where the opponent to the registration has a strong trademark. It is trite law that the stronger the mark, the greater the ambit of the protection it will be afforded. [See footnote 10]. In this case, the appellant's trademarks are strong. Their inherent distinctiveness is enhanced through their wide recognition. [See footnote 11]. The respondent's first use is relatively recent. The "James Bond" character, agent "007", has been made well-known through novels and films since 1962. The publicity surrounding the trademarks and their use continue. The likelihood of confusion may be enhanced when one of the marks is strong and even if the parties operate in different businesses. [See footnote 12]. In each of the respondent's three applications, "007" is either the only or the opening element of its trademarks. It proposes their application to some promotional wares which coincide in part with those listed in the appellant's U.S. registration of its marks. The opening element and the sound for the competing marks have a high degree of resemblance with the respondent's trademarks and, in particular, with its trademark "007". If the respondent's goods and services become more readily available in a larger geographic area, chances of their association with the appellant's trademarks will increase.
[17]
In light of the criteria set out in s. 6, I conclude that the use of the parties' trademarks in the same area would likely lead to the inference that the wares or services associated with those marks are produced by the same person. There is, in my view, a strong likelihood of confusion. At the very least, it has not been established on the balance of probabilities that there is no likelihood of confusion. While this finding disposes of the appeal, I will now consider the second issue raised by the parties.
The Issue Of Distinctiveness
[18]
According to s. 2 of the
Act
, "distinctive" in relation to a trademark means a trademark that actually distinguishes the wares and services in association with which it is used by its owner from the wares or services of others or is adapted so as to distinguish them.
[19]
The respondent's business activity, at least for the moment, is in the restaurant selling of sandwiches and beverages. At first glance, one might be attracted to the disparity between the parties' goods and services and decide that the respondent's trademark is distinctive. The respondent proposes, however, to use the trademark with other promotional products. More significantly, the respondent acknowledges that he is "... reasonably well aware of the movies featuring "Bond" or "007" and in those movies, I never did see any restaurant services performed by '007'." From this, I find that the respondent adopted "007" with knowledge of the prior use of the appellant's trademarks. The respondent's choice of "007" was deliberate and not unrelated to the mark's fame. In my view, a chain of "007" pizza, pasta and submarine sandwich outlets would not necessarily be distinguished, within the meaning of s. 2, by the public from the applicant's wares and services. In these circumstances, I cannot conclude that the respondent's marks are distinctive even though they have been used with substantially different wares.
[20]
In so deciding, I have relied on the judgment of my colleague Mr. Justice Dubé in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  its ladies' hosiery business. That mark had been made famous by the pageant known by the same name. In the words of Mr. Justice Dubé:
"In my view, in the case at bar, even if sales of hosiery would not appear at first blush to be related to a beauty pageant, it is likely that consumers might assume the organizers of the Miss Canada pageant had in some way approved, licensed, or sponsored the use of its trademark by a business which markets hosiery under the 'Miss Canada' trademark, or that there was some business connection between Hosiery and the Miss Canada pageant ... Therefore, I must conclude that Hosiery has not discharged the legal burden upon it of establishing that its trademark 'Miss Canada' is really distinctive of its wares." (References omitted) [see footnote 14]
This view is cogent, in my respectful opinion, in the particular circumstances of this action even though in other decisions concerning the s. 2 definition of "distinctive", the wares or services are similar. [See footnote 15].
[21]
In my opinion, the respondent's trademarks are not distinctive.
Conclusion
[22]
For these reasons, the appeal will be maintained. The decision of the Registrar rejecting the appellant's opposition is set aside. The appellant's opposition is maintained and the Registrar is directed to refuse the respondent's applications. These reasons will apply to the three appeals heard simultaneously with respect to the respondent's three applications.
[23]
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin/clh
Footnotes
1.	See D.R. Bereskin, Q.C.,
The Protection of Famous Foreign Trade Marks in Canada
, presented at the International Trademark Association 1995 annual meeting, April 29-May 3, 1995. This article provides a useful review of the two principal issues considered by the Registrar and in this appeal.
2.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 79, at p. 83 (T.D.).
3.	R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, ("the
Act
").  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 340, at p. 344 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 207, at p. 210 (T.D.), affd. (1992), 139 N.R. 319; 41 C.P.R.(3d) 67 (F.C.A.)
.
4.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 135 (T.D.).
5.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
6.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 216, at p. 226 (T.D.). Notice of Appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal was filed on May 1, 1996, court file no. A-365-96.
7.	The respondent relied on the cases of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 163 (Ex. Ct.) and
Moore  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 40, at p. 49 (F.C.A.). In both cases, the competing parties or their predecessors had a joint interest in the trademark prior to corporate re-organizations and the ensuing disputes. This is not the situation in this action.
8.	Supra, footnote 6, at pp. 228-229.
9.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 381 (F.C.A.). I have relied on the statements made by the Court of Appeal in
Miss Universe Inc.
in assessing the circumstances to be considered in determining whether there is a likelihood of confusion. I have followed the principles enunciated in this decision with respect to the burden of proof on the applicant for registration and in the application of the criteria in s. 6(5) of the
Act
.
10.	Ibid., at p. 388. See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 429 (Ont. H.C.).
11.	 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 169, at p. 171 (F.C.A.). Any reluctance to protect fictitious names or numbers is outweighed by their publicity and use:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 486 (T.D.).
12.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 62-63 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 126 (F.C.A.);
Motel 6,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 45 (T.D.).
[End of document]