Introduction
[1]
Mackay, J.
: These Reasons concern a number of determinations by the Court arising from proceedings that began on August 15, 2001, by reference to the Court of a certificate, filed by the Solicitor General and the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration pursuant to then s. 40.1 of the
Immigration Act
, that in their opinion, the respondent, Mr. Jaballah, a foreign national who came to Canada in 1996 and applied for refugee status, is inadmissible to Canada on national security grounds.
[2]
The proceedings were suspended in early July 2002 at the request of Mr. Jaballah when he applied to the Minister to be found to be a person in need of protection, pursuant to s. 112 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2001, c. 27, as amended, ("
IRPA
") which came into force June 28, 2002. Since then the respondent has remained, as he has been since mid-August 2001, in detention in solitary confinement. No final decision on his application to the Minister has been communicated to the Court, as has been expected in accord with
IRPA
and the
IRPA
Regulations
. On April 11, 2003 the Court heard a motion on behalf of the respondent, based on the principle of abuse of process and claiming
Charter
interests, the purpose of which would be that the Court should now resume its suspended proceedings, previously suspended, and quash the certificate of the Minister, and release Mr. Jaballah from detention.
[3]
In summary, the determinations now made, filed in two separate orders and determinations, now allow the respondent's motion in part, insofar as an assessment of the risk to Mr. Jaballah if he were now returned to Egypt, the "PRRA" by an officer acting on behalf of the Minister, which was provided to the respondent in August 2002, and now filed by direction of the Court in April 2003, is deemed to be the assessment of the risk by the Minister purusant to s. 172(2)(a) of the
IRPA
Regulations
, made in accord with s. 97 of the
Act
.
[4]
Further, the Court determines that, as there is as yet no satisfactory explanation for the delay in advising it of a decision by the Minister in relation to the application for protection, without any firm indication of a date for decision, continuing delay constitutes an abuse of the Court's process with the respondent continuing in detention, without right of review. In these circumstances, the appropriate relief in the circumstances of this case is to resume the proceedings that deal with the issue raised by reference of the Minister's certificate to the Court, leaving to the Minister a decision on the application for protection as the
Act
directs.
[5]
In Part II of these Reasons, the Court now determines, pursuant to s. 80(1) of the
Act
that the certificate dated August 13, 2001 by the applicant Ministers, on the basis of the evidence and information available to the Court, is reasonable.
[6]
Since there is no decision communicated on the application for protection, no determination is made whether such a decision is lawful, as provided for by s. 80(1). Presumably when made, the decision will be subject to judicial review.
[7]
These Reasons are long. They include reference to several stages in the proceedings. The following headings and paragraph numbers where each section begins, may assist in providing an overview of the context in which my determinations are made.
Part I - Background
Para.
--1. The legislative regime, the context for determinations
8
--2. The Court's determination to resume proceedings
17
--3. Immigration circumstances of the respondent
37
Part II - Proceedings concerning the Ministers' Certificate
--4. Preliminary matters
42
--5. Efforts to identify "new" information
50
--6. Withdrawal of counsel for the respondent
55
--7. Ensuring opportunity for the respondent to be heard
57
--8. Reviewing information and evidence, 1999 and 2001
61
--9. Delay in determining reasonableness of certificate
63
--10. The process condemned by counsel for Mr. Jaballah
65
--11. The reasonableness of the certificate of the Ministers
---a) The test for assessing what information is new
70
---b) Information new to the Ministers after November 1, 1999
81
---c) Information partly new to the Ministers in 2001
83
---d) Conclusion concerning new information before this Court
86
---e) Finding the certificate is reasonable
90
Part III - Conclusions, Orders, Costs
98
Part I Background
1. The Legislative Regime, The Context For Determinations
[8]
When this proceeding began, in August 2001, it was governed by the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended (the "
1985 Act
"), and in particular, s. 40.1 of that
Act
, under which the certified opinion issued and the matter was referred to this Court. However, before this decision was rendered, the
1985 Act
was repealed and replaced by
IRPA
, which came into force on June 28, 2002. This proceeding, begun under the
1985 Act
, has continued under
IRPA
, which provides in part, (consistent with the general principle under 44(c)) of the Interpretation Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-21, as amended), that:
"190. Every application, proceeding or matter under the former Act that is pending or in progress immediately before the coming into force of this section shall be governed by this Act on that coming into force.
"190. La présente loi s'applique, dès l'entrée en vigueur du présent article, aux demandes et procédures présentées ou instruites, ainsi qu'aux autres questions soulevées, dans le cadre de l'ancienne loi avant son entrée en vigueur et pour lesquelles aucune décision n'a été prise."
Relevant provisions of
IRPA
are reproduced in Annex A, with brief references to comparable provisions of the
1985 Act
. Statutory references in these Reasons are primarily to
IRPA
now in force, with additional references to comparable provisions in the
1985 Act
where that seems appropriate.
[9]
This proceeding began with the referral to the Court of a certificate by the applicants, the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration and the Solicitor General of Canada, pursuant to paragraph 40.1(3)(a) of the
1985 Act
(now replaced by s-s. 77(1) of the
IRPA
), for the Court to assess the reasonableness of the certificate, pursuant to paragraph 40.1(4) of the
1985 Act
(now replaced by s-ss. 80(1) and (2) of the
IRPA
). That certificate states the opinion of the applicants, based upon security intelligence reports, that Mr. Jaballah, who is not a Canadian citizen but who, after arriving in Canada in 1996, had claimed Convention refugee status under the
1985 Act
, is inadmissible to Canada as a person described in sub-paragraphs 19(1)(e)(ii), 19(1)(e)(iv)(B), 19(1)(e)(iv)(C), 19(1)(f)(ii) and 19(1)(f)(iii)(B) of that
Act
.
[10]
Comparable provisions of the
IRPA
, to those referred to in the Ministers' certificate, are paragraphs 34(1)(b), 34(1)(c) and 34(1)(f). Thus in the terms of the
IRPA
, the certified opinion of the Ministers is that Mr. Jaballah is inadmissible on security grounds for:
- engaging in or instigating the subversion by force of any government; in this case the government of Egypt (paragraph 34(1)(b));
- engaging in terrorism (paragraph 34(1)(c));
- being a member of an organization, pursuant to paragraph 34(1)(f), that there are reasonable grounds to believe engages, has engaged or will engage in acts referred to in paragraphs 34(1)(b) or (c).
[11]
My determinations are made pursuant to s. 80(1) of
IRPA
, after consideration of the evidence and information filed in the Court and adduced on behalf of the applicants, and in the absence of any evidence adduced by or on behalf of Mr. Jaballah, except that tendered on his behalf from earlier proceedings in 1999, when he had produced evidence relating to a similar certificate that was referred to the Court in accordance with s. 40.1(3) of the
1985 Act
. After hearings, that earlier certificate was found to be unreasonable and it was quashed by Order of Mr. Justice Cullen. (See
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), hereinafter "
Jaballah No. 1
").
[12]
These proceedings are unusual in that this is the second certificate with respect to Mr. Jaballah, issued for the same general purposes, setting out the same opinion by the applicant Ministers under then s. 40.1 of the
1985 Act
. The first certificate dated March 31, 1999, as noted, was found to be unreasonable, and was quashed by Mr. Justice Cullen's Order, dated in early November 1999. The second certificate, dated August 13, 2001, is now before the Court. It is said by counsel for the applicant Ministers to be based substantially on new information, a perspective not shared by the respondent, Mr. Jaballah.
[13]
The proceedings are unusual also in that after hearings commenced, and were to continue on March 11, 2002, to hear evidence and argument on behalf of Mr. Jaballah to respond to information claimed by the Ministers to be new, counsel for Mr. Jaballah announced his withdrawal from the s. 40.1 proceedings. Doing so, he said, was based on advice of counsel that he had consulted and on the ground that his oath as a barrister would not permit him to continue in these proceedings. In his view, the proceedings had been manipulated by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service ("CSIS") and had been used as an investigatory, prosecutorial service. The Court's traditional role as an adjudicator had been tarnished and these proceedings were a "sham". That perception, by experienced counsel, warrants addressing, after these Reasons first provide an overview of the process followed.
[14]
A further step in these proceedings was initiated on July 1, 2002 when counsel who had withdrawn from the s. 40.1 proceedings, requested on behalf of Mr. Jaballah that these proceedings be suspended pursuant to s. 79 of
IRPA
pending a decision of the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration on an application for protection, then proposed to be made by the respondent under s. 112 of
IRPA
, an application possible under that
Act
at that stage in the proceeding. With decision under reserve on the Ministers' motion that the Court find their certificate reasonable, the proceedings in regard to the certificate were then suspended pursuant to s. 79(1) of
IRPA
. While notice from the Minister of his decision on that application has not yet been received by the Court, it is now determined that the delay in providing that notice, while Mr. Jaballah remains in detention, in solitary confinement, and is not sufficiently explained, and without a reasonable forecast of its termination, in the circumstances of this case constitutes an abuse of process.
[15]
That warrants resumption by the Court of its primary task, and in accord with ss. 79(2) and 80(1) of
IRPA
, I now resume consideration of whether the certificate of the Ministers is reasonable.
[16]
After describing the basis of the Court's determination to resume the proceedings, these Reasons then provide a brief description of the immigration circumstances of the respondent. These Reasons then describe in summary the proceedings here followed in relation to the Ministers' certificate. The principal issue is whether there is "new information" before this Court, which was not before Mr. Justice Cullen in 1999, that supports a conclusion that the current certificate of the Ministers' opinion concerning Mr. Jaballah is reasonable.
2. The Court's Determination To Resume The Proceedings
[17]
On April 11, 2003 a motion on behalf of Mr. Jaballah was considered seeking, inter alia, orders that the decision of a Pre-Removal Risk Assessment ("PRRA") officer, dated August 15, 2002 and then forwarded to him, be filed and deemed by the Court to be the decision of the Minister concerning the risk to Mr. Jaballah if he were removed from Canada. The motion sought a further order that the certificate of the Ministers now be quashed because of abuse arising from delay in deciding Mr. Jaballah's application for protection made in July 2002, and that Mr. Jaballah be released from detention.
[18]
Delay, while Mr. Jaballah continues in detention in solitary confinement, as he has been since August 14, 2001, in the circumstances of this case, in my opinion, constitutes abuse of process.
[19]
The circumstances of this case at two stages have been described in previous decisions (see:
Re Jaballah
, [2001] F.T.R. Uned. 934; 2001 FCT 1287, [2001] F.C.J. No. 1748 (T.D.) dated November 23, 2001; and also
Re Jaballah
(2002), 224 F.T.R. 20; 2002 F.C.T. 1046, [2002] F.C.J. 1385 (QL), dated October 8, 2002). The former deals with a number of preliminary issues raised by Mr. Jaballah including the application of the principles of abuse of process or res judicata in this reference which I declined to apply at that stage of proceedings, having heard no evidence or argument that would warrant application of those principles. That decision also describes the background up to the fall of 2001, including reference to the earlier certificate issued concerning Mr. Jaballah, which was found to be unreasonable and quashed in November 1999.
[20]
The second of the earlier decisions dealt with submissions of the parties about the provisions of
IRPA
and the
IRPA
Regulations
relating to the process of the Court following Mr. Jaballah's application for protection and his receipt of the PRRA assessment, dated August 15, 2001, that his application should be granted. This assessment was based on finding substantial grounds for belief that, if removed from Canada to his native Egypt, Mr. Jaballah would face a risk of torture, and a risk to his life or of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, under paragraphs 97(1)(a) and (b) of
IRPA
. The assessment concluded that the application should be allowed.
[21]
At that stage, counsel for Mr. Jaballah urged that the Court should treat the assessment received by Mr. Jaballah, not by the Court, as the decision of the Minister in relation to the application for protection and that the certificate issued by the applicant Ministers in August 2001 should be quashed. There was no report to the Court of the Minister's decision on the application for protection. I found that under
IRPA
and the
IRPA
Regulations
, the Court's resumption of proceedings was directed after the decision of the Minister was reported to the Court, and that the decision of the Minister under paragraph 113(d)(ii) of
IRPA
(and s. 172(2) of the
IRPA
Regulations
) is to be based on factors set out in s. 97, and on an assessment whether the application should be refused "because of the nature and severity of the acts committed by the applicant or because of the danger that the applicant constitutes to the security of Canada".
[22]
To date there has been no report on the second aspect of the Minister's decision and no decision has been made. The Court made clear on at least three occasions that it was concerned with the delay, which in September 2002 was forecast to be at least three months before a decision would be rendered. In November and December 2002, the Court was advised by letters from counsel for the Minister of initiatives taken by representatives of the Government of Canada to seek information and assurances from representatives of the Government of Egypt. When there was no further information by mid March 2003, the Court initiated a telephone conference, arranged for a hearing on the matter, and welcomed a motion by counsel for Mr. Jaballah. The Court then reserved decision but now determines that the motion is allowed in part, insofar as it seeks an order that the PRRA decision, dated August 15, 2002, is filed, on behalf of the Minister as directed by the Court on April 11, 2003, and is deemed to be the report of the Minister in relation to the risk facing Mr. Jaballah if he were returned to Egypt.
[23]
Moreover, the Court determines that the delay in rendering the decision on the application for protection constitutes an abuse of process. The explanation provided of discussions within government about the process of implementing the new procedure under
IRPA
for applying for protection, of time consuming discussions with representations of the Government of Egypt, have thus far led to no report to the Court.
[24]
I note that at the hearing on April 11, 2003, where the principal concern was with delay, counsel for Mr. Jaballah tabled with the Court an affidavit exhibiting a copy of a letter from an officer of the Minister's department which was served on Mr. Jaballah on April 8, 2003 and a copy was later served on his counsel. The letter appends a memorandum and "An Assessment pursuant to R. 172(2)(b) of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
," dated April 3, 2003, by a senior analyst in the Case Review Division, Case Management Branch of the Minister's department. That assessment reviews the circumstances of Mr. Jaballah's case, finds it "apparent" that he is "a member of the group known as 'Al Jihad'", now an organization listed under Part II.I of the
Criminal Code
as an entity believed to be engaged in terrorist activity and concludes "... it is my assessment that Mahmoud Es-Sauy [apparently the name by which the writer refers to Mr. Jaballah] is a danger to the security of Canada".
[25]
That conclusion is not a surprise, in view of the Minister's certificate issued in August 2001. It would have been surprising if an officer acting for the Minister would now find that the respondent is not a danger to Canadian security. From correspondence, it appears Mr. Jaballah has been given an extension of time, to June 10, to respond in writing to the assessment that he is "a danger to the security of Canada".
[26]
With respect, that assessment does not seem at first glance to meet requirements of paragraph 172(2)(b) of the
IRPA
Regulations
which speaks of a written assessment to be provided to the applicant on the basis of factors in subparagraph 113(d)(ii) of the
Act
. That subparagraph in turn speaks of whether the application for protection should be refused "because of the danger the applicant constitutes to the security of Canada". That balancing step, weighing the risk to Canadian security which the applicant constitutes, and implicitly the risk to him if he be returned, is yet to be undertaken.
[27]
As I read the
Act
and the
IRPA
Regulations
, any decision that weighs the risk to Mr. Jaballah if he is returned and the danger that he constitutes to the security of Canada, will be required to be communicated to Mr. Jaballah (
Regulations
paragraph 172(2)(b)) with an opportunity to respond (
Regulations
s. 172(1)) before the decision on behalf of the Minister is made. That decision would then be subject to review of its lawfulness (
IRPA
s. 79(2)). That assessment, it may be argued, will be required to be made in conformance with s. 7 of the
Charter
, in light of the comments of the Supreme Court of Canada in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 208 D.L.R.(4th) 1. There, in discussing the Minister's decision that a refugee be deported, the Court said, in part:
"76 The Canadian rejection of torture is reflected in the international conventions to which Canada is a party. The Canadian and international perspectives in turn inform our constitutional norms. The rejection of state action leading to torture generally, and deportation to torture specifically, is virtually categoric. Indeed, both domestic and international jurisprudence suggest that torture is so abhorrent that it will almost always be disproportionate to interests on the other side of the balance, even security interests. This suggests that, barring extraordinary circumstances, deportation to torture will generally violate the principles of fundamental justice protected by s. 7 of the
Charter
. ...
. . . . .
"77 ... In Canada, the balance struck by the Minister must conform to the principles of fundamental justice under s. 7 of the
Charter
. It follows that insofar as the
Immigration Act
leaves open the possibility of deportation to torture, the Minister should generally decline to deport refugees where on the evidence there is a substantial risk of torture.
"78 We do not exclude the possibility that in exceptional circumstances, deportation to face torture might be justified, either as a consequence of the balancing process mandated by s. 7 of the
Charter
or under s. 1. (A violation of s. 7 will be saved by s. 1 "only in cases arising out of exceptional conditions, such as natural disasters, the outbreak of war, epidemics and the like" ... [citations omitted]. Insofar as Canada is unable to deport a person where there are substantial grounds to believe he or she would be tortured on return, this is not because Article 3 of the CAT directly constrains the actions of the Canadian government, but because the fundamental justice balance under s. 7 of the
Charter
generally precludes deportation to torture when applied on a case-by-case basis. We may predict that it will rarely be struck in favour of expulsion where there is a serious risk of torture. However, as the matter is one of balance, precise prediction is elusive. The ambit of an exceptional discretion to deport to torture, if any, must await future cases."
[28]
Unless the Minister's decision on the application for protection is favourable to Mr. Jaballah's claim, the portents are for continuing argument about, and resolution of, the lawfulness of the decision of the Minister, before this Court would otherwise resume proceedings under s. 79(2) of
IRPA
. At this stage, there simply is no reasonable prediction of when that process would be completed and when there would be a resumption of consideration of the reasonableness of the Ministers' certified opinion that Mr. Jaballah is inadmissible to Canada. Meanwhile, the respondent continues to be held in detention, thus far in solitary confinement, at the direction of the Ministers. Under
IRPA
, the opportunity of a person in Mr. Jaballah's position to have a review of his detention arises only a fixed period after a determination that the Ministers' certificate is reasonable, and the person concerned is not removed from Canada and is still held in detention.
[29]
In my opinion, delay in determining Mr. Jaballah's application for protection while he remains in detention, with no reasonable forecast of when that decision will be made, constitutes abuse of process in this case. The delay has no significance for the Court's primary function here, that is, to assess the reasonableness of the certificate referred to it for consideration. Whether the Minister's decision on the application for protection is made tomorrow or some months from now, this Court's responsibility to assess the certificate's reasonableness will remain the same.
[30]
In the circumstances, while the Court is not prepared to accept the remedy proposed by counsel for Mr. Jaballah, that is, an order quashing the Ministers' certificate, the abuse of process does warrant an order that the proceedings concerning the certificate now be resumed without waiting for the Minister's decision on the application for protection. In my opinion, though I have not heard argument on the matter, Mr. Jaballah is entitled under
IRPA
to an answer in response to the application for protection and the Minister has a duty to provide a decision in accord with the
Act
. Further, whenever that decision is rendered, in my opinion it will be subject to an application for leave and for judicial review.
[31]
I am not prepared to quash the certificate before the Court, not merely because the delay, which I find constitutes abuse, concerns a side issue principally relating to the possible ultimate removal of Mr. Jaballah from Canada, a matter not before the Court, but also because much time, effort and energy has been expended by the applicant Ministers and their departments, by counsel and by the Court. The abuse found does not warrant quashing the certificate, without a decision on the reasonableness of the Ministers' certificate.
[32]
For Mr. Jaballah, a preliminary motion that the certificate be quashed on the principle of abuse of process (discussed in
Re Jaballah
, 2001 FCT 1287, supra) concerned another perceived abuse, not delay in a decision on an application for protection, rather based on the perception that in these proceedings there is no evidence that was not before Mr. Justice Cullen in 1999  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
. I did not accept the preliminary objection when heard, and I do not consider the basis of the perceived abuse is established. It is clear from these Reasons that having carefully reviewed the evidence before Mr. Justice Cullen and that before this Court, there is new information and evidence available to this Court.
[33]
I am not persuaded that there is any abuse of process or undue prejudice to Mr. Jaballah, beyond that contemplated under
IRPA
, in the proceedings up to the time of Mr. Jaballah's application for protection in July 2002.
[34]
There is another factor of significance for the decision to now resume consideration of the reasonableness of the Ministers' certificate in light of the absence of any reasonable forecast of when the Court might otherwise deal with the certificate. Any perception that this Court is implicated in delaying its process concerning Mr. Jaballah must end, despite delay by the Minister's department on an issue not yet before the Court, and not relevant to determinations concerning the certificate before the Court.
[35]
While I find there is abuse of process in the delay in providing a decision on the application for protection by Mr. Jaballah, the Court does not approve the respondent's motion that in view of this abuse the certificate of the Ministers should now be quashed. Rather, the Court does resume its proceedings in regard to the certificate and now proceeds to deal with that matter. Further, I do not accept the application for Mr. Jaballah's release from detention where he is held at the Ministers' direction. His release from continuing detention may be dealt with by a detention review under
IRPA
.
[36]
Before setting out considerations relating to the proceedings for the assessment of the Ministers' certificate, the context for that assessment is assisted by a brief review of immigration circumstances of the respondent.
3. Immigration Circumstances Of The Respondent
[37]
Mr. Jaballah arrived in Canada in 1996 and he, his wife and four children claimed refugee status. The family originated in Egypt where Mr. Jaballah, his wife and at least his elder children are citizens. The family, then fewer in number, left Egypt in 1991 on a religious pilgrimage and did not return because of concern about the treatment by Egyptian authorities, of Mr. Jaballah, who alleges he had faced recurring arrests, detention and torture, and of his wife who had been detained, and so mistreated on one occasion that she had a miscarriage. From 1991 the family lived for three months in Saudi Arabia, then moved to Pakistan. Mr. Jaballah lived in 1994-95 in Yemen and Azerbaijan, apart from his family who remained in Pakistan. He rejoined them in 1996 and he and his family travelled through Turkey and Germany to Canada. On their arrival here in May 1996, Mr. Jaballah, who travelled using a false Saudi Arabian passport, his wife and four children, claimed Convention refugee status. Since their arrival in Canada two other children have been born to Mr. Jaballah and his wife.
[38]
On March 4, 1999, the Convention Refugee Determination Division (the "CRDD") of the Immigration and Refugee Board decided that Mr. Jaballah and his family born abroad were not Convention refugees. That decision was then the subject of an application for leave and for judicial review.
[39]
Meanwhile, on March 31, 1999 Mr. Jaballah had been arrested on the first security certificate issued against him by the applicants. That certificate was referred to this Court and, as noted, after hearings it was quashed by order of Mr. Justice Cullen in November 1999.
[40]
Later, leave having been granted for judicial review of the negative CRDD decision which rejected the family's refugee application, that decision was set aside on September 28, 2000, and it was referred back for reconsideration by a differently constituted panel (see:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 196 F.T.R. 175). Thereafter the rehearing of Mr. Jaballah's refugee claim by the CRDD was scheduled for August 16, 2001.
[41]
Rehearing of the refugee claim so far as it concerns his wife and children, was finally completed, after long delay on April 9, 2003. As we have seen on August 15, 2001, the certificate giving rise to this proceeding was referred by the Ministers to the Court, and to me as the Judge designated pursuant to s. 40.1(4) of the
1985 Act
(now ss. 76 and 78 of the
IRPA
). On August 14, 2001, the second certificate under s. 40.1 of the
1985 Act
having been issued by the applicant Ministers, Mr. Jaballah was arrested, and he has since been detained in solitary confinement.
Part II
4. Proceedings Regarding The Ministers' Certificate
Preliminary Matters
[42]
Preliminary proceedings in relation to the Ministers' certificate, including preliminary motions argued at hearings on October 31 and November 1, 2001, are reviewed in earlier Reasons (see:
Re Jaballah
, 2001 FCT 1287, supra). In those Reasons and by accompanying orders I dealt with preliminary motions of the parties, including the striking of subpoenas duces tecum issued on behalf of the respondent to the applicant Ministers. In response to the respondent's motion to stay proceedings, counsel for the applicants acknowledged that the principles of res judicata, issue estoppel and abuse of process might be applicable in situations where a second certificate is issued under s. 40.1 of the
1985 Act
, but they urged that these principles were not applicable in this case because there is new evidence before the Court, not presented  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
. I dismissed the respondent's motion that the proceedings be stayed on one or more of those principles at the preliminary stage, without prejudice to the respondent's returning to argue the application of those principles after evidence had been heard in this matter.
[43]
My earlier Reasons record that pursuant to paragraphs 40.1(4)(a) and (b) and s. (5.1) of the
1985 Act
the Court had considered evidence submitted on behalf of the applicant Ministers, in camera and ex parte, with counsel for the Ministers present, but in the absence of Mr. Jaballah or counsel on his behalf. I then approved a summary statement of the information before me, to be provided to Mr. Jaballah, omitting from that statement any information that, if disclosed, in my opinion would be injurious to national security or the safety of persons. With that summary the respondent was also provided with six binders of copies of documents, the binders being identified as A1, A2, A3, A4, A5 and B. That collection of documents released to Mr. Jaballah comprises some of the documentary information before the Ministers and submitted to the Court. It excludes any relevant documents withheld on grounds of national security or of potential injury to the safety of persons.
[44]
The earlier Reasons also dealt with two other matters raised by the respondent which are worth recording here. I indicated that constitutional issues raised, so far as they were similar to those raised before Mr. Justice Nadon in
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(3d) 33 (T.D.), if argued herein, would be dealt with as Nadon, J., had done, unless this Court could be persuaded that he was clearly wrong. That included his determination that a judge considering a certificate issued under s. 40.1 of the
1985 Act
has no authority to consider arguments about the constitutionality of that statutory provision, which has been found not to infringe ss. 7, 9, or subsection 10(c) of the
Canadian Charte
r of Rights and Freedoms
or paragraph 2(e) of the
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), appeal dismissed (1996), 201 N.R. 233 (F.C.A.), leave to appeal refused [1997] 2 S.C.R. v; 223 N.R. 72.). While there was no further argument of constitutional issues before me, I note for the record that they were raised.
[45]
The final matter raised in preliminary motions of the respondent concerned issues of disclosure of more than the summary statement of evidence and the documents released to Mr. Jaballah. I directed that he be provided with names of one or more CSIS officers knowledgeable about the summary public statements issued  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
and in this case, and a list of all officers of CSIS, the RCMP or other public servants who have interviewed Mr. Jaballah, together with information about those interviews. Subsequently, I directed that the applicants produce an officer of CSIS, knowledgeable about the evidence  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
and in this case, to testify about the differences in the evidence and information as set out in the public summary statements issued and the documents released to Mr. Jaballah in the two cases.
[46]
In mid-December 2001, a representative of CSIS, identified only as "Mike" for purposes of the hearing, was called as a witness by counsel for the Ministers. He was examined and then cross-examined, with regard to what new information, not adduced  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, was before this Court, especially in the public summary statement issued to the respondent. His evidence was given with particular attention to a document entitled "Comparison of Summaries,
Jaballah No. 1
(February 5, 1999) and Jaballah No. 2 (August 14, 2001)" prepared by counsel for the Ministers. I will examine in some detail the information which Mike testified was new in this case, after first completing the description of these proceedings.
[47]
It is useful to refer briefly to the summary statements released to Mr. Jaballah  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
in 1999 and in this case. Each sets forth the information made public that is the basis for the respective opinion of the Ministers. The opinion certified in 2001 is the same as that certified in 1999, i.e., that Mr. Jaballah is considered inadmissible to Canada pursuant to the classifications set out in the same paragraphs of s. 19 of the
1985 Act
. Much of the public information included in the summary statement on which the current opinion is said to be based is the same as that which was before Mr. Justice Cullen. Some information now relied upon which was not available to the Ministers when the first certificate was issued, comes from Mr. Jaballah himself by his own evidence or testimony in his CRDD refugee application and hearing, or in his testimony adduced  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1.
It is the use of that latter evidence which led counsel for the respondent to allege misuse of the Court process by CSIS and by the applicant Ministers who now argue, in part at least in reliance on Mr. Jaballah's testimony  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, that the certificate now before the Court is reasonable.
[48]
I note for the record that the summary statement provided to Mr. Jaballah in this matter, and the documents released to him, were prepared and compiled before mid-August 2001, more than a month before the terrible events in New York and elsewhere in the United States on September 11, 2001, and well before the subsequent events in Afghanistan and more recently in Iraq and elsewhere in the world. While in his testimony in mid-December 2001, Mike referred to recent information received since September 11 without specifying its substance, no other information originating or reported after that September date was filed with the Court at any time, except for the exhibits introduced through Mike's testimony.
[49]
Those exhibits include copies of judgment/orders of United States Federal Court indictments and convictions, and diagrams to demonstrate CSIS' perceptions of communication links between cells of the Al Jihad/Al Qaida network, particularly in or about August 1998, when the United States embassies in Nairobi and in Dar es Salaam were targets of lethal car bombs on the same day, resulting in substantial loss of life. The latter exhibits are interesting and they depict communication links between Mr. Jaballah in Toronto and certain known Al Qaida operatives or centres, and between those centres in various countries. At least in part, those exhibits are said to be based on indictments in proceedings in United States courts in regard to the 1998 embassy bombings. I note that the judgment/orders resulting from those indictments, which were introduced in these proceedings through testimony of Mike for the Ministers, do not include reference to, or support allegations specifically relating to, Mr. Jaballah. There is no reference to these perceived communication links in the summary of the Ministers' case, either the original or the supplementary summary referred to in these Reasons. The diagrams in themselves are of no weight as evidence and insofar as they are based on information available to the Ministers before November 1, 1999, they are not based on "new" information, not available or provided  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
.
5. Efforts To Identify "new" Information
[50]
When the two summary statements, issued  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
and in this case, were compared by counsel for Mr. Jaballah, he urged that there is relatively little different information provided to support the same opinion of the Ministers on this second occasion. Indeed, for Mr. Jaballah it is said that there is no significant new evidence that could warrant a different determination from that reached  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
.
[51]
That position was urged upon the Court following the testimony and cross-examination of Mike in December 2001. Counsel for the respondent had earlier asked a series of questions in cross-examination that led to confirmation by Mike that any allegations of involvement of Mr. Jaballah, and of his perceived relationships with others, were in essence similar to those alleged by the Ministers as the basis for their certified opinion  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
. In re-examination counsel for the Ministers asked a closing question which led to questions by the Court and by counsel for Mr. Jaballah in further cross-examination, as follows (transcript, December 18, 2001, at pp. 662-667):
"Mr. Batt [for the Ministers]:
Q. Mike, I take it that in relation to the overall responses that you have given your position is that there is new information and that new information casts a different light on the old information. Would that be a correct summation of what you have been saying for the last two days?
A. That would be correct, yes.
The Court: ... I am not sure what the implications of that answer are, and it may be that I should not be asking you but should be awaiting counsel's submissions on it.
I want to be fairly clear in my own mind that the view taken relates to new information to which Mr. Jaballah might be expected to respond. I am not sure whether that arises from your response which says that it is new light on old information. That may not be what you said but, if it is, then it is troubling. What do you mean by "new light?"
The Witness: The allegations, my lord, certainly remain the same. The activities of the individuals that Mr. Jaballah was in contact with and was associated with - we did not have all the information of those individuals and their activities and the meaning of their contact with Mr. Jaballah. With the recent investigations that have been carried out additional information has come up on those individuals and what they were actually involved in.
The Court: But they are not here.
The Witness: I am trying to think of how else I can phrase it.
The different terrorist incidences that have taken place, mainly the one that took place in East Africa in 1998 - there is additional information that has since surfaced on which individuals were involved and to what extent they were involved and how they were interconnected with each other. It is that information, my lord, that has given a clearer focus as to what actually took place in these operations, who was responsible for what, how the communications between those different cells actually took place, and who was involved in those communications.
The Court: Thank you. Each of you has an opportunity to comment or to question Mike if you wish arising out of my question.
Mr. Galati [for Mr. Jaballah]:
Q. I just have one question, my lord.
FURTHER CROSS-EXAMINATION
. . . . .
Mr. Galati [for Mr. Jaballah)]:
Q. The answers you gave during your cross-examination with me with respect to nothing new about the allegations or no allegation or direct link to those activities of those other members to Mr. Jaballah still hold. Right?
A. Mr. Jaballah had contact with those individuals at the time that they were operationally active.
Q. I understand that. That was dealt with in 1999. My question is: Given your answer to Mr. Justice MacKay, your answers still hold, for instance, that he is not alleged to have been linked to the USS Cole and the other activities or the structure of the Al Jihad which you now set out as new.
A. Not to the USS Cole, no.
Q. What I am saying is that your answers of today still stand where I pointed you to no new allegations or no direct link or no mention in the transcripts in the U.S. or the U.K. Correct?
A. On the direct link issue, it is the association that Mr. Jaballah had with these different individuals. The role that he played with those individuals is basically the focus of what we are interested in.
Q. But my point is that it is the same contact and role that Mr. Justice Cullen reviewed. It is not a new role that you are alleging post 1999. Correct?
A. We were aware of the contacts. We were not aware of the content of those contacts.
Q. What I am saying is that you are not alleging new contacts 1999 to 2001.
A. I think there is just the one that we mention there.
Q. You are only suggesting Mahjoub.
A. No, there was also the issue of Mr. Al Deek. That is new information. It is sort of on a separate issue.
Q. My point is: But not with respect to the London people.
A. The new information on the London people came out of the investigation on the activities of those individuals.
Q. I understand that, but you are not suggesting that there is new information that shows Mr. Jaballah in 2000 and 2001 renewing contacts with the London people.
A. That would be correct.
Q. There is no such information.
A. That is correct.
Q. All the information with respect to the London people is old stuff.
A. The contact with them, yes."
[52]
At the conclusion of the examination of Mike on December 18, 2001, the Court adjourned, to meet again on January 8, 2002 for submissions of the parties concerning that evidence, which completed the case for the Ministers. On the latter day, counsel for the applicants addressed eight matters raised by the evidence of Mike which were characterized as new information upon which the certificate of the Ministers was based in this case, which information was not before Mr. Justice Cullen in 1999. Counsel for the respondent again urged that he could not properly assist or advise his client unless the information claimed to be new before this Court could be better identified than was provided by the testimony of Mike and the Ministers' submissions relating to that testimony.
[53]
Thereafter, in January and early February 2002, I again convened hearings in camera and ex parte with counsel and a representative of CSIS, on five occasions, (January 10, 15, 25, 31 and February 4, 2002), all to direct the production of a further summary statement concerning the basis of the certified opinion of the Ministers which was intended, by emphasis in the text, to indicate clearly the information now available that was said to be new in that it was not before Mr. Justice Cullen, and was not withheld for security reasons. Further, I reviewed all documents filed with the Court, both those in the public record which were released to Mr. Jaballah in six binders in August 2001, and the classified documents not released, to identify which of those were considered to be new by the Ministers. A list of "new" documents among those in the public record in this case, which were not provided  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, was provided to counsel. I considered again those documents not previously released on national security grounds and confirmed for myself that these should continue to be held without disclosure to Mr. Jaballah, in accord with paragraph 40.1(5)(d) of the
1985 Act
. By telephone conferences with counsel for both parties on January 15, 31 and February 8, I sought to keep counsel for the respondent informed of progress and involved in scheduling further hearings.
[54]
As a result of those in camera hearings I issued directions dated February 5, 2002. Those directions provided for a further statement entitled "Unclassified Supplementary Summary of Information Relating to Mahmoud Jaballah (Jaballah No. 2), February 4, 2002", which highlighted information on the public record which is considered by the Ministers to be new. The directions also listed documents provided to the respondent that were not before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
. Arrangements were then made for public hearings to resume on March 11 and continue, to ensure, in accord with paragraph 40.1(4)(c) of the
1985 Act
, that Mr. Jaballah had a reasonable opportunity to be heard, before assessing the reasonableness of the certificate issued by the applicant Ministers on the basis of the evidence and information available to the Court.
6. Withdrawal Of Counsel For The Respondent
[55]
When the hearing resumed on March 11, as counsel for the parties had agreed and the Court had directed, for the purpose of hearing any evidence or submissions the respondent Mr. Jaballah might make in response to the information provided to him, his counsel requested the opportunity to address the Court on a preliminary matter. Counsel then advised that, having consulted with his client Mr. Jaballah, having sought advice from other experienced counsel, and having reviewed these proceedings up to that time, he had come to the conclusion that he then described as follows (transcript, March 11, 2002, pp. 879-883):
"This backdrop, my lord, leads me to my dilemma on which I have sought various - if I could add them all up, maybe 80 to 120 years of experience of barristers who all agree with me that I have no choice but to advise you that, when I took my barrister's oath in the Province of Ontario, apart from swearing allegiance to Her Majesty the Queen on my barrister's oath as an officer of this Court and all the other courts, by my oath as a barrister I am also required to 'not pervert the law but in all things to conduct myself truly and with integrity' and further 'to maintain the Queen's interest and interests of the citizens and uphold and maintain them according to the Constitution and law of this province.'
"My rules of professional conduct and ethics in Ontario further require that I 'not engage in conduct involving dishonesty, not engage in conduct that is prejudicial to the administration of justice' and 'not knowingly assist a judge or judicial officer in conduct that is in violation of applicable rules of judicial conduct or other law,' which we all understand in the province to include the Constitution and binding international treaties.
"In essence, my lord, it is my view as a barrister that it would breach the essence of my oath as a barrister, as historically and statutorily understood, as well as the rules of professional conduct. to participate any further as a barrister and officer of Her Majesty's Court in this process for the following reasons:
1. The proceedings against Jaballah in total, if you look  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
and the present proceeding, clearly manifest the fact that the court room has turned into the police station. The proceedings  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
were an investigative, interrogatory and evidentiary basis for Jaballah No. 2.
2. While my presence here would lend to the decorum of a fair and independent judicial review in fact and in substance, in my review of my own barrister's oath, I sincerely and honestly conclude that my presence here would be a sham and a detriment to my client and a complete breach of my oath and rules of professional conduct.
"While CSIS and the Solicitor General can jump up and down and pretend all they want about the soundness of the procedure here, the preliminary issues, the process and the invocation of national security as a bar to revealing the case against Jaballah and the case which Jaballah must meet has never been balanced or articulated by this Court or any other court and never adjudicated by this Court nor by the Supreme Court of Canada. We have been blindly accepting the word and procedure invoked by CSIS and the security forces despite the fact that there is no clear statutory outline of that process.
"While this in camera, secret procedure without any judicial balance or articulation may be acceptable to the Court, constitutional and international norms of natural justice apply equally to this Court and procedure and, more important for myself, to my oath as a barrister, as I historically understand it from the Magna Carta to the present day.
"Because they are embarrassingly absent, I as a barrister with an independent oath to keep and maintain refuse to participate in these proceedings any further. My oath would not forgive me; my conscience would not forgive me; and history would not forgive me.
"It is my humble view, my lord, that Nuremberg principles apply equally to Canada and the Canadian judicial systems as they do anywhere else. Japanese and Italo-Canadians were victims of what in my view were crimes against humanity during the Second World War. I will not participate or be complicit in what in my view is a similar injustice against the Muslims and Arabs by participating in this proceeding as structured.
"Mr. Jaballah and his family have filed suit in the Ontario court. I will pursue their rights from this Court's determination in other fora, but I am taking my leave from these proceedings, and Mr. Jaballah stands silent in the capable, but secret, hands of your lordship and CSIS counsel.
"I cannot proceed any further, my lord. It is as simple as that. I refuse to."
[56]
After further brief discussion with the Court, counsel for Mr. Jaballah, and counsel's legal advisor for that day, withdrew from the courtroom.
7. Ensuring Opportunity For The Respondent To Be Heard
[57]
The Court then called Mr. Jaballah to respond for himself, with the aid of an interpreter, to questions intended to assess his understanding of his position at that stage. The transcript records the pertinent portions of that process, as follows (transcript, March 11, 2002, pp. 888-893):
"THE COURT: Mr. Jaballah, we do need to know whether you wish to be represented by counsel. If you wish to take a little time to think about where you may go at this stage of the game, I will give you some time, but not very much. All I mean by that is that, if you want to represent yourself, you will need some time to do that. If you decide that you want to be represented by other counsel, then you will need to take some time to arrange for that.
I need to know by 12 noon whether or not you wish to proceed on your own behalf or whether you wish to try to retain other counsel. I am assuming - and you do not need to answer this question. I am assuming that Mr. Galati as your counsel may have advised you in advance of what he was going to do this morning, but who knows. I am not asking you to answer that.
Would you like to take a little time? Would you like to take the stand?
MR. JABALLAH (through interpreter): Mr. Galati is my counsel, my lawyer, and I would like to follow his instructions. I agree to his position. I agree to the position that my lawyer took this morning, and whatever he says represents what I believe with regard to the evidence that was presented to the Court.
The same evidence that was presented in these proceedings is the same as what was presented two years ago. I did not see anything that I could answer or give my response to.
There were two issues, one with regard to the mailing box and the other one with regard to the telephone number that was found on Mr. Mahjoub. On these two issues I have nothing to answer.
THE COURT: I want to be sure that I understand Mr. Jaballah's position. He says that Mr. Galati is his counsel and he wishes to act in accordance with his advice.
MR. JABALLAH (Through Interpreter): Yes.
THE COURT: My question is: Does he want advice from Mr. Galati now?
MR. JABALLAH (Through Interpreter): He advised me earlier, and I agreed to what he said, and I am following his advice. He is an expert in law. I have nothing else to say.
THE COURT: Do I understand that Mr. Jaballah is aware that Mr. Galati has been advised that there is a significant number -and I don't have the total in my head - of new documents which were not before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
?
MR. JABALLAH (Through Interpreter): Yes, and Mr. Galati reviewed these new pieces of evidence, and he reviewed this with me. He said that there was nothing new in these pieces of evidence. He also reviewed this evidence with me, and we both agreed that the only new evidence refers to the telephone number that was found on Mahjoub, of which I have nothing to say, and the mailing box which was in fact not used, and that was evidence in the first hearing.
Everything the lawyer reviewed is the subject of my testimony in the first hearing. I don't know of anything new that I can say in this proceeding.
THE COURT: Mr. Batt, do you have any questions, not about anything other than the position of Mr. Jaballah at this stage? Do you have any questions about that and nothing else?
MR. BATT: I just want to be sure that he understands that this is his reasonable opportunity to be heard. He has a right to state his position if he wishes to do so. As I understand it, if he does not, then we can move to ask your lordship to uphold the certificate as being reasonable and that deportation proceedings may follow. As long as he understands that, I think that is the key.
MR. JABALLAH (Through Interpreter): The lawyer is my counsel, and I follow his instructions as long as he is the one who is expert on the law. I am not an expert on the law. It is my lawyer who says that this is what should take place. That is his opinion, and I agree.
MR. BATT: My lord, the concern that I have is that, from my perception, the statement that Mr. Galati made this morning was a statement pertaining to Mr. Galati's personal position in light of these proceedings. That does not necessarily pertain to Mr. Jaballah's best interests. It may well be that he should have some advice from a different counsel who has a different perception of the proceedings than Mr. Galati who has basically stepped away from the legislation, as far as I can see.
MR. JABALLAH (Through Interpreter): Again, my position is that I follow my lawyer's instructions. He is the expert on the law and, as he sees it, there is nothing new in the evidence. I am following his instructions and his advice.
THE COURT: Thank you. I do want to ask just once more - Mr. Jaballah may not want advice from anyone else. Does he wish to respond to anything on his own behalf?
MR. JABALLAH (Through Interpreter): I cannot represent myself in this proceeding. I have my lawyer and I follow his advice and instructions.
THE COURT: Mr. Batt, if you have any further submissions - I have no further questions of Mr. Jaballah. Do you have any further questions or submissions you wish to make?
MR. BATT: In relation to Mr. Jaballah's status?
THE COURT: No. I understand that Mr. Jaballah does not wish to retain other counsel, that he has decided to accept the advice of previous counsel to make no representations on his own behalf, and that he accepts that this has been his opportunity under the statute to respond to the position of the Ministers."
[58]
I find that Mr. Jaballah declined the opportunity to seek services of another counsel. I also find that he declined the opportunity to make any submissions on his own behalf, except that he acknowledged there was information described as new by the Ministers that had not been before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
in respect of two matters. The first, of which he said he knew nothing, was information that his Toronto telephone number was found on a paper in possession of one Mahjoub, a person also certified under s. 40.1 of the
1985 Act
by the applicant Ministers as inadmissible to Canada. In that case, the certificate was found reasonable by Mr. Justice Nadon in October 2001 (see
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 212 F.T.R. 42 (T.D.). The second, concerned Mr. Jaballah's rental of a postal box, a matter he had testified about  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, which box he professed, as he had in 1999, not to have used. In all other respects the information considered by the Ministers to be new, was not new in Mr. Jaballah's view since that information was before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, a view reached after consultation with his counsel, who had now withdrawn.
[59]
I am satisfied that Mr. Jaballah understood that this was his opportunity to be heard with respect to the opinion of the Ministers and to the information on which that opinion was based, so far as that information was made known to him, in accord with paragraph 40.1(4)(c) of the
1985 Act
, now s. 78(i) of
IRPA
. That information was initially provided by the summary statement and documents provided in August 2001. Thereafter, the testimony and cross-examination of Mike in December 2001, submissions of the Ministers related to Mike's testimony in January 2002, and the Court's directions in February 2002, were all for the purpose of disclosing to Mr. Jaballah the information, on which the Ministers' opinion is based, that is said by them to be new in the sense that it was not before Mr. Justice Cullen in 1999  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
.
[60]
I find that Mr. Jaballah was provided with an opportunity to be heard regarding the issue of his inadmissibility and the information on the public record upon which the certified opinion of the Ministers is based, in accord with s. 78(i) of
IRPA
. I find also that he declined to exercise his right to use that opportunity. He did not respond in any detailed or significant manner to the information and evidence before the Court.
8. Reviewing Information And Evidence, 1999 and 2001
[61]
Following the Court's questioning of Mr. Jaballah at the hearing on March 11, 2002, counsel for the Ministers, by oral motion, proposed that the Court find the certificate signed by the Ministers on August 13, 2001, is reasonable, following decisions of the Court in
Al Sayegh, Re
(1997), 131 F.T.R. 7 (T.D.) and
Almrei, Re
, [2001] F.T.R. Uned. 917 (T.D.), 2001 FCT 1288. In each of those cases the judge concerned found the certificate at issue to be reasonable, after the person concerned declined to exercise the opportunity to explain or respond to the information provided and to the Ministers' opinion.
[62]
I declined to allow the Crown's motion at that stage since, in my view this case required the Court to determine whether there is new information, not available or before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, that supports a different conclusion about the opinion of the Ministers in this case than was reached by Cullen, J., in that earlier decision. I had made no determination of this matter prior to the March 11 hearing, and the directions of February 5 specified only what the applicant Ministers, not the Court, considered to be new information. At the hearing on March 11, I noted that I must assess the information which has been provided to Mr. Jaballah, and the information which is not public, in order to assess whether the opinion certified by the Ministers is reasonable. To do so, in view of the principles of res judicata and abuse of process, and the opinion expressed for him and by Mr. Jaballah himself, I must determine whether there is information before the Court that was not before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, which supports the opinion of the applicants certified in August 2001.
9. Delay In Determining Reasonableness Of Certificate
[63]
As designated judge I regret that determining the ultimate issue has been delayed. On my part, it simply required more time than I anticipated to fully compare the information that was before Mr. Justice Cullen  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
and the information that is before the Court in this proceeding. Until that task was completed, I could not fairly conclude whether there was new information before the Court, different from that  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, and that Mr. Jaballah's interests have been taken into account as fully and fairly as could be done in light of the general submission of his counsel, before he withdrew, and subsequently of Mr. Jaballah himself, that, in effect, no new evidence of significance is before the Court in this proceeding. No specific submissions were made by the respondent in relation to the information before the Court apart from the general response that it is not new.
[64]
As my review of the information filed in relation to both the 1999 and 2001 certificates, and my review of the record and submissions made in this case was about completed, and these Reasons were in an advanced draft, counsel for Mr. Jaballah, who had withdrawn from these proceedings on March 11, 2002, wrote to the Court on July 1, 2002, to request suspension of these proceedings pursuant to s. 79(1) of
IRPA
, which
Act
came into force on June 28, 2002 (SI/2002-97). As earlier referred to, the proceedings were suspended, and subsequent developments were reviewed in
Re Jaballah
2002 F.C.T. 1046, supra, and in Part I of these Reasons. The result of those developments is the Court's determination to resume the proceedings and to consider its original and primary responsibility to assess the reasonableness of the Ministers' certificate dated August 2001.
10. The Process Condemned By Counsel For Mr. Jaballah
[65]
Before turning to the issues following notice of the Minister's decision on the application for protection I deal with one other matter of concern, that is, the condemnation of the process herein by counsel for Mr. Jaballah before he withdrew from the proceedings on March 11, 2002.
[66]
At that time I asked counsel for Mr. Jaballah for further explanation since he had earlier agreed to the date for resumption of hearings, for the presentation of testimony or evidence in response to the opinion of the Ministers.
[67]
In essence, counsel said he did not know the case to be met and could not advise his client. In his words (transcript, March 11, 2002, pp. 883-886):
"... I don't know what the case is to meet. I am sure you do and I am sure my friend does, because you have seen everything. I am in the dark. Quite frankly, as I see my barrister's oath and I see the judicial system historically as it has evolved, we have, in my humble view, without any disrespect intended -- judges in Germany did it; judges and the lawyers in other places did it. Historically, they thought they were doing the right thing. In reviewing my oath in these proceedings, I think this is an abomination and a breach of natural justice, and we have crossed the line to the point where the Court is being used as an investigative tool by the security forces without a judicial balance and fairness to the person in front of the Court.
. . . . .
"I am at a complete loss to know what I would do for him except to lend credence to the notion that this is a fair and independent adjudication of the allegations against him, which as a barrister under my oath I cannot conclude in all fairness.
"I have my own oath to live with as a barrister.
"We often use the term 'officer of the court,' and it usually is meaningless. However, in this case it means something to me. I took an oath -
. . . . .
"... I am saying that the process that the Court is providing has been invented by CSIS in flagrant, common-sense opposition to the statutory scheme. ...
. . . . .
"I don't see where there is not a judicial balancing act on the pieces of evidence that are supposed to be withheld. There is a presumption in the
Act
that disclosure will flow unless it is injurious to national security or others.
"The Supreme Court of Canada has made it very clear what the test for that is. I have not been a participant in that test on any of the some 200 documents that are being withheld. I don't know how that is balanced. To balance that in secret and for me to pretend and second-guess and try to guess what the balance was and what the evidence is, I am not acting as a barrister. I am acting as decorum."
[68]
Those comments of counsel did little to assist the Court other than to indicate his frustration. I have described the process followed in this case in considerable detail for the record. I believe this Court consistently followed the process provided by Parliament in paragraphs 40.1(4)(a), (b) and (c), and paragraphs 40.1(5.1)(b) and (d) of the
1985 Act
as it then applied, a process now provided essentially by s. 78 of
IRPA
. In addition, the Court directed and heard testimony and cross-examination of Mike, as a representative of CSIS, and submissions related to that, and it issued directions including a highlighted supplementary summary and a list of "new" documents, all intended to clarify for Mr. Jaballah and his counsel, information upon which the opinion of the Ministers is based that they consider to be new in the sense that it was not before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
. These proceedings, until March 2002, were concerned, apart from other preliminary issues, to clarify what information before the Court is said by the Ministers to be new and to ensure that Mr. Jaballah, as the person named in the Ministers' certificate, would have a reasonable opportunity to be heard in relation to their opinion and the information on which it is based.
[69]
In the circumstances, I do not accept counsel's description that this Court has been used by CSIS as an investigative tool, or that reference by the Ministers in this case to information adduced  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
indicates that the earlier proceedings before Cullen, J., were simply an investigation leading to this proceeding. As for counsel's concern about disclosure, as I read the applicable legislation there is a clear exception to the principle that information provided to the Court by the Ministers is to be disclosed to the person concerned, and that is where the Court, pursuant to paragraphs 40(4)(a) and (b) or (5.1) of the
1985 Act
, now s. 78(g) of
IRPA
, determines, in the absence of the person named in the certificate and his or her counsel, that the information should not be disclosed on the grounds that disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of persons. Having followed the statutory provisions and taken special steps with assistance of counsel for the Ministers, to identify what the applicants consider to be new information, this Court does not accept the condemnation of these proceedings by Mr. Jaballah's counsel. I do acknowledge that under
IRPA
a person who is the subject of the Ministers' certificate and his or her counsel may not see the information relied upon by the Ministers, an invidious position but one provided by Act of Parliament.
11. The Reasonableness Of The Certificate Of The Ministers
a) The test for assessing what information is new
[70]
No submissions were made on behalf of or by Mr. Jaballah concerning the appropriate test for considering what information is new, or about the effective date for that test, or about the implications of the Ministers' view that information before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
should now be reconsidered in the new light shed upon it by new information. With no submissions on behalf of Mr. Jaballah, I did not request specific submissions from counsel for the applicants in regard to the test for identifying new information. Thus the following discussion of the appropriate test to apply in this case evolved without specific advice or submissions of counsel for either party.
[71]
By s. 80(1) of
IRPA
, I am to determine whether the certificate of the Ministers is reasonable on the basis of the evidence and information available to the Court, including that produced to Mr. Jaballah, and that filed but withheld from release to him on security grounds. For that determination, the Court may consider information that in its opinion is appropriate, even if that is inadmissible as evidence in ordinary civil or criminal proceedings, and the decision may be based on that information (paragraph 78(j) of
IRPA
). In sum, the Court is not bound by traditional rules of evidence and the designated judge makes her or his determination on the information and evidence filed in the Court upon which the certificate is said to be based.
[72]
The determination required is not a question of fact in the ordinary sense but rather it is an assessment of the reasonableness of the certified opinion made in the exercise of Ministerial discretion, in light of the information on which the opinion is based. While that seems obvious and is in accord with the statute, in the case where a second security certificate of the same opinion is issued after one has been quashed, this Court accepts that the principles of res judicata, of issue or cause of action estoppel, or of abuse of process, may be applicable. Information simply repeated, without any significant change from the proceedings  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, should not now be reassessed in considering the reasonableness of the Ministers' second certified opinion, in my view. If there is no new information the principle of res judicata or of abuse of process would apply to preclude a different determination from that reached  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
.
[73]
Section 40.1 of the
1985 Act
contained no provision for a second certified opinion of the Ministers to be filed concerning one person, after a first opinion has been found unreasonable, and similarly, s. 77 of
IRPA
contains no such provision. Nevertheless, in my opinion, express authorization to file a second certified opinion is not required. These proceedings are exceptional, designed as they are to provide for dealing with cases where interests of national security, inter alia, arise as a result of the background or activities of non-Canadians who seek admission to Canada. In my opinion, that exceptional process is not subject to the principle that parties to litigation are limited to bring one proceeding, at least where new evidence or information is presented.
[74]
If it were otherwise, the continuing security interests of the state, assessed and re-assessed on the basis of a mosaic of information gathered from various sources over time, might be compromised. The interests of the individual, the interests of fairness of process and the avoidance of its abuse are served by applying, as in the case of regular judicial proceedings, the principles of res judicata, of issue and cause of action estoppel, and of abuse of process.
[75]
By analogy to regular civil judicial proceedings, it seems appropriate to assess "new information" in any second proceeding by reference to the rules and jurisprudence concerning the reception of fresh evidence to consider varying a matter that has already been determined, or to propose a new trial for a matter decided.
[76]
The principle underlying Rule 399(2) of the
Federal Court Rules, 1998
, which provides for the setting aside or variance of an order "by reason of a matter that arose or was discovered subsequent to the making of the order", in my view, is appropriate by analogy to apply in this case to assess what is new evidence. Admittedly, there is no motion before the Court to set aside or vary the order made by Mr. Justice Cullen  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
.
[77]
In
671122  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 12, Mr. Justice Major, in upholding the decision of a trial judge not to reopen a trial, confirmed that the appropriate test for determining whether new evidence warrants a new trial is whether evidence discovered after trial, if presented at trial would probably have changed the result and whether the evidence could have been obtained before completion of trial by the exercise of reasonable diligence. Further, Major, J., quoted the following comments of Lord Denning in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.):
"... to justify the reception of fresh evidence or a new trial, three conditions must be fulfilled: first, it must be shown that the evidence could not have been obtained with reasonable diligence for use at the trial; secondly, the evidence must be such that, if given, it would probably have an important influence on the result of the case, though it need not be decisive; thirdly, the evidence must be such as is presumably to be believed, or in other words, it must be apparently credible, though it need not be incontrovertible."
[78]
Those same principles, and in particular that the new evidence would probably have an important influence on the result of the case, were adopted by Mr. Justice Teitelbaum of this Court in considering judicial review of a decision by the Veterans Review and Appeal Board in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; (1997), 129 F.T.R. 286 (T.D.), at paras. 26-27.
[79]
In my opinion, applying by analogy these principles, concerning the admission of new evidence after a matter has been determined, would lead to the following standard or test as appropriate for what should here be considered new information.
(i) Relevant information that came into existence or came to the knowledge of the applicant Ministers after November 1, 1999, when proceedings concerning the first certified opinion terminated with the decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, is new information.
Thus, information that was before the Court by testimony or otherwise in that case, or which was then available to the Ministers but not adduced before Mr. Justice Cullen, is not considered new information for this hearing and determination.
(ii) "Partially new information" obtained by the Ministers after November 1, 1999, which is relevant and sheds new light on information known or reasonably obtainable before that date if the totality of the information, the new and the related information from
Jaballah No. 1
, provides a different or fuller understanding of the circumstances, may have weight depending upon findings of Cullen, J., in that case.
For example, new information about the role and activities of persons or offices active in Al Jihad, with whom it is believed Mr. Jaballah had contact, may be given weight unless the findings of Mr. Justice Cullen specifically concluded that contact was not established. The principal ground for the decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
was Mr. Justice Cullen's assessment that the evidence adduced from and on behalf of Mr. Jaballah was credible, a general finding. That includes Mr. Jaballah's evidence that he did not know certain persons whose names were put to him. It also includes his admission that he did have contact with certain others and in particular with the London offices of an organization, now said to be a front for AJ and Al Qaida.
[80]
I turn to assessing the information before the Court, first the information on the public record that I consider to be new, and second, the partially new information shedding new light on earlier known information, that was not before the Court or available to the Ministers before the decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
.
b) Information New To The Ministers After November 1, 1999
[81]
There is information before this Court, which reached the Ministers after November 1, 1999, when the first certificate was quashed by order of Cullen, J., and which is included in the public record made available to Mr. Jaballah in the summary statement and documents provided in August 2001, in the testimony of Mike and in the supplementary summary statement issued with directions of the Court on February 5, 2002.
[82]
This information concerns the following matters of significance.
1) An Interpol notice, published July 13, 1999, which reached CSIS, acting for the Solicitor General, only on November 29, 1999, concerning an individual identified as Mahmoud Said, also known as Mahmoud Al Sayed Gaballah Said, who was wanted by the Government of Egypt under a warrant alleging that he was a member of a terrorist organization responsible for planning and logistics, the supply of weapons and explosives to, and the escape of, active terrorists. In August 2000 CSIS was provided with a certified comparison by an RCMP expert, of fingerprints taken in 1996 by Immigration Canada on his arrival in Canada of Mahmoud Es-Sayyid Jaballah, the respondent, and prints provided by the Government of Egypt to Interpol for its July 1999 notice. That certified comparison indicates that both sets of fingerprints are those of the same person. Absent any explanation, the clear inference is that Mr. Jaballah is the person whose fingerprints were circulated with the Interpol notice and further, that Mr. Jaballah is the person subject to a warrant for arrest in Egypt, though the Interpol notice is said to concern a person under another name. Mr. Jaballah did not respond to this information, although I note this notice was apparently relied upon as one basis for his application for protection in July 2002, at least as referred to in correspondence from his counsel.
2) Information received since November 1999 reports that Mr. Jaballah spent some time in 1993-94 in Afghanistan, a country he denied having visited when he testified  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
. Mr. Jaballah did not respond to this information that he had been in Afghanistan.
3) Information arose from the arrest of Mohamed Zeki Mahjoub, a person arrested in 2000 under s. 40.1 of the
1985 Act
, and found by Mr. Justice Nadon, in 2001, to be subject to a security certificate which was held to be reasonable in that case. Mr. Mahjoub was described by Mike, in his testimony before me, to be an AJ operative with the militant faction known as Vanguards of Conquest and also a member of the Shura Council or governing body of AJ. When arrested in 2000, Mr. Mahjoub had in his possession a paper with a name that he acknowledged referred to Mr. Jaballah and which also had written on it the telephone number of Mr. Jaballah. In this proceeding Mr. Jaballah's response to this information, at the hearing in March following withdrawal of his counsel, was that he "had nothing to say" about this.
4) Information was received by the Ministers about use of a post office box rented in Toronto by Mr. Jaballah in another name, which box was disclosed by Mr. Jaballah himself in the course of his testimony  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
. Then he said the box had been rented to provide an anonymous box to which his family in Egypt could communicate without indicating his whereabouts, but the box had not been used. Information now available to the Ministers is that correspondence intended for Mr. Jaballah from sources in Canada and abroad had been received at that box on a number of occasions up to June 1999. In testifying about this, Mike described the evidence of use as "physical evidence". In response to this Mr. Jaballah, in brief testimony through an interpreter after his counsel had withdrawn in this proceeding, said only the "... mailing box ... was in fact not used, and that was evidence in the first hearing".
5) A second matter concerning Mr. Jaballah's post office box is that, while there is no information about its use from another identified potential correspondent, Mike testified that Khalil Said Deek, a member of the information committee of AJ, and believed to be an active operative in Osama bin Laden's Al Qaida, when arrested in Pakistan and deported to Jordan, in December 1999, possessed a computer disk which contained, as a contact for AJ's publications, the address of Mr. Jaballah's post office box in Toronto. Mr. Jaballah did not respond to this information.
c) Information Partly New To The Ministers In 2001
[83]
In addition, the applicant Ministers have much new information about AJ and Al Qaida operations and the activities of a number of their leaders. It is primarily the new information in respect of these matters that is said by the applicant Ministers to cast new light and understanding on information that may have been available to them prior to November 1, 1999, about those people, their activities and their relationship to Mr. Jaballah. This information, which I describe, for purposes of these Reasons, as "partially new" information, concerns:
1) The place and role of Ayman Al Zawaheri, as leader of the AJ, in the integration of AJ operations with Al Qaida, and as a principal aide to Osama bin Laden. Mr. Jaballah is believed to have had contact with Al Zawaheri while in Yemen or Pakistan;
2) The status of Ibrahim Eidarous and Abdel Al Bari as senior operatives of AJ and Al Qaida in London, both persons with whom Mr. Jaballah is believed to have had contact by telephone in the summer of 1998, and of their roles in claiming responsibility of AJ for the bombing of United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in August 1998. While these hearings continued, at least into the early months of 2002, both these men had been in detention, involved in ongoing judicial proceedings, in England, and subject to a request for extradition from there to answer to indictments in the United States for their parts in the embassy bombings in 1998 in East Africa;
3) Kassun Daher, a Canadian citizen and member of an extremist organization based in Lebanon, was arrested in February 2000, and is held in detention in Lebanon. In
Jaballah No. 1
, Mr. Jaballah's contacts with Daher in Canada and with others here, who were believed to be involved with AJ activities, were explored, but he then acknowledged limited contacts but denied knowledge of any terrorist activities of Daher and the others. Daher's involvement in those activities was only fully understood by CSIS on information from elsewhere following Daher's arrest. Mr. Jaballah's contacts with Daher in Canada and after Daher left Canada give rise to concern on the part of CSIS;
4) The role of Thirwat Salah Shehata whom Mr. Jaballah acknowledged, in testimony  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, he had once known as his lawyer in Egypt in the 1980's. Information new to the Ministers indicates Shehata is a leader of the AJ and of Al Qaida, for a time he was one of a committee of three leading AJ, head of its security committee and a member of its governing body, the Majlis Shura. While Mr. Jaballah claimed ignorance of Shehata's activities, there is new information of a close relationship between the two men including contact on behalf of Mr. Jaballah with Shehata in Yemen or Pakistan;
5) The role of the AJ-Al Qaida centres in Baku, Azerbaijan, and in London, England, particularly their roles as communications centres in relation to the bombings of United States' embassies in East Africa in August 1998, and new information about AJ's internal security operations is such that it is believed anyone in contact with those centres would be a part of the larger AJ operations. Mr. Jaballah is said, from his own testimony  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, to have had contact with the London office of the International Office for the Defence of the Egyptian People (the "I.O.D.E.P"), perhaps some 20 times in the summer of 1998, seeking information in support of his refugee claim in Canada or other general information. That office was located at the address of AJ operations in London, operated, it appears from partially new information, under supervision of Eidirous and Al Bari at the time of Jaballah's contacts with London in 1998. It is believed that office was a cover for AJ operations in London and it was implicated as a communications centre for activities related to the conspiracy for bombing of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.
[84]
Very little of this partially new information makes specific reference to the respondent, Mr. Jaballah. At the hearings before Mr. Justice Cullen, Mr. Jaballah's evidence was that his contacts with any of the persons here referred to, or with the London office of the I.O.D.E.P., were made without his knowledge of any terrorist activities or similar involvement of these persons or of the London office. It is the view of the Ministers in light of the partially new information that anyone in contact with Messrs. Al Zawaheri, Eidirous, Al Bari, Shehata, Daher, and with the London office of the I.O.D.E.P., as Mr. Jaballah is believed to have been, and as he admits in some respects, would be involved with the extremist organizations with which those persons and that office were known to be associated. That perception is based in part on new information about AJ and Al Qaida operations carried on through local cells, with contacts limited to a few key persons, for reasons of internal security of those operations.
[85]
There is no response by or on behalf of Mr. Jaballah to the perception of the Ministers, arising from his contacts with known AJ operatives and from the new information concerning the activities and the methods of AJ operations, that he has been involved in AJ operations before and after his arrival in Canada. Further, there is no response to or explanation of his contacts with those persons and with the London office of AJ apart from that in his testimony  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
. That testimony was basically accepted by Mr. Justice Cullen as credible, but his decision was made with substantially less information before the Court than is now the case, particularly about AJ operations, their organization and methods to maintain internal security. The inference drawn and now strengthened by the new information is one adverse to Mr. Jaballah, that unless he was a senior AJ-Al Qaida operative, he could not have had contact with so many others who were senior members and active in those organizations.
d) Conclusion Concerning New Information Before This Court
[86]
I conclude there is new information before this Court that was not before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
. Some of that information is significant in its direct implications for Mr. Jaballah, including the Interpol notice and the identification, by fingerprint comparison, of the person concerned in that notice as Mr. Jaballah, information that he had spent time in Afghanistan, the fact that his telephone number was found in Mr. Mahjoub's possession, the fact that his anonymously rented postal box had been used and that its address was found on a computer disk in the possession of an accused extremist detained in Jordan, and information that certain persons with whom Mr. Jaballah had contact were active operatives with senior responsibilities in AJ/Al Qaida, some of whom were involved in communications concerning the bombings in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.
[87]
That information, new to the Ministers and not before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
is all on the public record in the summary statements and documents provided to Mr. Jaballah, and by testimony of Mike. The decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
was rendered without the additional new information now before the Court, not disclosed to Mr. Jaballah because of concern for national security or the safety of others, which relates to the contacts between Mr. Jaballah and others involved in AJ operations. That information, not on the public record, in part contradicts the evidence Mr. Jaballah gave  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, and it could only be ignored if there were persuasive explanation on his part, explanation which only Mr. Jaballah could provide, but which he declined to do.
[88]
It is my opinion, considering only the public information that is before the Court that is new and significant, not ascertainable by the Ministers before November 1, 1999, that information, had it been available for the earlier proceedings, could well have led to a different conclusion  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
. That conclusion is reinforced by other new information before the Court that was not made public but was withheld from Mr. Jaballah on grounds that its disclosure would prejudice national security or the safety of others.
[89]
In these circumstances, the principles of res judicata, issue estoppel and abuse of process, perceived because this is a second proceeding relating to a second certificate, of the same opinion that was before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, have no application here.
e) Finding The Certificate Is Reasonable
[90]
As earlier noted and I now repeat, I find that, in accord with the statute as it then applied and with paragraph 78(1) of
IRPA
, Mr. Jaballah had a reasonable opportunity to be heard, to respond to the opinion certified by the Ministers on August 13, 2001 and to the information made available to him upon which the opinion is based. He did not respond to any of the significant new information before the Court, which was not before Mr. Justice Cullen  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
.
[91]
It was in these circumstances that counsel for the Ministers moved orally, at the hearing in March 2002, that the Court find the certificate of the Ministers in relation to Mr. Jaballah is reasonable.
[92]
As in
Al Sayegh (Re)
, [1997] F.C.J. No. 537 (T.D.), and
Re Almrei
, [2001] FCT 1288 (T.D.), where the person who is the object of the opinion of the Ministers, has the opportunity to respond to that opinion and to the information on which it is based, but declines to explain or respond, the Court is left to assess whether the certified opinion is reasonable on the only evidence that is before it.
[93]
The certified opinion is that Mr. Jaballah is inadmissible to Canada on grounds of security, in the words of s. 77(1) of
IRPA
. Those grounds, described in August 2001 under the provisions of then s. 19 of the
1985 Act
, now have their expression as subparagraphs 34(1)(b), (c) and (f) of
IRPA
.
[94]
I find that the information on the public record includes items that support the opinion of the Ministers as reasonable, particularly in the absence of explanation or response by Mr. Jaballah. I refer in particular to the Interpol notice, the finding of Mr. Jaballah's telephone number in the possession of Mr. Mahjoub when the latter was arrested, the information about the inclusion of Mr. Jaballah's postal box address in Toronto among information contained on a computer disk seized on the arrest of Mr. Deek in Jordan, the use of Mr. Jaballah's postal box despite his denial, the communication links or relationships between Mr. Jaballah and senior leaders of AJ or its London office, and the inference that only persons actively involved with senior leaders of the organization would have such access. All these matters, provided in the public record to Mr. Jaballah, in my opinion provide a reasonable basis for the opinion of the Ministers that Mr. Jaballah engaged or was engaging in or instigating subversion by force of any government, in this case the government of Egypt (within paragraph 34(1)(b) of
IRPA
), that he had engaged or was engaged in terrorism (within paragraph 34(1)(c) of
IRPA
), and that he is a member of an organization, in this case Al Jihad (AJ) that there are reasonable grounds to believe engages, has engaged or will engage in acts to subvert by force the government of Egypt or acts of terrorism (within paragraph 34(1)(f) of
IRPA
).
[95]
I note that the term "terrorism" as used in s. 19 of the
1985 Act
, and used similarly in s. 34 of
IRPA
is not a word that is unconstitutionally vague.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at para. 98, the Court commented:
"In our view, it may safely be concluded, following the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, that 'terrorism' in s. 19 of the
Act
includes any 'act intended to cause death or serious bodily injury to a civilian, or to any other person not taking an active part in the hostilities in a situation of armed conflict, when the purpose of such act, by its nature or context, is to intimidate a population, or to compel a government or an international organization to do or to abstain from doing any act'. This definition catches the essence of what the world understands by 'terrorism'. Particular cases on the fringes of terrorist activity will inevitably provoke disagreement. Parliament is not prevented from adopting more detailed or different definitions of terrorism. The issue here is whether the term as used in the
Immigration Act
is sufficiently certain to be workable, fair and constitutional. We believe that it is."
[96]
I note further that by P.C. SOR/2002-284, dated July 23, 2002 the Governor General in Council, acting pursuant to s. 83.05(1) of the
Criminal Code
as amended by S.C. 2001, c. 41, s. 4, upon the recommendation of the Solicitor General of Canada, enacted
Regulations Establishing a List of Entities
. Those
Regulations
by s. 1 provide a list of entities, which the regulations state there are reasonable grounds to believe, have knowingly carried out, attempted to carry out, participated in or facilitated terrorist activity, or are knowingly acting on behalf of, at the direction of, or in association with an entity that has knowingly carried out, attempted to carry out, participate in or facilitated a terrorist activity. The listed entities include Al Qaida, Al Jihad (AJ) also known as Egyptian Islamic Jihad (EIJ), and the Vanguards of Conquest.
[97]
The information before the Ministers and in the public record provided by the Court to Mr. Jaballah, in my opinion, clearly supports the certified opinion of the Ministers as reasonable, that Mr. Jaballah is inadmissible to Canada on security grounds, as earlier concluded in relation to grounds included in paragraphs 34(1)(b), (c) and (f) of
IRPA
. I determine, noting the absence of any substantial response by or on behalf of the respondent, Mr. Jaballah, that the opinion certified by the applicant Ministers on August 13, 2001 is reasonable.
Part III Conclusions, Orders, Costs
[98]
A summary of the key determinations of the Court follows.
1. The motion of the respondent, Mr. Jaballah, heard on April 11, 2003 is allowed in part, that is, insofar as the PRRA report of an officer dated August 15, 2002, is filed and is deemed to be the risk assessment of the minister concerning Mr. Jaballah, if he were to be returned to Egypt.
2. The motion is also allowed in that the Court finds that continuing delay in deciding Mr. Jaballah's application for protection constitutes an abuse of process, for it is not satisfactorily explained, and is without reasonable forecast about when the decision may be rendered, while Mr. Jaballah remains in detention, in solitary confinement since August 14, 2001, with no right of review of that detention.
3. That abuse warrants the resumption of the Court's primary purpose in these proceedings to assess the reasonableness of the certified opinion of the Ministers, but that abuse which relates to a process collateral to the Court's primary function, does not warrant quashing the certificate, nor does it warrant the release of Mr. Jaballah without a normal review of that detention.
4. The proceedings in regard to the certificate are resumed, leaving outstanding the necessary determination by or on behalf of the Minister on Mr. Jaballah's application for protection.
5. The Court's process in relation to the certificate has followed the requirements of the
Immigration Act
, now
IRPA
. In so doing, the process, in my opinion, has been lawful.
6. There is new information and evidence before this Court that was not before the Court  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, information that, had it been available in that case, might well have led Mr. Justice Cullen to a different conclusion.
7. Mr. Jaballah, initially with counsel, and later representing himself, had a reasonable opportunity to respond to the new information before this Court, but he did not do so.
8. In light of the information and evidence before this Court, including in particular the new information not provided  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  No. 1
, the certificate of the Ministers, dated August 13, 2001, is reasonable, on the basis of the information and evidence in the public record, available to Mr. Jaballah. Further, that conclusion is supported by other information available to the Court, not provided to the respondent on grounds of national security.
9. The certified opinion of the Ministers, now found to be reasonable, is that Mr. Jaballah is inadmissible to Canada as a person within paragraphs 34(1)(b), 34(1)(c) and 34(1)(f) of
IRPA
.
[99]
Separate orders and determinations are now issued. The first includes determinations on procedural and other matters arising in consideration of the submissions of the parties on April 11, 2003. The second sets out my determination that the certificate of the Ministers is reasonable.
Costs
[100]
On the matter of costs, Mr. Jaballah asked for costs on a solicitor and client basis in his motion heard on April 11, 2003. That was in part successful. In my opinion, the motion would have been unnecessary were it not for the continuing unexplained delay in deciding the application for protection, a delay which continues to this day. That delay in the circumstances constitutes an abuse of process. Mr. Jaballah is entitled to the costs of preparation for and of the hearing on April 11, 2003 on a solicitor and client basis.
[101]
Costs were not requested on behalf of the applicant Ministers. If either party has further concerns about other costs of these proceedings, upon which the other party does not agree, the matter may be raised by written submissions or by personal appearance.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/ve
Annex A
Reasons for Order
Dated 20030522
File No. DES-4-01
Excerpt from the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, S.C. 2001, c. 27, as amended.
Division 9
Protection of Information
Section 9
Examen de renseignements à protéger
Comparable Provision of
1985 Act
Examination on Request by the Minister and the Solicitor General of Canada
Examen à la demande du ministre et du solliciteur général
76. The definitions in this section apply in this Division.
76. Les définitions qui suivent s'appliquent à la présente section.
--"information" means security or criminal intelligence information and information that is obtained in confidence from a source in Canada, from the government of a foreign state, from an international organization of states or from an institution of either of them.
--"juge" Le juge en chef adjoint de la Cour fédérale ou le juge de la Section de première instance de cette juridiction désigné par celui-ci.
none
--"judge" means the Associate Chief Justice of the Federal Court or a judge of the Trial Division of that Court designated by the Associate Chief Justice.
--"renseignements" Les renseignements en matière de sécurité ou de criminalité et ceux obtenus, sous le sceau du secret, de source canadienne ou du gouvernement d'un État étranger, d'une organisation internationale mise sur pied par des États ou de l'un de leurs organismes.
s. 40.1(4)
77. (1) The Minister and the Solicitor General of Canada shall sign a certificate stating that a permanent resident or a foreign national is inadmissible on grounds of security, violating human or international rights, serious criminality or organized criminality and refer it to the Federal Court--Trial Division, which shall make a determination under section 80.
77. (1) Le ministre et le solliciteur général du Canada déposent à la Section de première instance de la Cour fédérale le certificat attestant qu'un résident permanent ou qu'un étranger est interdit de territoire pour raison de sécurité ou pour atteinte aux droits humains ou internationaux, grande criminalité ou criminalité organisée pour qu'il en soit disposé au titre de l'article 80.
s. 40.1(1)
(2) When the certificate is referred, a proceeding under this Act respecting the person named in the certificate, other than an application under subsection 112(1), may not be commenced and, if commenced, must be adjourned, until the judge makes the determination.
(2) Il ne peut être procédé à aucune instance visant le résident permanent ou l'étranger au titre de la présente loi tant qu'il n'a pas été statué sur le certificat; n'est pas visée la demande de protection prévue au paragraphe 112(1).
s. 40.1(2)
78. The following provisions govern the determination:
78. Les règles suivantes s'appliquent à l'affaire:
--(a) the judge shall hear the matter;
--a) le juge entend l'affaire;
s. 40.1(4), 40.1(5)
--(b) the judge shall ensure the confidentiality of the information on which the certificate is based and of any other evidence that may be provided to the judge if, in the opinion of the judge, its disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person;
--b) le juge est tenu de garantir la confidentialité des renseignements justifiant le certificat et des autres éléments de preuve qui pourraient lui être communiqués et dont la divulgation porterait atteinte, selon lui, à la sécurité nationale ou à la sécurité d'autrui;
s. 40.1(4)
--(c) the judge shall deal with all matters as informally and expeditiously as the circumstances and considerations of fairness and natural justice permit;
--c) il procède, dans la mesure où les circonstances et les considérations d'équité et de justice naturelle le permettent, sans formalisme et selon la procédure expéditive;
s. 40.1 (4)
--(d) the judge shall examine the information and any other evidence in private within seven days after the referral of the certificate for determination;
--d) il examine, dans les sept jours suivant le dépôt du certificat et à huis clos, les renseignements et autres éléments de preuve;
s. 40.1 (4)
--(e) on each request of the Minister or the Solicitor General of Canada made at any time during the proceedings, the judge shall hear all or part of the information or evidence in the absence of the permanent resident or the foreign national named in the certificate and their counsel if, in the opinion of the judge, its disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person;
--e) à chaque demande d'un ministre, il examine, en l'absence du résident permanent ou de l'étranger et de son conseil, tout ou partie des renseignements ou autres éléments de preuve dont la divulgation porterait atteinte, selon lui, à la sécurité nationale ou à la sécurité d'autrui;
none
--(f) the information or evidence described in paragraph (e) shall be returned to the Minister and the Solicitor General of Canada and shall not be considered by the judge in deciding whether the certificate is reasonable if either the matter is withdrawn or if the judge determines that the information or evidence is not relevant or, if it is relevant, that it should be part of the summary;
--f) ces renseignements ou éléments de preuve doivent être remis aux ministres et ne peuvent servir de fondement à l'affaire soit si le juge décide qu'ils ne sont pas pertinents ou, l'étant, devraient faire partie du résumé, soit en cas de retrait de la demande;
paragraph 40.1(5.1)(c)
--(g) the information or evidence described in paragraph (e) shall not be included in the summary but may be considered by the judge in deciding whether the certificate is reasonable if the judge determines that the information or evidence is relevant but that its disclosure would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person;
--g) si le juge décide qu'ils sont pertinents, mais que leur divulgation porterait atteinte à la sécurité nationale ou à celle d'autrui, ils ne peuvent faire partie du résumé, mais peuvent servir de fondement à l'affaire;
paragraph 40.1(5.1)(d)
--(h) the judge shall provide the permanent resident or the foreign national with a summary of the information or evidence that enables them to be reasonably informed of the circumstances giving rise to the certificate, but that does not include anything that in the opinion of the judge would be injurious to national security or to the safety of any person if disclosed;
--h) le juge fournit au résident permanent ou à l'étranger, afin de lui permettre d'être suffisamment informé des circonstances ayant donné lieu au certificat, un résumé de la preuve ne comportant aucun élément dont la divulgation porterait atteinte, selon lui, à la sécurité nationale ou à la sécurité d'autrui;
paragraph 40.1(4)(b)
--(i) the judge shall provide the permanent resident or the foreign national with an opportunity to be heard regarding their inadmissibility; and
--i) il donne au résident permanent ou à l'étranger la possibilité d'être entendu sur l'interdiction de territoire le visant;
s. 40.1
--(j) the judge may receive into evidence anything that, in the opinion of the judge, is appropriate, even if it is inadmissible in a court of law, and may base the decision on that evidence.
--j) il peut recevoir et admettre en preuve tout élément qu'il estime utile -- même inadmissible en justice -- et peut fonder sa décision sur celui-ci.
s. 40.1(5)
79. (1) On the request of the Minister, the permanent resident or the foreign national, a judge shall suspend a proceeding with respect to a certificate in order for the Minister to decide an application for protection made under subsection 112(1).
79. (1) Le juge suspend l'affaire, à la demande du résident permanent, de l'étranger ou du ministre, pour permettre à ce dernier de disposer d'une demande de protection visée au paragraphe 112(1).
None
(2) If a proceeding is suspended under subsection (1) and the application for protection is decided, the Minister shall give notice of the decision to the permanent resident or the foreign national and to the judge, the judge shall resume the proceeding and the judge shall review the lawfulness of the decision of the Minister, taking into account the grounds referred to in subsection 18.1(4) of the Federal Court Act.
(2) Le ministre notifie sa décision sur la demande de protection au résident permanent ou à l'étranger et au juge, lequel reprend l'affaire et contrôle la légalité de la décision, compte tenu des motifs visés au paragraphe 18.1(4) de la Loi sur la Cour fédérale.
None
80. (1) The judge shall, on the basis of the information and evidence available, determine whether the certificate is reasonable and whether the decision on the application for protection, if any, is lawfully made.
80. (1) Le juge décide du caractère raisonnable du certificat et, le cas échéant, de la légalité de la décision du ministre, compte tenu des renseignements et autres éléments de preuve dont il dispose.
paragraph 40.1(4)(d)
(2) The judge shall quash a certificate if the judge is of the opinion that it is not reasonable. If the judge does not quash the certificate but determines that the decision on the application for protection is not lawfully made, the judge shall quash the decision and suspend the proceeding to allow the Minister to make a decision on the application for protection.
(2) Il annule le certificat dont il ne peut conclure qu'il est raisonnable; si l'annulation ne vise que la décision du ministre il suspend l'affaire pour permettre au ministre de statuer sur celle-ci.
paragraph 40.1(4)(d)
(3) The determination of the judge is final and may not be appealed or judicially reviewed.
(3) La décision du juge est définitive et n'est pas susceptible d'appel ou de contrôle judiciaire.
None
81. If a certificate is determined to be reasonable under subsection 80(1),
81. Le certificat jugé raisonnable fait foi de l'interdiction de territoire et constitue une mesure de renvoi en vigueur et sans appel, sans qu'il soit nécessaire de procéder au contrôle ou à l'enquête; la personne visée ne peut dès lors demander la protection au titre du paragraphe 112(1).
--(a) it is conclusive proof that the permanent resident or the foreign national named in it is inadmissible;
s. 40.1(7)
--(b) it is a removal order that may not be appealed against and that is in force without the necessity of holding or continuing an examination or an admissibility hearing; and
s. 40
--(c) the person named in it may not apply for protection under subsection 112(1).
s. 40
Detention
Détention
82.(1) ...
82.(1) ...
(2) A foreign national who is named in a certificate described in subsection 77(1) shall be detained without the issue of a warrant.
(2) L'étranger nommé au certificat est mis en détention sans nécessité de mandat.
paragraph 40.1(7)(b)
84.(1) ...
84.(1) ...
(2) A judge may, on application by a foreign national who has not been removed from Canada within 120 days after the Federal Court determines a certificate to be reasonable, order the foreign national's release from detention, under terms and conditions that the judge considers appropriate, if satisfied that the foreign national will not be removed from Canada within a reasonable time and that the release will not pose a danger to national security or to the safety of any person.
(2) Sur demande de l'étranger dont la mesure de renvoi n'a pas été exécutée dans les cent vingt jours suivant la décision sur le certificat, le juge peut, aux conditions qu'il estime indiquées, le mettre en liberté sur preuve que la mesure ne sera pas exécutée dans un délai raisonnable et que la mise en liberté ne constituera pas un danger pour la sécurité nationale ou la sécurité d'autrui.
s. 40.1(8), (9)
[End of document]