[1]
Denault, J.
: This is an application for certiorari to quash a decision by which the applicant, an inmate, was transferred from Matsqui Institution to Millhaven Institution and mandamus requiring that he be transferred back to the former facility.
FACTS:
[2]
May 25, 1986: Before the occurrence of the events which gave rise to the present action, the institutional preventive security officers of Matsqui Institution had been involved in an investigation into a serious escape plan apparently formulated by several inmates. Based on confidential information, the officers believed that the applicant was involved in the plan and might have a zip gun to be used in the escape. (The following description of a "zip gun" is given in Mr. David Martin's affidavit:
"A zip gun is a home-made weapon which could be manufactured from parts including a hollowed out bolt in the shape of a cartridge with a smaller bolt or other cylindrical object which fits inside and can be projected from the cartridge."
Mr. Martin is an institutional security preventive officer  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Institution.)
[3]
May 26, 1986: As a result, Mr. Hnatiuk's cell was searched. A folded map of British Columbia and a drilled out bolt compatible with use as a zip gun were found.
[4]
May 27, 1986: The applicant was put in administrative segregation. The notice he was served stated the following:
"You are being placed in administrative segregation according to section 40.(1)(A) of the Penitentiary Regulations. The reason for the decision is as follows:
'Security information leads us to believe that you were involved in an escape plot from Matsqui Institution; a map of the Province of British Columbia and a drilled out bolt which could be fashioned into a zip gun were found in your cell.
'An investigation is continuing into this matter and you will be kept informed. You will remain in Administrative Segregation until the investigation is completed.'"
[5]
May 28, 1986: The applicant was informed again that in order to maintain the good order and discipline of the institution, he was to remain in administrative segregation. The same reasons as those quoted above were given: see "Minutes of the Segregation Review Board".
[6]
On the same day, the applicant was interviewed by Messrs. Martin and Wishart, both members of the Institutional preventive security staff. At that time, Mr. Hnatiuk denied any knowledge of an escape plan or zip gun. Furthermore, he stated that the bolts predated his arrival in the cell and that they had been fastened to the wall for over two (2) years and were used to hang up clothes. Nevertheless, on June 1, 1986, during a second interview conducted by the same officers, the applicant admitted that in fact he had received the bolts from his friend and co-worker, inmate Eagleson. He specified that he had acquired these just prior to May 17, 1986 when Eagleson was placed in segregation due to his suspected involvement in the same escape plan.
[7]
June 10, 1986: The applicant was notified that his transfer to Kent Institution had been recommended because of the finding of the zip gun and map in his cell and because of security information implicating him. Although the applicant did not specify in the space allotted for that purpose on the above-mentioned notice that he wished to present written reasons which could justify a new case study, Mr. Alexander Murray Baldwin, Institutional Transfer Officer  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Institution, alleges that he did in fact orally advise M. Hnatiuk of his right to do so when he served him with the notice.
[8]
On June 11, 1986, the applicant was notified that a recommendation had been made to have him transferred to a Special Handling Unit (S-7). The latter transfer recommendation was based on the applicant's criminal history, previous wrongdoings in other institutions and security information revealing his recent involvement in the escape plot from Matsqui Institution. The notice also stipulated:
"You may make any comments, in writing, within three (3) working days and these shall accompany my recommendation."
[9]
Still on June 11, 1986, the applicant received the following Memorandum, entitled "Segregation Review Board Hearing Minutes":
"The investigation into your alleged involvement in an escape plot from Matsqui Institution is now complete. Security information confirms our belief that you were involved in an escape plot from Matsqui Institution; a map of the Province of British Colmbia and a drilled out bolt which could be fashioned into a zip gun, were found in your cell.
"You have been served with a notice recommending your transfer to higher security (Kent Institution), as well as a notice recommending your transfer to the Special Handling Unit. You have been advised that you may respond to these recommendations in writing. Documentation is now being prepared to be submitted to the Regional Classification Board recommending these transfers. Your written responses will be considered and included in these submissions.
"You will be kept informed."
[10]
On June 12, 1986, Mr. Hnatiuk submitted a written reply to the notice of transfer to a Special Handling Unit (SHU).
[11]
On June 26, 1986, the Regional Special Handling Unit Review Committee recommended that the applicant be placed in Kent Institution. The Committee also specified that a transfer to a Special Handling Unit was not recommended.
[12]
On July 2, 1986 the applicant was advised that his transfer to a SHU was not recommended.
[13]
July 16, 1986: Mr. Baldwin served the applicant with a written notice that his transfer to Millhaven Institution was being recommended by the Regional Transfer Board for the reasons he had previously been advised of and that security concerns dictated he be sent to Millhaven Institution and not Kent Institution. Again, the applicant was advised of his right to reply in writing.
[14]
On July 17, 1986, Mr. Hnatiuk availed himself of this opportunity and submitted a second written reply.
[15]
July 24, 1986: the Warden of Matsqui Institution recommended Mr. Hnatiuk's transfer to Millhaven Institution:
"In Mr. Hnatiuk's response, he indicates a strong desire to remain in the Pacific Region to facilitate community support ties; further, that the reasons for transfer cut of region are unfounded. Security information leads Matsqui Institution to believe that he was indeed involved in an escape plot. The SHU Review Committee recommended that Mr. Hnatiuk and his conspirators be transferred to separate S-6 maximum security installations. A decision which is supported."
[16]
By notice dated July 30, 1986, entitled "Segregation Review Board Hearing Minutes", the applicant was again advised that his response had been received and considered and that the transfer recommendation was upheld.
[17]
On August 13, 1986, the applicant was notified that his transfer had been confirmed by Regional Headquarters and would take place on August 19, 1986 (which it did).
[18]
August 12, 1986: On behalf of the applicant, a letter was sent by Ms. Elliott, Legal Information Counsellor, to the Regional Executive Counsellor requesting some further information with respect to the transfer decision. On August 22, 1986, she received the following answer:
"With reference to your letter of August 12, 1986, Mr. Hnatiuk has been given the information with reference to his transfer. We are satisfied that we have sufficient reasons to be concerned about his security classification and therefore appropriate transfer action is being taken. For the safety and security of the Institution and others we are not prepared to release any further information."
LEGISLATION AND DIRECTIVE:
[19]
The applicant was placed in administrative dissociation pursuant to paragraph 40(1)(a) of the Penitentiary Service Regulations, C.R.C. 1978, c. 1251, which states:
"40.(1) Where the institutional head is satisfied that
(a) for the maintenance of good onder and discipline in the institution, or
(b) in the best interests of an inmate
it is necessary or desirable that the inmate should be kept from associating with other inmates, he may order the inmate to be dissociated accordingly, but the case of every inmate so dissociated shall be considered, not less than once each month, by the Classification Board for the purpose of recommending to the institutional head whether or not the inmate should return to association with other inmates."
[20]
The procedures for transferring inmates followed by Matsqui Institution at the time of the applicant's transfer were provided for by Commissioner's Directive 600-2-04.1 and by a memo from the Commissioner of Corrections dated November 1, 1984, entitled "Involuntary Inmate Transfers Interim Instructions" (hereinafter referred to as the "Instructions"). Sections 19 and 20 of the Commissioner's Directive provide:
"
TRANSFERS - ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION
"19. When an inmate is to be transferred by administrative decision, without having so requested, he shall be informed, subject to security considerations, of the intention to transfer him and be given forty-eight (48) hours to present reasons for reconsidering the decision. The inmate shall be informed, in writing, of the reasons for the final decision.
"20. In deciding such transfers, the authorities shall give all possible consideration to family, cultural and language factors in order to minimize as much as possible the disruption which such transfers may cause."
[21]
As for the "Instructions", they read as follows:
"
INVOLUNTARY INMATE TRANSFERS INTERIM INSTRUCTIONS
"Recently some major problems have been experienced with regard to the processing of involuntary inmate transfers in that inmates have not been informed of the reasons for their transfer. Accordingly, C.D. 600-2-04.1 'Transfers Within Canada' will be amended to reflect this interim instruction following completion of field discussion and SMC approval at its November 1984 meeting.
"To comply with our duty to act fairly, effective immediately,
I am directing that all actions outlined in the attached checklist at Annex A be fully completed before an involuntary inter- or intra-regional transfer is authorized
. In addition, attached as Annex B is a suggested format of a notice of transfer recommendation which shall be served to the inmate before a transfer decision is made.
"All reasonable alternatives shall be considered before an involuntary transfer is proposed.
"Inmates may be involuntarily transferred for administrative or security concerns; in either case the precise reasons shall be documented in the progressive summary.
"When there are reasons to believe that an involuntary transfer may be necessary, an institutional multi disciplinary team, usually the case management team, is to examine the reasons in detail and ensure that such a proposal is fully justified in writing before making a recommendation to the Director.
"Before an institution proposes the involuntary transfer of an inmate, the Director shall cause the inmate to receive written notice of the intended action and the reasons for it. The notice shall advise the inmate that he has forty-eight hours in which to submit any written objections to the proposed transfer.
"The Director, together with two Assistant Wardens or senior staff reporting directly to the Director, shall review the transfer proposed and the written objections of the inmate. If the Director then decides to proceed in proposing the transfer, the inmate's written views shall be routed to the decision maker with the institution's recommendation.
"The decision maker shall consider the institution's recommendation and the inmate's objections before reaching a decision. His decision, including reasons in cases where the institution's recommendation is upheld, shall be communicated to the inmate in writing."
THE LAW:
[22]
It is now well established by the courts that prison administrators effecting an inmate transfer must comply with the duty to act fairly:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at 136;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), at 159  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  whether or not a breach to the aforesaid duty occurred. To properly answer that question, a determination of what is understood by that duty in the prison context is required. First, it must be remembered that this court will only interfere with the prison authorities' decision if a serious injustice has been committed:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 385;  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 654 S.C.R. In the former, at page 637 S.C.R., Mr. Justice Pigeon said:
"I must, however, stress that the order issued by Mahoney, J., deals only with the jurisdiction of the Trial Division, not with the actual availability of the relief in the circumstances of the case. This is subject to the exercise of judicial discretion and in this respect it will be essential that the requirements of prison discipline be borne in mind, just as it is essential that the requirements of the effective administration of criminal justice be borne in mind when dealing with applications for certiorari before trial, as pointed out in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). It is specially important that the remedy be granted only in cases of serious injustice and that proper care be taken to prevent such proceedings from being used to delay deserved punishment so long that it is made ineffective, if not altogether avoided."
[24]
Thus, before interfering with a disciplinary decision, a court will have to take into consideration this summons to circumspection made by our High Court.
[25]
It goes without saying that the burden of proving that the institutional officers acted in bad faith, arbitrarily, capriciously or in a demonstrably unfair manner will lie on the inmate challenging the transfer:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  require of a prison authority in the way of specific procedural rights? That the inmate possesses no right to an oral hearing is now well established:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  what procedural requirements had to be followed before an inmate's emergency transfer could take place (pp. 145-146):
"Prison disciplinary officials have a duty to act fairly in the exercise of their administrative functions. The decision to transfer a prisoner from one institution to another is essentially an administrative matter that should only be interfered with by the courts on the rare occasions when it is readily apparent that the prisoner so transferred has not been dealt with fairly, taking all factors into account. The advent of the
Charter
may have widened the scope of the factors but it has not changed the administrative nature of the decision to transfer and reclassify a prison inmate, which more often than not falls to be determined by the common law precepts of the duty to act fairly. While the rules contained in Commissioners' directives require that an inmate subjected to emergency transfer be given immediate notice in writing of the reasons for transfer and his right to submit written objections within forty-eight hours to the appropriate classification or transfer board, he is not entitled as of right to appear or be heard in person before the board on the matter of his transfer and reclassification.
Suffice it that the written reasons for transfer set out the outline or gist of the case against him sufficient to enable him to make written objections thereto and that he be notified in writing reasonably soon thereafter of the decision-maker's reasons for decision on the review
." (My emphasis)
[27]
I wish to point out that in the present case we are faced with an ordinary as opposed to an emergency transfer.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  reasonably grounded belief that the appellant had brought cyanide into Collins Bay would be an adequate justification for the decision to retransfer him to Millhaven. It is also not in issue that in reaching that decision the authorities were under a duty to act fairly towards the appellant.
The only real question in the present case is as to the content of that duty. More narrowly still, it is to know whether the appellant was given adequate notice of what was being alleged against him and a fair opportunity to answer those allegations.
" (My emphasis)
[28]
In the case at bar, was the applicant given an adequate notice of what was being alleged against him? Were the reasons given of such a nature that the inmate could meaningfully reply to the transfer notice? Was the applicant given a fair opportunity to answer
in writing
these allegations? As for this requirement, see the "Instructions". Finally, did the institutional officials take the inmate's response into consideration before coming to a final decision?  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]
The applicant argues that he was not treated fairly and in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice because: 1) section 20 of the Commissioner's Directive was not sufficiently taken into consideration; 2) the "Involuntary Transfer Check List" was not "fully completed" as prescribed by the "Instructions". Mr. Hnatiuk further alleges that nothing demonstrates that his written reasons were examined by the institutional multidisciplinary team. Finally, he submits that since the Regional Special Handling Unit Review Committee did not recommend his transfer to an S-7 unit, the Regional Transfer Board's decision to transfer him to an S-6 institution, being based on the same facts, was totally unjustified.
[30]
After a careful review of all the evidence, I am unable to conclude that the institutional authorities failed to fulfill their duty to act fairly in ordering the transfer of the applicant. First, the written notice in this case was not, as in the De Maria case, a "... bold allegation that there were grounds to believe ..." that the applicant was involved in an escape plot. The notice referred expressly to the discovery of incriminating evidence (zip gun and map). Second, on two occasions, Mr. Hnatiuk was given an opportunity to respond to the allegations made against him and both times he did so. Furthermore, these written submissions were indeed taken into consideration: see the above minutes of the Segregation Review Board (June 11, 1986). On July 30, 1986, the applicant received the following memorandum, also emanating from the Segregation Review Board:
"You will remain in administrative segregation as the result of your alleged involvement in an escape plot from Matsqui Institution. You have been served with a notice recommending your transfer to Millhaven Institution
and your response to this recommendation has been reviewed
. The recommendation has been upheld and transfer documentation subsequently forwarded to Regional Headquarters recommending your inter-regional transfer to Millhaven Institution." (My emphasis)
[31]
The fact that the Regional Special Handling Unit Review Committee did not recommend his transfer to an S-7 unit did not preclude the Regional Transfer Board from deciding as it did. The levels of security in an S-7 unit and an S-6 institution are quite different and call upon an examination of different selection criteria. In addition, I would like to point out that the Regional Special Handling Unit Review Committee itself recommended that "Mr. Hnatiuk (...) be retained in Kent Maximum Security Institution [S-6], until such time as he demonstrates willingness to adhere to institution programs.": Exhibit "F" of Mr. Baldwin's affidavit, p. 2.
[32]
It is true that the "Involuntary Transfer Check List" had not been "fully completed" since the two following questions remained unanswered: a) Has the institutional multi-disciplinary team examined the reasons for the transfer? b) Has the decision-maker's decision been communicated to the inmate in writing? As was shown by the evidence, both questions should have been answered in the affirmative. As for the first one, I refer the reader to the reasons stated above which demonstrate clearly that the prison authorities indeed gave consideration to the applicants' written submissions. Concerning the second question, Mr. Hnatiuk was informed of the confirmation of his transfer on August 13, 1986: Exhibit "L" of Mr. Hnatiuk's affidavit. Nonetheless, it is undeniable that the "Instructions" were not followed to the letter since the check list was indeed not fully completed. Does that failure to complete the form thoroughly amount to a breach by the institutional officers of their duty to act fairly? I do not believe it does. In Martineau No. 2, supra, Dickson, J., (as he then was), with whom Laskin, C.J., and McIntyre, J., concurred, made the following statement (p. 630):
"It should be emphasized that it is not every breach of prison rules of procedure which will bring intervention by the courts. The very nature of a prison institution requires officers to make 'on the spot' disciplinary decisions and the power of judicial review must be exercised with restraint. Interference will not be justified in the case of trivial or merely technical incidents.
The question is not whether there has been a breach of the prison rules, but whether there has been a breach of the duty to act fairly in all the circumstances.
The rules are of some importance in determining this latter question, as an indication of the views of prison authorities as to the degree of procedural protection to be extended to inmates." (My emphasis)
[33]
Although in the present case a breach of the prison rules did occur (if we consider the "Instructions" as capable of coming up to the level of a "rule"), I am convinced that there has been no breach of the duty to act fairly. On the contrary, it has been properly demonstrated that the applicant was adequately informed and that, on two occasions, he exercised his right to submit written submissions. Furthermore, these were taken into consideration by the prison authorities. Finally, as stated before, Mr. Hnatiuk was duly informed on August 13, 1986 of the confirmation of his transfer.
[34]
For all these reasons, I am unable to conclude that the prison authorities failed to fulfill their duty to act fairly. The application of Mr. Hnatiuk to quash his transfer dated August 19, 1986 is therefore dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]