Reasons For Order
[1]
Rouleau, J.
: The applicant seeks a writ of certiorari quashing the decision of a visa officer in Hong Kong rejecting his application for permanent residence under the "retired persons" category and an order in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent to process his application in accordance with the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the
Act
) and the
Immigration Regulations
1978 SOR/78-172 (the
Regulations
) as they existed at the time his application was originally submitted.
[2]
By way of background, the "retired persons" provisions in the
Regulations
were originally introduced to accommodate those persons who were born in Canada but had given up their Canadian citizenship notwithstanding the fact they hoped to return to the country in their later years. Such people would not have been admissible by any other means. A "retired person" was defined in s. 2(1) of the
Regulations
as:
"'retired person' means an immigrant
who has attained at least fifty-five years of age
and does not intend to seek or accept employment in Canada." (emphasis added)
[3]
"Retired persons" were not subject to the normal "points system" that is used for independent immigrants; instead the selection criteria, as it related to persons in this category, was set out in s. 8(1)(e) of the
Regulations
which provided:
"8(1) For the purpose of determining whether an immigrant and his dependents, other than a member of the family class or a Convention refugee seeking resettlement, will be able to become successfully established in Canada, a visa officer shall assess that immigrant or, at the option of the immigrant, the spouse of that immigrant,
(e) in the case of a retired person, on the basis of
(i) the location in which the immigrant intends to reside,
(ii) the presence of friends or relatives of the immigrant in the locality in which he intends to reside, and
(iii) the potential of the immigrant for adjusting to life in Canada, his motivation and whether he has sufficient financial resources to support himself and his accompanying dependents without receiving any financial social benefits that may be paid to him by any department or agency of a municipal, provincial or federal government in Canada."
[4]
These provisions were revoked and the "retired" category was eliminated, effective midnight August 2, 1991, by virtue of Regulation SOR/91-433; pursuant to s. 114(3) of the
Act
, the regulation revoking the category, having been published in the
Canada Gazette
of July 3, 1993, came into force 30 days thereafter.
[5]
In the present case, the applicant submitted an application for permanent residence under the "retired persons" category on October 29, 1990 notwithstanding the fact that he would not turn 55 until October 25, 1991. The Canadian Commission in Hong Kong accepted his completed IMM8 and the accompanying processing fee.
[6]
Mr. Richard Hetherington, an immigration counsellor for the Commission for Canada in Hong Kong (the Commission) explained in his affidavit that it was not uncommon for
potential
applicants in the retired category to submit their applications before meeting the age requirement on the assumption that because of the backlog, by the time their application was actually assessed they would have attained the required age. He points out that the Commission had no authority to refuse any completed IMM8 which had been accompanied by the correct fee.
[7]
Mr. Hetherington goes on to add that Commission officials were aware that the "retired" category was to be eliminated and because of this knowledge, all staff members were told to inform anyone submitting an application under this category who was underage, that they did not presently qualify and that they could be adversely affected by anticipated changes to the existing
Regulations
. In fact, the notation "adv. subj." appears next to the date stamp on the application indicating that the applicant, or his agent, was given this advice.
[8]
The category eventually was closed effective midnight, August 2, 1991. The Commission gave immigration lawyers and consultants advance notice of the impending closure. A communique released by the Commission on July 18, 1991 states:
"The closure of this category has now been announced in Ottawa, to take effect August 3, 1991. In order to qualify for consideration in the retired category, an applicant must complete the formal application form and submit the correct fee to the Commission, and be 55 years of age, all on or before the close of business on August 2, 1991."
[9]
The application was eventually reviewed on February 26, 1991 and a letter forwarded on that date indicated that his application for permanent residence was being refused. The visa officer determined that the applicant did not qualify as a "retired person"; that he did not meet the age requirement on the date he submitted his application nor on the date when the category was abolished. He was also advised, given his age and occupation that it had been determined that he could not receive the required number of units of assessment pursuant to regulation 8 and schedule 1; and that he would be inadmissible as an "independent" immigrant.
[10]
The applicant now seeks judicial review of this decision. Counsel, on his behalf, advanced the argument that the applicant has the right to have his application considered and processed in accordance with those procedures existing at the time the Commission accepted his application. I was referred to the remarks of Collier, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 161 (F.C.T.D.), at p. 165:
"What is at issue here is the right of the applicant to have her request considered and processed
in accordance with the procedure at the time she made her request. That invokes the duty of fairness
.
"Here, as I see it,
it is manifestly unfair to apply a new procedure, many months later, to an initial favourably recommendation
. In those circumstances, where there has been a breach of duty of fairness, certiorari, in administrative decisions, will lie:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 465." (emphasis added)
[11]
Counsel also argued that the authority of the visa officer to issue a visa to a qualified applicant did not arise when the application was initially received, rather it arose under s. 9(4) of the
Act
when the officer was assessing the application and could satisfy himself that the applicant met the requirements of the
Act
and
Regulations
. It was submitted that the material date for determining the applicant's eligibility should have been February 26, 1992; he would have qualified because by this time, he had reached the age of 55:
Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[12]
These arguments are without merit. There is no evidence that the procedure with regards to the processing of applications under this category had changed amounting to a breach of the duty of fairness as enunciated in
Henry
, supra. In the present case, it was the law that had been amended and the category abolished; it has nothing to do with procedural approach.
[13]
In suggesting that the material date for determining the applicant's eligibility under this category should have been February 26, 1992, applicant's counsel is arguing that the Commission's practice of accepting applications made by underage applicants under the "retired persons" category, raises a "reasonable or legitimate expectation" that the application will be processed in accordance with the category as it existed at the time when the application was submitted and that these applications should not be affected by any subsequent changes in the law.
[14]
It is well-established that the doctrine of "legitimate expectation" does not create substantive rights. As was stated by the Supreme Court of Canada in
Reference re: Canada Assistance Plan
, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 525; 127 N.R. 161; 1 B.C.A.C. 241; 1 W.A.C. 241, at p. 557:
"There is no support in Canadian or English cases for the position that the doctrine of legitimate expectations can create substantive rights. It is a part of the rules of procedural fairness which can govern administrative bodies. Where it is applicable, it can create a right to make representations or to be consulted. It does not fetter the decision following the representations or consultation."
[15]
It should be noted that when the applicant submitted his application to the Commission on October 29, 1990, he did not meet the age requirement and was therefore not legally entitled to have his application processed under this category. The practice of accepting applications filed by underage persons could not give rise to an expectation or right that the category would still prevail when an individual actually qualified under the program, particularly in light of the advance warnings given by officials at the Commission.
[16]
Section 114(1)(a) of the
Act
confers on the Governor-in-Council the authority to make regulations to provide for the establishment of, and the application of, selection standards. This authority was validly exercised and the retiree category was abolished. One cannot now raise the doctrine of "legitimate expectations" as authority that these changes do not apply to him. As Sopinka, J., remarked in
Reference re: Canada Assistance Plan
, supra, at p. 559:
"Parliamentary government would be paralysed if the doctrine of legitimate expectations could be applied to prevent the government from introducing legislation in Parliament."
[17]
Furthermore, the fact that some individuals may be prejudiced by legislative amendments does not render those amendments unlawful:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.).
[18]
Counsel for the applicant raised the issue of "legitimate expectation" in the following applications for judicial review:
Lau Wai Lok - T-700-92
Yu Kam Kan  - T-1258-92
Shum Shuk Mei - T-2256-92
Fai Sen Fong Kue  - T-2829-92
John Cham  - IMM-500-93
These applications were argued together in Toronto on August 30, 1993 and my rejection of this submission, which I have just outlined, applies mutatis mutandis to the files enumerated above.
[19]
This application is dismissed; costs to the respondent.
[20]
Having reviewed counsel's submissions concerning a serious question of general importance to be certified under s. 83(1) of the
Act
, I am satisfied that no such question arises out of this claim.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Gary W. McLaughlin\rdw
[End of document]