[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: This action involves alleged infringement of a patent for an easily removable safety rail stanchion, embodying a dog's leg offset, for use along the top edge of a precast concrete wall, to be put in place either in anchor sleeves cast into the wall, or bolted to the wall. With the stanchions and connecting cable railing in place, projecting above a floor capping the walls, workers are prevented from wandering off the edge of the building.
[2]
The Plaintiffs, by this motion, seek to strike out all or part of paragraph 22 of the Third Amended Defence and Counterclaim, which refers to s. 76 of the
Patent Act
and ss. 366 and 368 of the
Criminal Code
and which provide penal sanctions for false representations in the first instance and for forgery in the second instance. I now turn to some relevant background.
RELEVANT BACKGROUND
[3]
The third amended Defence and Counterclaim of 10 January, 2005, alleged that, before the commencement of this action, one of the Plaintiffs misled an employee of the Defendant as to the content of the pending patent application and:
"22. As a result of the conduct described in paragraphs 19-21 of the Third Amended Statement of Defence, the 136 Patent is void and unenforceable as against the Defendant. Further, and in the alternative, the Plaintiffs are not entitled to any equitable or other remedy as against the Defendant as alleged or at all. The Defendant pleads and relies upon s. 76 of the
Patent Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4, as amended, and ss. 366 and 368 of the
Criminal Code of Canada
."
The Defendant also pleads that this misleading amounted to the submission of a sham application to the Defendant and that it was used both with the intention of falsely and deceptively asserting rights which the Plaintiffs did not have and of falsely and deceptively inducing the Defendant to believe that it had infringed the rights of the Plaintiffs. Indeed, even the reference to a sham is in effect a reference to a deception or a deceit. It is paragraph 22, or alternatively the last sentence of paragraph 22, which the Plaintiffs wish struck out.
[4]
The response of the Plaintiffs to paragraph 22 of the Defence and Counterclaim, as set out in the Third Amended Reply and Defence to Counterclaim of 20 January, 2005, is that the error in one of the figures contained in a drawing of the stanchion ought to have been immediately detectable by the Defendant, but that, in any event:
"In further answer to paragraph 22 of the
Third
Amended Statement of Defence, the Plaintiffs plead that s. 76 of the
Patent Act
and the
Criminal Code of Canada
are not within the jurisdiction of this Honourable Court and the references to them do not disclose a reasonable cause of action, are embarrassing and should be struck out."
By raising the issue of want of a reasonable cause of action, embarrassment and the striking out of paragraph 22 in their Defence to Counterclaim the Plaintiffs, while responding by way of a pleading to the counterclaim, are not estopped from bringing the present motion to strike out all or part of paragraph 22.
[5]
Section 76 of the
Patent Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-4 provides, in part, that:
"
FALSE REPRESENTATIONS, FALSE ENTRIES, ETC.
"76. Every person who, in relation to the purposes of this Act and knowing it to be false,
(a) makes any false representation,
. . . . .
(d) produces or tenders any document containing false information,
is guilty of an indictable offence and liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to both."
"
EXPOSÉ FAUX, FAUSSES INSCRIPTIONS, ETC.
"76. Quiconque, relativement aux fins de la présente loi et en connaissance de cause, selon le cas:
a) fait un exposé faux;
. . . . .
d) produit ou présente un document renfermant des renseignements faux,
commet un acte criminel et encourt, sur déclaration de culpabilité, une amende maximale de cinq cents dollars et un emprisonnement maximal de six mois, ou l'une de ces peines."
Fox on Canadian Patent Law and Practice
, 4th Edition, 1969, Carswell, at page 604, points out that the Crown "... enters into the administration of the law of patents as part of its criminal jurisdiction.", providing through the
Patent Act
penalty by way of fine and imprisonment. Here I would observe that the
Federal Courts Act
vests both the Appellate and Trial Divisions with a criminal jurisdiction:
"
4. Federal Court - Trial Division continued
The division of the Federal Court of Canada called the Federal Court - Trial Division is continued under the name 'Federal Court' in English and 'Cour fédérale' in French. It is continued as an additional court of law, equity and admiralty in and for Canada, for the better administration of the laws of Canada
and as a superior court of record having civil and criminal jurisdiction
." (Emphasis added)
"
4. Maintien: Section de première instance
La section de la Cour fédérale du Canada, appelée la Section de première instance de la Cour fédérale, est maintenue et dénommée 'Cour fédérale' en français et 'Federal Court' en anglais. Elle est maintenue à titre de tribunal additionnel de droit, d'equity et d'amirauté du Canada, propre à améliorer l'application du droit canadien, et continue d'être une cour supérieure d'archives ayant compétence en matière civile et pénale."
This criminal jurisdiction is not a general criminal jurisdiction.
CONSIDERATION
[6]
I will begin with a consideration of paragraph 22 of the Defence and Counterclaim in the context of a quasi-criminal or criminal proceeding. The usual procedure in the Federal Court, where prosecutions under intellectual property legislation have taken place, is that the prosecution is by the Crown and here I have in mind, by way of example,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Investigation Act
, Canada 1960, c. 45 which referred to proceedings initiated by the Attorney General in the Exchequer Court of Canada and here see also the present version of the legislation, the
Competition Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-34, which again makes it clear, at s. 73, that proceedings are to be initiated by the Attorney General of Canada in the Federal Court.
[7]
I recognize that a private prosecution of a criminal matter, by way of indictment, may still be open, with the consent of a judge with appropriate jurisdiction. Section 22 of the defence is clearly not a prosecution under s. 76 of the
Patent Act
, nor does the Federal Court have the jurisdiction to entertain a prosecution under that section of the
Act
.
[8]
Sections 366 and 368 of the
Criminal Code of Canada
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-64, deal, respectively, with forgery and uttering a forged document. However paragraph 22 of the Defence and Counterclaim is so defective as an indictment, in the sense of a written accusation, in the criminal law sense, as to make it clear that a defendant does not look to a
Criminal Code
remedy. I must therefore look to see if paragraph 22 of the Defence and Counterclaim, or any part of it, gives rise to or supports a reasonable cause of action or defence, within the jurisdiction of the Federal Court, or alternatively, whether the allegations are, as submitted by the Plaintiffs, scandalous, prejudicial or likely to delay the fair trial of the action, here the reference being to s. 221(1)(c) and (d), dealing with the striking out of pleadings.
[9]
Here I would observe that the Federal Court, absent clear statutory jurisdiction as in
Canadian Coat and Apron
, supra, has always made it clear that there is no general jurisdiction in the Federal Court to deal with criminal matters and here I would refer, by way of example, to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at pages 115 and 116. In that instance Mr. Justice Rouleau dealt with a motion to strike out a statement of claim which had a quasi-criminal offence basis, under the
Canada Post Corporation Act
. In reasoning through to striking out the statement of claim, for want of a reasonable cause of action, Mr. Justice Rouleau observed that quasi-criminal offences sections of the legislation, which had a punitive nature, could not be a sound basis by which to extend the jurisdiction of the Federal Court in a civil suit. He concluded, at page 115, that the only relief afforded by such legislation was by way of the laying of information and then the prosecution of the matter in the provincial courts. He went on to say:
"I would also like to add that in my opinion, the case of
R. in right of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , clearly illustrates that there is no nominate tort based on the breach of a statutory provision alone, but rather that a cause of action must exist separate and apart under the law of tort. Without some indication in the
Canada Labour Code
or the
Canada Post Corporation Act
that such an action was contemplated in the statute, the breach of any provision of the
Acts
cannot be presumed to lead to a civil cause of action for the plaintiffs." (page 116)
In effect, such quasi-criminal statutory provisions, in themselves, do not found a basis for a civil cause of action. The Defendant says, in argument, that it does not purport to prosecute a criminal or quasi-criminal offence nor is it laying the groundwork for an injunction based upon criminal activity. Of course there is uncertainty when a party has pleaded facts and then consequences, as has been done in paragraphs 19 through 21 of the Defence and Counterclaim, for the pleader is not bound by or limited to those legal consequences: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Therefore, despite what may have been said or represented on this motion the Plaintiffs may well wish further to discovery and that is provided for in the case management aspect of an order of even date.
[10]
Taking a different approach the Defendant submits that once the jurisdiction of the Federal Court is established, here through the
Patent Act
, the Court then has all the necessary powers to exercise that jurisdiction: in effect the Court has the necessary powers to give suitable relief whether or not there is any explicit statutory grant to that end:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(4th) 49 (F.C.A.), at pages 52 and 53 [C.P.R.]. From this the Defendant asserts that the Federal Court may apply statutes if they are relevant to matters otherwise within the Court's jurisdiction and that is said to be so even if the Court is unable to entertain actions or prosecutions directly based on such statutes.
[11]
The next case in this line of reasoning is
384238  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), involving seizure of property which was supposedly transferred to a third party, the plaintiff, and out of the reach of the Crown after the fact. The plaintiffs, who had purchased the property, claimed for a return of the property from the Crown. The Crown in turn relied on the Ontario fraudulent conveyances legislation, by way of a defence. However
384238 Ontario
is of no particular assistance, for in the present instance, neither s. 76 of the
Patent Act
nor ss. 366 and 368 of the
Criminal Code
provide defences.
[12]
Of interest is the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 321 (F.C.A.), which involved alleged negligence on the part of the Crown as to the security provided by the failed operator of a grain terminal, which caused economic loss to the plaintiffs. In
Brewer Bros.
the Court of Appeal observed that the security provisions in the
Canada Grain Act
were enacted for a purpose, that of protecting grain producers whose crops were in the hands of the operator of a grain elevator. In
Brewer Bros.
the Court did not look at the legislated security provisions as providing a cause of action, but rather as evidence in support of a private law of duty of care:
"It was not contended, and I do not suggest, that these provisions of themselves created liability in favour of the respondents. The learned trial judge pointed out [at pp. 85-6] that, in the words of Dickson, J. (as he then was), in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  merely on proof of breach and damages should be rejected' although '[P]roof of statutory breach, causative of damages, may be evidence of negligence'. In the same judgment, at p. 24, Dickson, J., stated: 'Breach of statute, where it has an effect upon civil liability, should be considered in the context of the general law of negligence.' It would seem, therefore, permissible to have regard to the foregoing provisions of the
Act
in considering whether one of the major elements of negligence - duty of care - exists.
The statute provides strong evidence of a private law duty of care." (Pages 341-372 [D.L.R.])
[13]
Important in
Brewer Bros.
is the clear and close connection between the harm that the statute was designed to prevent and the damage suffered by the plaintiffs. In the present instance there is a reasonably arguable connection between s. 76 of the
Patent Act
, a disincentive and very real penalty for producing and tendering a document containing false information and what is alleged to have occurred: there is thus a direct connection and a reason for a part of what is alleged in paragraph 22 of the Defence and Counterclaim. However, on the basis of
Brewer Bros.
, there is no similar direct connection between what is set out in the Defence and Counterclaim and ss. 366 and 368 of the
Criminal Code
, dealing generally with forgery and uttering a forged document: paragraph 22 of the Defence and Counterclaim it is not, on the basis of
Brewer Bros.
, able to lead to any favourable result, but will merely delay proceedings, the hallmarks of a vexatious, scandalous and prejudicial plea, which would delay a fair trial.
[14]
In the face of the Court of Appeal decision in
Brewer Bros.
and the limits arising out of that case, by reason of the need for a reasonable connection between the statute and the civil law, I am also not prepared to extend the use of a general
Criminal Code
provision, when assessing or measuring improper conduct, on the basis of either
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). In
Montreal Fast Print
at issue was the production of documents, over which privilege had been claimed: no privilege existed. However in passing Mr. Justice Walsh referred to case law to the effect that if a client wished guidance from a lawyer to facilitate crime or fraud such communication would not be privileged. There is no connection between this and the present situation. Similarly, in
Bertram
Mr. Justice of Appeal Hugessen, in an aside which was not directly relevant, looked upon privilege as being vitiated by fraud. There is no connection between this principle as to the effect of fraud and what is alleged to have occurred in the present instance.
[15]
In argument counsel for the Defendant sought to establish the relevance of the
Criminal Code
provisions by a slightly different means, noting the criminal jurisdiction of the Federal Court granted by s. 4 of the
Federal Courts Act
and s. 20 of the
Federal Courts Act
granting, among other things, jurisdiction between subject and subject as to patents. Of course, this does not automatically give the Federal Court any limited or workable criminal jurisdiction, for that jurisdiction is only available when the test in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 766  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  has been met and that requires a grant of jurisdiction in the statute being considered, which was the situation in
Canadian Coat and Apron Supply
, supra, but not the situation in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  aspect, referring to the equitable relief sought by the Plaintiffs, in the nature of injunction and delivery up of offending articles and profits, the granting of which is discretionary. This, the Defendant submits, makes the conduct of the Plaintiffs relevant, here referring to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 321 (F.C.A.). <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> dealt, in part, with the remedy of accounting of profits as a discretionary equitable remedy and whether the principle was applicable when the entity seeking the accounting had not come before the Court in a proper state, there being allegations of unclean hands, laches and acquiescence.
[17]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> the Court of Appeal measured entitlement to an equitable discretionary remedy in terms of what in fact occurred, lengthy delay and bad faith, in the face of a Trial Division ruling. That factual and objective basis is pleaded in the present instance by the Defendant at paragraphs 19 through 21 of the Defence and Counterclaim. To try to use penalties under the
Patent Act
and under the
Criminal Code
to measure or augment the factual allegations is not workable: the plea, that entitlement to equitable remedies should somehow be measured against penal provisions, adds nothing by way of a reasonable cause of defence and indeed, as I have already pointed out, merely introduces a scandalous, vexatious, prejudicial or delaying element to the trial. The factual background set out in the Defence and Counterclaim, if proven, would provide the judge, at trial, with sufficient material by which to judge conduct and to measure the effect of that conduct on the availability of discretionary equitable relief.
[18]
This factual approach appears in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.), a decision of the British Columbia Court of Appeal. <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> adds nothing to the use of the penal provisions plea in paragraph 22 of the Defence and Counterclaim for the Court of Appeal merely points out that the test used by the trial judge, that of unfair or unjust conduct, which produced a result which was contrary to a sound sense of equity, rights and conduct, resulted in a conclusion in accordance with modern estoppel doctrine and "... the equitable jurisdiction to interfere in cases where the assertion of strict legal rights might be unjust or unfair." (page 100). In
Litwin Construction
, the Court of Appeal looked at factual conduct, not conduct as viewed in the light of statutory standards. In the present instance, one must keep in mind that only one of the statutory standards which the Defendant promotes, that set out in s. 76 of the
Patent Act
has any relevance, but it does not provide a defence.
[19]
The foregoing is not to say that the Federal Court may not entertain pleas of abusive conduct. Here counsel for the Defendant referred to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(3d) 129 (F.C.A.), where at issue was whether the paragraph of a defence, alleging a frivolous and vexatious action, intended to harass and intimidate, was a proper plea. In
Levi Strauss
one of the points raised was that the motive for bringing the lawsuit, that of harassment and intimidation, did not constitute a defence. The Defendant in the present case is able to point to the fact that the whole of the Defence and Counterclaim, including impugned paragraph 22, is incorporated in the counterclaim. While abuse of process may be a valid plea, in this instance in the counterclaim, that hinges on the misuse or perversion of the process of the Court. However this leads back to the factual conduct of the Plaintiffs, referred to at length in the Defence and Counterclaim and which really has no connection with penal provisions, be they in the
Patent Act
or in the
Criminal Code
.
CONCLUSION
[20]
One should not easily strike out a plea that has any indicia of legitimacy, in the sense that rather than being plainly and obviously futile, it has some chance of being an arguable part of the case. In view of the factual material alleged in paragraphs 19 through 21 of the Defence and Counterclaim it is arguable that paragraph 22, which is also relied upon in the counterclaim, is entirely unnecessary, but that is not the test on striking out.
[21]
In this instance the plea raising s. 76 of the
Patent Act
may be arguable on the basis of a connection between s. 76 of the
Patent Act
and what is alleged to have occurred, on the basis of the
Brewer Bros.
case, supra. Conversely, the application of ss. 366 and 368 of the
Criminal Code
, which is a very serious allegation, are not only plainly and obviously futile, but also scandalous, prejudice and liable to delay a fair trial.
[22]
The portion of paragraph 22 of the Defence and Counterclaim, dealing with s. 76 of the
Patent Act
has, as I have indicated, some possible utility. Therefore, while the whole of paragraph 22 of the Defence and Counterclaim is struck out, it is with liberty to amend so as to remove all reference to the
Criminal Code of Canada
.
[23]
As I have already indicated this may be an instance in which the Plaintiffs may well wish further examination for discovery on the allegations which remain in s. 22 of the Defence and Counterclaim. That will be provided for in the Order.
[24]
I thank counsel for their effort and the interesting material provided.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/gs
[End of document]