[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The plaintiff, by notice of motion dated and filed January 7, 1994, moves the court for the following measures of relief:
"1. An order pursuant to rule 419 ... to strike out the following paragraphs of the Amended Statement of Defence:
(a) the whole of paragraph 22;
(b) the whole of paragraph 23;
(c) the whole of paragraph 26
"2. An order, pursuant to rule 448 and rule 5 ... and the implied jurisdiction of the court to control its own process, that each of the party defendants herein, namely the Minister of National Defence, the Chief of the Defence Staff and Her Majesty the Queen, provide an Affidavit of Documents for Discovery in accordance with rule 448.
"3. An order, pursuant to rule 455, rule 456 and rule 5 ..., that each of the party defendants, or an appropriate substitute on behalf of that party defendant, be available for oral examinations for discovery and that the name of the examinees be communicated to Counsel for the plaintiff forthwith.
"4. Costs of this Motion in any event of the cause."
[2]
The grounds for these motions are:
"1. Rule 419 ... and the reasons for judgment ..., dated October 8, 1993, as pronounced by Madam Justice Reed, dealt with the issues in paragraphs 22, 23 and 26. The said reasons for judgment decided these issues which the defendants raised previously when they were brought before this court on September 8, 1993, in these proceedings by the defendant's Notice of Motion. The said issues pleaded in paragraphs 22, 23 and 26 are res judicata and there is an issue estoppel against the defendants and each of them as the court decided, inter alia:
(a) the plaintiff has the status to question the constitutional validity of Canadian Forces Administrative Order 20/53 and Deputy Chief of the Defence Staff Instruction 9/83;
(b) the court decided that the plaintiff had pleaded a sufficiency of facts to support the claims for which relief was asked for in the Amended Statement of Claim;
(c) when relief is sought under paragraph 24 of the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, section 22 of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
does not limit the granting of relief available under the
Charter
which is requested against the defendant, Minister of National Defence and Chief of the Defence Staff by the plaintiff;
"2. Counsel for the Deputy Attorney General of Canada, acting for all of the nominate defendants, has announced his intention not to follow the
Federal Court Rules
by providing only one Affidavit of Documents and a single nominee for oral examination for discovery.
"3. The following documentary evidence will be presented:
(a) the Affidavit of Laurie Miller, dated the 6th day of January, 1994 and filed herein;
(b) the Reasons for Judgment of this court, dated October 8, 1993."
[3]
There is a lengthy and (despite attempts at picky obfuscation), a relatively simple prologue to this matter. The issue, too, although genuine and quite arguable, is conceptually simple and it needs to be resolved. The issue, with its "setting", was stated in an earlier decision of this court,
League for  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.R.R.(2d) 177 (T.D.):
"It may seem strange to some that in this virtually secular state at this era of history anyone in the Canadian Forces or the Department of National Defence should be concerned about the religious or ethnic background of Canadian citizens who, members of the Canadian Forces, might be selected for peacekeeping duties. Canada can aptly be described as a secular state, because of its constitutional values and imperatives. Having entrenched in the
Constitution
as the supreme law of Canada, the freedoms of conscience, religion, thought, belief, opinion and expression, and the rights to equality without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour or religion, among others, it must be obvious to any thoughtful person that Canada is emphatically not a theocracy. Because of the events of Canada's confederation history, certain educational guarantees based on religion were constitutionally entrenched, but no further religious distinctions or guarantees were entrenched prior to the above recited rights and freedoms expressed in the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
. It must also be obvious to any thoughtful person that the very secularity of Canada's
Constitution
is precious because it extends standard protection to all.
"When one puts any new religious symbol in or among historic, public, national symbols, one to that extent dilutes the secularity of the state. No one dilutes the secularity of the state by the private practice or visible symbolic manifestation of his or her own religion, so long as such practice and manifestation do no objective harm to others, but the state ought to avoid the giving of unique preference or precedence to religions or religious personages per se, lest it impair its own secularity. In such manner, Canadians may enjoy and even assert their special configuration of freedoms and rights. These are important justiciable considerations if only because recent events in Europe and in the Asiatic parts of the Soviet Union seem to demonstrate that religious sentiments, beliefs and philosophies (perhaps astonishingly) cannot be eradicated in the human species, even after decades of the official and rigid, if not brutal, imposition of atheism. So, Canada's
Constitution
appears at once to liberate and to civilize religion among the people by asserting the norm of state secularity, where no religion is accorded hegemony in dictating the values, opinions, beliefs or expressions of society whose multicultural heritage is also constitutionally guaranteed.
"There are, no doubt, religions, philosophies and cultures whose practitioners' and adherents' values are inimical to the imperatives of Canada's
Constitution
. Sometimes those great discrepancies create mistrust, danger and violence, including hostage taking, aiding, abetting and counselling assault, murder and terrorism. The foregoing are all offences denounced in the
Criminal Code
and they are prosecutable and punishable in Canada. However, it is of sufficient notoriety for judicial notice that not all other countries share or respect Canada's constitutional imperatives and social values. Some such countries are recipients of Canadian peacekeeping missions. Given the foregoing, how far may the respondent go to protect, on racial or religious considerations, individual members of the Canadian Forces abroad and their missions in such countries? Herein resides the matter in issue in this litigation." (C.R.R. pp. 179-181)
It will be noted that the parties in the above cited litigation are respectively a defendant and the intervener herein. In that case, the court, in view of the law and jurisprudence of the time, considered the issue to be so important and so needing viva voce testimony and a real, interested individual as plaintiff, that it struck B'Nai Brith's originating motion with leave to commence an action by statement of claim preferably brought by a member of the forces allegedly at undue risk and contemplated by the respondent's policy. An appeal was taken, but abandoned.
[4]
So, now there is an action, this present litigation, which complies with the right recipe for having the issue judicially resolved. There is more human-made complication to this litigation, however.
[5]
First, the two original defendants, the Minister of National Defence (MND) and the Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS) represented by the Deputy Attorney General of Canada, moved to include Her Majesty the Queen as a defendant and to strike out several paragraphs and prayers for relief in the amended statement of claim. The motion smacked of a smokescreen, and except for the quite proper addition of the Sovereign, Madam Justice Reed dispelled it all, leaving the plaintiff's pleading intact for the reasons which she wrote and dated October 8, 1993, reported in (1994), 69 F.T.R. 81. No appeal was taken and, indeed, the defendants, now nominally three in number, pleaded to the amended statement of claim, on October 20, 1993. Then the defendants, after receiving the plaintiff's reply filed November 3, 1993, produced an amended statement of defence, with the plaintiff's consent and filed it on November 19, 1993.
[6]
It will be noticed that no statement of intervention has been lodged by the intervener. There might be one allowed, but there also might not be such. The intervener filed a motion as of December 30, 1993, seeking an order vesting it with all the rights of a party and specifically some non-reciprocal six forms of participation in this litigation. It seems that the intervener forgot that Madam Justice Reed directed (document 21, para. 2) that the intervener and the parties file the terms for the intervener's participation, but if consent were not possible, they could all make and file representations relating thereto, whereupon the court would establish the terms. The intervener's motion was supported by the announced affidavit of its counsel, who must have thought better of that arrangement and followed it by the unannounced, but filed, affidavit of the "legal secretary" for the intervener. No doubt. In any event the written submissions from the defendants were filed after the hearing of the motions  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and the intervener's reply was filed on March 17, 1994. Madam Justice Reed is seized of this matter, and will decide it according to law and her judicial discretion.
[7]
The plaintiff now alleges that the impugned paragraphs 22, 23 and 26 of the amended statement of defence are abusive of the court's process in that they are barred by the principle of res judicata in regard to the October, 1993 reasons of Reed, J. Those paragraphs run as follows:
"22. Further, he [the Deputy Attorney General] objects in point of law that the plaintiff has no standing to put in issue the legal validity or otherwise of National Defence Headquarters Instruction [Deputy Chief of Defence Staff] DCDS 9/83, and/or alternatively [Canadian Forces Administrative Order] CFAO 20/53.
"23. He objects in point of law that no material facts or, alternatively, that insufficient material facts, have been alleged in the said Amended Statement of Claim to support the prayer for relief and he says that the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief sought in paragraphs A through F thereof.
. . . . .
"26. He further objects in point of law that the relief prayed in paragraphs C and D of his prayer for relief (being a prohibitive injunction and a mandatory injunction) is not available against the defendants or any of them and he pleads and relies upon the provisions of s. 22(2) of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
in that behalf."
[8]
Madam Justice Reed in her two orders dated October 8, 1993 and October 22, 1993 respectively dismissed the defendant's motion and added as a defendant, Her Majesty the Queen. One must, then, look to her reasons to discover whether the defendants be confronted with a true res judicata, or perhaps issue estoppel. Here are pertinent passages from those reasons as published in 69 F.T.R. starting at p. 81:
"
[1]
Reed, J.
: A series of applications of a procedural nature were brought on together: ...; whether [the] claim joins together two unrelated causes of action, one of which cannot stand on the basis of the pleadings as they presently exist; whether portions of the pleadings should be struck because they plead evidence rather than facts; who is the proper defendant; whether the League for Human Rights of the B'Nai Brith Canada ('the League') should be added either as a plaintiff (as of right or with leave of the court) or as an intervenor.
"
[2]
The issues to which this litigation relates are the alleged refusal of post Lieutenant Liebmann to a position in the mid-east during the Gulf war because he was Jewish and the validity of certain policies of the Canadian Armed Forces which provide that some of its members may be denied the opportunity of participating in some peacekeeping operations because of the cultural, religious and other sensitivities of other parties to that operation or of host countries.
. . . . .
"
[10]
The argument made by counsel for the Deputy Attorney General that an insufficient factual background exists to allow a challenge to CFAO 20-53, is based in part on the decisions in: [listing them].
"
[11]
As I understand the
Slaight
,
Controni
,
Swain
and
Lavigne
cases, the Supreme Court has held that when the text of a legislative instrument (including subordinate legislative instruments) clearly authorizes action which infringes a
Charter
right, then, the court can declare that instrument unconstitutional. When a legislative text is however constitutionally neutral (confers an imprecise delegation of discretion), one must look to the way in which the authority granted by that instrument has been used. Counsel argues that in this case, since there is no factual situation pleaded with respect to the application of CFAO 20-53, that policy cannot be challenged on the basis of the present pleadings.
"
[12]
I accept counsel for the League's argument that if I were to accede to the request made by counsel for the Deputy Attorney General, I would in fact be making a decision that the legislative text of CFAO 20-53 is constitutionally neutral and that this is an issue more appropriately decided by the trial judge after hearing argument and all of the evidence.
"
[13]
I think it is open to the plaintiff to seek anticipatory relief, to challenge the constitutionality of the provisions of a governmental instrument or policy which can potentially be applied to his or her detriment. Lieutenant Liebmann, as a member of the armed forces, can be adversely affected in the future by the policy. He should not have to wait until it is actually applied to his detriment in order to challenge it. In addition, at this stage of the proceedings one assumes that the facts as pleaded in the statement of claim are true. It is asserted that CFAO 20-53 is merely the successor to and a continuation of DCDS 9/93 and that DCDS 9/83 was applied to Lieutenant Liebmann, in my view, these factors provide a sufficient nexus to allow the constitutional validity of CFAO 20-53 to be challenged in these proceedings on the basis of the pleadings as they stand."
[9]
Reed, J., in effect holds that the question of standing to challenge DCDS 9/83 and/or alternatively CFAO 20-53 is resolved in favour of the plaintiff's standing, but that the constitutional or legal validity of those orders is properly in issue in this litigation. It will be remembered that no appeal was taken against that learned judge's ruling. The defendants in so pleading in paragraph 22 are indeed checked by res judicata and by issue estoppel, as well as by invocation of rule 419(1)(f), abuse of process. It being understood that the validity of DCDS 9/83 and/or alternatively CFAO 20-53 remains in issue, paragraph 22 of the defendants' amended statement of defence will be, and is, struck from the pleading. After all, in further support of this finding, Reed, J., also wrote:
"
[14]
Insofar as the propriety of Lieutenant Liebmann challenging CFAO 20-53 is concerned, in my view the
Danson
decision supports the conclusion that this is appropriate. In that case, the issue before the court, as described in the S.C.R. headnote, was 'can this application be heard without reference to any factual situation and without any affidavit evidence'. The application had been brought by way of motion so that evidence would normally be presented through affidavits. The court held that the application could not proceed without reference to at least some adjudicative or legislative facts. At the same time, it noted that since the challenge to the application had been brought, the applicant had obtained affidavit evidence containing such facts, for example, opinions concerning the manner in which the new rules regarding costs allegedly would undermine the independence of the bar and evidence of specific instances in which particular counsel had been threatened with the invocation of the impugned rules. This material was not considered for the purposes of the appeal because it had been filed after the appeal was launched. The court noted however, at p. 1102 S.C.R.:
'We have discovered by a roundabout route that the appellant is in possession of the facts he need to bring his challenge, by way of application, to a conclusion on the merits if he so chooses ...
It is not necessary that the appellant prove that the impugned rules were applied against him personally
(standing not being an issue); but he must present admissible evidence that the effects of the impugned rules violate provisions of the
Charter
.' (underlining added)
. . . . .
"
[17]
Accordingly, I am not prepared to grant the request that the paragraphs of the statement of claim which relate to the constitutional challenge to CFAO 20-53 be struck out because they are irrelevant."
[10]
Thus without having obtained the reversal on appeal of those reasons, the defendants abuse the court's process by giving it yet another try in their subsequently amended pleading.
[11]
In regard to the defendants' paragraphs 23 and 26, one may have regard to these passages of Madam Justice Reed's reasons also reported in (1994), 69 F.T.R., as follows:
"
[13]
I think it is open to the plaintiff to seek anticipatory relief, to challenge the constitutionality of the provisions of a governmental instrument or policy which can potentially be applied to his or her detriment. Lieutenant Liebmann, as a member of the armed forces, can be adversely affected in the future by the policy. He should not have to wait until it is actually applied to his detriment in order to challenge it. In addition, at this stage of the proceedings one assumes that the facts as pleaded in the statement of claim are true. It is asserted that CFAO 20-53 is merely the successor to and a continuation of DCDS 9/83 and that DCDS 9/83 was applied to Lieutenant Liebmann. In my view, these factors provide a sufficient nexus to allow the constitutional validity of CFAO 20-53 to be challenged in these proceedings on the basis of the pleadings as they stand.
. . . . .
"
[48]
Lastly, with respect to counsel for the plaintiff's argument that the present defendants are appropriate defendants because part of the remedy sought is an injunction to prevent those defendants implementing, or authorizing the implementation of the policy which it is sought to challenge, I find it useful to quote from Sharpe, Injunctions and Specific Performance (1983), at pp. 3-49 ff:
[passage quoted]
. . . . .
"
[51]
There is, of course, in nonconstitutional cases, in some jurisdictions, a debate as to the appropriateness of granting injunctions against officers of the Crown when that injunction operates against them in their representative capacity only as opposed to against them in their personal capacity. A discussion of this debate and approval of the approach which has been taken by the Canadian courts is found in S.A. de Smith, Judicial Review of Administrative Action (4th Ed. 1980), at pp. 445-449. In the present case, since the challenge is a constitutional one, that particular debate would be irrelevant in any event since the court has jurisdiction pursuant to s. 24 of the
Constitution Act, 1982
to grant whatever remedies are appropriate in the circumstances.
"
[52]
On the basis of the above review of the relevant jurisprudence, I am not persuaded that it is appropriate to strike the plaintiff's action as against the present named defendants. I see no impediment however to adding Her Majesty the Queen as an additional defendant to the action. Counsel for the plaintiff indicated that he had no objection to that course of action. An order to that effect will therefore be issued."
[12]
Once again, the defendants, by their failure to win a reversal, if they could, on appeal are foreclosed from preventing the plaintiff from merely
seeking
the relief pleaded. Whether he will get it or not is quite another matter for, as mentioned, the main issue in the litigation evinces rather evenly balanced considerations. Why the defendants are raising procedural obstacles of matters already decided, and not only by Reed, J., but also by the jurisprudence she cites is puzzling, not to say they do not have the right to try until their obstacles are judicially demolished. The striking out of their amended defence's paragraphs 23 and 26 is part of that demolition, and those paragraphs will be - are - struck.
[13]
The court notes, and abides by, the jurisprudence and doctrine cited by Reed, J., and by the plaintiff in written argument, part I, filed on January 31, 1994. They are too numerous to recite and analyze here, but they were noticed.
[14]
The next matter has to do with production of documents pursuant to rule 448. The defendants seek to produce only one affidavit as to documents among the three of them. Rule 449(2) countenances hearsay, just as a deponent on oral discovery may relate hearsay because in both instances the respective deponents are under a duty to inform themselves, such that they cannot always, and maybe not often, speak with direct personal knowledge. Now, the Minister and the CDS are now and always individuals, but sued in their representative and nominal capacities as respectively civil and military servants of the Crown. Their respective offices under the Crown are relatively permanent, but the individual incumbent changes from time to time. Here the plaintiff does not sue them for relief which can be granted or exacted in their personal capacities, but only in their official capacities.
[15]
There may be documents held in the offices of one defendant but not the other. The offices, files and computer records of each of the defendants could well have notional or real nooks and crannies different from those of their co-defendants. Otherwise, the court would make an order here, consistent with that which will be made regarding oral discovery. This is not to detract from the defendants' seemingly genuine offers and efforts to scour their files and premises for relevant documents, with their solicitors' help, in obedience to rule 449(3). These realities, in this case only, seem to dictate compliance with rule 449(1)(c), maybe even (d) and not (a). Of course, nothing stands in the way of compliance with rule 449(1)(a). That is to say, because the Minister and the Chief of the Defence Staff are sued in their official capacities, they are not thereby necessarily exigible to compulsion to swear the affidavit as to documents personally. It would be good if they would, but they may designate a knowledgeable person in their respective offices to perform the search required by rule 449(2) and to be the deponent.
[16]
Rule 449(1) was amended for effect on January 13, 1994, by SOR/94-41, only days after the plaintiff's application herein was commenced. The court proceeds, in this situation, in compliance with the interpretive rule of long standing: legislative changes of existing substantive rights do not affect litigation already instituted, but adjectival or procedural changes operate from the date of their coming into force. A long-standing authority in this regard is
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , especially at p. 443, where with one judge out of five dissenting the Supreme Court of Canada held "that this enactment [an amendment to the Ontario
Statute of Frauds
] is not retrospective and does not bar a [substantive] action to recover commission under a contract made before it [the amendment] came into force". (from headnote) The converse is also true as explained in the concurring reasons for judgment. Mr. Justice Toy in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.S.C.), at p. 148, explained the rule as in the
Upper Canada College
case. In the domain of criminal law the rule was explained, in the converse form, by His Honour Judge Remnant through his reasons in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C. Co. Ct.).
[17]
The resolution of the issue is thus: (a) needless to say the Sovereign is not required to be the deponent in any such affidavit pursuant to rule 448; (b) affidavits as to documents shall be sworn by, or on behalf of, the other two defendants pursuant to rules 448 and 449, and filed in court in the usual manner, with the usual consequences.
[18]
There is much contradictory jurisprudence as to whether Ministers or other high servants of the Crown are properly impleaded in an action in which Her Majesty the Queen is properly impleaded. The authorities which reject the impleading of Ministers and mandarins would à fortiori seem to go against the notion of such persons' exigibility to oral or written discovery, including affidavits as to documents. Madam Justice Reed's order, while adding the Sovereign, clearly did so in contemplation of the retention of the Minister and the CDS as defendants, too. There is in Canada a tradition of semantic deference: courts do not purport to enjoin or prohibit the Sovereign by name. The Sovereign's Ministers are however another matter, for they are servants who can quite properly, in appropriate cases, be enjoined or prohibited. Since the advent of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, and of s. 52 of the
Constitution Act, 1982
, Schedule B to U.K. 1982, Chap. 11, it has become possible and oftimes proper to check State action and/or legislation by enjoining, prohibiting or otherwise commanding the Sovereign's civil and military servants.
[19]
The late Beetz, J., of the Supreme Court of Canada cast much light on that process in his learned and innovative reasons, for the court, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 241; 38 D.L.R.(4th) 321; 18 C.P.C.(2d) 273; 25 Admin. L.R. 20. Even the State can be enjoined. This being a case in which the plaintiff, with his clear standing to do so, has rationally invoked the
Charter
and, pursuant to Madam Justice Reed's earlier cited reasons, clearly needs to keep the Sovereign's Minister and Chief of the Defence Staff as defendants herein, and properly in their representative, official and not personal capacities.
[20]
Does that mean that the plaintiff is entitled, from the beginning, just to line up all of the defendants for personal examination for discovery? Not by a long shot. A Minister of the Crown is not a proper deponent to be examined orally for discovery, and, in any event, the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate why the individuals nominated for discovery by the defendants cannot or would not provide adequate discovery. The relevant jurisprudence, cited by the defendants, is:
Hamilton and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 277-278 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 672, at pp. 682-683 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 604-606 (B.C.S.C.), reproduced at tabs 6 through 11 of the defendants' authorities. Similarly the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate why it is necessary to have discovery personally, orally of the CDS.
[21]
This is not a case of judicial review of decisions of the MND and the CDS.
[22]
One must consider rule 456(4) where the court may, on the application of a party entitled to examine for discovery, order that some other person be examined. In this situation, it may be best to leave the parties to themselves, to let them negotiate as to who will be examined or not. If that does not work, the parties can then apply to this court to resolve the matter for them. The cases of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.) are noted. What this means is that the plaintiff should get on with his examination for discovery and if it be unsatisfactory in any cogent matters, he can invoke rule 456 to try for a better deponent.
[23]
The most helpful tool to deciding this particular issue is the October 8, 1993 "Reasons for Orders" of Reed, J. At pp. 12-24, Reed, J., considers whether or not the Minister of National Defence, the Chief of the Defence Staff, Her Majesty the Queen or the Attorney General of Canada are the proper defendants to this action. At p. 24, Her Ladyship decides that the Minister of National Defence and the Chief of the Defence Staff are properly named as defendants, in addition to Her Majesty the Queen. Justice Reed's analysis is very thorough, covering ss. 2, 17 and 48 of the
Federal Court Act
, Federal Court Rules 400 and 600, s. 23(1) of the
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-50 as amended S.C. 1990, C-8, ss. 12(1) and 18(2) of the
National Defence Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-5, and s. 1.23 of the
Queen's Regulations and Orders for the Canadian Forces
.
[24]
Are there three separate defendants here, or only one? Is it simply the Crown, along with two of its agents? This answer is important, as it impacts on the question of who is amenable to discovery in this matter. Based on the language used by Reed, J., it is the latter of these possible interpretations. At p. 92, 69 F.T.R., Reed, J., refers to "... the Crown or an emanation thereof ...". A little later in her decision, Reed, J., states further:
"
[42]
... It is important to underline that in the present case, the present defendants are not being sued in their personal capacities. If they were, it is unlikely that this court would have jurisdiction over the action.
The present defendants are being sued in their representative capacities only, as officers, servants or agents of the Crown.
The relief sought against them relates only to actions they might take in the performance of those duties." (emphasis not in original text) (69 F.T.R. 93)
Further on a few pages in her decision, in relation to the concern of the Deputy Attorney General that if the parties were to remain as stated, the plaintiff may seek to obtain discovery from each of them, Reed, J., notes:
"
[47]
One assumes, indeed, more than assumes, is confident that if the Attorney General were to designate an
individual
to be examined for discovery,
a person knowledgeable in the matters in issue would be chosen
. If this did not prove to be the case, which I think is highly unlikely, the court could intervene to ensure that an appropriate person was examined." (emphasis not in original text) (69 F.T.R. 95)
[25]
This demonstrates that Reed, J., saw the real defendant here as being Her Majesty the Queen. The other "parties" named were merely "officers, servants or agents of the Crown". This conclusion is further supported by the fact that the plaintiff relies on s. 17(5)(b) of the
Federal Court Act
.
[26]
Here are several relevant authorities:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pp. 177-178 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 85 A.P.R. 63; 107 D.L.R.(3d) 208 at pp. 209, 213 and 215 [D.L.R.] (C.A.);
Canada (Minister of Industry, Trade and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 122-136 [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Admin. L.R.(2d) 203 at pp. 206-207 [Admin. L.R.] (T.D.).
[27]
These authorities in addition to the reasoning of Reed, J., cited, lead to the conclusion that there is, in truth and substance, but one defendant here for the present purpose, and that the Crown needs to produce only one deponent for oral examination for discovery. If such person is not properly informed, refuses to answer proper questions or is otherwise unsatisfactory, as previously noted, the plaintiff may apply, in accordance with the
Rules
(not just for the sake of doing so), to the court to compel the Crown to produce a proper deponent. It should not be necessary to do so.
[28]
The principal matter in issue in this case poses an important, justiciable question for resolution in the public interest of Canada. The resolution will add to the historic definition of Canada, whichever way it goes. One wonders why the parties simply do not get on with it instead of wasting their energies in interlocutory motions.
[29]
In summary, the dispositions of the plaintiff's applications are:
1. All of paragraphs 22, 23 and 26 of the defendants' amended statement of defence are to be struck out;
2. Each of the defendants, the Crown, the Minister of National Defence and the Chief of the Defence Staff is to provide an affidavit (sworn, but not necessarily sworn personally by those officials) as to documents, pursuant to rules 447, 448 and 449, notwithstanding that duplication and overlap of revelations may occur; and
3. The Crown, pursuant to rule 456(2), may be examined orally for discovery by the plaintiff in the usual way (i.e. the deponent may be required to attend in Victoria or Vancouver and to bring specified, appropriate documents with him or her for examination on oath or affirmation; and
4. The success being slightly divided but largely in the plaintiff's favour, the costs of this motion shall be taxed 80% in the plaintiff's favour in any event of the cause.
Application allowed in part.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]