 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (TD)
MLB headnote and full text
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  J.
January 21, 1995.
Summary:
A native of Afghanistan was denied Con­vention refugee status pursuant to the exclu­sion in article 1(F)(a) of the Convention (crimes against humanity). He applied for judicial review.
The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Divi­sion, dismissed the application.
Aliens - Topic 1330.2
Admission - Refugees - Disqualifications - Crimes against humanity - A native of Afghanistan was denied Convention refu­gee status pursuant to article 1(F)(a) of the Convention (crimes against humanity) - He worked for the local secret police (Khad) chief and became a member of the Khad - He fled Afghanistan after rebel forces took over the government - He stressed his minimal involvement in the Khad - The Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, affirmed the Board's deci­sion - The court concluded that the Khad had a "limited, brutal purpose"; that the claimant had the requisite personal knowl­edge of the offences; and that he did not extricate himself at the earliest possible opportunity.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 5].
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), refd to. [para. 8].
Moreno and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 8].
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), refd to. [para. 8].
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), refd to. [para. 8].
Statutes Noticed:
Immigration Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, s. 2(1) [para. 4].
United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, Article 1(F)(a) [para. 4].
Counsel:
Edward Corrigan, for the applicant;
Charles Johnston, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Rodney L.H. Woolf, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
George Thomson, Deputy Attorney Gen­eral of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
This application was heard in Toronto, Ontario, on January 13, 1995, before Wetston, J., of the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division, who delivered the following judgment on January 21, 1995.
[1]
Wetston, J.
: This is an application for judicial review of a decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board, Convention Refugee Determination Division (the "Board"), dated May 24, 1994, wherein it was determined that the applicant was not a convention refugee.
[2]
The applicant is a citizen of Afghanistan. In February 1989, the government forced him into military service. In August 1989, he was captured by the Mujahadeen, who were, at the time, fighting the government. He was released after five days. The applicant then travelled to the city of Herat. In September 1990, he obtained employment as a cleaner/receptionist for the local militia leader and local Khad (the Afghani secret police) chief, Mir Amza Khan. About a year later, the applicant was promoted to driver and part-time body guard for Mir Amza Khan. About that time, the applicant became a member of the Khad.
[3]
In April 1992, the government fell to the Mujahadeen and Mir Amza Khan was captured and executed. It was at this time that the applicant learned from friends that his name was on a Mujahadeen "hit list" for his association with both Mir Aza Khan and the Khad. The applicant fled Herat and remained in hiding with friends until November 1992, when he and his wife left Afghanistan for Iran. In January 1993, the applicant arrived in Canada and claimed refugee status.
[4]
The Board determined that article 1(F)(a) of the
United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
applied to the applicant excluding him from the definition of Convention refugee under s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, as amended. Article 1(F)(a) provides:
"The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:
(a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes;"
The Minister did not participate in the hearing and the Board made its determination on the evidence presented to it. Having determined that the exclusion applied to the applicant, the Board did not consider the well-foundedness of the claim, nor did they make any specific credibility findings other than to comment that, based on his generally unsatisfactory demeanour, in their opinion, the applicant did not tell them the whole story.
[5]
Did the Board err in determining that the applicant is not a Convention refugee by reason of the exclusion in article 1(F)(a)? Specifically, did the Board err by 1) misapplying the test for complicity under Article 1(F)(a), as set out by Mr. Justice MacGuigan in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.); and 2) did the Board misconstrue the evidence before it?
[6]
Essentially, the applicant argues that his minimal involvement in the Khad, mere membership, is not sufficient to the Board's finding that he was complicit or an accomplice. Counsel for the applicant emphasizes that the applicant did not witness or commit any acts contemplated in article 1(F)(a). Considering the applicant's minimal involvement, and that he left the Khad as soon as it was practicable, when the government fell, the applicant submits that the Board erred in determining that the exclusion applied in this instance. According to the applicant, considering the severity of the consequences of the exclusion, article 1(F)(a) should be narrowly and restrictively applied.
[7]
In the respondent's submission, the issue to be considered is whether the Board correctly determined that the Khad was "principally directed to a limited, brutal purpose". The respondent argues that the applicant's decision to remain with the organization, even after realizing what atrocities were being committed, was sufficient to trigger the application of the exclusion clause.
[8]
In a relatively recent decision of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), the law (cases considered by Madame Justice Reed in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, include: <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra,
Moreno and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.); and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)) with respect to the article 1(F)(a) is summarized as follows:
"1. The burden of proof which must be met by the Minister to demonstrate that the Convention does not apply to a given individual is less than the balance of probabilities. That is, there is no need for the person to have been convicted or even charged with an international offence. This follows from the wording of the text which requires only that there be 'serious reasons for considering' that the individual committed an act of the type described. ...
"2. An individual who has been complicit in (an accomplice to) an act which is physically committed to another is as responsible for the offence as the person who physically committed the act. Thus, if there are serious reasons for considering that an individual has been complicit in the commission of an international offence that individual will be excluded from obtaining refugee status by operation of art. I(F).
"3. In order to be complicit in the commission of an international offence the individual's participation must be personal and knowing. Complicity in an offence rests on a shared common purpose."
Madame Justice Reed goes on to indicate that the jurisprudence establishes that:
"Those cases have established that mere membership in an organization which from time to time commits international offenses is not normally sufficient to bring one into the category of an accomplice. At the same time, if the organization is principally directed to a limited, brutal purpose, such as a secret police activity, mere membership may indeed meet the requirements of personal and knowing participation ...
"As I understand the jurisprudence, it is that a person who is a member of the persecuting group and who has knowledge that activities are being committed by the group and who neither takes steps to prevent them occurring (if he has the power to do so) nor disengages himself from the group at the earliest opportunity (consistent with the safety of himself) but who lends his active support to the group will be considered to be an accomplice. A shared common purpose will be considered to exist. I not that the situation envisaged by this jurisprudence is not one in which isolated incidents occurred but where the commission of such offenses is a continuous and regular part of the operation."
Mr. Justice MacKay, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), adds:
"Essentially then, three prerequisites must be established in order to provide complicity in the commission of an international offence: (1) membership in an organization which committed international offences as a continuous and regular part of its operation, (2) personal and knowing participation, and (3) failure to disassociate from the organization at the earliest safe opportunity."
[9]
The documentary evidence before the Board concerning the Khad organization led them to the conclusion that the Khad, a secret police force, which routinely used torture, both physical and psychological, and extra-judicial killings as accepted practice, was an organization with a limited and brutal purpose. Considering that the applicant offered no evidence to the contrary, but rather focussed on his minimal involvement, it was open to the Board to conclude that the Khad had a limited, brutal purpose.
[10]
The question then is did the applicant have the requisite personal and knowing participation to be within the 1(F)(a) exclusion?
[11]
The applicant testified that Khad used death treats to expropriate his family's home in the mid-1980s. The applicant further testified that he knew that the local population of Herat were terrified of the Khad. Moreover, the applicant admitted that he had some personal knowledge of what Mir Amza Khan was doing and that he sometimes knew the names of people the Khad were planning on seizing, albeit that he had no way of warning them. Based on the evidence before them, the court is of the opinion that the Board correctly concluded that in this instance, the applicant has the requisite knowledge.
[12]
Finally, the Board goes on to consider whether the applicant disassociated himself at the earliest possible opportunity. Considering that when the applicant became a member, he knew of the Khad's reputation, on balance, the Board concluded that applicant remained with Khad, despite available opportunities to disassociate, until the government was overthrown by the Mujahadeen.
[13]
Despite counsel for the applicant's contention that the applicant was in a "catch-22" type situation, and that he left the Khad at the first opportunity, the court is of the opinion, that there was sufficient evidence to the contrary upon which the Board could reasonably conclude that the applicant failed to disassociate himself at the first available opportunity.
[14]
For all the above reasons, this application is dismissed.
[15]
No question was proposed for certification, therefore, no question will be certified.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/saf
[End of document]