[1]
Rouleau, J.
: This is an appeal from a decision of a Citizenship Judge in which Mr. Chan's application for Canadian citizenship was denied. Mr. Chan appeared before me in Calgary on March 17, 1992.
[2]
The only issue on appeal, as it was before the Citizenship Judge, is whether or not the appellant was "resident" within the meaning of s. 5(1)(c) of the
Citizenship Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-29. That provision requires the accumulation of at least three years of residence in Canada within the four years immediately preceding the date of application for citizenship.
[3]
Mr. Chan came to Canada from Hong Kong on July 6, 1986. He applied for citizenship on September 21, 1989. The Citizenship Judge pointed out that during this period, Mr. Chan had only been physically present in Canada for 526 days and that he was absent for 647 days. In other words, he was 569 days short of the three years residency requirements of the
Act
.
[4]
Additionally, she noted that Mr. Chan maintained a family home in Calgary, albeit registered in his wife's name, and that his wife and two sons have lived there while Mr. Chan was out of the country. Also, he has joint bank accounts in Canada, a Canadian Visa and Mastercard, a Social Insurance Number, and an Alberta Health Care Card. He holds a family membership at the Calgary Winter Club, although by his own admission, he did not go there very often because he was away so much, and he is a member of the Calgary Chamber of Commerce.
[5]
She was of the view that it was not enough for Mr. Chan to demonstrate that he had "maintained ties" with Canada during his periods of absence, he also had to demonstrate to her that he had actually resided amongst Canadians and, in effect, that he had "thrown his lot with us in some Canadian community". She was not satisfied that he had done this. She was of the view that the appellant had only established a "pied à terre" in Canada, as contemplated by Mr. Justice Joyal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Imm. L.R.(2d) 241.
[6]
Section 5(1)(c) of the
Citizenship Act
which deals with the residency requirements, has given rise to extensive jurisprudence and several general principles have been established. In
Re Papadogiorgakis
(1979), 88 D.L.R.(3d) 243, Thurlow, A.C.J., as he then was, adopted a very liberal approach to determining the residency requirements. At page 248 of his reasons he states:
"A person with an established home of his own in which he lives does not cease to be resident there when he leaves it for a temporary purpose whether on business or vacation or even to pursue a course of study. The fact of his family remaining there while he is away may lend support for the conclusion that he has not ceased to reside there. The conclusion may be reached, as well, even though the absence may be more or less lengthy. It is also enhanced if he returns there frequently when the opportunity to do so arises. It is as Rand, J., appears to me to be saying in the passage I have read [
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 225] 'chiefly a matter of the degree to which a person in mind and fact settles into or maintains or centralizes his ordinary mode of living with its accessories in social relations, interests and conveniences at or in the place in question'."
[7]
In
Re Roberts
(1979), 92 D.L.R.(3d) 76, it was held by Grant, D.J., as summarized in the headnotes:
"The effect of these provisions is that where a person has been admitted to Canada as a permanent resident but leaves Canada for extended periods of time in the course of his employment, he does not lose his status if he can show that he did not intend to do so, the possession of a returning resident permit being prima facie proof thereof. Moreover, he can count his time abroad towards his residency requirement."
[8]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), Dubé, J., held that a Lebanese couple who had established a home in Hawkesbury, Ontario, were entitled to citizenship even though the husband had not spent much time in Canada given that he was unable to find a job in Canada and consequently was still employed at the Beirut Airport.
[9]
Notwithstanding the fact that this court appears to favour a liberal interpretation of the residency requirements, there are cases in which a strict interpretation is given. In this regard I would like to refer to the comments of Addy, J., in
Re Stafford
(1980), 97 D.L.R.(3d) 499 (F.C.T.D.), wherein he writes at page 501:
"Were it not for the fact that all these cases have adopted the line of reasoning in the
Papadogiorgakis
case I would perhaps have been inclined to disallow the present appeal and follow the stricter interpretation adopted by my brother Walsh, J., in the above-mentioned
Khoury
case and also adopted the cases which immediately followed the
Blaha
decision. However, consistency in decisions as to interpretation, especially at the appellate level, is of great importance to the proper administration of justice. As the more liberal interpretation does not appear to be fundamentally unacceptable nor inconsistent with any of the provisions of the
Citizenship Act
, as now is formulated, I am prepared to adopt what now appears to be the generally accepted view.
"In saying this, however, I wish to emphasize that residence still must be distinguished from domicile. Where a person is absent from Canada, in order to maintain Canadian residence as opposed to a provincial domicile which can be maintained by a mere intent to return, one must keep what might be termed some concrete and substantial form of residential pied à terre at some place of residence in Canada. One must also throughout that entire period, consider that particular place as one's home or residence and any absence as merely temporary."
And further, the comments of my colleague Mr. Justice Joyal which were cited by the Citizenship Judge in her reasons, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  statutory requirements under s. 5 thereof, a landed immigrant cannot simply adopt Canada as a flag of convenience."
[10]
Mr. Chan and his counsel appeared before and their testimony shed additional light on the matter. It is my view that Mr. Chan intended to make Canada his permanent home and that he was not simply adopting Canada as a "flag of convenience". Furthermore, he has never abandoned that intention. Circumstances arose which mandated that he be absent from Canada for considerable periods of time. These absences are now preventing him from obtaining citizenship.
[11]
As stated earlier, Mr. Chan, immigrated to Canada with his wife and two sons, from Hong Kong on July 6, 1986. They settled in Calgary and he opened two businesses there, Satiwell Industries Ltd. and later Motech Mfg. Ltd. Once he had his family settled in Calgary, it was Mr. Chan's intention to bring his elderly parents over to Canada, particularly so since he was an only child. Unfortunately, his father became seriously ill shortly after their arrival and the whole family returned to Hong Kong to be at his bedside. He died on July 26, 1986. While the rest of the family returned to Canada, Mr. Chan remained behind because his mother was overwhelmed by the death of her husband and her health began to deteriorate rather rapidly. A doctor's opinion stated that she was unfit to travel to Canada.
[12]
Over the next three years, Mr. Chan made several trips back to Hong Kong to be with his mother and to care for her. The record indicates that he was never absent for more than four months at a time, and that while he was away, in addition to caring for his mother he was actively promoting his Canadian businesses. For instance, on one trip he purchased injection machines and moulds for Satiwell Industries Ltd., and on another, he prepared for the setting up of Motech Mfg. Ltd. and purchased equipment for this company. On other visits he attended trade fairs to promote his Canadian enterprises and he even went to Australia on a promotional trip. In addition, he also worked on a tender for the Alberta Plastic Waste and Scrap Recycling Project.
[13]
Mr. Chan's prolonged absences from Canada are, to my mind, justifiable. As an only child, he felt it was his duty to take care of his elderly mother in her final years. Had it been possible, he would have brought her to Canada and looked after her here. She passed away September 1, 1991.
[14]
He has no ties in Hong Kong, apart from a business, Hing Wah Houseware Mfg. Ltd. in which he owns a 51% interest. He is gradually winding down this business, and I note that the daily management of this business vests with two Directors, Mr. Fun and Mr. Ngai. It was also pointed out to me that this business is interconnected with the two Canadian companies and, as a result, it is contributing to the viability and success of the Canadian enterprises.
[15]
In contrast, he has two businesses in Calgary, a home which he has owned since 1987, and a wife and two sons who have fulfilled the residency requirements and obtained citizenship. Whenever possible, he has involved himself in the community. In 1989 for example, he organized a very successful photo exhibit as part of a fund raising campaign for the construction of a Chinese Cultural Centre in Calgary. I am satisfied therefore that Mr. Chan has demonstrated to me that he meets the residency requirements of the
Act
.
[16]
In concluding, a frequently quoted passage from Walsh, J., in
Re Kleifges
(1978), 84 D.L.R.(3d) 183 at page 189, bears reproduction:
"... for an applicant who would very obviously make an excellent citizen the provisions of the Act should be given a liberal interpretation so as to make the granting of citizenship to him possible, rather than a narrow and restricted interpretation ..."
[17]
This appeal is allowed.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]