[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The applicant is seeking (i) a writ of certiorari quashing a decision rendered by the respondent denying him day parole, or (ii) alternatively, an order of mandamus to require the respondent to render a decision granting him day parole, or (iii) again alternatively, an order requiring an oral hearing of him in person, on the question of his being granted day parole by the board.
[2]
The applicant moves for those remedies pursuant to section 18 of the Federal Court Act and to Rule 324. In the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  did so because he had "grave misgivings that service was not properly effected" and noted that the respondent had "not filed any representations in reply to the 324 motion nor has it given any indication of its intention to do". Such is not the situation here, for the (same) respondent by its solicitors and counsel has made a very full response to the motion with affidavits and written argument. The applicant has been a trifle prolix, but basically he has confined his written argument into a more-than-one-part submission and a reply to the respondent's written arguments. In this regard the present matter is quite different from that of the Gammond case.
[3]
In that case, however, McNair, J., did express an obiter dictum on an identical aspect of the two cases, when he wrote the following passage near the end of his reasons:
"There is, however, another ground on which I would have dismissed the application. The applicant is a lay prisoner advocating his own cause and he is to be commended for the carefully documented and soundly researched case he put forward on his own behalf. Nonetheless, his representations raise issues of the gravest import which, in my opinion, ought not to be disposed of without an oral hearing."
[4]
That the applicant's representations raise issues of the gravest import is beyond doubt in that matters of the liberty of the individual are the subject of both statutory and constitutional enactments. In the Canadian Bill of Rights, R.S.C. 1970, Appendix III, paragraph 1(a) proclaims
"(a) the right of the individual to ... life, liberty [and] security of the person ... and the right not to be deprived thereof except by due process of law;"
Similarly, the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms being Part I of the Constitution Act, 1982 (hereinafter the Charter) provides:
"7. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice."
[5]
Now it is quite apparent that the applicant, an inmate at William Head prison institution at Metchosin, British Columbia, purposely invoked Rule 324 and followed its procedures, in order to place his written complaints before the court for adjudication. Equally, it is abundantly clear that the respondent has reciprocally replied in writing, and has not sought to invoke that portion of Rule 324(3) which permits it to apply for an "oral hearing", in the words of the rule. Since Rule 324 operates for the convenience of the Bar (if not also for the avoidance of expense for their client litigants), fairness demands that it operate for the convenience of prison inmates, too. Surely very special circumstances would be needed to deprive a prisoner of the convenient access to the court which is afforded by Rule 324, within whose contemplation there is always a judge available, no matter where the applicant may be imprisoned.
[6]
At some, perhaps considerable, expenditure of time and money, either party may cross-examine the other party's deponents on their affidavits filed in the proceedings. In this instance no such cross-examination has been sought.
[7]
There is yet another factor to consider. The court cannot compel an individual applicant to be represented by counsel, advisable as that may be, because every individual who complies with the procedural rules has an undeniable right to access to, and audience in, the court, subject always to normal requirements of decorum. Not everyone--indeed, not every barrister--is effective in expressing oral submissions to a tribunal. So, to deny unrepresented prisoners the access afforded by Rule 324, could well be to compel a perhaps inarticulate, illeducated person (unlike the present applicant) to make a hopelessly inept and ineffectual oral submission, if that person be determined to place his complaints before the court. More appropriate is to permit a prisoner, at the utterly inconsequential risk of displaying shaky spelling and grammar, to reflect upon his or her words in composing written submissions at a time of his or her own choosing and perhaps with the aid of someone more literate than the applicant.
[8]
Thus, with utmost respect for the learned judge who expressed his obiter dictum in the Gammond case, the court, in the present case "considers it expedient" that this motion "be disposed of without personal attendance" of either "party or an attorney or solicitor on his [or its] behalf."
[9]
In his written reply argument, said by the applicant to be this final submission, he raises a question about the term, and therefore the validity, of the respondent's chairman's appointment. That question is legally vapid, but more to the immediate point it is a matter of neither reply nor rebuttal in the course of the argumentation of the parties. Accordingly that aspect of the applicant's written argument is simply to be ignored in these proceedings. The parties' submissions therefore are complete and closed.
[10]
In his affidavit filed December 23, 1985, the applicant swore to the truth of these passages:
"2. That I was sentenced to a term of seven years imprisonment for importing a narcotic with a street value of $25,000 on May 30th, 1984, with a recommendation by the learned trial judge [as is clearly shown in Ex. H] that I serve my sentence at William Head Prison which is a medium-minimum security rated prison.
"4. That on the 20th day of July, 1984, the National Parole Board notified me by letter that I was eligible for Unescorted Temporary Absences on 30 July, 1985; for Day Parole on 30 July 1985 and for Full Parole on 29 September, 1985. Exhibit 'B' to this my affidavit.
"5. That I applied to the National Parole Board for Day Parole on the 21st day of March, 1985 and my application was acknowledged by a letter dated 10 April, 1985. This letter informed me that the Board would make a decision without conducting a personal interview. Exhibit 'C' to this my affidavit.
"9. That I was denied a hearing for Day Parole by the National Parole Board and instead, on October 18, 1985, the Board by means of a 'Paper Panel Info Shared Assistant' denied me Day Parole. Exhibit 'G' to this my affidavit.
"11. That the National Parole Board completely ignored all representations made on my behalf and all of the postive things I have accomplished since my arrest, conviction and subsequent imprisonment.
"12. That I have been on Escorted Temporary Absences since June 1985 and have completed each and every absence successfully. I have received eight hours per month E.T.A. to visit with my family who are completely supportive of me.
"13. That I was on Bail from September, 1982 until May, 1984 while awaiting trial. I abided by all of the conditions of my release.
"14. That I was only 20 years of age at the time I was charged with my criminal offence.
"15. That I am a first offender and had never been in conflict with the law up to the time of the offence for which I was convicted.
"16. That I have attended university while in prison and have earned 78 credits towards my degree in communications. Exhibit 'I' to this my affidavit.
"17. That I have maintained an - A average in my university courses at William Head and will continue until graduation at Simon Fraser University. Exhibit 'J' to this my affidavit.
"18. That my Case Management Team which consists of Living Unit Officer [named], my Living Unit Development Officer, [named] and my Parole Officer, [named], who have known me since my incarceration at William Head, all fully supported me for Day Parole. None of my team were present when the Parole Board were making their decision and none of my Team were able to present their arguments on my behalf orally.
"19. I have never seen or talked to any member of the National Parole Board.
"20. I belong to the Laren Society and I have been accepted to reside at the Bill Mudge Residence - their halfway House - if I were to receive a Day Parole.
"21. I attend the weekly meetings of the John Howard Society held at William Head and I have been accepted by the John Howard Society to reside at their halfway house - Manchester House - if I were to receive a Day Parole.
"22. That on page 11 and 12 of 'A Guide to Conditional Release for Pentitentiary Inmates' issued by the National Parole Board to prisoners, it states the 'Factors Considered.' If the board considered these factors, I would have received a Day Parole. Exhibit 'K' to this my affidavit.
"23. That I verily believe that the National Parole Board by denying me an in-person hearing, failed to act in a fair manner and I was denied fundamental justice.
"24. That I verily believe that if I were given the opportunity and my Case Management Team were given the opportunity to present my case for Day Parole at an inperson hearing, I would be granted Day Parole."
[11]
What the applicant does not mention in his affidavit is one of the factors mentioned in Ex. K, "institutional behaviour-offences". In the applicant's case that is a factual factor. For the respondent there was filed the affidavit of Nan Georgina Harrison, a member of the respondent board who received the applicant's application for day parole dated March 21, 1985. She and two other members of the board reviewed that application in September, 1985. The reasons given to the applicant (named: Christopher MacDonald) for not granting him day parole, according to this affiant, were communicated to him in a notification dated September 17, 1985, a copy of which is Ex. C to her affidavit:
"You are serving a relatively long sentence for a serious offence you have been involved in contraband within the institution and a further offence-free period is necessary to prove credibility. The board does not believe that you have gained the maximum benefit from incarceration, nor has the deterrent aspect of your sentence been achieved."
[12]
It is noteworthy, as will become evident later in these reasons, that the two forms of Notification of National Parole Board Decision appended as Exhibits C and G to Ms. Harrison's affidavit (dated respectively September 20 and October 24 in 1985, both bear the following message:
"You may request that this decision be re-examined by the National Parole Board Appeal Committee in Ottawa. Your completed 'Request for Re-examination of Decision' form should be received by the Case Analysis and Review Section, National Parole Board, 340 Laurier Avenue West, Ottawa Ontario, K1A OR1 within thirty (30) days of the date of this notification, This form (NP B32) is available at the institution."
That message neither offers nor forecloses an in-person review but, since the re-examination would be performed by the committee in Ottawa, it tends to imply that the re-examination could not involve the applicant's personal participation or attendance before the committee.
[13]
Ms. Harrison further deposed:
"6. That in reaching this decision, I considered the Case Management Team's recommendation that day parole be granted. A copy of the Case Management Team's Progress Summary and Recommendations dated August 22, 1985 is attached to my affidavit and marked as Exhibit 'D'."
This document, a very favourable report, signed by a section supervisor and by a parole officer of the Victoria Parole Office, notes 3 institutional offence convictions described therein as "possession of contraband (marijuana) on two occasions and failing to obey an order." Nevertheless, the case management team, (with whom the applicant "was actively involved" according to paragraph 7 of the filed affidavit of Fraser Simmons, Regional Manager, Case Preparation for the respondent) articulately and strongly recommended that the applicant be accorded day parole.
[14]
The case management team again recommended the applicant for day parole, in October, 1985, and in the event of denial by the respondent, the team recommended unescorted temporary absences of 48 hours per month to his parents' home. A copy of their progress summary and recommendations are Ex. E to Ms. Harrison's affidavit. She, with another member of the earlier panel, and a different third member reviewed this October application. The request for unescorted temporary absences was granted, while that for day parole was again denied.
[15]
Ms. Harrison's affidavit continues, in regard to the request for day parole.
"11. That the reasons given to the applicant for not granting him day parole were communicated to him in the form of a Notification dated October 22, 1985, a copy of which is attached to my affidavit and marked as Exhibit 'G'.
"12. That the above decision dated October 22, 1985, is the same decision as the one attached to the applicant's affidavit marked as Exhibit 'G'.
"13. That the reason the applicant was denied day parole was that there was still a concern regarding the applicant's involvement with drugs in the institution and that he might re-offend.
"14. That I considered the recommendations presented by the Case Management Team dated October 3, 1985, as set out in Exhibit 'E', but that I was still concerned about the applicant's risk to re-offend.
"15. That with regard to paragraph 5 of the applicant's affidavit, the board did not receive a request for an oral hearing from the applicant following the board's letter of April 10, 1985, stating that the Parole Board would make a decision without conducting a personal interview.
"16. That with regard to paragraph 10 of the affidavit, I took into consideration the trial judge's decision at the sentencing hearing. However, it was obvious to me, given the applicant's involvement with drugs in the institution, that the rehabilitation of the applicant had not been achieved.
"17. That with regard to paragraphs 11 through 18 and 20 through 22, I took into account all the factors listed by the applicant, but it was still my opinion that day parole should not have been granted in either September or October of 1985 for reasons set out earlier in paragraphs 7 and 13 of this my affidavit."
[16]
Now, the foregoing evidence is conclusive as to the legal propriety of the decisions rendered by the respondent in rejecting the application for day parole. It is apparent that the applicant was disappointed, and indeed probably incredulous, over that decision, in light of the highly favourable recommendations which supported his case. However, this present proceeding for mandamus is not an appeal on the record in which the court can assess the evidence and the weight of evidence before the National Parole Board.
[17]
As an independent tribunal, the board is not legally obliged to conform its decisions to favourable recommendations, but rather, only to consider them. It may properly find greater weight in other considerations properly before it, such as the applicant's institutional behaviour. This court is not entitled to usurp the board's function. Even if the court would have come to the opposite conclusion, if it were charged with the same responsibilities as is the board, so long as the board acts within its jurisdiction, the court will not command the board to render a different decision. There is no basis here for finding that the decision involved an unreasonable exercise of discretion. That being so, the respondent's decision is also not to be quashed in this sense, either.
[18]
Accordingly, the applicant's motion for mandamus in regard to the substance of the decision, with certiorari in aid, as it were, is dismissed.
[19]
There remains the issue as to whether the respondent's decision to deny day parole ought to be quashed on certiorari in order that the applicant may be heard in person upon his request for day parole before the board prior to its rendering of the decision on that request. Does "due process" or "the right to a fair hearing in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice" exacted by the Bill of Rights, or "the principles of fundamental justice" proclaimed by the Charter, demand a so-called oral hearing by the respondent on this request for day parole? Questions of a highly similar nature were considered by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . There the subject matter was different, being the appellants' alleged rights to a hearing in the determination of their asserted refugee status pursuant to the Immigration Act, 1976. Although the Supreme Court came to a unanimous judgment in favour of the appellants, it divided equally in emphasizing the Charter on the one hand and the Bill of Rights on the other.
[20]
The Supreme Court's two approaches to the matter are instructive for, despite the divergence of basic emphasis in resolving the issues, both groups of judges began by identifying the statutory source of alleged rights. Madam Justice Wilson, writing also for Chief Justice Dickson and Mr. Justice Lamer, is reported at p. 188 S.C.R. as noting that: "If, as a matter of statutory interpretation, the procedural fairness sought by the appellants is not excluded by the scheme of the Act, there is, of course, no basis for resort to the Charter". Mr. Justice Beetz, writing also for Messrs. Justices Estey and McIntyre, is reported at p. 228 S.C.R. as noting that: "Accordingly, the process of determining and redeterimining appellants' refugee claims involves the determination of rights and obligations for which the appellants have, under s. 2(e) of the Canadian Bill of Rights, the right to a fair hearing in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice."
[21]
In the present case, the rights and obligations of the applicant are to be identified and determined on two bases. The first is the lawful sentence of imprisonment which was imposed upon him. It must be regarded as an apt sentence, since its term of seven years is the minimum term prescribed by Parliament for his offence, and it has not been modified on any appeal. The applicant's status of prison inmate does not, of course, dilute his right to life and security of the person, but it severely limits his right to liberty. His obligation is to keep the peace by submitting to his carceral bounds and to be of that special form of good behaviour exacted by the discipline of all lawful prison regulations and orders. The second basis of identifying and determining the applicant's rights and obligations is the Parole Act and regulations. By means of this legislation Parliament itself has prescribed the conditions under which the respondent is empowered to grant conditional liberation from prison during the very term of imprisonment imposed under the sentence pronounced by a court of competent jurisdiction.
[22]
Two provisions of the Act may be noted:
"6. Subject to this Act, the Penitentiary Act and the Prisons and Reformatories Act, the board has exclusive jurisdiction and absolute discretion to grant or refuse to grant parole ... and to revoke parole or terminate day parole.
"11. Subject to such regulations as the Governor in Council may make in that behalf, the board is not required, in considering whether parole should be granted or revoked, to personally interview the inmate or any person on his behalf."
[23]
The manner in which the respondent board dealt with applications at the material times is explained in the filed affidavit of Roger Labelle, vice-chairman of the board since April, 1980. He swore, in part, thus:
"2. Prior to the latter part of 1984, when Mr. Justice MacNair [sic] of this Honourable Court delivered his judgments in the cases of O'Brien (1984), 17 C.C.C.(3d) 163 (Court No. T-900-84 and Ford (1984), 43 C.R.(3d) 26 (Court No. T-901-84), the policy of the board with respect to the types of decisions that were required to be made by way of in-person hearings was as set out in paragraph 6 and Exhibit 'D' of the applicant's affidavit. The first (and only the first) review for day parole was then held by way of a hearing.
"4. After the judgments  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and Ford, the board had to change the policy referred to earlier in paragraph 2 of this affidavit. Since December 31, 1984, all decisions which are not required by statute or regulation to be made by way of a hearing are generally made only after a review of the inmate's file, which may include representations made by the inmate or an assistant if the inmate chooses to do so. Attached hereto as Exhibit 'A' of this my affidavit is a copy of Circular No. 1984-31, entitled 'Conduct of Hearings', which sets out the policy applicable at the time the board rendered its decision with respect to the applicant's request for day parole. ...
"5. Circular 1984-31 provided for three exceptions to the policy. The first was that all decisions which resulted in the loss of liberty already granted were and still are required to be made after a hearing (see paragraph 7 of the Charter). This exception dis [sic] not apply in the applicant's case.
"6. The second exception was set out at paragraph 6 of the Circular which provided that in exceptional circumstances, the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman could personally approve that a hearing be held even though the hearing was not required by statute ...
"7. I and, according to the information I am given, the Chairman of the Board was never asked to exercise our discretion to grant a hearing in the applicant's case. I am advised that the applicant has not asked to be provided such a hearing except in the course of the present application before this Honourable Court.
"8. The third exception to Circular 1984-31 was described at paragraph 9 of the Circular. This paragraph, which is still in force, provides that the Appeal Committee, when re-examining a decision pursuant to section 22 of the Parole Regulations or Board policy, may decide to grant a hearing even when the hearing is not required by statute or regulation to be held. Attached hereto as Exhibit 'B' to this my affidavit is the board policy on the appeal or re-examination of decisions which was applicable when the board rendered its decision denying the applicant day parole. Pursuant to that policy, the decision made against the applicant was subject to internal appeal. The applicant did not ask that the board's decision be re-examined but had he applied to the Appeal Committee, the Committee would have examined his request on the basis of the criteria set out in the paragraph 6 of the present affidavit."
[24]
Does all of this signify that the adjudication performed on the applicant's request for day parole, without an oral hearing, violated the principles of fundamental justice? Here again the reasons expressed by the Supreme Court in the Singh case are instructive. At page 213 of the Supreme Court Reports, Madam Justice Wilson is reported to have posed this question, always in regard of course to the claim for refugee status under the Immigration Act. She wrote that she was prepared to accept the:
"... submission that procedural fairness may demand different things in different contexts: see Martineau, supra, at p. 630. Thus it is possible that an oral hearing before the decision-maker is not required in every case in which s. 7 of the Charter is called into play. However, I must confess to some difficulty in reconciling [Crown counsel's] argument that an oral hearing is not required in the context of this case with the interpretation he seeks to put on s. 7. If 'the right to life, liberty and security of the person' is properly construed as relating only to matters such as death, physical liberty and physical punishment, it would seem on the surface at least that these are matters of such fundamental importance that procedural fairness would invariably require an oral hearing. I am prepared, nevertheless, to accept for present purposes that written submissions may be an adequate substitute for an oral hearing in appropriate circumstances."
The particular provisions of the statutory scheme in that immigration case were what persuaded Wilson, J., that the circumstances were inappropriate for a denial of an oral hearing, as revealed on p. 215 of the reported judgment:
"... What the [Immigration Appeal] Board has before it is a determination by the Minister based in part on information and policies to which the applicant has no means of access that the applicant for redetermination is not a Convention refugee. The applicant is entitled to submit whatever relevant material he wishes to the board but he still faces the hurdle of having to establish to the board that on the balance of probabilities the Minister was wrong. Moreover, he must do this without any knowledge of the Minister's case beyond the rudimentary reasons which the Minister has decided to give him in rejecting his claim. It is this aspect of the procedures set out in the Act which I find impossible to reconcile with the requirements of 'fundamental justice' as set out in s. 7 of the Charter."
It will be necessary to determine if the same factor presents itself upon a request to the National Parole Board to grant day parole.
[25]
Mr. Justice Beetz who wrote for those judges who based their decision in the Singh case on the provisions of the Bill of Rights, is reported as noting at pp. 229 and 230 S.C.R.:
"I do not wish to suggest that the principles of fundamental justice will impose an oral hearing in all cases.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 747, Estey, J., speaking for the court quoted Tucker, L.J. in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  depend on the circumstances of the case, the nature of the inquiry, the rules under which the tribunal is acting, the subject matter that is being dealt with, and so forth.'
"The most important factors in determining the procedural content of fundamental justice in a given case are the nature of the legal rights at issue and the severity of the consequences to the individuals concerned. In the same Inuit Tapirisat case, at the same page, Estey, J., also quoted Lord Denning, M.R., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the nature of the investigation and the consequences which it may have on persons affected by it. The fundamental rule is that, if a person may be subjected to pains or penalties, or be exposed to prosecution or proceedings or deprived of remedies or redress, or in some such way adversely affected by the investigation and report, then he should be told the case made against him and be afforded a fair opportunity of answering it.'"
[26]
According to the affidavits of Ms. Harrison, the board member, and of Mr. Simmons the board official, the only material which was considered on the applicant's request for day parole were the applicant's own written request and the two reports of progress summary with those favourable recommendations submitted by the case management team, in the preparation of which the applicant was fully informed of content and is said to have actually participated.
[27]
Here again there was no accuser (known or unknown) in any sense of the word to be faced by the applicant. If there were, he would, of course, have the right to face, and question, his accuser(s). Here there were no accuser(s) and no material or other information kept from the applicant's ken. There was no information on file which could be considered confidential. Here, then, there can be no valid complaint to the effect that the board might have been influenced by some unfavourable allegations of which the applicant knew nothing. He was full apprised. This case, then, fits not within the rule formulated in the Singh case, but rather within the exceptions expressed by both factions of the Supreme Court.
[28]
Furthermore, what is at stake in an application for day parole is very different in nature and degree from what is at stake in the determination of refugee status. With respect, there is merit in the notion expressed by Mr. Justice McNair in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 326:
"... The subject-matter of the application was simply a request. There was no question of the deprivation of any constitutionally enshrined right of liberty, conditional or otherwise, such as might occur with the revocation or parole and its consequences on earned remission or the suspension of madatory supervision. The applicant made a request for the granting of a privilege which was denied in accordance with the clearly mandated legislative provision. To my mind, a distinction must be drawn betwen a denial affecting the expectation of enjoyment of some anticipated privilege of liberty and the deprivation of some right of liberty, presently existing and enjoyed, where such deprivation is contrary to fundamental justice."
[29]
Conceptually and actually the deprivation by revocation of even a conditional liberty which has already been accorded is different from, and more serious than, the discretionary withholding of such a conditional liberty in the first place. Such was the thrust of the judgment of this court in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The cases of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> : 146 D.L.R.(3d) 629, Re Lowe and The Queen (1983), 5 C.C.C.(3d) 535, Re Dumoulin and The Queen (1984), 6 C.C.C.(3d) 190, and Re Swan and The Queen (1984), 7 C.C.C. 150, are all cases concerned with revocation of parole.
[30]
As with revocation, the appropriateness of an oral hearing for deciding on full parole is not in question here. Day parole is of a more limited probationary nature; and the kind of decision-making process appropriate for the principles of fundamental justice, for the inmate, and for society in which the inmate seeks to be conditionally liberated, must be viewed through the optic of the statutory scheme. Parliament wills that the offender be subjected to the denunciation and punishment of an apt, lawful sentence. But Parliament relents in according the board discretion to permit certain well-behaved inmates to avoid the punishment of incarceration, by serving some part of the apt term to which they were lawfully sentenced outside of the prison. Parliament has ordained, by section 11 of the Parole Act, that the inmate seeking day parole is not entitled to be personally interviewed, that is, to have an oral hearing of his request.
[31]
In cases of such requests the inmate is the actor who, in effect, places his own progress and behaviour before the Parole Board in order to persuade it to grant the request. Naturally, the board must and may examine that progress, if any, and that behaviour so that it may properly exercise its discretion. This may be contrasted with revocation proceedings in which the board is the actor in calling upon the parolee, in effect, to explain his reported misbehaviour, failing justification for which he may be returned to prison. However, in neither case may the board act upon reports (with certain exceptions) known only to it and not to the prisoner or parolee as the case may be. When, as here, all the materials in use are available and known to the applicant and he asserts no wish to add to them or to make any written explantions beyond what he has submitted, the principles of fundamental justice do not demand that he must also have the occasion to make oral submissions to elaborate further the written submissions filed in a process which he has himself initiated. But for parole (and mandatory supervision) each inmate would be properly obliged to serve the appropriate term of imprisonment imposed by lawful sentence of the court. It is the applicant who seeks, by discretionary exception, to be relieved of that proper obligation. It is not the board which is seeking to abort or take away any qualified liberty already accorded to the applicant. The applicant's progress in prison, the behaviour or misbehaviour, and the initiation of the application for day parole are all in the applicant's hands. The applicant needs no right of oral presentation or of reply in person since it is his application alone, including the favourable case management reports in this case, which are before the board. Content with that documentation, the applicant made no further submissions. In these circumstances the lack of an oral hearing is quite unexceptionable. If certainly does not transgress on the principles of fundamental justice.
[32]
This court ought not unnecessarily to tack on to those principles any extra procedures which conflict with the scheme of the legislation. So, the applicant's motion for an order to compel the board to arrange for him an oral hearing, or in-person hearing, fails.
[33]
This finding that the respondent board's decision-making process in regard to the applicant's request for day parole meets the tests of the Bill of Rights and the Charter, still leaves one further consideration at large. The relief which the applicant seeks here is discretionary on the part of the court. Ordinarily the court will not even consider a favourable exercise of discretion unless and until the applicant has exhausted all avenuse of redress and appeal before invoking the court's powers. According to Mr. Labelle the respondent's vice-chairman, and Mr. Simmons who, and whose staff, have custody and control of the applicant's file among others, the applicant never made any "Request for Re-examination of Decision" to the Appeal Committee of the board after his application for day parole had been denied. No extraordinary reasons for by-passing a request for re-examination of that decision have been placed herein before the court. Accordingly, the court ought not to, and will not, exercise its discretion in favour of the applicant's motion for an order to compel the respondent to provide a new, and in-person hearing for his application.
[34]
These reasons address past events. Although the court's conclusion regarding the matters in dispute indicates that the respondent is under no constitutional or other legal duty to provide an in-person or oral hearing of the applicant's request for parole, nothing herein should be construed to inhabit the respondent from granting day parole to the applicant if, in the respondent's lawfully exercised discretion, he now or later merits such consideration. Obviously, his institution of the proceedings herein should not count against him in that regard. That noted, the applicant's motion for certiorari, mandamus or, in the alternative an order requiring a new hearing, is dismissed with costs.
ORDER FOLLOWING DECISION
[35]
IT IS ORDERED that the applicant's motion herein be, and it is hereby, dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/kam
[End of document]