[1]
Denault, J.
: This is an application for certiorari to quash the respondent's decision denying the applicant's request for transfer from William Head Institution to Ferndale Institution and mandamus requiring that the applicant's transfer be executed. The applicant also seeks additional orders, mostly in the nature of declaratory relief. I have been asked to dispose of this matter on the strength of the record, without the personal attendance of the parties.
The Facts:
[2]
The applicant was convicted of the offence of first degree murder for which he received a life sentence with a 25 year minimum, commencing in March 1983. He was initially placed in Kingston Penitentiary, a maximum security institution located in Kingston, Ontario.
[3]
In 1988, the applicant was granted a transfer to Mission Institution, a medium security federal institution located in the Pacific Region. Shortly thereafter, he was granted a transfer to William Head Institution, a medium security federal institution located in Victoria, B.C. The latter transfer was granted primarily to facilitate family visitation.
[4]
By application dated January 17, 1991, Mr. Kelly requested a voluntary transfer from William Head to Ferndale Institution, a minimum security federal institution located in Mission, B.C. Mr. Kelly based his request on the demands of his graduate program. (Since being incarcerated, Mr. Kelly has successfully completed a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Psychology and a two year program in Health and Fitness. He is currently enrolled in the School of Physical Education at the University of Victoria, where he is seeking his Masters Degree.) According to the applicant, his faculty advisor suggested that he should find a way to get on campus in order to use the labs. It seems that the reduced level of security at Ferndale might eventually allow him to leave the institution to attend courses and use the facilities on campus at Simon Fraser University.
[5]
In order to assess Mr. Kelly's transfer application, Mr. Alvin Kube, the applicant's case management officer, met with the applicant's case management team to discuss the feasibility of transferring the applicant to a minimum security institution. The resulting Progress Summary Report, completed on February 26, 1991, recommended that Mr. Kelly's transfer application be denied. The following is a reproduction of the portion of the Progress Summary Report which summarizes the reasons for the case management team's negative recommendation:
"In sum, the recommendation for denial is based on the following points:
1. Patrick Kelly is too early in his sentence to warrant a transfer to a lower security.
2. Patrick Kelly's main community support is contained on the island. A move to the mainland would create problems on both ends to accommodate passes, visits, etc. Kelly's transfer to William Head was to facilitate being near his community support.
3. Patrick Kelly's educational needs can be facilitated at William Head Institution. There is no foreseen advantage to Kelly in transferring to Ferndale Institution in this regard.
4. There is the opinion that Kelly is utilizing this transfer to further his claim of innocence and to attain better positioning within the penal system. A transfer to lower security, considering Kelly's excellent performance, can certainly be accommodated nearer his 15 year review.
"
Recommendation
: That Patrick Kelly's request for transfer to Ferndale Institution be denied at this time."
[6]
By decision dated April 23, 1991, the respondent denied the applicant's request for transfer for the following reasons:
"Mr. Kelly's primary community support remains on Vancouver Island. His Correctional Treatment Plan can be more adequately facilitated at William Head Institution.
"Mr. Kelly is deemed to be properly classified as a medium security inmate. He will require the support of his Case Management Team and security staff before transfer to minimum security will be considered further."
[7]
The applicant was provided with a copy of the written reasons for the respondent's ruling and was informed of his right to appeal this decision using the inmate grievance procedure. There is nothing in the record to indicate whether or not he exercised this right.
[8]
On September 12, 1991, Mr. Kelly reapplied for a transfer to Ferndale Institution, basing his application on his concern for his safety. Prior to his conviction, Mr. Kelly worked in narcotics-related investigation for the R.C.M.P. It appears that Mr. Kelly is normally housed in a trailer at William Head Institution. However, construction has caused him to recently be moved to the open dormitory. A Progress Summary Report, prepared in response to his reapplication, once again recommended rejection of Mr. Kelly's application for transfer. Upon requesting information regarding his case management team's position on a transfer to another
medium
security institution, Mr. Kelly was given written assurances that he would receive a favourable recommendation.
The Applicant's Position:
[9]
The applicant argues that the reasons given for nonsupport of his application were erroneous, without foundation or speculative and contrary to the
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, the common law duty to act fairly and the Correctional Service of Canada's Commissioner's directives pertaining to inmate transfers.
Discussion:
[10]
In his notice of motion and throughout his written submissions, Mr. Kelly attacks the validity of the reasons provided by his Case Management Team in the Progress Summary Report which recommended the refusal of his request for transfer. However, the present application for certiorari is aimed at quashing the
respondent's
decision to deny the applicant's transfer and not the Case Management Team's
recommendation
of "nonsupport". Consequently, this court will focus its attention on the only decision which it has jurisdiction to review, that is, the decision of the respondent dated April 23, 1991.
[11]
It is well established that transfer decisions are administrative in nature and should not be interfered with unless the decision maker has clearly breached his duty to act fairly or a serious injustice has been committed (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 671;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.C.C.(2d) 353; 106 D.L.R.(3d) 385, at p. 637;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 654 S.C.R.). Mr. Justice Addy, in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  intervene in the transfer decisions made by prison authorities:
"There is no 'right' for a prisoner to be in one prison rather than another and the decision to transfer from a medium to a maximum security prison or vice versa is basically and essentially an administrative decision which must not be interfered with by the courts failing clear and unequivocal evidence that the decision was taken arbitrarily and in bad faith or in a capricious manner and in addition that the decision is quite unfair and works a serious injustice on the prisoner. [See also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .]"
[12]
Consequently, this court is limited to a review of the
legality
of the respondent's decision to deny the applicant's transfer, and not its
merits
(
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.)).
[13]
The evidence reveals that the respondent complied with the procedural requirements of notifying the applicant of his decision and providing him with written reasons for that decision. (See Commissioner's Directive No. 540, s. 15. Section 37(3) of the
Penitentiary Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-6, authorizes the Commissioner to make rules pertaining to inter alia the custody of inmates. Such rules are referred to as the Commissioner's directives.) The applicant was also advised of his right to appeal the respondent's ruling (Ibid. s. 16). In decisions involving the
involuntary
transfer of an inmate, there is a further requirement that the affected inmate be given an opportunity to respond to allegations made against him. However, in cases involving an application for voluntary transfer made by an inmate himself, there is no such procedural requirement.
[14]
Prior to making a decision in regards to a transfer application, the respondent is required to consider the applicant's Progress Summary Report. (See Commissioner's Directive No. 540, Annex A, s. 10.) The respondent's decision specifically mentions that the case management team's support will be required before a transfer to a minimum security institution will be considered further. It is, therefore, obvious that the Progress Summary Report was considered in this case.
[15]
The Progress Summary Report must address the inmate's progress according to his Correctional Treatment Plan as well as his security requirements or "offender profile" as defined in Commissioner's Directive 006. (See Commissioner's Directive No. 540, s. 4.) The evidence establishes that these requirements were also met. According to Mr. Alvin Kube, the applicant's security classification as a "medium security inmate" was based on factors including the violent nature of the offence for which he was convicted, the progress he had made in his correctional Treatment Plan (including the time he had served on his sentence), and the psychiatric evaluation of the applicant.
[16]
In arriving at a decision with respect to a request for transfer, the respondent is required to take into account the two guiding principles outlined in s. 13 of the
Penitentiary Service Regulations
which reads as follows:
"13 The inmate shall, in accordance with directives, be confined in the institution that seems most appropriate having regard to
(a) the degree and kind of custodial control considered necessary or desirable for the protection of society, and
(b) the program of correctional training considered most appropriate for the inmate."
[17]
In the present case, the respondent, in denying the applicant's request for transfer, stated that Mr. Kelly was "properly classified as a medium security inmate". Clearly, this factor relates, at least in part, to an assessment of the risk to society in transferring the applicant to a lower security facility and, as such, is a valid consideration in light of regulation 13(a). A second reason for denying Mr. Kelly's transfer application precisely relates to the criterion outlined in regulation 13(b). More specifically, the respondent states that the applicant's "Correction Treatment Plan can be more adequately facilitated at William Head Institution."
[18]
Also included in the respondent's reasons is the fact that the applicant's primary community support is on Vancouver Island. Although Mr. Kelly may argue that the people who make up his community support are quite willing to see him transferred to Ferndale, it should be emphasized that this factor constituted the primary reason for his transfer to William Head Institution. Having due regard to all of the above, I find the respondent's reasons to be quite consistent with the guidelines outlined in regulation 13.
[19]
After a careful review of all the evidence, I am unable to conclude that the respondent's decision is in any way erroneous, speculative or without foundation. In fact, the respondent's ruling was made with due regard to the enabling statute and the Commissioner's Directives. In my view, the respondent's actions were quite consistent with both his statutory and common law duties.
[20]
The applicant submits that the respondent's decision to deny his transfer in this case is analogous to the decision which was under review in the case of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  involuntary transfer, without any fault or misconduct on the part of the inmate ... is the quintessence of unfairness and arbitrariness". However, the case on which the applicant relies involved the
involuntary
transfer of an inmate from a minimum security institution to a maximum security institution by penitentiary authorities. In the case at bar, the decision under review relates to an application made by the inmate for a
voluntary
transfer to a
lower
security institution. Consequently, the words of Mr. Justice Muldoon cannot properly be applied in this instance.
[21]
The applicant contends that he fulfills all of the criteria for entrance to a minimum security institution, as outlined in the Commissioner's Directive No. 006. He underlines the importance of respecting the guidelines set out in the Correctional Service of Canada's Case Management Manual which states that "offenders should be serving their sentences at the lowest level of security considered necessary to meet these goals". It is a well-established principle that, except in cases of serious injustice, it is not open to a court reviewing a transfer decision to simply substitute its judgment for that of experienced prison administrators (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the
merits
of the reasons contained in the Progress Summary Report. As stated above, this is outside the bounds of my jurisdiction. Upon reviewing the evidence, I see no justification for this court's interference by way of an order of certiorari.
[23]
With respect to the application for mandamus, the applicant requests that this court order "the respondent to comply with all relevant provisions of the
Penitentiary Act
, the Commissioner's Directives (pertaining to transfers) made pursuant thereto, the common law duty to act fairly, the principles of natural justice, and the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
" and compel the respondent to order the applicant's transfer from William Head Medium Security Institution to Ferndale Minimum Security Institution. To obtain an order for mandamus, the applicant must demonstrate that the party whose performance he is trying to compel owes the applicant a clear, legal duty to perform the requested act, but that his request was somehow denied or neglected. Simply stated, mandamus is a remedy granted to compel the performance of an imperative public duty. If the duty involves the exercise of discretion, mandamus cannot compel a particular result. With respect to the applicant's request that this court compel the respondent to grant the applicant's transfer, such a decision must, by operation of the enabling statute, be made by the
respondent
, in accordance with the exercise of
his discretion
. Since such a decision contains a discretionary element, mandamus is not an available remedy. In regards to this applicant's request for an order compelling the respondent to comply with all relevant legislation and its common law duties, the court cannot order mandamus in that form.
[24]
As for the declaratory relief sought by the applicant, they all relate to the reasons contained in the Progress Summary Report. As stated above, the recommendation made by the applicant's case management team is not reviewable by this court.
[25]
For all of the above reasons, Mr. Kelly's application is dismissed with costs.
Motion dismissed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sms
[End of document]