[1]
Denault, J.
: The applicant, the Information Commissioner of Canada, is applying with the consent of the complainant, the Honourable Allan McKinnon, for a review of the respondent Department's refusal to comply with the complainant's July 16, 1986 request for information. The information requested from the Department of External Affairs was the amount, in kilograms, of the largest single annual import quota of foreign cheese allocated to a firm or individual in 1985.
[2]
The respondent Department refused the request stating that the information was exempted from disclosure by ss. 20(1)(b) and (c) of the Access to Information Act, S.C. 1980-81-82, c. 111, Schedule I. The Department noted that on two previous occasions it had refused disclosure of similar information and that the Information Commissioner had agreed that the information was exempted under ss. 20(1)(b) and (c) of the Act. It also noted that the same was true of requests for information relating to the amount of import quotas on chicken and turkey. The following passage from the Department's letter of refusal is most indicative of its reasons for refusal:
"Similarly in an Access Request for 'names of individuals and companies, and their addresses, who were given permits to import into Canada foreign cheese in excess of 25,000 kilograms, from January 1985 to date', the Department concluded that this specific information (notwithstanding the public availability of the complete list of cheese import quota holders) was exempt under ss. 20(1)(b) and (c). In this instance, (your file 3100-0541) Mr. George Hamelin, in his capacity as Assistant Information Commissioner, concluded that he was satisfied that the exempted information falls under 20(1)(b) and (c) of the Act. In such circumstances, the exemption is mandatory and consequently (he) propose(d) to dismiss (the) complaint as not supportable."
[3]
The provisions relied on by the Department protect third parties from the disclosure by government institutions of confidential information that would be detrimental to their interests. In the present case it was established that the amount of import quotas on foreign cheese given to Canadian firms have not been released by government in the past, and that they are determined on the basis of individual importer's percentage of the cheese import business in the years 1973 and 1974. Import quotas were established in 1975, when the total allocation of quota for cheese imports amounted to 50 million pounds. This total was divided amongst 198 importing firms and covered some 200 varieties of cheese from 25 different countries. Yearly changes since that time have resulted in changes in the total amount imported, in the number of importers, and in the number of varieties imported. Under the quota system an importer is required to import at least 95% of its quota in any given year, in order to avoid a reduction in his quota for the following year. The fact that quotas have not always been met has resulted in numerous reductions and has allowed new importers to be apportioned a quota of their own. As a result there are currently some 250 importers. Nevertheless, some importers have been able to meet their quotas year after year, and in such cases the quota remains equal to the importer's share of the market in 1973 and 1974, determined in accordance with the information supplied to the government when the cheese quotas were implemented. The only reduction that would have occurred in such case was the 1979 reduction when the government unilaterally reduced all quota allocations by 10%. In the present case the Department of External Affairs, whose Special Trade Relations Bureau (STRB) administers the calculation and allocation of quotas, has refused to disclose the information sought on the grounds that it is confidential information between itself and a third party, and that it is commercial information the disclosure of which would prejudice the third party.
[4]
The Information Commissioner did not view the Department's reasons for refusal as being justified under the Act. Consequently it informed the third party of its findings and advised it of its right to make representations to the Information Commissioner regarding disclosure. The third party did so and insisted that the information was exempted pursuant to s. 20(1)(d) of the Act, as well as paragraphs (b) and (c) as the Department had suggested.
[5]
The Commissioner maintained however that the exemption from disclosure was not justified. It was therefore recommended that the information be released by March 16, 1988. When this recommendation was not complied with, the Commissioner wrote to the complainant and obtained his consent to seek judicial review, pursuant to s. 42(1)(a) of the Act, of the Department's refusal to disclose the information.
[6]
The issue is a straightforward one of statutory interpretation. Does the information requested fall within the statutory exemptions in ss. 20(1)(b), (c) and (d) of the Act?
The Law:
[7]
The relevant provisions of the Access to Information Act are the following:
"2(1) The purpose of this Act is to extend the present laws of Canada to provide a right of access to information in records under the control of a government institution in accordance with the principles that government information should be available to the public, that necessary exemptions to the right of access should be limited and specific and that decisions on the disclosure of government information should be reviewed independently of government.
"20(1) Subject to this section the head of a government institution shall refuse to disclose any record requested under this Act that contains
(a) trade secrets of a third party;
(b) financial, commercial, scientific or technical information that is confidential information supplied to a government institution by a third party and is treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party;
(c) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to result in material financial loss or gain to, or could reasonably be expected to prejudice the competitive position of, a third party; or
(d) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to interfere with contractual or other negotiations of a third party.
. . . . .
"20(6) The head of a government institution may disclose any record requested under this Act, or any part thereof, that contains information described in paragraph (1)(b), (c) or (d) if that disclosure would be in the public interest as it relates to public health, public safety or protection of the environment and, if the public interest in disclosure clearly outweighs in importance any financial loss or gain to, prejudice to the competitive position of or interference with contractual or other negotiations of a third party."
[8]
The Access to Information Act has been interpreted in a purposive and liberal manner, and courts are invariably guided by the purpose clause in s. 2.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 943, Jerome, A.C.J., states:
"... since the basic principle of these statutes is to codify the right of public access to government information two things follow: first, that such public access ought not be frustrated by the courts except upon the clearest grounds so that doubt ought to be resolved in favour of disclosure; second, the burden of persuasion must rest upon the party resisting disclosure whether, as in this case, it is the private corporation or citizen, or in other circumstances, the government."
Thus in the present case both the respondent Department and the third party bear the onus of proving upon the clearest grounds that the information sought is exempted by ss. 20(1)(b), (c) or (d). I will address each of these provisions in turn.
Section 20(1)(b)
[9]
The proper approach to the interpretation of s. 20(1)(b) was laid out in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 197, where MacKay, J., made the following comments:
"The authorities relied upon by both counsel in relation to s. 20(1)(b), and others, have made clear that exemption from disclosure under that paragraph requires that the information in question meet all four of the following criteria, that it be:
(1) financial, commercial, scientific or technical information,
(2) confidential information,
(3) supplied to a government institution by a third party, and
(4) treated consistently in a confidential manner by the third party."
MacKay, J., then went on to consider in depth the application of each of these requirements to the case before him. In the course of his analysis he made several comments which will provide a useful guide whenever the interpretation of s. 20(1)(b) arises. Thus it was held that information will be deemed to be financial, commercial, scientific or cultural, when it relates to material that is commonly referred to as such, in keeping with the ordinary dictionary definition of those terms. In this respect I have no hesitation in finding that the amount of the import quota sought is commercial information within the meaning of s. 20(1)(b). Moreover even if a more narrow meaning were ascribed to such terms, such as a requirement that the information have an independent market or cost value - a view explicitly rejected  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  - I am satisfied, on the affidavit evidence of the third party that its quota figure does have independent value, and is commercial information in even the strictest meaning of that term. The illicit offer received by the third party for the sale or long-term rental of unused portions of its quota are supportive of this finding.
[10]
As for the second criterion, the confidential nature of the information, the Air Atonabee decision contains a thorough review of the jurisprudence on this issue and MacKay, J., concludes at p. 202, with the following comments:
"This review leads me to consider the following as an elaboration of the formulation by Jerome, J., in Montana, supra, [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ] that whether information is confidential will depend upon its content, its purposes and the circumstances in which it is compiled and communicated, namely:
(a) that the content of the record be such that the information it contains is not available from sources otherwise accessible by the public or that could not be obtained by observation or independent study by a member of the public acting on his own,
(b) that the information originate and be communicated in a reasonable expectation of confidence that it will not be disclosed, and
(c) that the information be communicated, whether required by law or supplied gratuitously, in a relationship between government and the party supplying it that is either a fiduciary relationship or one that is not contrary to the public interest, and which relationship will be fostered for public benefit by confidential communication."
[11]
Insofar as these comments are not taken as superadded conditions to the Act, I find them instructive in determining whether the information sought in the present case is, or is not confidential. I am satisfied that the information sought is not otherwise accessible by the public. I am also satisfied that the market information on cheese imports in 1973 and 1974 provided to the government and upon which all initial and subsequent quotas were established was communicated in a reasonable expectation of confidence that it would not be disclosed. In fact neither of these points were strongly contested by the Commission. The Commission has however suggested that because the information requested is submitted by the third party in order to continue to receive an import allocation quota, and because its submission is thus of substantial financial benefit to the third party, it is therefore not provided in a relationship required by the public interest to be fostered by preserving confidential lines of communication. In other words since the quota system itself provides incentive for the third party to report its imports year after year, and to prove that its quota has been met, there is not need for the government to preserve confidentiality; the government need not fear that the third party will be less candid or forthcoming in the future merely because government breached the confidentiality of the information originally provided to it, because the third party's self-interest in maintaining its quota will ensure its candour.
[12]
When seen in its true light, this portion of the applicant's argument has very little to recommend it. Indeed it lends support to those cases which have rejected the American doctrine in National Parks and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  its disclosure would "(1) ... impair the government's ability to obtain necessary information in the future, or (2) ... cause substantial harm to the competitive position of the person from whom the information was obtained". ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 199-200; Re Noel and Great Lakes Pilotage Authority Ltd. (1988), 45 D.L.R.(4th) 127.) What the Commission has failed to appreciate is that the public interest in fostering confidential communication is merely an indicia of the confidential nature of the information and not a condition. The American approach has the advantage of clearly recognizing that confidentiality is a shared responsibility between informer and informant and that as such each side may have legitimate interests in preserving confidentiality. According to that theory it is sufficient, to demonstrate that confidentiality exists, to establish that the interests of either party require as much. I would agree that a determination of confidentiality is not made less objective by the fact that only one side has an interest in maintaining confidentiality. What must be objectively determined is whether the information was obtained in exchange for the explicit or implicit promise that it would be treated confidentially. All that the third indicia of confidentiality outlined by MacKay, J., allows for is the possibility that the Government's need, or the public interest as he puts it, to maintain confidentiality may be legitimately considered as a factor in determining whether a given piece of information is of a confidential nature. As long as this criteria is used as an indicator and not a condition of confidentiality there is no danger in retaining it as a factor to be considered.
[13]
In any event the public interest may indeed require, in the present case, that the relationship of confidentiality be fostered; while the obtention of necessary information in the future may not depend on good relations between government and importers, there is nonetheless a public interest in maintaining good relations per se with law abiding persons. There is a public interest in ensuring that government act in good faith regarding confidential information that is received by it. The Information Commissioner would have government say: "As we have established a quota system based on information which you have provided to us in confidence, and as this system itself ensures your continued cooperation, through economic incentive and the strong arm of the law, we may breach the confidence you have reposed in us without any fear of reprisal; hence we are justified in doing so and mandated to do so by the Access to Information Act". I do not think the Act requires anything of the kind. I find that given the government's duty to act in good faith, there is a public interest in fostering the confidential nature of its relationship with the third party. This is not to say that government will always be bound by its undertaking to act in confidence, the Act expressly provides exceptions to this rule in s. 20(6), but I am satisfied that s. 20(1)(b) does require that the government consider itself bound by its undertakings to act confidentially, in respect of financial, commercial, scientific or technical information, whenever the third party to whom the undertaking was given has consistently treated the information as confidential. This rule holds true whether the undertaking was made either before or after the coming into force of the Access to Information Act. The proper course in challenging the validity of such an undertaking is for the complainant, or the Commissioner, to avail itself of the grounds in s. 20(6). In this way a balancing of interests, in favour of and against disclosure can occur. To hold otherwise, and conclude that undertakings of confidentiality are strictly meaningless in light of the Act, is to give the Act a dogmatic interpretation rather than a rational one, and is thus an interpretation which the law resists.
[14]
The grounds in s. 20(6), set out above, release the government from its undertakings of confidentiality whenever it is in the public interest "as it relates to public health, public safety, or protection of the environment" to do so. Yet none of these valid grounds of public interest have been advanced by the Commission in the present case. In fact the release of the information sought would make the third party, the only cheese importer whose quota was publicly known, and thus place it at a competitive disadvantage in relation to all other importers. If no other quota is revealed, then there is all the more reason to refrain from singling out the third party in this manner. I find that the public interest goes very much against these sort of market interventions by government, and that this is yet another reason to foster the confidentiality of the government's relationship with the third party. I therefore reject the applicant's argument that the information was not confidential because the public interest does not require that a relationship of confidentiality be fostered. I do so for the following two reasons: a) the public interest in fostering confidential relationships is merely an indicator and not a condition of confidentiality; and b) there is a public interest in maintaining the confidentiality of this relationship since: i) an undertaking was given that the information would be kept confidential; and ii) similar relationships with other importers are being maintained confidential, and in these circumstances disclosure of the information would amount to an unfair market intervention by government.
[15]
In light of all the above I am satisfied that the respondents have established based upon an objective determination that the information requested is confidential in nature.
[16]
The Commission based the s. 20(1)(b) aspect of its case on the fact that the information sought is not information "supplied to a government institution by a third party". That is the third criteria identified by MacKay, J., in Air  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . The Commission argued that the information provided in 1975, is not the information that is now being sought. It submitted that:
"The total quota allocation in 1985 is not the same information as was supplied to importers to the STRB in respect of their performance in the years 1973 and 1974. The general reduction in total quotas in 1979, the importers shift in varieties sourced, and other changes in market participants and demand establish that the market is dynamic and subject to continuous variation."
This however is insufficient to rebut the respondents proof that large quota holders (roughly the 20 largest importers) have been able to retain their quotas and shares of the market at a constant level since 1975 other than for the 1979 reduction mentioned above; that these quotas were based on confidential information of the importers' imports in 1973 and 1974; and that neither the information originally received by government, nor any of the quota allocations subsequently deduced from it, have ever been communicated to the public or to any person or firm other than those who originally supplied the information. The uncontested affidavit evidence of the third party is that its own share of the total quota has remained unchanged from 1975 to the present, and that thus, the disclosure of its quota allocation in any given year, would be as harmful as the release of its original or present allocation. To my mind, the information sought (the largest quota in 1985) and the information provided in 1975 by the third party, is essentially the same information, and the disclosure of either would amount to a breach of s. 20(1)(b). The confidentiality of the 1985 quota figure itself is also borne out by the method in which it is received. While it is calculated on the basis of the third party's previous quotas going back to 1975, it is received by government through a computer hookup which preserves the confidentiality of the system. Each importer has been assigned a company file number which gives them access to their quota on the computer. Each import of cheese is added to the quota holder's tally until the quota is reached, at which point import permits are no longer issued. The confidentiality of the importers' file numbers and of their ability to meet their yearly quota allocation complements the confidentiality surrounding the original 1973 and 1974 market information on which the quota allocation is based. The facts reveal plainly to me that the information is supplied by the third party to the Special Trade Relations Bureau, a branch of the Department of External Affairs, which is a government institution, within the meaning of the Act, and I find therefore that the third criterion is met.
[17]
As for the fourth and final criterion under s. 20(1)(b), the evidence amply demonstrates that the third party did itself consistently treat the information sought in a confidential manner. The affidavit of Robert Bertrand, an officer in the Special Trade Relations Bureau, establishes that all importers guard their quota allocation figures jealously as the information is considered "confidential and extremely sensitive". This is also confirmed by the affidavit of Peter Dawes, former chief executive officer of the Canadian Importers Association/Association des Importateurs Canadiens. In the course of his functions with that association, over 16 years, Mr. Dawes helped form and served as executive director of the International Cheese Council of Canada, which was formed in direct response to the government's imposition of import quotas on foreign cheese. In his affidavit Mr. Dawes affirms that:
"The information concerning each importer's volume allocation of quota is so sensitive that even the Council's operating fees, which are based on the volume of each importer's quota, were self-assessed and forwarded to a trust account administered by legal counsel and therefore protected under client/solicitor privilege. This was done by a unanimous instruction from the founding members of the Council.
. . . . .
"Importers consider information on the actual levels of quota allocated to a company as expressed in volume by weight to be highly confidential and a matter of strategic consequence for many reasons, but mostly related to competitive and financial considerations."
Mr. Dawes then goes on to enumerate some of those considerations, but I think that, in the absence of any suggestion by the applicant that the third party, or any other importer has ever made known its own quota figures, the foregoing is sufficient to establish that the final criterion of s. 20(1)(b) was met. Indeed it confirms the uncontested affidavit evidence of the third party itself. Thus I am led to conclude that the respondents have demonstrated that the information sought falls within the exemption under s. 20(1)(b) and that as such the Department's refusal to disclose the information was justified.
[18]
That finding is in itself sufficient to dispose of this matter, but I am also satisfied that the respondents have made out their case for exempting the information under s. 20(1)(c) of the Act.
Section 20(1)(c)
[19]
Under s. 20(1)(c) the parties are agreed that the test requires the party resisting disclosure to adduce evidence of harm that could reasonably be expected to be caused by disclosure. The test was established in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 246, at 255 (F.C.A.) and reaffirmed in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pages 90 and 91].
"In applying [ss. 20(1)(c) and (d)] to the material before him the judge followed the guidelines laid down by MacGuigan, J.A., for this court in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , where he said, at page 89:
'... I believe one must interpret the exceptions to access in paragraphs (c) and (d) to require a reasonable expectation of
probable
harm (The underlining is in the original.)
'The applicant now invites us to say that this is wrong, first because paragraph (c), while conveying the notion of "prejudice" (or harm), does not set so high a threshold as probability and, second, because paragraph (d) speaks only of interference and does not require any showing of harm at all. We do not agree. The setting of the threshold at the point of probable harm seems to us to flow necessarily from the context, not only of the section but of the whole statute and it is the only proper reading to give the French text ("risquerait vraisemblablement de causer des pertes").'"
Thus while the law is clear, and there is no dispute as to the test to be applied, determining just what constitutes a "reasonable expectation of probable harm" will invariably give rise to serious disagreement, as it has in the present case.
[20]
The respondents' argument is advanced in the affidavits of Mr. Dawes, and of "Mr. Third Party", the president of the third party, and its former Controller, Secretary-Treasurer, and Director of Finance. The name of the third party, and its affiant are confidential matters which do not appear in the public records submitted for this application. Mr. Dawes submitted that once the amount of the largest quota allocated in any given year was made public, other importers and knowledgeable parties would immediately be able to match that quota figure to the company to which it was granted, because the largest import quota holders are known to their competitors. He also indicated that as overall demand for imported cheese always surpasses supply, importers are under great pressure from their customers (retailers, wholesalers and restaurants) to use their full quota to meet a particular demand rather than follow through with their particular plans. It is therefore important that an importer's quota volume not be known to its customers. Moreover by keeping its import quota secret a large importer can and will choose to apportion its quota among many small customers or to one customer exclusively for certain cheeses, if its quota volume were known it could not negotiate as successfully with its customers. I find that these disadvantages vis-à-vis one's clientele would be even more accentuated in a case where a given importer was the only importer whose quota volume was known.
[21]
Other than disadvantages vis-à-vis clientele, the Dawes affidavit establishes that knowledge of a competitor's quota volume "is valuable commercial intelligence which can be used to advantage by determining a competitor's price structures and marketing strategies". Given the existing market information, it is argued that knowledge of each importer's quota entitlement is the only information lacking to estimate profit levels, discern pricing strategies, market plans, and financial strength of the competition. One of the conclusions reached by Mr. Dawes is that:
"... disclosure of quota levels of individual importers, or the largest quota holder in Canada in any given year, would cause that importer financial damage. An important distinction on the facts before us is that the loss and damage will be long term: - not as it relates to the products marketed by the company but to the overall competitive position of the company whose confidential information is disclosed once and for all. This is because a company's quota entitlement to various varieties and volume within the current regulatory regime is not expected to change in the foreseeable future."
The affidavit of the third party's president confirms the examples of probable harm that would flow from the divulgation of the information sought, and gives specific examples of how, competitors, suppliers and customers could use the information to the third party's detriment.
[22]
In contrast the Commission has forwarded the expert testimony of Thomas C. Greig, Partner-in-Charge of the International Trade Services Group at Price Waterhouse in Toronto, and former Assistant Deputy Minister of the Customs program in the Federal Department of National Revenue. Mr. Greig has also served as Assistant Deputy Minister, Finance, at the Department of National Defence, and as Executive Vice-President, Finance of M. Loeb Ltd. a wholesale food distributor. After reviewing the affidavits of the respondents Mr. Greig concludes that the release of the information requested "would not result in competitive prejudice or commercial loss or gain to any party participating in the cheese market". Essential to Mr. Greig's findings was his opinion that in a business such as the cheese import business the large players would have a fairly accurate idea of who their major competitors were and what their volume of imports was. He concluded that as the information request did not ask for a breakdown of the largest quota holder's allocation according to variety, country of origin, and quality, nor for the name of the holder, the information revealed could not be used in the manner which the respondents' affiants have suggested. Mr. Greig also submitted that his findings would remain the same even if the name of the largest quota holder were revealed, and indeed it was plainly apparent at the hearing that all the parties knew very well the exact identity of the third party. According to Mr. Greig there is no harm in releasing the information, because, by and large it contains nothing new, nothing that would dramatically alter the competitive position of the third party.
[23]
Having reviewed the evidence thoroughly, I have some sympathy for Mr. Greig's position, but I do not find it sufficiently refutes the evidence of the respondent's affiants. In particular it does not raise any doubt that could be resolved in the applicant's favour. In fact while the information requested, may not be as informative, or as damaging to the third party, as previous access requests in this matter would have been had they not been refused, it is nevertheless information which by its very nature can be of no use other than to the third party's competitors, suppliers or customers. I do not question the motives of the complainant in making the request, and indeed such matters are rarely relevant at all in access requests. But the nature of the information requested is such that in the final analysis I am compelled to conclude that the best evidence put forward is that of the respondents. Given the nature of the information sought, its potential uses, and the great confidence with which it has been guarded at all times, I find that the respondents have established that a reasonable expectation of probable harm exists regarding its disclosure. For these reasons I find that the respondents have met their burden of proving that the information requested is exempt from disclosure under s. 20(1)(c) of the Act.
Section 20(1)(d)
[24]
As for the last ground argued, the exemption under s. 20(1)(d) of the Act, which only the third party raised before me, I must briefly indicate that it was not satisfactorily proven. Section 20(1)(d) requires proof of a reasonable expectation that actual contractual negotiations other than the daily business operations of the third party will be obstructed by disclosure. Reliance is placed on the strong sense of the words "interfere with" as indicated by the use of the word "entraver" in the French text. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 55:
"With respect to s. 20(1)(d), I accept the submission of the information Commissioner that this paragraph is intended to catch contractual situations not covered by s. 20(1)(c) and hence can have no application to day-to-day sales such as are principally in question in the domestic meat industry. It may, however, have some relevance with respect to international sales ..."
[25]
As this case deals with the cheese import business, Mr. Justice MacGuigan's caveat with respect to international sales is not applicable. While some evidence was tendered in the Dawes affidavit of the possible effect of disclosure on international contracts generally, and while hypothetical problems concerning foreign suppliers and local customers were raised in the third party's affidavit, these are not sufficient to establish a reasonable expectation that any particular contract or negotiations will be obstructed by disclosure. Consequently, the grounds for exemption under s. 20(1)(d) have not been demonstrated.
[26]
However as the respondents have demonstrated that the requested information is exempted from disclosure under ss. 20(1)(b) and (c) of the Act, this application and the order requested by the Information Commissioner must be denied.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]