[1]
Rothstein, J.
: This is an application to review the decision of a panel of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board dated June 5, 1992, wherein the panel determined that the applicant was not a Convention refugee.
[2]
The applicant is 30 year old citizen of Somalia who made a claim to Convention refugee status by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution on the grounds of political opinion and membership in a particular social group.
[3]
The applicant was born in Hargeisa, Somalia which is a city in the northern part of Somalia. By birth, the applicant is a member of the Isaaq tribe.
[4]
In 1971, at the age of nine years, the applicant was sent by his parents to live with his aunt in Mandera, Kenya in order to obtain a quality of education that was unavailable in Somalia. The applicant stated that he has not been back to Somalia since that time.
[5]
The applicant was able to stay in Kenya illegally because of a forged birth certificate and identification card that his aunt obtained on his behalf. The forged documents allowed him to stay in Kenya long enough to complete high school and work at his uncle's restaurant in Nairobi.
[6]
In 1988, the Somalia National Movement (SNM), a rebel group dominated by members of the Isaaq clan, rebelled against the Somali government of Mohammed Siad Barre. As a result, a war ensued in northern Somalia between the SNM and the Barre forces.
[7]
The applicant stated that, in 1988, he was told that the Somali government authorities had arrested his father and that members of the applicant's clan, the Isaaq, were being persecuted. Since 1988, the applicant has not heard any news about his family.
[8]
In November of 1989, the Kenyan government implemented a screening program designed to determine which ethnic Somalis were living in Kenya illegally. Those discovered were to be deported to Somalia. The applicant stated that he was afraid to report to the Kenyan authorities since he feared they would discover his forged identification papers. Consequently, the applicant went into hiding. With the help of his uncle, the applicant was able to obtain a forged Kenyan passport and an airplane ticket to Canada. The applicant left Kenya in August 1990, arriving in Canada that same month.
[9]
The civil war between the government forces of President Barre and the SNM led to Barre's overthrow in January of 1991.
[10]
The claimant stated that he fears returning to northern Somalia because the forces of former President Barre are still well armed and capable of persecuting the applicant because of his membership in the Isaaq clan. The applicant stated that there is no government in northern Somalia capable of providing him with protection. He stated that the SNM forms a government in name only but that there are no functioning ministries in the country.
[11]
The applicant stated that he was also fearful of returning to northern Somalia because of inter-clan warfare. Various sub-clans of the Isaaq clan are in conflict with one another and he fears returning to Hargeisa or anywhere else in the north. He was fearful that he might fall victim to the random violence that was occurring in the area.
[12]
The applicant expressed a fear, that because of his Kenyan accent and lifestyle, he would not be comfortable in northern Somalia.
[13]
The Board addressed the issue of whether the applicant faced persecution because of his political opinion and membership in a particular social group. At p. 4 of its reasons, the Board stated:
"There is no documentation that suggests that since the overthrow of Barre that there has been persecution of the Isaaqs in northern Somalia."
[14]
The panel considered the applicant's fear with respect to former President Barre as well as the applicant's fear of persecution from the Isaaq sub-clans in the north of the country at pp. 4 and 5 of its reasons. The panel stated:
"The panel is of the opinion that the evidence does not establish that there is a systemic pattern of abuse amongst Isaaqs towards one another in the north. The political situation in Somalia is unsettled but the oppressive regime of Barre, one of the agents of persecution which the claimant fears, is clearly ousted from power. In the panel's opinion this constitutes a fundamental change insofar as the removal of a key agent of persecution is concerned. The Somalia National Movement (SNM) dominated by the Isaaqs' controls much of the north of the country. The claimant fears that as a member of the Isaaq tribe he could be at risk if inter-tribal conflict and violence ensues in the north of Somalia.
"The panel is of the opinion that it's too early to discern a pattern that would seriously threaten the stability in the north of Somalia.
"There is no provision in the definition of Convention refugee set out in the
Immigration Act
that pertains to the protection of members of the factions and tribal conflicts who face conflict of a generalized nature in which the participants could be exposed to the same degree of risk."
[15]
The evidence before the Board was that Barre and his supporters were located in southwestern Somalia. In 1991, Barre attempted to gain control of Mogadishu but he was beaten back. There was no evidence that Barre was a serious threat in the north which was controlled by the Isaaq, the applicant's clan.
[16]
As to whether there was an effective government to protect the applicant in the event of a threat by the Barre forces, applicant's counsel referred to a portion of the documentary evidence which suggested that in the north there had been much destruction of the infrastructure of the area. The applicant had testified that while there was a government, it had no functioning departments.
[17]
Counsel for the respondent referred to references in the evidence to there being a defence minister in the regional government authority in the north. Some evidence indicated that while the government may have lost control in one centre because of intra-clan rivalry, this did not suggest that there was a total absence of governmental authority in the north.
[18]
In my opinion the Board's conclusions respecting the threat of the Barre forces was reasonable. Barre is in the southwest. His attempts at returning to power have been unsuccessful. Counsel did not refer me to any direct evidence of a potential threat of Barre forces in the north. As to governmental protection, while there certainly was evidence of destruction of infrastructure in the north of Somalia, that is not equivalent to there being no functioning government. There is some evidence of the existence of a government. I cannot say that the Board ignored evidence or took into account factors that were not in the evidence in concluding that the applicant could avail himself of governmental protection in the event of a threat from the Barre forces. I do not think the Board erred in either of these two respects.
[19]
Two other arguments of the applicant require attention. One is that the evidence indicated that the northern part of Somalia had declared itself independent as the Somaliland Republic. Counsel argued that there was a question as to whether the applicant had a right to go to Somaliland and that the onus was on the respondent to demonstrate that indeed he could. Counsel said that the panel ignored this issue. However, he acknowledged that he did not raise it before the panel. In my view, if this is a real issue, the applicant has the onus of showing, at least on a prima facie basis, that he might encounter some difficulty in trying to enter the new country. The onus is not on the respondent or the Board to raise the issue. When it was not raised by counsel for the applicant, the Board did not err by not addressing the issue.
[20]
The final issue is whether it is reasonable for the applicant to return to northern Somalia. Counsel for the applicant argued, based on the doctrine of Internal Flight Alternative, that reasonableness is a relevant consideration in this case.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.). at p. 711. Counsel for the applicant says it is not reasonable because of the destruction of the country, the fact that the applicant has not lived there for many years and because of his Kenyan accent and western influence which would render him out of place in northern Somalia. Counsel argues, based on
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.) and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), that the reasonableness test need not be related to the applicant's fear of persecution.
[21]
Counsel for the respondent says that the Board in this case did not address the matter of Internal Flight Alternative in its reasons because the applicant had not been in Somalia before he came to Canada. Further, she says that in any event, the reasonableness test must be related to persecution. Otherwise persons outside a region would have a better claim to refugee status than persons living within the region for reasons based on factors other than fear of persecution. Counsel for the respondent indicated that <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> was not definitive on this point and that the scope of the reasonableness test was to be decided by the Federal Court of Appeal in an upcoming appeal.
[22]
As I read the decisions cited by counsel for the applicant, I do not see that they link the reasonableness test to a well-founded fear of persecution by the applicant. The approach that I will adopt on this issue therefore will be consistent with the cases cited by counsel for the applicant.
[23]
While in this case the Board did not deal with the Internal Flight Alternative doctrine, the facts of this case are similar to those in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (supra), in which a citizen of Somalia had lived in Kenya for some years and had claimed refugee status in Canada. It seems that by analogy, the Internal Flight Alternative doctrine might be applicable in cases of refugees coming from countries other than their country of citizenship, but only being able to return to a portion of their country of citizenship because they still have a well-founded fear of persecution in other parts of that country. In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (supra), Wetston, J., stated at p. 315 of his decision:
"In assessing Hargeisa as an IFA, the Board did not appear to have fully applied the test enunciated in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra. The applicant asserts that he has no way of proving that he belongs to the Isaaq clan if he is returned to Hargeisa. This fact was brought to the Board's attention during the hearing (p. 29 of the Board's record), but is not addressed in the Board's reasons Similarly, the applicant states that he has never lived in Somalia, that he does not know where his family is, that he does not speak the language and that he has no prospects for residence or employment in Somalia, including Hargeisa. These are all circumstances, particular to the individual that must be considered in assessing the reasonableness of an IFA. However, these matters are not discussed in the Board's reasons."
[24]
In the case at bar the Board dealt with reasonableness at p. 5 of its decision:
"The claimant has stated that he would feel out of place in Somalia since he hasn't been there for 20 years. However, the panel is of the opinion that that is not within the purview of the definition. He has a good knowledge of the situation in Somalia and in particular the north. The claimant may fear economic hardship that awaits him or the atmosphere of distrust that prevails throughout Somalia but we cannot see why there is a serious possibility that he would face persecution for any of the reasons in the definition of Convention refugee or who he could face it from especially in the northern part of Somalia."
[25]
In my view the panel, for all intents and purposes, took the position that the applicant's concern about feeling out of place, his absence for 20 years, his Kenyan accent, economic hardship and the atmosphere of distrust were irrelevant. Following <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (supra), I must conclude that the panel erred in not considering these circumstances particular to the applicant and not considering the reasonableness of the applicant having to return to northern Somalia.
[26]
The application is allowed. The June 5, 1992, decision of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board is set aside and the matter is referred back to a differently constituted panel for rehearing and reconsideration solely on the issue of the reasonableness of the applicant returning to northern Somalia.
Application allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]