[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for judicial review pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
by the applicant, Edwina Slattery, in regard to a decision of the Canadian Human Rights Commission (the "Commission" or the "CHRC"), dated February 21, 1991, not to deal with the applicant's complaint (number H 32197) against the Public Service Staff Relations Board (the "Board"). The decision was made under s. 41(d) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. H-6 (the "
CHR Act
"), because the Commission was of the opinion that the facts, as alleged by the applicant, did not constitute a discriminatory practice.
[2]
This was one of two applications brought by the applicant for judicial review of two decisions of the Commission. The other concerned a decision of the Commission, after investigation, to dismiss complaints of age and sex discrimination alleged by the applicant against their employer, the Communications Security Establishment of the Department of National Defence (the "CSE"). That other application for judicial review, of the Commission's decision, made pursuant to s. 44(3)(b)(i) of the
CHR Act
, has been dealt with by my colleague  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[3]
In this case the applicant's claim of discrimination against the board was also dismissed by the Commission at a more preliminary stage and pursuant to a different provision of the
Act
than was followed in Court file T-675-92. Here the decision not to deal with the applicant's complaint was made on the basis that the Commission determined, pursuant to s. 41(d) of the
Act
, that the facts as alleged in the complaint did not constitute a discriminatory practice under the
Act
. While it was not referred to in argument as authority for the CHRC decision in this case, it is clear, in my opinion, that the authority lies under s. 44(3)(b)(ii) of the
Act
. It is urged by the applicant that this decision, made without investigation other than consideration of the complaint itself, breached principles of natural justice including procedural fairness, and that the Commission exceeded its jurisdiction and erred in law. This application seeks an order setting aside the decision of the CHRC and referred the matter back with directions that the Commission deal with the applicant's complaint.
Background
[4]
The applicant, Edwina Slattery, was a senior employee in years of service, of the CSE serving as a cryptanalyst from 1956 until she was dismissed by her employer on May 4, 1988. Beginning in the mid 1970's, she became involved in and began promoting women's issues at the CSE, and she led in development of an early Equal Opportunity for Women project. She became the Special Advisor/Equal Opportunities for women for the CSE. The background of her experience at the CSE is fully described in the Reasons of Mr. Justice Nadon in regard to the applicant's other application for judicial review, referred to above.
[5]
Over the years, the applicant filed with the Commission a number of complaints of discrimination against her employer. The complaint giving rise to the Commission's decision here in question arose from differences between her employer and the applicant concerning the terms of an agreement in writing under which she was on paid education leave. The employer requested an outline of the courses that the applicant was proposing to take, and when the applicant did not respond, the employer wrote informing her that she was in breach of the agreement, terminating the agreement and instructing her to return to work. On May 4, 1988, when the applicant did not report for work at the CSE as directed, her employer terminated her employment, by a declaration that she had abandoned her position, pursuant to s. 27 of the
Public Service Employment Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-33. The applicant filed a complaint with the CHRC against her employer alleging sex and age discrimination contrary to s. 7 of the
CHR Act
. She alleged that the Deputy-Chief of CSE had declared that she had abandoned her position even though she was authorized to be away from work until 1990 under the paid educational leave agreement, and that her employer had denied her severance pay and had returned her pension contributions without her prior knowledge or approval.
[6]
The Commission then referred the applicant to the Public Service Staff Relations Board as the appropriate forum for her case, and she grieved the declaration of abandonment of her position, pursuant to s. 92(1) of the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-35. Over a 25 day period, from November, 1988 through to October, 1989, a Board adjudication hearing was conducted to determine whether the employer's declaration of abandonment of position was a valid declaration or a disciplinary action in disguise. During the course of the hearing, the adjudicator, having suggested that the parties engage in a mediation process, arranged for a mediator. Mediation, however, was not successful. Finally, on March 12, 1990, the adjudicator found that the applicant had not abandoned her position and that the employer's declaration of abandonment had been rendered in bad faith. Although the adjudicator so concluded, she declined to order that the applicant be reinstated. Instead, as a remedy, the applicant was awarded a lump sum payment equivalent to two years salary at her former pay rate, without any benefits.
[7]
On March 15, 1991, the applicant filed a complaint with the Commission against the board, alleging that it had discriminated against her by treating her in an adverse, differential manner because of her sex and age, contrary to ss. 2, 7, 10, 12, 14, of the
Act
. In her complaint, she alleged that several incidents during the Board's adjudication hearing constituted continuation of the harassment and discrimination by her former employer, the CSE. More specifically, the applicant made several allegations against counsel representing the employer, against the mediator, and against the adjudicator's decisions. It is said that counsel representing the employer harassed her and treated another female witness differently, that the mediator called her a "hog" and made numerous attempts to coerce her to withdraw her human rights complaints, that the adjudicator's decision, by failing to grant reinstatement, perpetuated the effects of the employer's discrimination against her, and that the decision was sexist, containing stereotypical notions of maleness and femaleness.
[8]
On March 18, 1991, the Commission designated an investigator for the applicant's complaint. The investigator prepared a "Report Prior to Investigation", dated July 30, 1991, which recommended that "the Commission not deal with the complaint because the facts as alleged by the complainant would not constitute a discriminatory practice". In a "Summary of reasons for recommendation", the report stated, in part:
"3. The complainant's allegations do not constitute discrimination under the
Canadian Human Rights Act
. She insisted on filing her complaint under ss. 2, 7, 10, 12 and 14. Section 2 only states the purpose of the
Act
. An employment relationship does not exist between the respondent and the complainant for ss. 7 and 10 to apply. In addition, the complainant does not support her allegation that there was a violation of s. 12, which relates to the publication of discriminatory notices.
"4. As to the complainant's allegation of a violation of s. 14, the conduct of the counsel for the department is not applicable to the complaint, and the facts alleged in the complaint about the conduct of the mediator and the decision of the adjudicator does not support the allegation."
[9]
The investigator found, essentially on consideration of the complaints as filed by Ms. Slattery, that the complainant had met the requirement of s. 40 to file a complaint and that the mediation service provided by the board was within the reach of s. 5 of the
CHR Act
. She also stated that the respect to the mediator's alleged misbehaviour, the mediator's single comment of name calling, made during the course of a mediation discussion, could not support an allegation of sexual harassment under the
CHR Act
. With respect to the adjudicator's decision itself, the investigator's report stated that "the facts alleged in the complaint form provide no basis to support the allegation that the decision of the adjudicator itself constitutes harassment."
[10]
The process of the investigation is criticized by the applicant. It is urged by the applicant and not disputed by the respondent that the investigator did not investigate the complaints by inquiries to the applicant, to the board, the mediator, the adjudicator, or any persons who might be considered to be witnesses to the board's processes, and the investigator did not examine the adjudicator's decision about which the applicant complained. Moreover, the adjudicator's decision was not subsequently considered by the CHRC, and was not part of the documentary record before the Commission when it determine to dismiss the complaint.
[11]
Before consideration of the investigator's report by the Commission the applicant was provided an opportunity to respond to the pre-investigation report. In response, counsel for the applicant made submissions on November 1, 1991, and requested the Commission to proceed by further investigating the complaint, on the basis that the facts of the case did constitute discriminatory practice and that serious issues of discrimination were raised which were of concern, not only to the complainant but also generally, as a matter of public policy.
[12]
On February 17, 1992, the Commission considered all three complaints filed by the applicant: two against the employer, the CSE and one against the board. In reaching its decision with respect to the complaint against the board, which decision gives rise to this application for judicial review, the Commission had before it the following materials: the "Report Prior to Investigation", dated July 30, 1991; the complaint form, dated March 15, 1991; a chronology; a letter and submissions from Lucie Laliberte (counsel for the applicant) to the Commission, dated November 4, 1991, made in response to the investigator's report which had been provided for comment by the applicant; and a letter from Ian Deans [Chair, Public Service Staff Relations Board] to the Commission, dated September 5, 1991, declining to make any representations with regard to the investigator's Report prior to Investigation.
[13]
The Commission's decision was communicated to the applicant, by a letter dated February 21, 1992, which read as follows:
"The Canadian Human Rights Commission has reviewed your complaint (H32197) against the Public Service Staff Relations Board dated March 15, 1991, alleging discrimination in employment on the grounds of sex and age. The Commission also reviewed the submissions dated November 1, 1991, November 4, 1991 and February 6, 1992, signed by Lucie Laliberte.
"After careful consideration of the documents submitted the Commission has decided, pursuant to s. 41(d) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, not to deal with the complaint because the Commission is of the opinion that the facts, as alleged, would not constitute a discriminatory practice.
"As the Commission's decision is final, we have closed our file on this complaint."
[14]
Thereafter, on March 23, 1992, the applicant filed on originating motion initiating this application for judicial review, seeking an order that the decision conveyed by letter of February 21, 1992 be set aside and the matter be referred back to the CHRC to deal with the applicant's complaint.
Relevant Statutory Provisions
[15]
The applicant has made her complaint, of discrimination based on sex and age, against the board, pursuant to ss. 2, 7, 10, 12, 14 of the
CHR Act
. Those provisions, as they relate to such discrimination, are as follows:
"2. The purpose of this Act is to extend the laws in Canada to give effect, within the purview of matters coming within the legislative authority of Parliament, to the principle that every individual should have an equal opportunity with other individuals to make for himself or herself the life that he or she is able and wishes to have, consistent with his or her duties and obligations as a member of society, without being hindered in or prevented from doing so by discriminatory practices based on ... age, sex, ...
. . . . .
"7. It is a discriminatory practice, directly or indirectly,
(a) to refuse to employ or continue to employ any individual, or
(b) in the course of employment, to differentiate adversely in relation to an employee,
on a prohibited ground of discrimination.
. . . . .
"10. It is a discriminatory practice for an employer, employee organization or organization of employers
(a) to establish or pursue a policy or practice, or
(b) to enter into an agreement affecting recruitment, referral, hiring, promotion, training, apprenticeship, transfer or any other matter relating to employment or prospective employment,
that deprives or tends to deprive an individual or class of individuals of any employment opportunities on a prohibited ground of discrimination.
. . . . .
"12. It is a discriminatory practice to publish or display before the public or to cause to be published or displayed before the public any notice, sign, symbol, emblem or other representation that
(a) expresses or implies discrimination or an intention to discriminate, or
(b) incites or is calculated to incite others to discriminate
if the discrimination expressed or implied, intended to be expressed or implied or incited or calculated to be incited would otherwise, if engaged in, be a discriminatory practice described in any of ss. 5 to 11 or in s. 14.
. . . . .
"14(1) It is a discriminatory practice,
(a) in the provision of goods, services, facilities or accommodation customarily available to the general public,
(b) in the provision of commercial premises or residential accommodation, or
(c) in matters related to employment,
to harass an individual on a prohibited ground of discrimination.
"14(2) Without limiting the generality of subs. (1), sexual harassment shall, for the purposes of that subsection, be deemed to be harassment on a prohibited ground of discrimination."
[16]
The respondent submits that the Commission has statutory discretion under the
CHR Act
to decide how to deal with a complaint. That discretion, is urged, arises from the following provisions:
"41. Subject to s. 40, the Commission shall deal with any complaint filed with it unless in respect of that complaint it appears to the Commission that
(a) the alleged victim of the discriminatory practice to which the complaint relates ought to exhaust grievance or review procedures otherwise reasonably available;
(b) the complaint is one that could more appropriately be dealt with, initially or completely, according to a procedure provided for under an Act of Parliament other than this Act;
(c) the complaint is beyond the jurisdiction of the Commission;
(d) the complaint is trivial, frivolous, vexatious or made in bad faith; or
(e) the complaint is based on acts or omissions the last of which occurred more than one year, or such longer period of time as the Commission considers appropriate in the circumstances, before receipt of the complaint.
"42(1) Subject to subs. (2), when the Commission decides not to deal with a complaint, it shall send a written notice of its decision to the complainant setting out the reason for its decision.
"42(2) Before deciding that a complaint will not be dealt with because a procedure referred to in para. 41(a) has not been exhausted, the Commission shall satisfy itself that the failure to exhaust the procedure was attributable to the complainant and not to another.
"43(1) The Commission may designate a person, in this Part referred to as an 'investigator', to investigate a complaint.
"43(2) An investigator shall investigate a complaint in a manner authorized by regulations made pursuant to subs. (4).
. . . . .
"44(1) An investigator shall, as soon as possible after the conclusion of an investigation, submit to the Commission a report of the findings of the investigation.
"44(2) If, on receipt of a report referred to in subs. (1), the Commission is satisfied
(a) that the complainant ought to exhaust grievance or review procedures otherwise reasonably available, or
(b) that the complaint could more appropriately be dealt with, initially or completely, by means of a procedure provided for under an Act of Parliament other than this Act,
it shall refer the complainant to the appropriate authority.
"44(3) On receipt of a report referred to in subs. (1), the Commission
(a) may request the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel to appoint a Human Rights Tribunal in accordance with s. 49 to inquire into the complaint to which the report relates if the Commission is satisfied
(i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is warranted, and
(ii) that the complaint to which the report relates should not be referred pursuant to subs. (2) or dismissed on any ground mentioned in paras. 41(c) to (e); or
(b) shall dismiss the complaint to which the report relates if it is satisfied
(i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is not warranted, or
(ii) that the complaint should be dismissed on any ground mentioned in paras. 41(c) to (e).
. . . . .
"47(1) Subject to subs. (2), the Commission may, on the filing of a complaint, or if the complaint has not been
(a) settled in the course of investigation by an investigator,
(b) referred or dismissed under subs. 44(2) or (3) or para. 45(2)(a) or 46(2)(a), or
(c) settled after receipt by the parties of the notice referred to in subs. 44(4),
appoint a person, in this Part referred to as a 'conciliator', for the purpose of attempting to bring about a settlement of the complaint.
. . . . .
"49(1) The Commission may, at any stage after the filing of a compliant, request the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel to appoint a Human Rights Tribunal, in this Part referred to as a 'Tribunal', to inquire into the complaint if the Commission is satisfied that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is warranted."
The Issues
[17]
The issues raised concern the exercise of the Commission's discretion in the conduct of investigation of complaints. It is urged on behalf of the applicant that there was no investigation in this case and the failure to examine any evidence beyond the written complaint filed by the applicant was a breach of the principle of fairness, and in assessing the applicant's complaint the Commission erred in law as it also did by failing to apply the
Act
properly in its decision. The issues also raise the question of the appropriate standard for judicial review.
The Conduct Of The Investigation
[18]
It is accepted that in this case the investigator appointed to investigate the applicant's complaint did not interview any possible witnesses including the applicant, the counsel for the employer, the mediator or the adjudicator whose conduct or whose report respectively were the focus of certain specific complaints of Ms. Slattery. Nor did the investigator examine the report of the adjudicator, or refer it to the Commission. On the basis of her review of the applicant's complaints, apparently with some internal staff discussion, the investigator completed her report prior to investigation, recommending that the CHRC not deal with the applicant's complaint against the board.
[19]
That report was provided to counsel for the applicant and to the board for comment and counsel for the applicant made substantial comment in regard to the investigator's findings and recommendations and urging that the investigation be carried further. The investigator's report and submissions of the applicant's counsel were both before the Commission in February 1992 when it made its decision to dismiss the complaint. In providing opportunity for the parties to the complaint to comment on the investigator's report before it was submitted to the Commission, and in ensuring that comments received were submitted to the Commission, the process appears to meet the standard of fairness set out by Mr. Justice Sopinka in
Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 385; at 902.
[20]
Nevertheless, it is here contended that the principle of fairness is breached by the failure of the investigator to look beyond the written complaint of the applicant. For the Commission it is urged that it acts primarily in an administrative capacity in the exercise of the discretion vested in it to conduct investigations. That exercise involves investigations at varying levels of complexity, the first a paper screening to review the complaint in light of s. 41, in order to assess whether further investigation is warranted, then an investigation that leads to the collection and assessment of evidence relating to the complaint and finally a thorough assessment of all available evidence for presentation to a tribunal, if the Commission determines that the complaint should be referred for investigation and report by a tribunal. In this case the investigator's conclusion after the paper screening assessment was that the complaint, on the facts alleged, did not constitute any discriminatory practice under the
Act
.
[21]
As we have seen, the report with that conclusion and the bases for it was provided to the applicant before its submission to the Commission and the resulting comments of counsel for the applicant were submitted with the report of the investigator to the Commission for its consideration. In my opinion, the process followed cannot be said to have violated the principle of fairness applicable in the investigation of complaints by the CHRC.
[22]
There can be no doubt that establishment and management of a process for investigating complaints made under s. 40 is within the discretion of the CHRC under its enabling legislation. In the exercise of that discretion this court should only intervene where it is persuaded the Commission has erred in law or has acted unreasonably. That standard is described by my colleague Mr. Justice Nadon in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 658; and
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , per McIntyre, J., at p. 5 S.C.R. The decision of Nadon, J., in
Slattery
, supra, has since been followed by my colleague  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  note that recent decisions of the court have declined to set aside other decisions of the Commission to dismiss complaints where those decisions have been made under s. 44(3)(b)(i).  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), my colleague Mr. Justice Dubé declined to order certiorari in a case where the Commission determined that on the evidence the allegations of discrimination were unwarranted. In the course of his decision Dubé, J., commented (at p. 196):
"The
Act
does not require that members of the Commission examine the complete record of the investigation. The
Act
does not provide for an oral hearing in the case of an investigation, but provides for written observations, unlike the investigation by a Tribunal, where the hearing takes the form of an adversary proceeding. The members of the Commission must decide based on the material before them whether the evidence provides reasonable justification for proceeding to the next stage ..."
In both
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), and in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), my colleague Mr. Justice Pinard declined to grant certiorari in relation to decisions of the Commission not to proceed further with investigation of complaints because, having regard to all the circumstances, an inquiry into the complaint was unwarranted, pursuant to s. 44(3)(b)(i).
[24]
The applicant in the case at bar seeks to distinguish all three of these cases, as well as
Syndicat
, supra, on the ground that in each of those cases, unlike this one, the investigator appointed to consider the complaint had gone well beyond considering the written complaint itself and had sought and considered other evidence before recommending that the complaint not be further pursued.
[25]
I deal later in these reasons with the particular errors in law alleged by the applicant. Aside from those, no error appears from the record. In my opinion, the investigator's report, which implicity explains the Commission's decision which adopted the report's recommendation without expressing any independent reasoning, did not err in law in its summary reasons. Those reasons included that no complaint lies under s. 2 of the
Act
which states the purposes of the legislation; that there was no employment relationship between the board and the applicant and thus no basis for any complaint under ss. 7 and 10; that no factual basis was alleged, of the publishing or display before the public of any notice, sign, symbol, emblem or other representation expressing, implying or inciting discrimination, necessary for the application of s. 12. Though each of those was a conclusion of law, none of them is in error in the circumstances of this case.
[26]
I turn to the particular allegations of the applicant that the Commission erred in law in relation to its investigation.
Errors In Law Alleged
In The Investigation
[27]
It is urged that two aspects central to the applicant's complaint were not considered by the investigator or by the CHRC in its decision. These were the complaints concerning the adjudicator's decision, which decision the investigator and the Commission failed to consider, and the alleged discrimination against the applicant by the mediator named by the adjudicator.
[28]
In regard to both it is urged that as there was no investigation by the investigator of the evidentiary basis for these complaints, the decision not to deal with the complaints in the absence of any evidence constitutes a denial of natural justice and an error in the exercise of the Commission's jurisdiction. I am not persuaded that this is the result in law unless the complaints were clearly within the jurisdiction of the Commission under the
Act
. Here the Commission's decision was that they were not within its jurisdiction, that is, that the complaints did not raise a basis for finding any discriminatory practice under the
Act
.
[29]
The adjudicator's decision was obviously important in the perceptions of the applicant and her complaint. The complaint itself alleges that the result was simply carrying on the discriminatory treatment of her employer, i.e., awarding mere monetary damages when only reinstatement of the applicant in her employment would provide redress in the absence of fault on her part. The effects upon the applicant of the report, the sexist flavour of the report, the alleged inexperience of the adjudicator in dealing with issues of discrimination are outlined in the applicant's complaint and in the later written submissions of her counsel. In these circumstances, was it an error in law for the investigator, and later the Commission, to fail to take into account the content of the adjudicator's report?
[30]
Counsel for the Commission rightly points out that the CHRC had no authority to review the adjudicator's report or its results. It is suggested such a review might have been open to the applicant by seeking judicial review of the report but that was not done. Whether or not judicial review was a process open to the applicant it is clear that the CHRC has no authority to review the adjudicator's report in any manner that would constitute assessment or judgment on its merits.
[31]
Here the investigator's report includes in its summary of reasons the statement "As to the complainant's allegation of a violation of s. 14, ... the facts alleged in the complaint about ... the decision of the adjudicator does (sic) not support the allegations". In the investigator's more extended discussion, brief reference is also made to this particular aspect of the applicant's complaint in the following terms:
"15. Under s. 14(1) of the
Act
, a complaint of harassment must relate to an activity, such as employment or the provision of a service ...
"16. The other allegations of harassment relate to the conduct of the mediator, and the decision of the adjudicator. The facts alleged in the complaint form provide no basis to support the allegation that the decision of the adjudicator itself constitutes harassment. ..."
In written submissions for the applicant it is urged that the Commission could not reach its decision without, at a minimum, considering the evidence relied upon by the applicant as detailed in her complaint and in the submissions advanced on her behalf by counsel, i.e., the report of the adjudicator. It is clear that the submissions of counsel and the applicant's complaint were before the Commission. The fact that the adjudicator's decision was not considered by the CHRC or by the investigator is not, in my opinion, a basis for invalidating the board's decision.
[32]
I reach that conclusion because I am not persuaded that the Commission erred in law in its determination that on the facts alleged, the report of the adjudicator, did not constitute "a discriminatory practice" under the
Act
, with particular reference to s. 14 which provides for the discriminatory practice of harassment on a prohibited ground of discrimination. The report of the adjudicator, authorized by law as the conclusion of an inquiry under the
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, could not be considered, despite the applicant's perceptions, as an extension of the relationship previously existing between CSE and the applicant. Nor can it be considered, by itself, whatever its content, to be harassment within the circumstances provided by s. 14(1).
[33]
For similar reasons, I am not persuaded that the CHRC erred in concluding that the factual basis of the applicant's complaint in relation to the conduct of the mediator did not constitute harassment within s. 14(1). Again, it is urged that failure to seek evidence of the matter beyond the terms of the applicant's complaint was an error in law by the Commission. Moreover, the statement in the investigator's report, which the Commission's decision implicitly endorsed, that "the single comment, i.e., calling the applicant a 'hog' because she refused to agree not to pursue her human rights and privacy complaints, and her civil action, in return for a financial settlement" does not constitute harassment, is said to constitute an error in law. The applicant relies on decisions of Human Rights Tribunals which have included comment that a single incident of discrimination on the basis of sex may constitute sexual discrimination. While the decisions referred to [see footnote 1] do not support that principle except by dicta of the tribunal members concerned, counsel for the respondent at the hearing conceded the general principle that a series of acts or a course of conduct may not be necessary to establish discrimination based on sex, or harassment based on sexual discrimination. That may be, in circumstances where the parties are in an employment relationship, as was the case in the decisions relied on by the applicant. No such relationship was in existence between the mediator, or the adjudicator or the board, and the applicant in the case at bar.
[34]
Even accepting that in providing mediation and adjudication services, the board was providing services customarily available to the general public within s. 14(1)(a) of the
Act
, there was no continuing relationship between the board and the applicant. A single incident of conduct, however inappropriate or even offensive, or a single decision of an adjudicator, could not ordinarily be considered to constitute harassment of the applicant. In my opinion, it cannot be said to be in error, or unreasonable, for the Commission to conclude that, in the absence of a continuing relationship involving unequal power between the applicant and those acting on behalf of the board, a single incident of offensive conduct or a single decision of an adjudicator does not constitute harassment on a prohibited discriminatory ground in this case. I am not persuaded that the CHRC erred in law, in finding that the facts alleged by the applicant did not constitute a discriminatory practice.
The Standard For Judicial Review
[35]
For the applicant, written submissions urged that the Commission should treat a complaint in the circumstances of this or any other case, "on the basis that the facts alleged by the complainant are true or are capable of being proven", a standard similar to that of this court in considering a motion to dismiss an action or to strike a pleading on the ground that no cause of action is established in law. As I read the decision of the Commission, implicitly accepting the recommendation and the reasons of the investigator, that is essentially what was done in this case. It is assumed the facts alleged by the applicant in her complaint are true or capable of proof, but those "facts" do not include her interpretation of the
CHR Act
. The decision here is that on the facts alleged, no discriminatory practice under the
Act
is established. That assessment is more than one of fact; it includes assessment of the application of the law to the facts alleged.
[36]
The determination by the Commission, in its implicit finding that the decision of the adjudicator and the conduct of the mediator did not constitute discriminatory practices under s. 14(1), ultimately concerns the jurisdiction of the Commission. In that decision the standard for the court in an application for judicial review, in light of the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, per La Forest, J., at p. 583 of [1993] 1 S.C.R., is ultimately the standard of correctness.
[37]
In deference to the expertise of the CHRC in relation to issues relating to the application of its enabling statute to the facts of complaints, it is my view that the court should intervene in relation to issues concerning jurisdiction of the Commission only where it is persuaded the Commission has erred, that its decision is incorrect. That recognizes the appropriate standard in the context of the deference to the decisions of the CHRC made in the course of administering its enabling statute, and in the context of the normal burden of argument in an application for judicial review pursuant to s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
.
[38]
In this case this court is not persuaded that the Commission has erred in law in its determination that the facts alleged by the applicant in her complaint would not constitute a discriminatory practice.
The Commission's Decision And
Paragraph 41(d) Of The Act
[39]
The final argument raised by the applicant is that the Commission erred in law by deciding pursuant to s. 41(d) not to deal with the complaint, without expressly stating in its decision any reference to the criteria included in that paragraph or to the basis on which the Commission reached its decision. Essentially, this argument raises the nature of the reasons that ought to be expressed by the Commission for its conclusion.
[40]
Under s. 42(1) when the Commission decides not to deal with a complaint, it is required to "send written notice of its decision to the complainant setting out the reason for the decision". The applicant argues, in effect, that if the reason is as expressed in this case, because pursuant to s. 41(d) it is of the opinion that the facts as alleged would not constitute a discriminatory practice, then the Commission must expressly state in the terms of s. 41(d) that the complaint is trivial, or frivolous, or vexatious, or made in bad faith and perhaps also explain why this is so.
[41]
Perhaps if the Commission were to do so it might in some cases communicate more effectively or precisely why it has decided not to deal further with a complaint, though in most circumstances it may be unlikely even this would satisfy a disappointed complaint. Nevertheless, I hasten to add that in my view the responsibility of the CHRC, to give reasons under s. 42(1), was met in this case. There is not, in my opinion, an obligation in law for the Commission to specify which one or more of the criteria in s. 41(d) of the
Act
it has determined is or are applicable to a complaint which it dismisses under that provision. More especially is this so where it has not merely made reference to that paragraph as a basis of its decision, but has specified that it has determined, or is of the opinion, that the facts as alleged would not constitute a discriminatory practice. In short, the complaint deals with circumstances which the Commission concludes are not within its jurisdiction to consider. That explanation clearly meets the CHRC's obligation in law to give reason for its decision, pursuant to s. 42(1).
[42]
In a legal sense the complaint may be said to be frivolous, not that it is not seriously intended, but rather in the sense that it is beyond the jurisdiction of the CHRC and to pursue the matter would be futile since nothing can be done by the Commission under its enabling legislation to seek redress of the matters that are the subject of the complaint.
Conclusion
[43]
For the reasons set out, I am not persuaded that the CHRC erred in law in its determination that the facts as alleged by the applicant would not constitute a discriminatory practice under the
Act
and that it would not deal with the complaint, pursuant to s. 41(d). Nor did it err in law in not referring to one or more of the criteria in s. 41(d) in expressing its decision.
[44]
Thus, an order goes dismissing this application for judicial review.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/saf
Footnote
1.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  document]