[1]
Rothstein, J.
: The applicant is a citizen of El Salvador. His refugee application is based on his fear of persecution by the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN) and from the police authorities in El Salvador.
[2]
The FMLN sought to recruit the applicant in March 1988. In July 1988, the applicant joined the police force of El Salvador. There was evidence of further attempts by the FMLN to recruit him and threats of violence and death if he resisted recruitment.
[3]
As a result of threats to his family from the FMLN, the applicant deserted from the police force in September of 1990 and went to Honduras. He subsequently came to Canada and made a refugee claim. The refugee claim was based not only on his fear of the FMLN but also on his fear of the military authorities who he alleged would persecute deserters from the police force.
[4]
On February 1, 1992, a peace accord was entered into in El Salvador ending 12 years of war in that country.
[5]
The applicant's refugee claim was heard by the Immigration and Refugee Board on May 8 and June 17, 1992, and a decision was rendered by a panel of the Board on September 18, 1992, refusing the applicant's refugee claim.
[6]
Counsel for the respondent acknowledges that, but for the changed circumstances in El Salvador, the respondent would not oppose the applicant's refugee claim. Respondent's counsel also agrees that the Board did make errors with respect to certain aspects of the evidence but since these errors referred to matters prior to the change in country conditions, they were not important for the purpose of this judicial review.
[7]
Counsel for the applicant submits that a change of country conditions must be meaningful and effective and durable to remove the objective basis of the applicant's well-founded fear of persecution. He relies upon
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), in which Marceau, J.A., states at p. 224:
"... the mere declarations of the new four-month old government that it favoured the establishment of law and order can hardly be seen, when the root of the appellant's fear and the past record of the new government with respect to human rights violations are considered, as a clear indication of the
meaningful and effective
change which is required to expunge the objective foundation of the appellant's claim." (my underlining)
[8]
Similarly in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), Marceau, J.A., states at p. 392:
"Again, a more detailed analysis of the conflicting evidence in respect of a change in circumstances was necessary to meet the requirement that the change be
meaningful and effective
enough to render the genuine fear of the appellant unreasonable and hence without foundation." (my underlining)
[9]
Applicant's counsel submits that these statements stand for the proposition that a change in country conditions must be meaningful and effective. Counsel for the respondent does not challenge this statement of the law. I am aware that some jurisprudence of the Trial Division of this court is to the effect that there is no requirement that an immigration tribunal must consider whether a change in country conditions is effective or durable or even substantial. See for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). But I am bound by the jurisprudence established by the Federal Court of Appeal. I acknowledge that the standard to be met by the Minister in arguing changed country conditions in a Convention refugee application is not as high as in a case of removing Convention refugee status.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.), decision dated October 8, 1993. But this does not derogate from the necessity for an immigration tribunal to have some regard for the meaningfulness and effectiveness of the change in country conditions.
[10]
The context in which changed country conditions is to be considered is in relation to an applicant having established a well-founded fear of persecution in the absence of changed country conditions. To refuse an otherwise sustainable refugee claim on the basis of changed country conditions without some regard to whether the change is meaningful and effective so as to remove the objective basis for the applicant's fear of persecution would not be reasonable.
[11]
The evidence upon which the Board relied in this case in support of its view as to the change in country conditions in El Salvador consisted of various articles written between January 15, 1992, before the peace accord took effect, and April 25, 1992, less than three months after the accord. One of the latter articles dated April 23, 1992 is entitled
Peace Process in Danger, US Approves More Military Aid, Arms Cache Discovered, Death Squad Activity Continues
. In respect of this April 23, 1992 article the panel stated at p. 11:
"Although there has been a certain degree of violence - to be expected at the conclusion of 12 years of unrelentless war - perpetrated by isolated extremist groups, dissatisfied with the peace treaty, the ceasefire has not been vitally affected."
Later in its reasons the panel stated:
"... the peace accord can indeed be seen as a positive step forward, which not only signals the end of a bloody period in the country's history, but also
appears
to mark a beginning of a more harmonious lifestyle among Salvadorans.
"Given ... that former members of the FMLN and government security forces
may
join the new national civil police force, ..." (my underlining)
The panel then stated at p. 12:
"The panel finds that given the meaningful and
promising
changes that have started to take place in El Salvador, there is only a mere possibility that the claimant would be persecuted should he return to El Salvador." (my underlining)
[12]
I am not satisfied that the evidence in this case relied upon by the panel addressed the legal test of a change in country conditions being meaningful and effective. I do not see how a panel can come to the conclusion that there is only a mere possibility of persecution as a result of changed country conditions when it is only able to state that there are "positive steps forward", "signals of the end of a bloody period in a country's history", "the appearance of the beginning of a more harmonious lifestyle among Salvadorans", "that former members of the FMLN and government security forces may join the new national civil police force" and "promising changes that have started to take place". The panel's conclusion is derived from articles published before or at the time of the peace accord and at most, less than three months after the peace accord. These can only be preliminary tentative indications of the effect of the changes at best, especially in light of contrary evidence before the panel from one of the later articles, that the peace process was in danger and that death squad activity continued. The evidence does not support a conclusion that there is only a mere possibility that the claimant would be persecuted should he return to El Salvador. I think the Board erred in law by ascribing to evidence a meaning that it could not reasonably bear.
[13]
The judicial review is allowed and the decision of the Immigration and Refugee Board is set aside. The matter shall be referred back for a redetermination by a differently constituted panel of the Immigration and Refugee Board. The parties are directed to provide the new panel with up-to-date information on changed circumstances.
Application allowed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]