[1]
Dubé, J.
: This application is for an order pursuant to rule 419 striking out the plaintiff's statement of claim. The defendant, the Ship "Expo Spirit", is a hovercraft operating out of Victoria, B.C., leased to the defendant Hoverwest Ferry Services Inc. ("Hoverwest") and owned by British Hovercraft Corporation ("Hovercraft"). The claim is for fuel and lubricant supplied to the "Expo Spirit" in 1986 in the amount of $24,037.26.
[2]
The owner of the vessel seeks to strike out the statement of claim on three separate grounds which I will address as follows.
1. The "Expo Spirit" is not a ship and there is no basis in law for an in rem admiralty proceeding.
[3]
Section 2 of the Federal Court Act defines a ship as follows:
"'ship' includes every description of vessel or boat used or designed for use in navigation without regard to method or lack or propulsion."
[4]
The defendant argues that a hovercraft is not a ship as it is an air cushion vehicle which does not travel directly on water. The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines hovercraft as follows:
"'hovercraft' a vehicle or craft supported by air ejected downwards against surface (of land or sea) just beneath it."
[5]
The Living Webster Encyclopedic Dictionary provides the following definition:
"'hovercraft' a vehicle which travels a few feet above relatively level terrain or waters by being buoyed or supported by a column of air pressure supplied by fans beneath its chassis."
[6]
The Canada Shipping Act defines an air cushion vehicle as follows under s. 2:
"'air cushion vehicle' means a machine designed to derive support in the atmosphere primarily from reactions against the earth's surface of air expelled from the machine."
[7]
Subsection 705(1) of the Canada Shipping Act provides that certain sections of Part I of the Act "apply to air cushion vehicles used in navigation". Subsection 727(2) provides that the definition of "air cushion vehicle" under the Act is to come into force on a day to be fixed by proclamation. Counsel claims that the section has never been proclaimed.
[8]
It is trite law that a statement of claim ought not to be struck out unless it is plain and obvious that there is no cause of action. It is certainly not plain and obvious to me, at least at this stage of the action, that a hovercraft is not a ship under the Federal Court Act. To the contrary, as I read the definition above referred to under s. 2 of the Federal Court Act, a "ship" includes
any
description
of vessel or boat used in
navigation
. That wide description does, in my view, encompass a craft used in navigation, even if there is some airspace left between it and the water. Expert evidence would have to be adduced at trial to establish a different interpretation. It is also to be noted that Hovercraft has already filed its defence in which it states that it is "the owner of the
Ship
'Expo Spirit'."
2. If the "Expo Spirit" is a ship the Affidavit to Lead Warrant is defective.
[9]
In his argument counsel for the owners of the "Expo Spirit" attacks the affidavit to lead warrant mostly on the grounds that Federal Court Rule 332(1) stipulates that affidavits be confined to such facts as the witness is able of his own knowledge to prove, whereas the affidavit in question is from information obtained by the affiant, a lawyer, from another person.
[10]
I have already dealt with such a matter in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and held that an application for a warrant under rule 1003 is an interlocutory motion and that the affidavit may be made from information obtained by the affiant from another source. As I pointed out, the very nature of such an arrest application calls for a speedy procedure: the solicitor must move with all due dispatch, at times from information obtained by phone or wire.
[11]
Counsel further attacks the affidavit on the ground that rule 1003(3) prescribes that a warrant of arrest shall not be issued against a foreign ship belonging to a port of a state having a consulate in the province where the ship is, until a notice that the action has been begun has been sent to that consulate.
[12]
The instant affidavit declares that the vessel "Expo Spirit" is "of the Port of Victoria". However, paragraph 2 of the statement of claim states that the "Expo Spirit" operating out of Victoria, B.C. is "owned by British Hovercraft Corporation". No evidence was brought out at the hearing to the effect that Great Britain has a consulate in the Province of British Columbia. And, in any event, the procedure invoked under rule 419 provides for the striking out of a pleading, not the invalidation of an affidavit.
3. There is no basis in law or fact for the plaintiff's claim against the "Expo Spirit" and its owners.
[13]
Affidavit evidence filed at the hearing by Hovercraft shows that the "Expo Spirit" is wholly owned by Hovercraft and was leased to Hoverwest for six months. According to an affidavit, paragraph 6.1(a) of the lease stipulates that the lessee shall "provide and use all necessary fuels and lubricants as prescribed by the manufacturer of the craft", and paragraph 6.1.4 provides that the lessee shall "pay all costs and expenses whatsoever of operating and using the craft and all costs and expenses incidental thereto".
[14]
Undoubtedly, claims for the supply of fuel to a ship fall within the maritime jurisdiction of this Court under s. 22(2)(m) of the Federal Court Act. Under s. 43(2) of the Act, this jurisdiction may be exercised in rem. However, the jurisprudence has clearly established that it is an essential element of actionable claims for necessaries that there should be an owner liable in personam.
[15]
As Collier, J., pointed out in The Ship " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 1237:
"Prior to the coming into force of the Federal Court Act, the Exchequer Court on its admiralty side by statute had jurisdiction in respect of claims for necessaries. Legislation enabled the claimant to enforce his rights in rem but was dependent on his establishing a liability on owners, apart from statute. In my view, the so-called admiralty jurisdiction sections of the Federal Court Act did not alter the previous position."
In the Armar case the plaintiff brought an action in rem for stevedoring services requested by the charterers. The plaintiff contended that the services were necessaries within the meaning of s. 22(2)(m) of the Federal Court Act for which the vessel or owner is liable by virtue of reading that paragraph together with s. 43(2) of the Act. The learned judge dismissed the action on the grounds that the personal liability of the vessel owner had not been proved.
[16]
In a more recent decision  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Addy, J., of this court struck out the statement of claim, dismissed the action and cancelled the warrant of arrest on the ground that there is no right in rem against a ship unless the actual registered owner can also be held legally responsible for the debt. However, in that case, he considered a charterer by way of demise to be the owner pro tempore of the ship during the voyage. Under a charter by demise the charterer becomes, during that period, the owner of the vessel; the master and crew become to all intents his servants and through them the possession of the ship is in him (See Scrutton on Charter Parties, page 45.) However, in the instant case, insufficient evidence has been filed by either party to determine whether or not the "Expo Spirit" was chartered by lease or by demise to Hoverwest. In fact, Hovercraft, for reasons of its own, opted not to file the lease.
[17]
In the Thorne Riddell case, Addy, J., continued as follows at page 37:
"Whether it be by virtue of presumed or implied authority or otherwise, unless the supplier is put on notice or has reason to suspect that the actual owner has forbidden the credit of the ship to be pledged, then it would seem that an action for such necessaries might well be maintainable in rem against the ship when its owner pro tempore, that is, the charterer by way of demise, would be responsible at law for those supplies."
The evidence filed by Hovercraft indicates that two employees of Hovercraft, Senior Engineer Andrew David Clapp and his associate, Trevor Burgess, were posted in Victoria, B.C. "to supervise maintenance of the Ship 'Expo Spirit'." Clapp indicates that he supervised the refuelling in June 1986. It was done from an Esso truck. He or Burgess "would indicate delivery of the fuel by initialling the supplier's invoice". "Neither I nor may associate, Trevor Burgess, ever requested Esso to refill the said tanker. This was usually done by one William McCaffrey, an employee of Hoverwest Ferry Services Inc., with the title of Engineering Manager." The invoices filed indicate that the fuel was sold to Hoverwest with an address in Victoria, B.C.
[18]
The said William Frederick McCaffrey, Maintenance Manager for Hoverwest, attests that he has seen a contract between Imperial Oil and Hoverwest, signed by the vice-president of Hoverwest, by which Imperial Oil agrees to supply fuel and lubricants and that he, from time to time, on behalf of Hoverwest ordered engine oil from Imperial Oil. To the best of his knowledge, no fuel or lubricants were ever ordered from Imperial Oil by Hovercraft.
[19]
On the other hand, the plaintiff Imperial Oil filed an affidavit of one of its solicitors to the effect that he has been advised by one Roger Rocan "a salesman employed by Esso" that Andrew Clapp and Trevor Burgess were introduced to Rober Rocan, both as being representatives of the owners of the hovercraft "Expo Spirit": at no time was Roger Rocan aware of the aforementioned lease. On numerous occasions Andrew Clapp signed invoices for fuel delivered to the "Expo Spirit". Obviously, the affidavit is mostly hearsay, still not objectionable in such interlocutory proceedings. None of the affiants were cross-examined.
[20]
Again, it is well known that a motion to strike out under rule 419 ought not to be granted, unless it be plain and obvious that the plaintiff has no cause of action. There is insufficient evidence before me to find, at this stage, that the plaintiff has no action in rem against the "Expo Spirit". The plaintiff can possibly establish at trial that Hoverwest was a charterer by demise and/or that it was led to believe that Hoverwest was authorized to purchase necessaries on behalf of the owners of the vessel.
[21]
Consequently, the motion is denied. Costs in the cause.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/kawm
[End of document]