 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Harrington, J.
October 3, 2006.
Counsel:
Louis Nadeau, for the applicants;
Suzon Létourneau, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Louis Nadeau, Montreal, Quebec, for the applicants;
John H. Sims, Q.C., Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Montréal, Quebec, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Harrington, J.
: Immigration to a western country from a male dominated society with a state religion can give rise to intense personal confrontation.
[2]
Ms. Allafzadeh, her husband and their children emigrated from Iran to the Netherlands. While there, she and the children converted from Islam to Christianity. Her husband reacted violently, denouncing her within the sizeable Islamic community there. On the advice of a social worker, she and the children fled to Canada and claimed refugee status.
[3]
In a very short decision, no more than one and a half pages, the member of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board found Ms. Allafzadeh and her children were citizens of both Iran and the Netherlands. She held they were not in need of international protection, as the documentary evidence established that the Netherlands is a democracy with police and judicial systems capable of protecting its citizens throughout the entire country. Ms. Allafzadeh had not approached the police to complain about her husband, and so did not rebut the presumption that the state was able to protect her.
[4]
This is a judicial review of that decision. Two major points were raised in argument. One is that the decision did not contain an analysis such as to allow the unsuccessful applicants to understand exactly why they were rejected. The other is that the decision did not take into account the Gender Guidelines issued by the chairman of the Immigration and Refugee Board, particularly relevant since Ms. Allafzadeh comes from a culture and religion where the husband is said to enjoy absolute reign.
[5]
I find no basis for the allegation that the analysis within the decision was inadequate. Four country reports with respect to the Netherlands were specifically identified. The member cannot be accused of picking and choosing from the material therein. All reports overwhelmingly support the proposition that the Netherlands is an active democracy with a complete police and court administration. Unfortunately, it appears to be a frailty of the human condition, worldwide, that there is domestic violence against women and discrimination against minorities. The documentation indicates that the Netherlands is not immune from these phenomena. However, vigorous steps are in place to combat them.
[6]
Although the Gender Guidelines were not mentioned, there is a presumption that the member took them into consideration ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2006] F.C.J. No. 717 (QL)). It should also be kept in mind that, to a large extent, they deal with trauma and other issues which might inhibit a woman from clearly stating her case. However, there was no such difficulty here, and she was believed. Risk of domestic violence from her husband because of her religious conversion is not in doubt.
[7]
Rightly or wrongly, one may not reduce the risk of domestic violence by simply fleeing to another country.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Supreme Court noted that international refugee law serves as a backup to the protection owed a national by her own state. It cannot come into issue if protection is available in that state. It is not enough that Ms. Allafzadeh has a subjective fear; there must be an objective basis to that fear. As stated by Justice La Forest at paragraph 50:
…clear and convincing confirmation of a state’s inability to protect must be provided…Absent some evidence, the claim should fail, as nations should be presumed capable of protecting their citizens. Security of nationals is, after all, the essence of sovereignty.
[8]
The only evidence proffered in this case of a general nature was that the Netherlands, just like every other country, has problems with domestic violence and discrimination against minorities, but it is dealing with it. The only evidence personal to Ms. Allafzadeh, which evidence was accepted, was that she was told by a social worker that it was useless to go to the police, and that she should flee. Unfortunately, that was bad advice and does not constitute evidence of a “complete breakdown of state apparatus…” as per Ward, above, at paragraph 50.
[9]
Having found that the applicants were entitled to protection in the Netherlands, it was not necessary for the member to consider their situation should they be returned to Iran.
[10]
Although counsel for the applicants proposed a question of general importance with respect to the Gender Guidelines, the facts of this case do not give rise to any issue which could support an appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal.
[11]
Although the pleadings and argument were in French, at the request of counsel these reasons are first issued in English as Ms. Allafzadeh and her children have some knowledge of that language.
ORDER
[12]
THIS COURT ORDERS that:
1. The application for judicial review of the decision of the Refugee Protection Division, Immigration Refugee Board, dated 2 March 2006, in its file numbers MA5-05594, MA5-05595, MA5-05596 and MA5-05597, is dismissed.
2. There is no question of general importance to certify.
[End of document]