[1]
Dubé, J.
: This is an application for judicial review by way of originating motion on the grounds that the National Farm Products Marketing Council:
"1. committed jurisdictional error in that it failed to comply with statutory requirements and breached the rules of natural justice;
"2. erred in law in giving prior approval for a quota order proposed to be made by the Canadian Egg Marketing Agency which reduced the egg marketing quota allocated to New Brunswick, contrary to the provisions of s. 4(2) of Part II of the Schedule to the
Canadian Egg Marketing Proclamation
; and
"3. erred in law in basing its decision in part on the Canadian Egg Marketing Agency Statement of Quota Policy dated October 25, 1984, which was itself contrary to s. 4 of Part II of the Schedule to the
Canadian Egg Marketing Proclamation
."
Facts:
I. The Parties:
[2]
The respondent Canadian Egg Marketing Agency (the "Agency"), was established by the Governor-in-Council on December 15, 1972, under the
Canadian Egg Marketing Agency Proclamation
, SOR/73-1 (now C.R.C., c. 646, as amended) (the "
Proclamation
"). The
Proclamation
was made pursuant to the
Farm Products Marketing Agencies Act
, S.C. 1970-71-72, c. 65 (now R.S.C. 1985, c. F-4) (the "
Act
") in accordance with a 1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement in respect of the establishment of a Comprehensive Marketing Program for the Purpose of Regulating the Marketing of Eggs in Canada (the "1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement"). The powers of the Agency included, among other things, the power to establish a quota system for interprovincial and export trade in eggs (see ss. 2 to 8 of the
Act
).
[3]
The signatories to the 1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement were the federal and all the provincial Ministers of Agriculture, all the federal and provincial Agricultural Supervisory Boards, and all the provincial Egg Commodity Boards. The applicants, the New Brunswick Farm Products Marketing Commission (the "Commission") and the New Brunswick Egg Marketing Board (the "Board"), as well as the respondent National Farm Products Marketing Council (the "Council"), were also signatories.
II. Historical Context:
[4]
The 1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement is divided into several parts: (1) the enumeration of the parties to the Agreement; (2) the resolution establishing the legal authorities under which the plan is being established and the duties and responsibilities of the participants; (3) the official signatures of the parties; (4) Schedule "A" which is the original
Proclamation
establishing the Agency, Part I, and the Federal Plan, Part II, that Canada was to implement legislatively; (5) Schedule "B" which establishes the Provincial Plan that the provinces were to incorporate in their legislation; and (6) Schedule "C" which is the Proposal for the National Egg Marketing Plan for Canada adopted by the Canadian Egg Producers Council dated August 1972 and amended by the National Farm Products Marketing Council in October 1972 to establish the Agency.
[5]
The Federal-Provincial Agreement provided that Canada was to establish the Agency to regulate the interprovincial and export marketing of eggs and that the provinces were to provide for the regulation of the intraprovincial marketing of eggs through provincial commodity boards, i.e. the New Brunswick Egg Marketing Board and the New Brunswick Farm Products Marketing Commission.
[6]
Central to the supply management system established pursuant to the 1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement was the creation of a national quota system through a series of dovetailing federal and provincial quota regulations and orders. Combined intraprovincial, interprovincial and export marketings were initially set out at a base level of 475,000,000 dozen eggs per year which was allocated amongst the provinces in accordance with the previous five year average provincial marketings, as contemplated by s. 23(1) of the
Act
.
"23(1) A marketing plan, to the extent that it allocates any production or marketing quota to any area of Canada, shall allocate that quota on the basis of the production from that area in relation to the total production of Canada over a period of five years immediately preceding the effective date of the marketing plan."
[7]
The quota of eggs (expressed in number of dozens) originally assigned to New Brunswick was 8,683,000 or 1.828 per cent of the combined base marketings for Canada. These base allocations were agreed to in Schedule "A" of the 1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement which was in turn reflected in s. 3 of Part II to the Schedule of the
Proclamation
made by the Governor-in-Council.
[8]
As originally drafted in the Schedule to the
Proclamation
and the 1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement, s. 4(2) (now s. 4(3)) provided that decreases in provincial quota allocations below the base allocations were to be spread proportionately among all the provinces. By way of contrast, s. 4(1) provided that increases in provincial quota allocations above the base allocations were to be based on certain enumerated criteria.
[9]
The original provisions of ss. 4(1) and (2) of Part II of the Schedule to the
Proclamation
read as follows:
"4(1) No order or regulation shall be made where the effect thereof would be to
increase
the aggregate of
(a) the number of dozens of eggs produced in a province and authorized by quotas assigned by the Agency and by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade, and
(b) the number of dozens of eggs produced in a province and anticipated to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade other than as authorized by quotas assigned by the Agency and by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board
to a number that exceeds, on a yearly basis, the number of dozens of eggs set out in
section 3 of this Plan
for the province [8,683,000 for New Brunswick]
unless
the Agency has taken into account
(c) the principle of comparative advantage of production,
(d) any variation in the size of the market for eggs,
(e) any failures by egg producers in any province or provinces to market the number of dozens of eggs authorized to be marketed,
(f) the feasibility of increased production in each province to be marketed, and
(g) comparative transportation costs to market areas from alternative sources of production.
"4(2) No order or regulation shall be made where the effect thereof would be to
decrease
the aggregate of
(a) the number of dozens of eggs produced in a province and authorized by quotas assigned by the Agency and by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade, and
(b) the number of dozens of eggs produced in a province and anticipated to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade other than as authorized by quotas assigned by the Agency and by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board,
to a number that, on a yearly basis, is less than the number of dozens of eggs set out in
section 3 of this Plan
for the province [8,683,000 for New Brunswick]
unless
at the same time the number of dozens of eggs produced in each other province and so authorized to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade is
decreased proportionately
." (My underlining)
[10]
In response to market conditions at the time, the Agency contemplated, in mid-1973, the need to reduce provincial quota allocations below the base allocations. Initially, it was planned to make a 10 per cent cut in allocations to all the provinces. However, a decision was made, on equitable grounds, to exempt from the 10 per cent cut the three provinces which had the smallest percentage of quota: New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland. This decision was reflected in s. 2 of an Interim Supplementary Agreement dated April 18, 1975. This Interim Supplementary Agreement also provided for a penalty system (see s. 3).
[11]
On June 10, 1975, an Agreement to Amend the 1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement (the "1975 Amending Agreement") was made. The 1975 Amending Agreement contemplated the making by the Governor-in-Council of amendments to the 1972
Proclamation
in accordance with Schedule "A" to the 1975 Amending Agreement. In particular, an amendment was contemplated to s. 4(2) (now s. 4(3)) by adding a new paragraph (c) enabling the Agency to exempt New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland from the proportional underbase decreases in quota allocation. A parallel and identical amendment in respect of provincial marketing was contemplated in s. 4(2) of Schedule "B" to the 1975 Amending Agreement. The proposed amendment read as follows:
"4. Subsection 4(2) of Part II of the schedule to the said Proclamation is amended by adding thereto the following paragraph.
(c) except that
the Agency may exempt any province
whose share of the Canadian market as shown in column III of the Table set out in
section 3 of this Part
is less than 2% [i.e. New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland]." (My underlining)
[12]
As a result of the Interim Supplementary Agreement dated April 18, 1975, and the 1975 Amending Agreement, the
Proclamation
was subsequently amended on August 27, 1975 (
Canadian Egg Marketing Agency Proclamation
, amendment, SOR/75-548 (September 15, 1975)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 2539). The amendment to the
Proclamation
added s. 4(1.1) to Part II of the Schedule to the
Proclamation
(now s. 4(2)) and changed the wording of s. 4(2) (now s. 4(3)). The amendments read as follows:
"4(1) Section 4 of Part II of the schedule to the said Proclamation is amended by adding thereto immediately after subsection (1) thereof the following subsection:
'(1.1) No order or regulation shall be made where the effect thereof would be to
decrease
the aggregate of
(a) the number of dozens of eggs produced in the Province of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island
or
Newfoundland and authorized by quotas assigned by the Agency and by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade; and
(b) the number of dozens of eggs produced in the Province of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island
or
Newfoundland and anticipated to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade other than as authorized by quotas assigned by the Agency and by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board.'
"(2) All that portion of subsection 4(2) of Part II of the schedule to the said Proclamation following paragraph (b) thereof is revoked and the following substituted therefor:
'to a number that, on a yearly basis, is less than the number of dozens of eggs set out in
section 3 of this Plan
for the province unless at the same time the number of dozens of eggs produced in each of the provinces,
other than the Provinces of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland
, and so authorized to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade is decreased proportionately.'" (My underlining)
[13]
However, this amendment to s. 4(2) (now s. 4(3)) is different from that agreed to by the signatories in Schedule "A" of the 1975 Amending Agreement but it is, of course, the amendment in force at the relevant time and still in force today. In particular, this amendment clearly excludes the Provinces of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland from proportional quota allocation reductions (i.e. "other than the provinces of ..."), whereas the proposed amendment provided that the Agency "
may
exempt any province".
[14]
In 1976, the 1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement was further revised and consolidated -
Federal-Provincial Agreement in respect of the revision and consolidation of the Comprehensive Marketing Program for the purpose of regulating the marketing of Eggs in Canada
, signed July 29, 1976 (the "1976 Federal-Provincial Agreement"). Schedules "A", "B" and "C" to the 1976 Federal-Provincial Agreement are the original schedules to the 1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement. Schedule "D" to the 1976 Federal-Provincial Agreement is the amending
Proclamation
dated August 27, 1975, resulting from the Interim Supplementary Agreement dated April 18, 1975 and contains what is now s. 4(2) (formerly s. 4(1.1)). Schedule "E" to the 1976 Federal-Provincial Agreement is Schedule "B" to the 1975 Amending Agreement which amended the provincial plan. However, Schedule "A" to the 1975 Amending Agreement which proposed to amend the federal plan is
not
included. It would therefore seem that the 1976 revised and consolidated Federal-Provincial Agreement specifically excluded Schedule "A" to the 1975 Amending Agreement, which was the proposed amendment to the federal plan.
[15]
By operation of the
Agencies' Orders and Regulations Approval Order
, C.R.C., c. 648, regulations affecting quota must receive prior approval from Council pursuant to ss. 7(1)(d) and 22(1)(f) of the
Act
, which read as follows:
"7(1) In order to fulfil its duties, the Council
(d)
shall
review all orders and regulations that are proposed to be made by agencies and that are of a class of orders or regulations to which the Council, by order, provides that this paragraph is applicable and, where it is satisfied that the orders and regulations are necessary for the implementation of the marketing plan that the agency proposing to make the orders or regulations is authorized to implement, the Council shall approve the orders and regulations;
"22(1)
Subject to the proclamation
by which it is established and to any subsequent proclamation altering its powers, an agency may
(f) where it is empowered to implement a marketing plan, make such orders and regulations as it considers necessary in connection therewith,
but all such orders and regulations shall, in the case of orders and regulations that are of a class to which paragraph 7(1)(d) is made applicable, be submitted to the Council before the making thereof
, and in any other case, be submitted to the Council either before or after the making thereof and
(i) any order or regulation that is submitted to the Council
before the making thereof
and that is thereafter
made before the Council approves
the order or regulation
is of no force or effect
, and
(ii) any order or regulation that is submitted to the Council
after the making thereof that is set aside
by order of the Council thereupon
ceases to be of any force or effect
;" (My underlining)
[16]
Section 2 of Part II of the Schedule to the
Proclamation
authorizes the Agency to establish a quota system:
"2(1) The Agency shall, by order or regulation, establish a quota system by which quotas are assigned to all members of classes of egg producers in each province to whom quotas are assigned by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board.
"2(2) The Agency, in establishing a quota system, shall assign quotas in such manner that the number of dozens of eggs produced in a province and authorized to be marketed in interprovincial and export trade in the year 1973, when taken together with the number of dozens of eggs produced in the province and authorized to be marketed in intraprovincial trade in the same year, pursuant to quotas assigned by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board, and the number of dozens of eggs produced in the province and anticipated to be marketed in the same year, other than as authorized by a quota assigned by the Agency or by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board,
will equal the number of dozens of eggs set out in section 3 of this Plan for the province
[8,683,000 for New Brunswick]." (My underlining)
[17]
Back in 1973, the Agency made regulations respecting the determination of the number of dozens of eggs that egg producers in Canada could market in interprovincial or export trade, known as the
Canadian Egg Marketing Agency Quota Regulations
, SOR/73-289 (June 1, 1973)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 1240 (C.R.C., c. 656, revoked by SOR/86-8 (December 17, 1985)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 14) (the "
Quota Regulations
"). These
Regulations
were first approved by Council pursuant to s. 7(1)(d) of the
Act
and have since been amended many times.
[18]
In 1983, the Agency amended the
Quota Regulations
in order to revise the quotas assigned to producers as a function of a percentage (SOR/83-938 (December 1, 1993)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 4359). All of the provinces' percentages were below 100 per cent other than New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland whose percentages were above 100 per cent.
[19]
That same year, Council had requested that the Agency develop a policy to address the fact these three provinces were in an overbase position, while the majority were in an underbase position. On October 25, 1984, the Agency unanimously adopted a Statement of Quota Policy with Respect to the Provinces of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland (the "1984 Quota Policy"). The 1984 Quota Policy, which was agreed to by the Agency member from the New Brunswick Board, provided in part as follows:
"(3) In the event the next or subsequent quota allocation made by the Agency to
all
provinces has the effect of
decreasing
the provincial allocation of
any
province
below the base allocation of that province
in the marketing plan, the provincial allocation to New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland will be decreased pro rata provided that any such quota allocations made by the Agency
shall not have the effect
of establishing a provincial allocation to New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland
below their base provincial allocation in the marketing plan
." (My underlining)
[20]
It was agreed that under the original 1972 Federal-Provincial Agreement that all provinces were subject, on a pro rata basis, to quota decreases when any province was below base. However, the present situation inevitably arose from the application of the amendment exempting the Provinces of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland from quota decreases below base levels.
[21]
The Agency claimed that it was justified in adopting this Quota Policy "in the exercise of its discretion pursuant to s. 24 of the
Farm Products Marketing Agencies Act
(the
Act
), in accordance with its objects under s. 22 of the
Act
and pursuant to ss. 2, 3 and 4 of Part II of the marketing plan, in matters of quota allocation ...".
[22]
Effective January 31, 1984, the signatories to the Federal-Provincial Agreement agreed to amend the 1976 revised and consolidated Federal-Provincial Agreement. In effect, the amendment changed the penalty system and based it on the Agency's quota allocations in SOR/83-928 (quotas assigned to producers as a function of a percentage) and any future allocations. Paragraph (f) of Part III (Commodity Boards) of the Federal-Provincial Agreement was repealed and the following substituted therefor:
"(f)(l) To be responsible for ensuring that the total of regulated hens within the province does not exceed the prescribed percentage of the provincial allocations in regulated hens as determined, from time to time, by the level of quota established for the province in the Canadian Egg Marketing Agency's Quota Regulations, converted into regulated hen numbers according to a formula, in respect of rates of lay, established, from time to time, by the Agency and approved by Council, and, if unable to do so, to pay the Agency, as liquidated damages, one dollar ($1) per regulated hen in excess of the prescribed percentage ...
"For the purpose of this paragraph the prescribed percentage is
100% for the provinces of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland and 97% in all other provinces
..." (My underlining)
[23]
Over the years, adjustments have been made to reflect the increased productivity of Canadian flocks as measured by surveys conducted on a regular basis.
[24]
In December 1985, the
Quota Regulations
were revoked and replaced with new regulations, under the same title, the
Canadian Egg Marketing Agency Quota Regulations
, SOR/86-8 (December 17, 1985)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 14. They increased the number of dozens of eggs for New Brunswick to 9,385,760 for the 12 month period commencing April 1, 1986.
[25]
However, in March 1986, the "new"
Quota Regulations
were partially amended and renamed the
Canadian Egg Marketing Agency Quota Regulations, 1986
, SOR/86-411 (March 27, 1986)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 1708 (the "
1986 Quota Regulations
"). This latest amendment was not really substantive in nature. It simply changed the coming into force of the "new"
Quota Regulations
from April 1 to June 1, 1986 and similarly changed the reference period in the Schedule.
[26]
In 1988, further to yet another amendment to the
1986 Quota Regulations
, the number of dozens of eggs for New Brunswick was increased to 9,513,866 for the 12 month period commencing January 1, 1989, SOR/88-553 (October 31, 1988)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 4516.
[27]
However, on March 29, 1989, and again on December 13, 1989, the Agency, with the prior approval of Council, implemented two
decreases
of two per cent for all provinces. New Brunswick's egg allocation was first reduced to 9,336,840 dozen eggs for the 12 month period commencing August 6, 1989 (SOR/89-191 (April 5, 1989)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 2048) and then to 9,179,760 dozen eggs for the 12 month period commencing April 30, 1990 (SOR/90-29 (December 19, 1989)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 174). It is submitted by counsel for the Board that these reductions had been agreed to by the New Brunswick signatories (the Board and the Commission) and no reductions have ever been imposed upon New Brunswick without its consent.
[28]
On November 28, 1991, the Agency's
1986 Quota Regulations
were amended to reflect the latest changes in the rate of lay from 21.7 to 22.8 dozen eggs per bird per year. New Brunswick benefitted from this rate of lay increase and its allocation
increased
to 9,736,197 dozen eggs for the 12 month period commencing December 29, 1991 (SOR/91-699 (December 2, 1991)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 4707).
[29]
As a result, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland have been in an overbase position since 1984 due to adjustments in the rates of lay for regulated and unregulated production upwards from 19 dozen eggs per bird per year prior to 1984 to the current level of 22.8 dozen eggs per bird per year. The other provinces remain in an underbase position as a result of quota reductions applicable to all provinces other than New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland.
[30]
In 1991, the Agency planned to put into place an overbase reduction program for the three provinces so as to reduce their quota allocations from an overbase position to base levels. An Overbase Purchase Program (The
Canadian Egg Marketing Agency - Program for Structural Change
dated October 11, 1991), was established and a resolution was passed by Council to provide compensation in the amount of $17 per bird removed from production (Resolution 278.91 dated September 27, 1991).
[31]
The Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland Boards both agreed to the program and entered into the overbase reduction program. New Brunswick, however, opposed the overbase reduction program from the beginning. In response to New Brunswick's concerns, the Agency agreed to allow overbase quota allocation reductions in this province to be phased-in over a three year period with the first beginning May 1, 1992.
[32]
On February 13, 1992, pursuant to s. 22(1) of the
Act
, the Agency applied to Council for prior approval of an amendment to the
1986 Quota Regulations
required to implement the overbase reduction program which would reduce New Brunswick's quota to 9,385,132 dozen eggs for the 12 month period commencing May 1, 1992.
[33]
The applicants took issue with the Agency's quota reduction proposals claiming that New Brunswick's quota could not be decreased and so filed a complaint with Council who decided to investigate and to consider the Agency's application for prior approval at the same time.
[34]
By a fax transmission dated February 27, 1992, the Board and the Agency were advised that Council would inquire into the Board's complaint and that a hearing on the matter, pursuant to s. 7 of the
Act
, would take place before three named Council members on March 16, 1992. The hearing was to be conducted pursuant to Council's "Guidelines for the Disposition of Complaints made pursuant to the
Farm Products Marketing Agencies Act
". The fax transmission is reproduced in its entirety:
"This is to advise you that the New Brunswick Egg Marketing Board has filed a notice of complaint with the National Farm Products Marketing Council. The Board's complaint is in regard to CEMA's decision to purchase overbase quota in New Brunswick. The Board contends that New Brunswick should be exempted from the program.
"The Council has decided to inquire into this complaint by holding a hearing pursuant to s. 7(1)(f) of the
Farm Products Marketing Agencies Act
, and based on its 'Guidelines for the Disposition of Complaints Made Pursuant to the
FPMA Act
'. The hearing date has been set for Monday, March 16, 1992 beginning at 9:00 a.m. and will be held in the:
NFPMC Boardroom
13th Floor, Martel Building
270 Albert Street
Ottawa, Ontario
"Council members Glenn Flaten and Peggy Smyth will join me as a panel to hear this matter.
"The New Brunswick Egg Marketing Board has been asked to provide Council and the Agency with its written grounds for complaint no later than close of business, March 5, 1992. We are asking the Agency to reply in writing to the Council, no later than March 12, 1992. Persons or parties wishing to intervene will also have until March 12 to provide written statements to the Council."
[35]
The relevant provisions of Council's Guidelines are the following:
"(5) The Council shall retain the prerogative of deciding on
the nature of the inquiry it will initiate into the complaint received
.
"(6) When the Council decides to inquire into a complaint by conducting a hearing,
it shall establish a panel
consisting of one or more persons to conduct said inquiry and give to the panel the complaint document.
"(7) The panel shall, within five (5) days of being established,
(a) send a copy of the complaint notice to the agency concerned and inform it and the complainant of the date, time and place fixed by it to conduct the hearing; and
(b) issue deadlines for its receipt of the detailed written allegations of the complainant and the agency's replies to such allegations, along with all documentary evidence in support thereof.
"(8) A hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a complaint by the Council. Where circumstances warrant, the panel may set a later date for the hearing, with the consent of the complainant and the agency.
"(11) The complainant, the agency concerned and the intervenors have the
right to attend
a hearing and to
present evidence
and
cross-examine witnesses
, and
make representations
personally or through their representatives.
"(13) A hearing shall be
open to the public
unless the panel otherwise directs.
"(14) The proceedings shall be
recorded
and a
transcript placed on file
.
"(15)
The rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
A panel shall
apply the procedures it deems appropriate
during the course of the hearing.
"(16) As soon as is practicable after the completion of the inquiry,
the panel shall present its recommendations to the Council
and
the Council shall send a copy of its decision
together with the reasons therefore to the complainant, the agency concerned, the intervenors and all signatories to the federal-provincial agreement concerned." (My underlining)
[36]
The hearing was heard on March 16, 1992, and, as contemplated in the February 27, 1992, notice to the parties, was presided over by a panel of three Council members: Dr. Cliff McIsaac, Mr. Glen Flaten and Ms. Peggy Smyth (the "Panel"). None of the parties at the inquiry raised any objection to the fact that, in accordance with Council's procedural guidelines, the Panel would subsequently be presenting a report for decision by the full Council.
[37]
As a result of the hearing held by the Panel, a recommendation was made to Council to approve the proposed amendment to the
1986 Quota Regulations
. Also, the Panel found that New Brunswick should not be exempt from the Agency's overbase purchase program ("Report of the National Farm Products Marketing Council respecting an inquiry into a complaint of the New Brunswick Egg Marketing Board and New Brunswick Farm Products Marketing Commission against the Canadian Egg Marketing Agency respecting the Agency's program to purchase overbase allocation and the Agency's quota order to be implemented effective May 1, 1992" dated March 24, 1992). Reproduced below are the more relevant portions of the Panel's report:
"Council Position
"During the hearing, it was eminently clear that the major argument forwarded by New Brunswick in support of its case centered on an interpretation of s. 4 of Part II of the Agency's
Proclamation
. The Council will deal with this argument below followed by other observations and finally with recommendations.
"Section 4, Part II
"[statutory provisions]
"There is virtually no difference of opinion with regard to the interpretation of ss. 4(1) and 4(3). Section 4(1) instructs the Agency to take into account certain criteria set out in the subsection when an allocation is made to a province which exceeds that number specified in s. 3 of the Plan. Section 4(3) instructs the Agency that with the exceptions of New Brunswick, P.E.I., and Newfoundland, allocations to provinces below those levels set out in s. 3 must be made on a pro rata basis.
"Section 4(2) is very ambiguous and subject to any number of interpretations. Unlike ss. 4(1) and 4(3), s. 4(2) contains no reference point, i.e., there is no similar reference number below which no order or regulation shall be made which would decrease the aggregate of ... to a number of dozens of eggs set out ... etc. The subsection may be interpreted as open-ended and therefore consistent with New Brunswick's arguments that allocations to the three Atlantic provinces cannot be reduced below existing levels. Another interpretation could be forwarded similar to New Brunswick's is that only the sum of the allocations to the three provinces cannot be decreased. This arises because of the use of the words 'decrease the aggregate of' and the lack of the words 'for the province' in any reference statement that would logically follow s. 4(2)(b). Under this interpretation the Agency could increase, decrease, or leave unchanged individual allocations to the three provinces, so long as the aggregate or sum of the three allocations was not decreased.
"The CEMA's interpretation of s. 4(2), which the Council tends to endorse, confines quota allocation decreases to the three Atlantic provinces from going below the base numbers set out in s. 3 of the Plan. Section 4(2) may not be inconsistent with 4(3) in that 4(3) only exempts the three provinces from pro rata allocation decreases below base levels. It could be argued that 4(3) does not provide a blanket exemption below base levels but only an exemption from 'pro rata' decreases. Section 4(2) provides the relevant exemption, which exemption is made reference to in 4(3).
"Section 4(2) cannot and should not be interpreted in isolation from the other subsections and indeed without reference to the intent of signatories when the Federal/Provincial Agreement was amended and s. 4(2) included in the
Proclamation
. Section 4(1) refers to above base allocations to all provinces; s. 4(3) refers to below base allocations to all provinces excepting New Brunswick, P.E.I. and Newfoundland. It would seem reasonable, then to interpret s. 4(2) within the context of below base allocations to the three provinces i.e. that they are exempt from such decreases.
"Finally, the Council's decision to endorse an interpretation of s. 4(2) which would not obstruct above base allocation cuts but only below base allocation decreases was influenced significantly by what the Council believes was the original intent of signatories. There is no compelling reason to believe that signatories intended to guarantee growth to these three provinces in 'good times' but exempt them from cutbacks (except below base) in 'bad times'. Not only would this be inequitable but it could create serious market distortions. The Council believes the exemption was established to provide a minimum protection for smaller provinces (below two percent of national market) from economic hardships incurred as a result of below base allocation decreases only. This position is reinforced by the fact that the New Brunswick director to the CEMA agreed to the Agency's 1984 overbase quota policy stipulating that there would be no ad infinitum retention of overbase gains by New Brunswick, P.E.I. and Newfoundland.
"The Council's position is based on its interpretation of s. 4(2) and its considered opinion of what signatories intentions were some 17 years ago. Section 4(2) is unclear in terms of intent, ambiguous at best, and subject to a number of well-supported interpretations. It is therefore imperative that this section be clarified as soon as possible to reflect the current understanding of all signatories.
. . . . .
"Recommendations
"1. Given Council's interpretation of s. 4(2) of Part II of the
Proclamation
, it is the view of Council that New Brunswick should not be exempted from the CEMA's overbase purchase program.
"2. Given the lack of clarity and ambiguity which characterizes s. 4(2) of Part II of the
Proclamation
, it is recommended that the CEMA sponsor an amendment to the Agreement and
Proclamation
which would remove the ambiguity and provide a clear interpretation acceptable to all signatories. This clarification of s. 4(2) could form part of a larger process to review and revise the Federal/Provincial Agreement.
"3. The National Farm Products Marketing Council will prior-approve the proposed amendment to the quota order eliminating the overbase in Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island as well as reducing New Brunswick's overbase by a third. The quota order would become effective on May 1, 1992.
"4. The Canadian Egg Marketing Agency proceed to develop an overbase policy based on the criteria outlined in s. 4.1 subparagraphs (c) through (g) of Part II of the
Proclamation
."
[38]
At the meeting of Council on March 24, 1992, the Panel presented its report and recommendations to the full Council. All Council members had been provided with a copy of the submissions presented as well as a complete transcript of the proceedings before the Panel. The report of the Panel was adopted in full and Council ruled in favour of the Agency with regards to New Brunswick's complaint. By adopting in full the Panel's report, Council also priorly approved the amendment to the
1986 Quota Regulations
which came into effect on May 1, 1992 (SOR/92-193 (March 30, 1992)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 1426):
"That the Council accepts in full, the report and recommendations of the panel, in the matter of the complaint by the New Brunswick egg signatories against the Canadian Egg Marketing Agency, and rules for the Agency in this matter."
[39]
By a notice of motion dated April 27, 1992, the Board sought interim relief against the implementation of the amended
1986 Quota Regulations
and the collection by the Agency of liquidated damages consequential upon those amendments. The motions judge, the Honourable Mr. Justice Rouleau, declined to grant interim relief to prevent the application of the
1986 Quota Regulations
. However, the Agency consented to an order prohibiting it from collecting any liquidated damages assessed against the Board until such time as the main application was determined by the motions judge, and Mr. Justice Rouleau so ordered (T-946-92, unreported, May 12, 1992 (F.C.T.D.)). Also, the application for judicial review by the Commission (T-921-92) was joined to the Board's application.
Issues:
I. Jurisdictional Error And
Breach Of Natural Justice:
[40]
The relevant statutory provisions of the
Act
are the following:
"7(1) In order to fulfil its duties, the Council
(d)
shall review all orders and regulations that are proposed to be made by agencies
and that are of a class of orders or regulations to which the Council, by order, provides that this paragraph is applicable and, where it is satisfied that the orders and regulations are necessary for the implementation of the marketing plan that the agency proposing to make the orders or regulations is authorized to implement,
the Council shall approve the orders and regulations
;
(f)
shall make such inquiries and take such action within its powers as it deems appropriate in relation to any complaints received
by it from any person who is directly affected by the operations of an agency and that relate to the operations of the agency;
"8(1) A public hearing
shall
be held by the Council
(a) in connection with an inquiry into the merits of establishing an agency or of broadening the authority of an existing agency to cover any additional farm product or farm products;
(b) where the Council has under review a proposed marketing plan; or
(c) in connection with any other matter relating to its objects if the Governor-in-Council or the Minister directs the Council to hold a public hearing in connection with such matter.
"8(2) A public hearing
may
be held by the Council in connection with any matter relating to its objects
where the council is satisfied that such a hearing would be in the public interest
.
"8(3)
The chairman of the Council may direct that a public hearing under this section be held on behalf of the Council by two or more members thereof designated by the chairman
, and the members so designated have for the purpose of the hearing the powers of the Council set out in subsection (5) and shall report to the Council on the hearing.
"9
The Council shall give notice of any public hearing under s. 8 and of the matters to be considered thereat in the
Canada Gazette
and in one or more newspapers and farm journals in general circulation throughout all of Canada and in particular in those areas of Canada where, in the opinion of the Council, there are persons who are likely to be interested in the matters to be considered thereat." (My underlining)
a. The Board's Arguments:
[41]
Section 8(2) of the
Act
grants Council the power to hold a public hearing "in connection with any matter relating to its objects where the Council is satisfied that such a hearing would be in the public interest". It is submitted that the questions of prior approval of regulations, pursuant to s. 7(1)(d) of the
Act
, and an inquiry into a complaint, pursuant to s. 7(1)(f) of the
Act
, are matters of which Council "could" hold a public hearing and that the Board believed it was a public hearing.
[42]
In support of its contention that the hearing held on March 16 was a "public hearing", reference is made to the notices sent out by Council. Other than the fax transmission referred to above, Council also faxed to all the signatories to the Federal-Provincial Agreement a "Notice of Hearing Before the N.F.P.M.C." in both official languages. The English version uses the terms "inquiry" and "hearing". The French version, however, refers to "enquête", an inquiry, and "audience publique", a public hearing.
[43]
According to the Board, the way in which the hearing was conducted also leads one to believe that the hearing was public in nature: the Panel heard evidence, there were cross-examinations, a rebuttal and the entire proceedings were transcribed, thus giving the appearance that it was a public hearing.
[44]
Furthermore, due to the fact that only three members of the Council attended the hearing, it is submitted that Council was purporting to act pursuant to s. 8 of the
Act
since s. 8(3) of the
Act
is the only section authorizing the Chairman of the Council to "designate" two or more members to hold a hearing. It is also submitted that s. 7(1) does not give Council the power to delegate to a panel.
[45]
Consequently, the Board submits that if the hearing by the three member panel was a hearing contemplated by s. 8 of the
Act
, then the hearing was unlawfully constituted and Council had no jurisdiction to priorly approve the quota order in that: (1) there is no record of any designation by the Chairman pursuant to s. 8(3); and, more importantly, (2) no notice of the hearing was published in the
Canada Gazette
as required by s. 9 of the
Act
.
[46]
The Board claims that if the hearing of March 16, 1992, was a "public hearing" as contemplated by the
Act
, then the decision should have been made by the Panel and the Panel alone. There should not have been a report and recommendations to Council with Council making the final "ruling". Section 8(3) provides that the panel will "report" to Council. It does not say that Council will make the final decision: however, since Council did make the ultimate ruling, there was a breach of the principles of natural justice as (1) the applicants were denied the right to be heard by the full Council, and (2) if the full Council was to decide, then the full Council should hear, or, if the Panel was to decide, then the decision should have been reserved for the Panel (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 321; 68 D.L.R.(4th) 524; 90 C.L.L.C. 14,007; 42 Admin. L.R. 1 (hereinafter "
Consolidated-Bathurst
"). However, see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 193, where the governing statute clearly envisaged that members of the Executive Committee who were not on the hearing panel would participate in the decision on renewal such that there was not a violation of the maxim that they who hear should decide (hereinafter " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ")).
[47]
Finally, the fact that the Board did not object in a timely manner does not in and of itself confer jurisdiction on Council (
F.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Div. Ct.) (hereinafter " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> "), because, at the time, the Board could not object for it was unaware that the hearing was not a public one.
b. The Agency's Arguments:
[48]
The Agency, on the other hand, submits that Council was under no obligation to hold a public hearing. Council's power under s. 8(2) is clearly discretionary in that it "may" hold a public hearing: it is clear from Council's Report and the February 27, 1992, Notice to the Signatories that the hearing was conducted pursuant to s. 7(1)(f) of the
Act
and not ss. 8 and 9. Section 7(1)(f) of the
Act
gives Council the broad discretion to "make such inquiries and take such action within its powers as it deems appropriate" in relation to complaints such as that of the Board.
[49]
The Agency argues that, as master of its own procedure, Council had wide latitude as to the procedures it wished to adopt. The procedure which Council chose to adopt is outlined in Council's Complaint Guidelines (supra). Pursuant to paragraph 5 Council has the "prerogative of deciding on the nature of the inquiry it will initiate into the complaint received".
[50]
According to the Agency, Council's interrelated function of considering whether to grant prior approval to its amendment to the
1986 Quota Regulations
and whether the Board's concerns about that proposed amendment were valid is a quasi-legislative function and bears no resemblance to the functions performed by tribunals in cases where a rigid "he who decides must hear" rule has to be applied.
[51]
Thus, given the quasi-legislative context involved, it was open to Council to adopt a purely written procedure to consider the complaint. Council, it is submitted, cannot be faulted for having allowed the parties to present their case orally before a Panel of Council Members and then have the matter considered by the full Council with the benefit of copies of the transcript and written submissions. The recommendations of the Panel were adopted in full by the Council and there is no evidence that they were altered as a result of the meeting with the full Council. Also, there was no objection by the Board, or by its experienced counsel, to the procedure adopted in the instant case such that the Board must be taken to have waived the right to challenge the procedures adopted by Council ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at pp. 551-552 S.C.R.; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at pp. 726-727 O.R.).
[52]
It is therefore submitted by the Agency that when these circumstances are examined as a whole, it cannot be said that there has been a breach of natural justice or procedural fairness.
c. Disposition Of The
Preliminary Issue:
[53]
In order to fulfil its duties, Council is under no obligation to hold a public hearing for prior approval of orders or regulations proposed to be made by the Agency or for the inquiry into complaints. Other than the mandatory provisions of s. 8(1), the decision to hold a public hearing is completely within Council's discretion pursuant to s. 8(2).
[54]
In the instant case, Council decided to hold a hearing in order to inquire into the complaint and to consider the quota order proposed to be made by the Agency. The Board was given ample notice of the hearing, its nature and the procedures to be followed.
[55]
Moreover, there was no breach of the Board's right to be heard nor of the principle that they who decide should hear. All parties were given the opportunity to fully present their arguments in both written and oral format before the Panel. A transcript of the proceedings before the Panel was provided to each member of the full Council who accepted in its entirety the Panel's report and the recommendations contained therein.
[56]
It is true that the failure to make timely objection does not confer jurisdiction where none exists ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra, at p. 726 O.R.). However, in the case at bar, Council did have the jurisdiction to proceed as it did for the reasons given above. I must therefore agree with the Agency and conclude that Council did not commit jurisdictional error nor was there a breach of the principles of natural justice.
[57]
Before addressing the merits of the case, that is, the question of interpretation of s. 4(2) of Part II of the Schedule to the
Proclamation
, I will first turn to the test for the judicial review applicable to Council's decision.
II. Test For Judicial Review:
a. The Board's Arguments:
[58]
The Board submits that the test for judicial review applicable to the case at bar is whether Council's interpretation of s. 4 of Part II of the Schedule to the
Proclamation
is wrong in that it "committed an error of law". It is only in the presence of a privative clause that the standard is whether the decision was "patently unreasonable" (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 449; 45 Admin. L.R. 161, at p. 184 (S.C.C.) per Gonthier, J. (hereinafter "
National Corn Growers
");
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 437; 89 C.L.L.C. 14,050; [1989] 6 W.W.R. 673; 40 Admin. L.R. 181, at p. 1003 S.C.R. per La Forest, J. (hereinafter " <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ");
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 15; 274 A.P.R. 15; 91 C.L.L.C. 14,002; 76 D.L.R.(4th) 389; 48 Admin. L.R. 1 at p. 40 (S.C.C.) per McLachlin, J. (hereinafter "
Lester
"). In the case at bar, there is no privative clause in the
Act
, thus the court's jurisdiction to engage in judicial review is
not
limited to a patently unreasonable error of law.
b. The Commission's Arguments:
[59]
The Commission is also of the view that the test for judicial review is an error of law on the face of the record. However, in the event that the test is a "patently unreasonable" error of law, then it is the Commission's submission that Council's decision was patently unreasonable.
c. The Agency's Arguments:
[60]
The Agency, on the other hand, submits that the court should defer to Council's interpretation unless it was patently unreasonable (
National Corn  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra;
Lester
, supra;
Re A.G. Can. and MacLaren
(1987), 79 N.R. 1; 41 D.L.R.(4th) 41 (F.C.A.)). In the course of his argument, counsel for the Agency referred to the
National Corn Growers
case where Wilson, J., reasoned at page 203 Admin. L.R.:
"... In that case [
A.U.P.E., Branch 63 v. Olds College
, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 923], Laskin, C.J., dealt with a board that was not protected by a privative clause and observed that given the extensive powers which
The Public Service Employee Relations Act
, S.A. 1977, c. 40, conferred on the Alberta Public Service Employee Relations Board, certiorari 'is a long way from an appeal and is subject to restriction in accordance with a line of decisions of this court which, to assess them generally, preclude judicial interference with interpretations made by the Board which are not plainly unreasonable' [S.C.R., at p. 927].
"While one may question whether the court deliberately set out to construct a 'restrictive and unified' theory of judicial review through its decisions in
C.U.P.E.
,
Volvo
,
Douglas
, and
Olds College
, supra, in my view there can be no doubt that this court made clear that it was not prepared to interfere with a specialized tribunal's interpretation of its constitutive legislation where the interpretive exercise was one that was within the tribunal's area of expertise and where the impugned interpretation was not patently unreasonable."
[61]
He also referred to an Ontario Divisional Court decision (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  where an administrative tribunal is interpreting its constituent statute, the courts should be hesitant to intervene unless the "interpretation adopted by the tribunal is so unreasonable that it requires intervention by the court". However, the court explained that the reason it was not using the term "patently unreasonable" was that it has been more or less confined to situations in which the tribunal is protected by a privative clause.
[62]
The Agency submits that the court need not find that Council was correct in its interpretation of s. 4(2), so long as it was not unreasonable based on the circumstances.
d. The Proper Test Where
No Privative Clause:
[63]
The standard of judicial review applicable to an administrative tribunal's interpretation of a statutory provision will depend on (1) whether the provision in question is one which limits the jurisdiction of the tribunal or (2) whether the provision is one which Parliament intended to leave to the tribunal (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[64]
When the interpretation of a provision goes to the very jurisdiction of the tribunal, the courts will intervene if the interpretation is simply wrong. However, if the interpretation of a particular provision was intended to be left to the tribunal "then its decision is not reviewable unless the interpretation placed upon those provisions is patently unreasonable and the Board thereby exceeded its jurisdiction" (Ibid, at p. 628 S.C.R.).
[65]
The first step, therefore, involves the determination of the tribunal's jurisdiction. To use the words of Beetz, J., in
Syndicat national des employés de la commission scolaire régionale de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Q.A.C. 244, at pp. 1088-1089 S.C.R.:
"At this stage, the court examines not only the wording of the enactment conferring jurisdiction on the administrative tribunal, but the purpose of the statute creating the tribunal, the reason for its existence, the area of expertise of its members and the nature of the problem before the tribunal. At this initial stage a pragmatic or functional analysis is just as suited to a case in which an error is alleged in the interpretation of a provision limiting the administrative tribunal's jurisdiction: in a case where a patently unreasonable error is alleged on a question within the jurisdiction of the tribunal, as in a case where simple error is alleged regarding a provision limiting that jurisdiction, the first step involves determining the tribunal's jurisdiction."
[66]
In the case at bar, the National Farm Products Marketing Council was established to assist in the establishment of farm products marketing agencies and to oversee the operations of these agencies to ensure that they are carried out in accordance with their objects. As part of these duties, Council must priorly approve all orders or regulations proposed to be made by agencies regarding quota allocations and it must inquire into complaints it has received.
[67]
The decision for which judicial review is sought is clearly one which was intended by Parliament to be left to Council.
[68]
In the
National Corn Growers
case, Wilson, J., in a very detailed manner, set out the principle as follows (at page 208 Admin. L.R.):
"I think it important to remember that Dickson, J. [C.U.P.E.] stated that the proper question was [S.C.R. at p. 237]:
'Did the Board here so misinterpret the provisions of the
Act
as to embark on an enquiry or answer a question not remitted to it? Put another way,
was the Board's interpretation so patently unreasonable that its construction cannot be rationally supported by the relevant legislation
and demands intervention by the court upon review?' (Emphasis added)
"It seems to me that Dickson, J., was not suggesting that a tribunal's decision should be reviewed if the conclusions reached in that decision could not be sustained on any reasonable interpretation of the facts or the law. Instead, he was stating that if it was evident that the Board's interpretation of provisions in its constituent legislation was not 'patently unreasonable', then the process of judicial review should come to an end.
"The distinction is a subtle one. But it is not without importance. One must, in my view, not begin with the question whether the tribunal's
conclusions
are patently unreasonable; rather, one must begin with the question whether the tribunal's interpretation of the provisions in its constitutive legislation that define the way it is to set about answering particular questions is
patently unreasonable
. If the tribunal has not interpreted its constitutive statute in a patently unreasonable fashion, the courts must not then proceed to a wide ranging review of whether the tribunal's conclusions are unreasonable." (My underlining)
[69]
Having said that, this court will only intervene if Council's interpretation of s. 4 of Part II of the Schedule to the
Proclamation
, and in particular s. 4(2), was patently unreasonable. I now turn to the merits of the case.
III. Statutory Interpretation Of
Section 4(2) Of Part II Of The
Schedule To the Proclamation:
a. The Board's Arguments:
[70]
The Board submits that s. 4(2) prohibits the Agency from reducing New Brunswick's quota allocation of 9,736,197 dozens of eggs for the 12 month period commencing December 29, 1991 which was established by an amendment to the
1986 Quota Regulations
dated November 28, 1991 (SOR/91-699 (December 2, 1991)
Canada Gazette
Part II, p. 4707).
[71]
The plain meaning of the word "decrease" in s. 4(2) contemplates that there will be no reductions in quota for the three provinces affected. There is no mention of base level. If the legislator intended to use the base amounts set out in s. 3 of Part II of the Schedule to the
Proclamation
as the benchmark from which New Brunswick's quota could not drop, it could easily have done so. Parliament did not hesitate in both ss. 4(1) and (3) to use the words "number of dozens of eggs set out in s. 3 of this Plan". It could not have been by chance that those words were left out of s. 4(2).
[72]
Section 4(2) provides that "the aggregate of the number of dozens of eggs produced in the Province of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island
or
Newfoundland" cannot be decreased. The word "or" used is disjunctive such that it is the aggregate of each individual province which cannot be decreased.
[73]
The Board, therefore, submits that, based on a plain meaning of the provisions of s. 4, the Agency could not amend the
1986 Quota Regulations
in such a way as to decrease New Brunswick's quota allocation. The Federal-Provincial Agreement and its amendments cannot be used to create an ambiguity in s. 4 where none exists. Even should they be so used, they do not bind the Governor-in-Council, Lieutenant Governors-in-Council or boards as the Ministers may only "recommend" to them and this is made clear in Part I of the agreement and its amendments:
"The Honourable Ministers will
recommend
, respectively to the Governor-in-Council and Lieutenant Governors-in-Council or provincial agricultural marketing boards each within their respective jurisdiction under the
British North America Act
that: ..." (My underlining)
[74]
The Board further submits that the Agency's 1984 Quota Policy, on which Council partly based its decision, is in direct conflict with the clear language of s. 4(2) which prohibits any quota allocation decrease. The third paragraph of the 1984 Quota Policy, however, specifically states that if a quota allocation to all provinces has the effect of decreasing the provincial allocation of any province below the base allocation of that province, then the provincial allocation to New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland will be decreased pro rata and such decrease cannot reduce their base allocation.
[75]
Furthermore, if one compares the quota allocation in question, effective May 1, 1992, with the previous one effective December 29, 1991, one notices that only the allocations to the Provinces of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland have been decreased. There was no quota allocation to all of the provinces which had the effect of decreasing the provincial allocation of any of the provinces below base, such that there should have been no pro rata decrease of the quota allocations to the three provinces. It is submitted that the Agency is not even following its own policy.
b. The Commission's Arguments:
[76]
The Commission also submits that Council erred in its interpretation of s. 4(2). In examining the words of s. 4(2), Council stated that they were ambiguous and subject to a number of interpretations. However, Council decided to read into s. 4(2) words that were not there, namely, that the quota allotted to the three provinces could not be reduced below base, that is, the quota allocated in s. 3 of Part II of the Schedule to the
Proclamation
.
[77]
The Commission argues that the omission in s. 4(2) of any reference to s. 3 base allocations was for a purpose: the three provinces were given a privileged status.
[78]
It is further submitted that Council erred by referring to the Federal-Provincial Agreement and its amendments, for the agreement itself is not admissible to show the purpose or object of the
Proclamation
. The Agreement does not fall into the same category as an international agreement where the courts have accepted the principle that international agreements may be examined to clarify any uncertainty in the domestic law. Even in this context, such agreements are examined only if the domestic legislation in question is unclear (
National Corn  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 482).
[79]
However, if Council was correct in referring to the Agreement, it erred in its interpretation of the intent of the signatories of the Agreement.
[80]
Part VI of the revised and consolidated 1976 Federal-Provincial Agreement is the interpretation part and it includes a definition of "marketing plan" as follows:
"'Marketing Plan' as referred to in this Agreement means, in respect of the Federal Minister of Agriculture, the
Canadian Egg Marketing Agency Proclamation
as set out in Schedule A to the original agreement and to this agreement
and any amendments thereto made pursuant to the amending agreement of June 10, 1975 which amendments are set out as Schedule D to this agreement
together with any further amendments made pursuant to this revised and consolidated agreement which are set out in Schedule G and in respect of each of the Provincial Ministers of Agriculture Part II of their respective provincial marketing plans (or regulations) as set forth in Schedule B to the original agreement, and to this agreement together with any amendments to said Part II as set forth in Schedule B to the amending agreement of June 10, 1975 and Schedule E to this agreement together with any further amendments necessary as a result of this revised and consolidated agreement as set forth in Schedule H, taking into consideration the differences mentioned therein or necessitated by the legislation in respect of each province;" (My underlining)
[81]
The Commission submits that the intention of the parties could not be other than as expressed in the words used in Schedule D (contains s. 4(1.1) which is now s. 4(2)) to which the definition refers: the words clearly indicate that New Brunswick's quota is not to be decreased. If the parties had wanted it to be otherwise, they would have so provided in the agreement.
[82]
Counsel for the Commission referred to the Federal Court of Appeal decision in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 657 F.C., where the oft quoted excerpt from the late Dr. E.A. Driedger (
Construction of Statutes
, 2nd Ed. (Toronto: Butterworths, 1983), at p. 87) is cited:
"The Modern Principle
"Today there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an
Act
are to be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the
Act
, the object of the
Act
, and the intention of Parliament."
[83]
It was determined in that case that if the language employed by Parliament in a particular provision is clear and unambiguous, then one must stop there. However, if the language used is ambiguous, then one may consider extrinsic evidence, i.e. House of Commons Debates, in order to determine the intention of Parliament.
[84]
Also, in
Re Upper Churchill Water Rights Reversion Act
, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 297; 53 N.R. 268; 47 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 125; 139 A.P.R. 125; 8 D.L.R.(4th) 1, at p. 318 S.C.R., McIntyre, J., the Supreme Court of Canada held that:
"... extrinsic evidence is admissible to show the background against which the legislation was enacted. I also agree that such evidence is
not
receivable as an aid to construction of the statute."
[85]
In the
National Corn Growers
case, the court followed English precedents dealing only with the admissibility of international agreements. The principles in that case do not apply to interprovincial agreements, and even if they did, Council's interpretation of s. 4(2) based on the intent of the signatories of the Federal-Provincial Agreement was patently unreasonable.
[86]
The Commission points out that Council referred to the Agency's 1984 Quota Policy applicable to New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland. There is no question that this policy is consistent with the Agency's view that it has the power to reduce New Brunswick's quota to the level of its original base allocation. However, it cannot be used by Council as authority for an interpretation of the
Proclamation
in a manner which fails to give effect to the plain meaning of the words used in that
Proclamation
.
c. The Agency's Arguments:
[87]
According to the Agency, jurisprudence has well established that courts must exercise caution and deference in reviewing the decisions of specialized administrative tribunals (
National Corn  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , supra;
Lester
, supra). The curial deference required in these circumstances applies not only to the determination of fact but also to the interpretation of legal issues, particularly where those legal issues fall squarely within the expertise of the tribunal concerned (
Lester
, supra).
[88]
The Agency claims that Council's interpretation of s. 4(2) is not so patently unreasonable that it cannot be rationally supported by the relevant legislation and demands intervention by the court upon review.
[89]
Council concluded that it could not interpret s. 4(2) in isolation of subss. (1) and (3). It found that s. 4(2) was ambiguous because, unlike ss. 4(1) and 4(3), it contains no reference point for restrictions on quota allocation decreases. Section 4(1) refers to above base allocations to all provinces. Section 4(3) refers to below base allocations to all provinces excepting New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland. The Agency submits that it would seem reasonable then, to interpret s. 4(2) within the context of below base allocations to these three provinces. The provision, therefore, is capable of various interpretations. It was thus necessary and proper for Council to examine s. 4(2) in its legislative and historical contexts for the provision cannot be construed in isolation (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.)).
[90]
The Agency argues that since the
Proclamation
was originally made, it has been periodically amended to give effect to the Federal-Provincial Agreement and the intention of the signatories. Their practices must therefore be considered in determining the proper meaning of s. 4(2). Thus, it is reasonable to make reference to the Federal-Provincial Agreement to determine whether there is any ambiguity, even latent, in s. 4(2) of the
Proclamation
. It is submitted that a close analogy exists to domestic legislation enacted to give effect to an international governmental agreement (
National Corn  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 185 Admin. L.R., where Gonthier, J., adopted the remarks of Ian Brownlie,
Principles of Public International Law
(3rd Ed.) (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979):
"If the convention may be used on the correct principle that the statute is intended to implement the convention then, it follows, the latter becomes a proper aid to interpretation, and, more especially, may reveal a latent ambiguity in the text of the statute even if this was 'clear in itself'. Moreover, the principle or presumption that the Crown does not intend to break an international treaty must have the corollary that the text of the international instrument is a primary source of meaning or 'interpretation'. The courts have lately accepted the need to refer to the relevant treaty even in the absence of ambiguity in the legislative text when taken in isolation.")
It is logical to reconcile the Federal-Provincial Agreement with the legislation implementing it. Reference to the former is made in order to understand the latter.
[91]
The Agency avers that it is clear from the history of s. 4(2) that the intention of the signatories was to limit the exception of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland from quota allocation reductions to reductions below base levels. Council found that the signatories did not intend to guarantee growth to these provinces in "good times" and exempt them from cutbacks in "bad times" (i.e. when all other provinces are below base). No decreases have ever reduced New Brunswick's allocation below its base level.
[92]
In
Re Maple Lodge Farms Ltd. and Government of Canada et al.
(1982), 44 N.R. 354; 137 D.L.R.(3d) 558, at p. 562 D.L.R., the Supreme Court of Canada stated that:
"In construing statutes such as those under consideration in this appeal, which provide for far-reaching and frequently complicated administrative schemes, the judicial approach should be to endeavour within the scope of the legislation to give effect to its provisions so that the administrative agencies created may function effectively, as the legislation intended. In my view, in dealing with legislation of this nature, the courts should, wherever possible, avoid a narrow, technical construction, and endeavour to make effective the legislative intent as applied to the administrative scheme involved."
[93]
The Agency concludes that in light of this decision, s. 4(2) should not be interpreted in a technical, legalistic manner which would defeat the intent of the signatories and render s. 4(2) in direct conflict with the June 10, 1975 Federal-Provincial Amending Agreement.
[94]
The Agency contends that the interpretation advanced by the Board and the Commission would produce an absurd result. If accepted, it would mean that New Brunswick could permanently reap the automatic benefits of overbase increases from rate of lay changes regardless of changes in the marketplace. Such an absurd result produced by a narrow and isolated reading of s. 4(2) should be avoided in favour of a common-sense interpretation consistent with the intent of the statutory scheme (Driedger, supra, at p. 1). This was the approach adopted by Council.
[95]
It would also be highly inequitable to adopt the approach advanced by the applicants. Having agreed to the Agency's 1984 Quota Policy and having accepted the overbase quota reductions implemented in 1989, the applicants cannot be heard to suggest that overbase quota allocation reductions are impermissible. The November 1991 quota allocation increase, to which the Board now claims a vested right, was granted simply to accommodate New Brunswick in the application of the Agency's overbase reduction program.
[96]
It is therefore submitted that Council's interpretation of s. 4(2) was not patently unreasonable, but was a practical, common-sense construction consistent with the legislative scheme and the Federal-Provincial Agreement.
d. Disposition Of The Key Issue:
[97]
The court will not interfere with Council's decision unless Council's interpretation of s. 4(2) of Part II of the Schedule to the
Proclamation
was patently unreasonable. I must therefore decide whether or not it was patently unreasonable and, in order to do so, I must consider these three questions:
(1) whether it was patently unreasonable for Council to conclude that s. 4(2) was ambiguous and that the word "decrease" contained therein must be interpreted to mean "decrease below base level";
(2) whether it was patently unreasonable for Council to refer to the Federal-Provincial Agreement and its amendments in interpreting s. 4(2); and
(3) whether it was patently unreasonable for Council to base its decision in part on the Agency's 1984 Quota Policy.
[98]
First, in my view, Council erred in finding that the wording of s. 4(2) was ambiguous. For purposes of clarity I will reproduce the relevant portions of s. 4 as it exists today in Part II of the Schedule to the
Proclamation
(C.R.C., c. 646):
"4(1) No order or regulation shall be made where the effect thereof would be to
increase
the aggregate of
. . . . .
to a number that exceeds, on a yearly basis, the number of dozens of eggs set out in
s. 3 of this Plan
for the province [8,683,000 for New Brunswick]
unless
the Agency has taken into account
. . . . .
"4(2) No order or regulation shall be made where the effect thereof would be to
decrease
the aggregate of
(a) the number of dozens of eggs produced in the Province of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island
or
Newfoundland and authorized by quotas assigned by the Agency and by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade; and
(b) the number of dozens of eggs produced in the Province of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island
or
Newfoundland and anticipated to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade other than as authorized by quotas assigned by the Agency and by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board.
"4(3) No order or regulation shall be made where the effect thereof would be to
decrease
the aggregate of
(a) the number of dozens of eggs produced in a province and authorized by quotas assigned by the Agency and by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade, and
(b) the number of dozens of eggs produced in a province and anticipated to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade other than as authorized by quotas assigned by the Agency and by the appropriate Board or Commodity Board,
to a number that, on a yearly basis, is less than the number of dozens of eggs set out in
s. 3 of this Plan
for the province
unless
at the same time the number of dozens of eggs produced in each of the provinces,
other than the Provinces of New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland
, and so authorized to be marketed in intraprovincial, interprovincial and export trade
is decreased proportionately
." (My underlining)
[99]
Section 4(2) clearly states that no order or regulation will have the effect of decreasing the quota allocations of the three provinces. There is no reference to the s. 3 base level. If Parliament specifically included the phrase "set out in s. 3 of this Plan" in both ss. 4(1) and 4(3), then it is reasonable to assume that it was omitted from s. 4(2) for a purpose. One can only speculate as to the purpose, however, it is noteworthy that New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland represent but a very small percentage of the entire quota allocation (less than 2% each). It is very unlikely that the egg production in these three provinces would create the havoc in the egg market claimed by the Agency if their quota allocations were not decreased. I find, therefore, that it was patently unreasonable for Council to conclude that s. 4(2) was ambiguous.
[100]
Secondly, the words of a particular statutory provision are to be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme and object of the statute, as well as the intention of Parliament (Driedger, supra). Even if there is no ambiguity in s. 4(2) itself, the intention of Parliament must be gathered from the words of the statute, read in their entire context. It is at this point that one may consider extrinsic evidence in order to determine the intention of Parliament at the time the statutory provision was enacted.
[101]
The courts have acknowledged the principle that international agreements may be used as extrinsic evidence in order to determine the intention of Parliament in the domestic legislation. They cannot, however, be used to create an ambiguity in the statute where none exists.
[102]
If the words of a statutory provision, read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme and object of the statute, as well as the intention of Parliament, are clear and unambiguous, then they must be followed. In so reading a statute, words should not be added or deleted, for the construction of the statute must be taken from the words used.
[103]
In the case at bar, the Federal-Provincial Agreement is not an "international agreement". However, insofar as it may be used to assist in determining the intention of Parliament when it enacted s. 4(2), it is admissible extrinsic evidence.
[104]
The proposed 1975 amendment to the federal plan, which was never enacted, contemplated an amendment to the then s. 4(2) (now s. 4(3)). However, when Parliament amended the
Proclamation
, it added another provision, s. 4(1.1) which is the present s. 4(2), the key subsection favouring the three small provinces.
[105]
The 1976 revised and consolidated Federal-Provincial Agreement contains in its Schedule D the
Proclamation
as it exists today. This revised and consolidated agreement was adopted by all of the signatories. The signatories, therefore, endorsed the present wording of the
Proclamation
.
[106]
The words of s. 4(2), read in conjunction with ss. 4(1) and 4(3), are clear and unambiguous and in harmony with the scheme and object of the
Proclamation
and with the intention of Parliament. It was patently unreasonable for Council to use the Federal-Provincial Agreement to create an ambiguity where none existed.
[107]
Thirdly, the 1984 Quota Policy is that of the Agency. It was created after the enactment of the
Proclamation
and its amendment. In my view, it sheds no light on the intent of Parliament when it enacted s. 4(2) some nine years earlier. Council's reference to it was patently unreasonable in that it relied on evidence which was wholly irrelevant to the question before it.
[108]
It therefore follows that I must conclude that Council's decision to priorly approve the Agency's proposed quota order reducing New Brunswick's quota allocation to 9,385,132 dozen eggs for the 12 month period commencing May 1, 1992 was patently unreasonable in the circumstances.
[109]
Thus, the application is granted. It is hereby ordered that the decision of Council made on March 24, 1992 to priorly approve what is now published
Canadian Egg Marketing Agency Quota Regulations, 1986
, amendment SOR/92-193 be quashed. Consequently, it is ordered that the
Canadian Egg Marketing Agency Quota Regulations, 1986
, amendment SOR/91-699 continue in full force and effect. Costs to the applicants.
Application allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]