 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (FC)
MLB unedited judgment
[French language version follows English language version]
[La version française vient à la suite de la version anglaise]
Marc Awashish, Denis Weizineau, Noëlla Chachai, Nathalie Awashish and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  FC 765)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Blais, J.
July 20, 2007.
Counsel:
Lina Beaulieu and Josée Bérubé, for the applicants;
Martin Dallaire, for the intervenor (Simon Awashish);
Nicole Bérubé, for the respondents.
Solicitors of Record:
Gagné Letarte, senc, Quebec, Quebec, for the applicants;
Cain Lamarre Casgrain Wells, St-Félicien, Quebec, for the intervenor (Simon Awashish);
Nicole Bérubé, Roberval, Quebec, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. This case was originally cited as [2007] F.T.R. TBEd. AU.006.
[1]
Blais, J.
[Translation]: This is an application for judicial review made pursuant to section 18.1 of the
Federal Courts Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, by which the applicants are asking the Court to quash the elections held  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on May 30 and 31 and June 1, 2006; to issue a writ of
quo warranto
divesting of their duties the members of the Opitciwan Band who were illegally elected to the Opitciwan Atikamekw Band Council (the Council); and ordering that new elections be held in accordance with the rules of the [TRANSLATION]
Opitciwan Atikamekw Council Electoral Code
(the Electoral Code) adopted by the Council in May 2005.
RELEVANT FACTS
[2]
On September 24, 2002, the Council adopted resolution No. 2002-09-24-075, setting up a study group to review the electoral by-laws and create a proper electoral code. At that time, the members of the Opitciwan community elected their chief and Council members in accordance with customary rules, some of which were written down. This resolution also provided for the submission of a draft electoral code to the Council, its posting and publication in the community, consultation of the community on major points in the draft, and the adoption of the Electoral Code by referendum.
[3]
On May 19, 2005, a special general public assembly was convened at which a proposal was made by Paul-Yves Weizineau to the Council to amend resolution No. 2002-09-24-075 by repealing the referendum procedure contemplated for adoption of the new Electoral Code. As a majority of the members present agreed, the proposal was adopted. The members present at the assembly then recommended that the Council adopt the Electoral Code and that it come into effect as soon as approved. This proposal was unanimously adopted.
[4]
The respondents alleged that another public assembly was held on May 30, 2005, at which resolutions for amendments to the Electoral Code were adopted, but the transcript of that meeting still cannot be found and the amendments were not reflected in the version adopted by the Council.
[5]
On May 31, 2005, the Council adopted resolution No. 2005-05-31-016, which provided for the adoption of the Electoral Code as submitted at the assembly of May 10, 2005, and its application in the forthcoming general elections.
[6]
On July 18 and 19, 2005, elections were held  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and Jean-Pierre Mattawa, Martin Awashish, Maria Chachai, Régina Chachai, Paul Awashish, Fernand Denis-Damée and Boniface Awashish were declared elected.
[7]
Following these elections five complaints were filed with the appeal board formed pursuant to section 19 of the Electoral Code. In its decision of September 15, 2005, the appeal board concluded that the elections in question should be quashed, new elections held and, in the meantime, the former Council should be responsible for governing the Band. Following this decision, a general assembly was convened by the election board on September 21, 2005, at which the members present rejected the appeal board’s decision and declared the elections of July 18 and 19 valid.
[8]
On October 21, 2005, Simon Awashish, former chief of the Opitciwan Atikamekw Band defeated in the 2005 elections, filed an application for judicial review in the Federal Court (T-1846-05) from the decision of September 21, 2005, together with a motion for an order of interlocutory injunction, seeking
inter alia
a writ of
quo warranto
divesting of their duties the members of the Council elected in 2005 and conferring the duties of the Council members on the individuals who were members of the Council prior to the 2005 elections until new elections were held.
[9]
In a decision dated December 16, 2005, Madam Justice Danièle Tremblay-Lamer allowed the motion, ordering
inter alia
that the status quo existing before the September 21, 2005 decision be restored and accordingly that the Council members elected on July 18 and 19, 2005, be divested of their duties and the applicant, as well as the former Council members, be reinstated until the Court ruled on the application for judicial review.
[10]
On December 22, 2005, a meeting of the Grand Council of Elders of Opitciwan was held at which the Federal Court judgment and the validity of the Electoral Code were discussed. It is clear from reading the minutes of that meeting that there was some confusion among the elders, who mentioned
inter alia
the difficulty of participating in assemblies, which were held in French, when several of them did not speak the language. In the respondents’ submission, and as set out in the petition discussed in the following paragraph, the elders apparently decided at that meeting that the Electoral Code should be suspended. According to the applicants’ submission, however, the elders never made such a decision.
[11]
The only passage from the minutes in which the Electoral Code question was raised reads as follows:
[TRANSLATION]
Elizabeth Aw. Mentioned that if you take the judgment and the code – as she has read the Electoral Code several times, and
she is for the judgment as the code is authentic
, then she asked why they did not want to have the Code, there was something blocking them regarding the Electoral Code, and it is true there is something blocking them.
Gabriel.
I also read the Code  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and I thought the document was valid
, I even think that Antoine does not know what the Code contains, I will go and see Antoine to have the Code read. They wondered why they do not want this Code.
PYW. A Council of Elders should be formed, if you say it is difficult to make a decision, we should have a Council of Elders before the elections, within two months.
JCH.
I think that we cannot take a decision today
; he asked William to leave it as such for the moment.
PYW.
Mentioned that the judgment is valid as there is no decision. He explained that the judgment and Code would be in suspense on January 16 at the general assembly
. He asked again for a Council of Elders to be formed. Annie 32 replied how can you think that people today will listen to us when they don’t want to even listen to the elders anymore.
PYW. Proposed that if ever things were very bad in our community, we would organize another meeting and his proposal was accepted. Also suggested that
the present situation be left as it is
, and asked Simon, Jean Pierre and Paul to proceed to communicate by radio to calm tensions before the elections. If PY hears of troublemaking, he will intervene with the elders.
PYW. Asked elders to think about the formation of the Council of Elders.
JCH. Asked what would become of the election board and PYW replied there would be no new board and he re-read the agenda once again, explaining the procedures for the next general assembly.
I asked PYW who the leaders would be and he replied in accordance with the court judgment.
[Emphasis added.]
[12]
Following this meeting, a petition was circulated and signed by over 400 members of the community. The petition supported the following proposal:
[TRANSLATION]
Pursuant to the decisions taken by the elders at their meeting on December 22, 2005.
It was decided that the present Electoral Code should not be implemented for the next elections and that election procedures should follow custom.
We, the members of the Opitciwan Atikamekw community, support their decisions.
[13]
A series of public assemblies were held between January and May 2006 at which the Federal Court judgment, the decision of the elders, the formation of a new election board and the Electoral Code were discussed. At the same time Nicole Bérubé, now counsel for the respondents in this case, was instructed by certain members of the community to enter into negotiations with Martin Dallaire, counsel for the applicants in docket T-1846-05, with a view to resolving the political crisis  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[14]
On February 6, 2006, the Council adopted resolution No. 2006-02-01-001, recognizing the new election board appointed at the general assembly of January 18, 2006.
[15]
At a special assembly held on February 16, 2006, the Council members reinstated by the judgment of Tremblay-Lamer J. announced their withdrawal from the Council for reasons of public and personal safety. That said, seven of the eight Council members present at the assembly later indicated that they expected to remain in their positions until the new Council was elected at a general election.
[16]
On March 1, 2006, the Council adopted resolution No. 2006-03-01-008, directing the election board to convene a general assembly of members of the community to initiate the electoral process in accordance with the Electoral Code.
[17]
On March 17, 2006, several members of the community sent a letter to the acting chief, asking him to suspend application of the Electoral Code for the forthcoming elections.
[18]
On March 21, 2006, a public assembly was held at which suspension of the Electoral Code for the 2006 elections was proposed. The result of the vote on this proposal was as follows: 76 in favour, 3 against and 2 spoiled ballots.
[19]
On April 10, 2006, the Council adopted resolution No. 2006-04-10-020, recognizing the difficulties of implementing the Electoral Code and the need to hold other elections as soon as possible. The Council thus agreed to suspend the Electoral Code and to submit to the assembly the application of certain standards for the elections, namely, the composition of an election board, the definition of eligibility for elections under clause 7.1 of the Electoral Code, the number of positions to be filled (1 chief and 6 councillors), the length of the future Council’s mandate (two years), the appointment of an arbitrator rather than an appeal board, a process for members residing outside the reserve to vote and the date of the elections.
[20]
That said, this resolution was signed only by the chief and four councillors, which did not constitute a majority of the Council. It should also be noted that the resolution followed not only a series of general assemblies but also negotiations between Ms. Bérubé and Mr. Dallaire on behalf of their respective clients.
[21]
On April 27, 2006, a general public assembly was held pursuant to resolution No. 2006-04-10-020. Some 180 persons were present and voted on the points raised by the resolution in question. Another general assembly was held on May 3, 2006, at which the by-laws used for the 2003 elections were reviewed and updated for the 2006 elections.
[22]
On May 30 and 31 and June 1, 2006, elections were held  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and 770 of the 1,352 electors on the electoral roll exercised their right to vote. Jean-Pierre Mattawa, Fernand Denis-Damée, Régina Chachai, Martine Awashish, Boniface Awashish, Charles Jean-Pierre and Annie Chachai were declared elected.
[23]
By a letter June 15, 2006, to the Opitciwan returning officer, ten members of the community challenged the results of the elections and contended that the Electoral Code was still legally in effect and had not been observed. Receiving no reply to their complaint, the applicants filed this application for judicial review, alleging
inter alia
infringements of the Electoral Code regarding notice of elections, the nomination process, the electoral process, voting procedures, the code of conduct of those elected and the voting process for members not residing  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[24]
In the proceeding at bar, the applicants are asking the Court to quash the elections held  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on May 30 and 31 and June 1, 2006, issue a writ of
quo warranto
divesting of their duties the members of the Opitciwan Band illegally elected to the Council in the elections, issue an order of injunction directing that new elections be held consistent with the Electoral Code and ordering the provisional enforcement of the judgment to be rendered, notwithstanding appeal.
[25]
On January 19, 2007, the applicants in docket T-1846-05 officially discontinued their application, following an agreement giving Simon Awashish intervener status in the case at bar.
PRELIMINARY ISSUE
[26]
To begin with, I must discuss an application made by counsel for the respondents the day after the hearing held at Roberval on June 13, 2007.
[27]
First, I note that the parties submitted their arguments during the day on June 13 and that the case was taken under advisement that same evening. It is unusual to ask the Court to re-open the proceeding during the advisement to hear allegedly fresh evidence.
[28]
I have reviewed the correspondence received from the parties and I do not think there is any reason to re-open the argument, since the parties have a duty to ensure that all available, relevant and probative evidence is filed with the Court at the proper time and in accordance with the rights of the other parties.
[29]
Accordingly, I consider it as not consistent with the interests of justice to re-open the matter, and consequently the application to re-open the proceeding is dismissed.
ISSUES
[30]
Essentially, the following issues were raised in this matter:
1. Was the adoption of the Electoral Code by the Opitciwan Atikamekw Council valid?
2. If so, was the suspension of the Electoral Code by the Opitciwan Atikamekw Council valid?
3. If the Electoral Code were still in effect, did the evidence before the Court establish that there were one or more breaches of the Electoral Code that would justify the Court quashing the 2006 elections?
ANALYSIS
(1) Was the adoption of the Electoral Code by the Opitciwan Atikamekw Council valid?
[31]
The respondents submit first that the 2006 elections should not be quashed by this Court for an infringement of the Electoral Code since the Electoral Code was not and never was valid, as a result of the absence of a consensus to indicate that the Electoral Code reflected Band custom. This argument was based on the fact that the Council held no referendum, as it had initially undertaken to do, and on the absence of any evidence regarding the way in which the preparation and consultation process preceding adoption of the Electoral Code took place. The respondents further alleged that the Electoral Code was adopted in haste, since the Council’s mandate was nearing its end and elections were to be held as soon as possible.
[32]
The respondents object to the procedure used for adoption of the Electoral Code, when it was proposed that the Council repeal the referendum procedure initially agreed upon, it was recommended that the Council adopt the Electoral Code and the latter was in fact adopted by the Council, all at one assembly. The respondents further maintain that we cannot regard adoption of the Electoral Code by at most 30 individuals out of a possible 1,352 on the electoral roll as indicating that the Code was the subject of a broad consensus. The respondents add that no evidence was presented regarding notices convening the assembly of May 19, 2005, and if there was no reasonable notice so that members of the community could exercise their voting rights, the rules of natural justice were infringed.
[33]
Finally, the respondents maintain that it is for the applicants to prove that the Electoral Code represents custom.
[34]
The applicants and the intervener Simon Awashish maintain that the Electoral Code is valid, emphasizing that the Electoral Code was the result of a long process of consultation to create a structure that would enable members of the community to vote freely and in an orderly manner, consistent with established custom and practice in the community. The applicants further submit that the respondents are unfounded in law in saying that the Electoral Code does not apply because it had not been the subject of a referendum when it was adopted.
[35]
The applicants further submit that this argument regarding the validity of the Electoral Code was made within a completely unreasonable period of time, and moreover by persons claiming to be elected in September 2005 following elections held under the Electoral Code.
[36]
The applicants further rely on the order made by Tremblay-Lamer J. in docket  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  in which she acknowledged the
prima facie
validity of the Electoral Code, in particular at paragraphs 6 and 7:
Contrary to what the respondents allege, there is strong evidence showing that the
Electoral Code represents the custom
of the Band.
¶
7 The applicable custom when a Band Council is to be chosen in cases not governed by section 74 of the
Indian Act, ibid.
, “must include practices for the choice of a council generally acceptable to members of the band upon which there is a broad consensus”:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
. In this case, the Electoral Code was validly adopted by resolution following consultations with the community on May 31, 2005.
[37]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
, Mr. Justice Strayer noted the following:
Unless otherwise defined in respect of a particular band, “custom” must I think include practices for the choice of a council which are generally acceptable to members of the band, upon which there is a broad consensus. . . . The real question as to the validity of the new constitution then seems to be one of political, not legal, legitimacy: is the constitution based on a majority consensus of those who, on the existing evidence, appear to be members of the Band? This is a question which a court should not seek to answer in the absence of some discernable legal criteria which it can apply. While there might be some other basis for judicial supervision if there were clear evidence of fraud or other acts on the part of the defendants which could clearly not be authorized by the
Indian Act
, there is no evidence of any such activities before me.
[38]
At present, it seems clear that the Electoral Code is a matter of controversy within the Opitciwan community. However, the respondents did not establish that this was true when it was adopted in 2005. Further, although the Council had initially undertaken to proceed by referendum, and though it probably would have been better to proceed in that way in order to ensure the existence of a broader consensus before the Electoral Code was adopted, I am not persuaded that such a procedure was necessary to make adoption of the Code valid.
[39]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
, Mr. Justice Heald adopted the analysis of Strayer J. in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ,
supra
, and elaborated on certain points. He wrote the following:
¶
27 In the words of Justice Strayer, a band’s custom must “include practices for the choice of a council which are generally acceptable to members of the band, upon which there is a broad consensus”. I agree with this characterization of a band’s custom. However, determining what is generally acceptable to members of the band gives rise to difficulties, as is exemplified by this litigation. Justice Strayer further stated the validity of the constitution in that case was a question of political legitimacy, and was a question the court should not seek to answer in the absence of some “discernible legal criteria”.
¶
28 The Respondents submitted that the objective legal criteria sought by Justice Strayer could be found in subsection 2(3)(
a
) of the
Indian Act
. This section reads as follows:
2. (3) Unless the context otherwise requires or this Act
otherwise provides,
(
a
) a power conferred on a band shall be deemed not to be exercised unless it is exercised pursuant to the consent of a majority of the electors of the band; and . . .
¶
29 The Respondents submitted that it is the Band that has the power to determine what the constitution, or electoral procedures, of the Band are, and that this power must be exercised in accordance with subsection 2(3)(
a
), as set out
supra
. I agree that it is the Band itself, not the Band Council, that has the power to determine what constitutes the Band's custom. However, I disagree with the Respondents’ submission that this is a “power conferred on a band” as is contemplated by subsection 2(3)(
a
) of the
Indian Act
.
[40]
Although Heald D.J. acknowledged that custom must be determined by the Band, not the Council, he refused to apply paragraph 2(3)(
a
) of the
Indian Act
, which provides that the consent of a majority of the electors must be obtained before proceeding. By the same logic, I do not think it was necessary for the Council to proceed by referendum in order to ensure that it had the support of a majority of the public before adopting the Electoral Code. This is not a situation in which the Electoral Code was developed and adopted in secret. The public was consulted throughout the process and the Electoral Code was adopted at a public assembly.
[41]
The most persuasive aspect of the applicants’ argument regarding the validity of the Electoral Code is that it was used for the 2005 elections, in which a large number of electors in the community took part, and that the Code’s validity was not questioned before or during the elections. The validity of the Electoral Code was only questioned for the first time in reply to the allegations raised in connection with the application for judicial review in docket T-1845-06.
[42]
In
Bone
,
supra
, Heald D.J. was confronted by a situation similar to the one at bar, as illustrated by the following passage from his judgment:
¶
54 The next event that is relevant to the Applicant’s submission that the Code reflects the Band’s custom is the March 14, 1994, election itself. It is not disputed that the election was held in accordance with the Code, and following the election the Election Appeal Board was appointed in accordance with the Code and adjudicated the Applicant’s appeal in a manner consistent with the Code. In fact, everything seemed to transpire in accordance with the Code until the Elections Appeal Board rendered its order, at which time the Respondents refused to comply with the order.
[43]
Faced with evidence that supported “no more than a weak inference that the Code received the support of the Band membership”, Heald D.J. turned to the election which followed adoption of the Code, concluding as follows at paragraphs 64 and 65 of his decision:
I think the answer is to be found in the conduct of the Band in relation to the March 14, 1994, election and the events that followed. The Band conducted the nomination proceedings, the election and the subsequent election appeal, all in accordance with the Code. According to the Affidavit of the Respondent Hall, there were 478 votes cast for the election of the Band Chief. Although neither party led evidence as to the total number of eligible voters at the time of the election, the Respondent Hall deposed that at the time of the plebiscites there were 964 Band members of voting age, including non-residents. Thus, it can be said that approximately 50 % of the eligible voters participated in the March 14, 1994 election. There is no evidence that at any time before or during the election any Band member objected to the manner in which the election by Band custom was proceeding. In my view, the conduct of the Band in acquiescing in the use of the Code, is sufficient evidence to satisfy the requirement of Justice Strayer, as set out in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
, that it was “generally acceptable to members of the band, upon which there is a broad consensus”, and therefore reflects the Band’s custom.
¶
65 Accordingly, I declare that the Code was in force as of March 14, 1994.
[44]
By the same reasoning, I note that 649 electors exercised their right to vote in the first poll, and 701 electors in the second poll, out of a possible 1,352 on the electoral roll, according to the information supplied by the respondents. As noted earlier, no evidence was presented of an objection before or during the elections, except for the refusal by Fernand Denis-Damée to sign the resolution adopting the Electoral Code, because the resolution was not consistent with the resolution providing that the Code would be adopted by referendum. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the community’s acquiescence in use of the Electoral Code in the 2005 elections is sufficient evidence to establish that the Electoral Code reflected “practices for the choice of a council which are generally acceptable to members of the Band, upon which there is a broad consensus” (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
).
(2) Was the suspension of the Electoral Code by the Opitciwan Atikamekw Council valid?
[45]
As I have found that adoption of the Electoral Code in 2005 was valid, I must now consider whether the suspension of it in 2006 was as well.
[46]
In support of their argument that the 2006 elections was illegal, the applicants maintain that the elections should have been held according to the procedure set out in the Electoral Code. In the event of disagreement with certain provisions of the Electoral Code, the amendment procedures set out in the Code should have been used, and this was not done. The applicants maintain that the process used to suspend the Electoral Code was unlawful and thus that the Electoral Code remained in effect for the 2006 elections.
[47]
The applicants argue that the respondents manipulated members of the community by arranging a large number of assemblies and resolutions to set aside the Electoral Code and to establish an anti-democratic process that would guarantee their speedy election. The applicants contend that the respondents submitted a petition to the community to support the opinion expressed by the Council of Elders that the Electoral Code should be set aside, when the Council of Elders had said nothing of the kind. The applicants accordingly conclude that no weight should be given to this petition, since people subscribed to it spontaneously out of respect for what they thought was the opinion of the community’s elders.
[48]
The applicants further maintain that members of the Council, who were reinstated following the Court’s order, and those of the election board elected in 2005, were gradually sidelined and that the months leading up to the 2006 elections were characterized by intimidation, pressure and verbal violence and members of the community finally voted in the greatest possible confusion.
[49]
The respondents, for their part, maintain that the 2006 elections were legal since the Electoral Code had been suspended and replaced by the by-laws in effect in the 2003 elections, accompanied by certain amendments approved at general assemblies on April 27 and May 3, 2006. The respondents further contend that, as suggested by Tremblay-Lamer J. in her order, the parties had reached agreement in order to encourage a political settlement to the crisis  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and a board had in fact been empowered to review the Electoral Code, which would then be submitted to community members for approval by referendum.
[50]
The respondents further note that the signatories of the letter of June 15, 2006, did not dispute that the Electoral Code had been sidelined once the elections in which they participated had been held.
[51]
Unlike the situation when the Electoral Code was adopted, the respondents note that the decision to suspend the Electoral Code and the electoral rules adopted by the community was the subject of a broad consensus. The respondents allege that participation in the process of suspending the Electoral Code in 2006 was greater than in the process of adopting it in 2005.
[52]
The respondents further submit that several of the applicants criticized the process of suspending the Electoral Code without taking part and without being aware of the efforts made to arrive at the agreement, as indicated by the examinations of the applicants Clément Cleary and Nathalie Awashish, and of the intervener Simon Awashish.
[53]
Finally, the respondents argue that, pursuant to the negotiations undertaken to establish the process for the 2006 elections, the decision to suspend the Electoral Code was approved by the Council in resolution No. 2006-04-10-020.
[54]
To begin with, I have considerable reservations regarding the interpretation placed by the respondents on the “so-called” decision of the Council of Elders made at the meeting of December 22, 2005. After reading the transcript of that meeting carefully, I have to say that the position taken by the Council of Elders on the question of the Electoral Code seems somewhat unclear. Reading the transcript, which was prepared in good faith and the content of which is not disputed in Court, leads me to conclude that
nothing
was decided by the elders at this meeting of December 22, 2005. It was instead a meeting at which participants discussed many matters, including the Electoral Code, but it appears to the Court that opinions varied and that no decision was taken on whether the Electoral Code applied. The only clear decision appears to have been to postpone the discussion to a new meeting of the Council of Elders after the holidays in early January 2006.
[55]
The petition which circulated to support suspension of the Electoral Code, and the letter dated March 17, 2006, which clearly stated that it reflected the elders’ position that the Electoral Code should be suspended, appear to the Court to be an inducement: that is, incorrect information was used in the wording of the petition to obtain general agreement of members of the Band that the Electoral Code should be rejected.
[56]
Circulating incorrect information in order to get the support of a majority of citizens, though regrettable, is not new in aboriginal municipal politics and is not sufficient to vitiate the electoral process. What I regard as unacceptable is making people believe that the Council of Elders, consisting in fact of the Band’s elders, made a decision when that apparently was not the case.
[57]
It is the Band’s elders, meeting on occasion in what is called the Council of Elders, who approve the changes made from time to time to any code of conduct adopted by the Band. This procedure is not unique and is to be found in all Indian bands in Canada. In fact, younger members of the aboriginal communities feel reassured in adopting a code of conduct which has received the approval of the Council of Elders. This procedure of having major decisions affecting management of band councils approved by the elders is part of any decision-making process.
[58]
In the case at bar, this approval process was clearly flouted and everyone, including the elders themselves, allowed themselves to be manipulated and ended by believing that they agreed with rejection of the Electoral Code.
[59]
What member of the Band would dare to refuse to sign a petition to reject the Electoral Code when he or she believed that the elders had themselves rejected it? It was clearly the weight of the opinion of the Council of Elders which led people to sign the petition spontaneously, as it falsely claimed to be implementing the decision of elders to reject the Electoral Code.
[60]
It may also fairly be assumed that the same elders who were concerned about divisions within the Band at the meeting of December 22, 2005, and hoped that some calm would prevail after the holiday period, would have been ill advised to support the Electoral Code when a majority of members appeared to reject it.
[61]
It is also true that there were several public assemblies and that the Council adopted a resolution reflecting the apparent consensus among members of the community that the Code should be suspended. This resolution was followed by two further general assemblies at which procedures for the 2006 elections were adopted. The general elections went forward on May 30 and 31 and June 1, 2006 and 770 of the 1,352 electors on the electoral roll exercised their right to vote.
[62]
I now come to the formal decision to “suspend” the Electoral Code. First, the Electoral Code exists and is valid, as discussed earlier. Accordingly, the question is whether it is possible under the same Electoral Code to suspend its application. After considering this point, I do not think that is the case.
[63]
I can understand and accept that people were upset following the events that occurred in 2005 and 2006, and in particular successive elections which had a decisive effect on Band members. I also understand that members were anxious to find some stability and that the Electoral Code appeared to be causing certain problems.
[64]
It appears from the evidence submitted that the effect of the Electoral Code was to prevent the Band Chief, respondent in the case at bar, from running for office in the elections in 2006 since he had been charged with a criminal offence, and this made him ineligible. Suspension of the Electoral Code accordingly allowed him to run for office, which is an important point in view of the situation which led to the “suspension” of the Electoral Code and the motivations of the parties involved.
[65]
I also understand that the respondents to some extent used the Electoral Code as a “lightning rod”, holding it responsible for the Band’s problems. I am unable to see what is so dangerous in the application of the Electoral Code and what makes it so objectionable. Any electoral code is just a code which sets out rules to be followed in the electoral process.
[66]
I also note that the process used in suspending the Electoral Code did not comply with the rules of the Electoral Code itself, as well as abusing the process for approval by the elders. What good can an electoral code be if its application is suspended when elections are held?
[67]
I have reviewed in detail the transcripts of the meetings held between January and April 2006, and I feel that it is excessive to say the least to maintain that these meetings constituted a broad consultation on the need to suspend the Electoral Code. It was more a question of the choice of the members of the election board and the legality of replacement of individuals elected in the preceding year. There also appears to have been a wish to have elections as soon as possible. The provisions of the Electoral Code and the rules for replacing it, if necessary, were discussed very little at these meetings.
[68]
Accordingly, I have no hesitation in concluding that the resolutions adopted at various times between January 18, 2006, and April 2006 did not have the effect of amending the existing Electoral Code or of suspending its application, pursuant to the existing rules of law for doing so which were set out in the Electoral Code in effect.
[69]
I therefore consider that the elections held  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on May 30 and 31 and June 1, 2006 were held illegally and should accordingly be quashed.
[70]
I also feel that the members of the Council elected at these elections were illegally elected, and I issue a writ of
quo warranto
to divest of their duties the members of the Opitciwan Band elected to the Atikamekw Band Council, namely, Jean-Pierre Mattawa, Fernand Denis-Damée, Régina Chachai, Martine Awashish, Boniface Awashish, Charles Jean-Pierre and Annie Chachai.
[71]
Finally, I order that new elections be held in accordance with the rules of the Electoral Code.
(3) If the Electoral Code were still in effect, did the evidence before the Court establish that there were one or more breaches of the Electoral Code that would justify the Court quashing the 2006 elections?
[72]
In view of my conclusions on the foregoing points, it will not be necessary to answer this question.
[73]
Having said that, I would add that, in view of the fact that a political crisis has been occurring in the Opitciwan community since 2005 and the results of the last two elections have been challenged in this Court, it would be desirable to have the controversy surrounding the Electoral Code resolved once and for all. Band members should realize that the rules of conduct governing the electoral process are only a means of ensuring a democratic election. However, those elected, whoever they may be, cannot assume the right to alter the existing rules.
[74]
The applicants established that the process for adopting the Electoral Code was followed and that it is valid. The respondents, for their part, were not able to show that the Electoral Code had been legally amended or set aside.
[75]
Any future attempt to amend or to substantially alter the electoral process should be made in accordance with the existing Code, and I would suggest that the process should be transparent and be the subject of broad consultation so that people know what they are voting for.
[76]
Finally, although use of judicial review to ensure the legality of elections is a legitimate procedure, the fact remains that it would be desirable for the next elections to be held in a more harmonious atmosphere and to lead to results which are not challenged in this Court, so as to enable those elected to concentrate on the community’s other needs.
[77]
The application for judicial review at bar is accordingly allowed.
JUDGMENT
[78]
The Court orders that:
(a) the elections held  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  on May 30 and 31 and June 1, 2006 be quashed;
(b) a writ of
quo warranto
be issued divesting of their duties the members of the Opitciwan Band illegally elected to the Opitciwan Atikamekw Band Council, namely, Jean-Pierre Mattawa, Fernand Denis-Damée, Régina Chachai, Martine Awashish, Boniface Awashish, Charles Jean-Pierre and Annie Chachai;
(c) new elections be held in accordance with the Electoral Code of the Opitciwan Atikamekw Council and within the deadlines therein specified;
(d) the judgment be given effect on a provisional basis, notwithstanding appeal;
(e) with costs to the applicants against the respondents.
.........................
Marc Awashish, Denis Weizineau, Noëlla Chachai,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Martine Awashish, Boniface Awashish, Charles Jean-Pierre  et Annie Chachai (défendeurs) et Simon Awashish (intervenant)
[1]
Le juge Blais
: Il s'agit d'une demande de contrôle judiciaire, présentée en vertu de l'article 18.1 de la Loi sur les Cours fédérales, L.R.C. 1985, ch. F-7, par laquelle les demandeurs demandent à la Cour d’annuler les élections tenues à Opitciwan les 30, 31 mai et 1er juin 2006; d’émettre un bref de quo warranto dépossédant de leurs fonctions les membres de la Bande d’Opitciwan ayant été illégalement élus au Conseil de Bande des Atikamekw d’Opitciwan (le Conseil); et d’ordonner la tenue de nouvelles élections respectant les règles du Code électoral du Conseil des Atikamekw d’Opitciwan (le Code électoral), adopté par le Conseil en mai 2005.
FAITS PERTINENTS
[2]
Le 24 septembre 2002, le Conseil a adopté la résolution #2002-09-24-075, voulant qu’un groupe de travail soit constitué pour procéder à la révision des règlements électoraux et créer un véritable code électoral. À cette époque, les membres de la communauté d’Opitciwan élisaient leur chef et leurs conseillers selon les règles coutumières dont certaines étaient écrites. Cette résolution prévoyait aussi la soumission d’un avant-projet de code électoral au Conseil, son affichage et sa publication auprès de la communauté, la consultation de la communauté sur les points majeurs de l’avant-projet, et l’adoption du code électoral par voie référendaire.
[3]
Le 19 mai 2005, une assemblée publique générale spéciale a été convoquée au cours de laquelle une proposition a été soumise par M. Paul-Yves Weizineau au Conseil pour amender la résolution #2002-09-24-075, en abrogeant la procédure référendaire prévue pour l’adoption du nouveau code électoral. La majorité des membres présents étant d’accord, la proposition a été adoptée. Les membres présents à l’assemblée ont ensuite recommandé que le Conseil adopte le Code électoral et que celui-ci entre en vigueur dès son approbation. Cette proposition a été adoptée à l’unanimité.
[4]
Les défendeurs allèguent qu’une autre assemblée publique aurait eu lieu le 30 mai 2005, au cours de laquelle des résolutions d’amendements au Code électoral auraient été adoptées, mais le procès-verbal de cette réunion demeure introuvable et ces amendements ne sont pas reflétés dans la version adoptée par le Conseil.
[5]
Le 31 mai 2005, le Conseil a adopté la résolution #2005-05-31-016, laquelle prévoit l’adoption du Code électoral tel que présenté lors de l’assemblée en date du 10 mai 2005, et son application lors des prochaines élections générales.
[6]
Les 18 et 19 juillet 2005, des élections ont eu lieu à Opitciwan, et Jean-Pierre Mattawa, Martin Awashish, Maria Chachai, Régina Chachai, Paul Awashish, Fernand Denis-Damée et Boniface Awashish ont été déclarés élus.
[7]
À la suite de cette élection, cinq plaintes ont été déposées devant le comité d’appel, formé en vertu de l’article 19 du Code électoral. Dans sa décision du 15 septembre 2005, le comité d’appel a conclu que l’élection en question devait être annulée, que de nouvelles élections devaient être tenues et que, dans l’intérim, la gouvernance de la Bande devait être assumée par l’ancien Conseil. À la suite de cette décision, une assemblée générale a été convoquée par le comité d’élection le 21 septembre 2005, au cours de laquelle les membres présents ont rejeté la décision du comité d’appel et déclaré les élections du 18 et 19 juillet valides.
[8]
Le 21 octobre 2005, Simon Awashish, ancien chef de la bande des Atikamekw d’Opitciwan défait aux élections de 2005, a déposé une demande de contrôle judiciaire devant la Cour fédérale (T-1846-05) à l’encontre de la décision du 21 septembre 2005, accompagnée d’une requête pour l’émission d’une ordonnance d’injonction interlocutoire, visant entre autres l’obtention d’un bref de quo warranto dépossédant de leurs fonctions les membres du Conseil élus en 2005 et attribuant, jusqu’à la tenue de nouvelles élections, les fonctions de membres du Conseil aux individus membres du Conseil avant les élections de 2005.
[9]
Dans une décision rendue le 16 décembre 2005, la juge Danièle Tremblay-Lamer a accordé la requête, ordonnant entre autres que le statu quo existant avant la décision du 21 septembre 2005 soit rétabli, et donc que les membres du Conseil élus les 18 et 19 juillet 2005 soient dépossédés de leurs fonctions et que le demandeur, ainsi que les anciens conseillers, soient réintégrés dans leurs fonctions jusqu’à ce que la Cour se prononce sur la demande de contrôle judiciaire.
[10]
Le 22 décembre 2005, une réunion du Grand Conseil des Sages d’Opitciwan a eu lieu, au cours de laquelle la décision de la Cour fédérale ainsi que la validité du Code électoral ont été discutées. Il est clair à la lecture du procès-verbal de cette réunion qu’une certaine confusion régnait chez les aînés qui mentionnaient entre autres la difficulté de participer aux assemblées, qui se déroulent en français, alors que plusieurs d’entres eux ne parlent pas cette langue. Selon les défendeurs, et tel que précisé dans la pétition discutée au paragraphe suivant, les aînés auraient décidé lors de cette réunion que le Code électoral devait être suspendu. Par contre, selon les demandeurs, les aînés ne se sont jamais prononcés en ce sens.
[11]
Le seul extrait du procès-verbal dans lequel la question du Code électoral est soulevée se lit comme suit :
Élizabeth Aw. Mentionne que si on prend le jugement et le code, car elle a lu plusieurs fois le code électoral, et
elle est pour le jugement car le code est authentique
, puis elle demande pourquoi ils ne veulent pas avoir le code, il y a quelque chose qui les bloquent [sic] face à ce code électoral et c’est vrai qu’il y a quelque chose qui les bloquent [sic].
Gabriel,
moi aussi j’ai lu le code en atikamekw, et j’ai cru que ce document est valable
, je pense même que Antoine ne sait pas de ce quoi contient le code, j’irai voir Antoine pour faire la lecture de ce code. Et ils se demandent pourquoi ils ne veulent pas de ce code.
PYW. On doit former un conseil des sages, si vous dites que c’est difficile de prendre une décision, on doit avoir un conseil des sages pour avant l’élection et ce sera dans 2 mois.
JCH,
je crois que nous ne pouvons pas prendre de décision aujourd’hui
, il demande à William de laisser comme tel pour le moment.
PYW
mentionne que le jugement est valable car il n’y a pas de décision. Il explique que le jugement et le code seront en suspends le 16 janvier prochain à l’assemblé[sic] général[sic]
. Et demande toujours de former un conseil des sages, Annie 32 réplique comment veux-tu que les gens d’aujourd’hui vont nous écouter cas ils ne veulent même plus écouter les aînés.
Pyw propose que si jamais ça va très mal dans notre communauté, nous organiserons une autre réunion et sa proposition est acceptée. Et
de laisser tel[sic] quel[sic] [ la situation actuelle
, et de demander à Simon, Jean Pierre et Paul de procéder des communiquer[sic] par la radio pour calmer les tensions avant l’élection. Si PY entend des mauvaises langues, il interviendra avec les aînés.
Pyw demande aux aînés de réfléchir pour la formation du conseil des sages.
JCh demande de ce qu’ils deviendront le comité d’élection, PYW répond qu’il n’y aura pas de nouveau comité et il relit l’ordre du jour encore une fois en expliquant les procédures pour la prochaine assemblées[sic] générale.
J’ai demandé à PYW, qui seront les dirigeants, et il répondu selon le jugement de la cours
.  (Je souligne.)
[12]
À la suite de cette réunion, une pétition a circulé et a été signée par plus de 400 membres de la communauté. Cette pétition supportait la proposition suivante :
Suite aux décisions prise [sic] par les aînés lors de leur réunion tenue le 22 décembre 2005.
Il avait été décider [sic] que le présent code électorale [sic] ne soit pas mise [sic] en application pour la prochaine élection et que les procédures d’élection se déroule [sic] selon la coutume.
Nous, les membres de la communauté Atikamekw d’Opitciwan, appuyons leurs décisions.
[13]
Une série d’assemblées publiques ont eu lieu entre janvier et mai 2006, au cours desquelles la décision de la Cour fédérale, la décision des aînés, la formation d’un nouveau comité électoral et le Code électoral ont été discutés. À la même époque, Me Nicole Bérubé, maintenant procureure des défendeurs dans ce dossier, a été mandatée par certains membres de la communauté afin d’entreprendre des négociations avec Me Martin Dallaire, le procureur des demandeurs dans le dossier T-1846-05, dans le but de régler la crise politique à Opitciwan.
[14]
Le 6 février 2006, le Conseil a adopté la résolution #2006-02-06-001, reconnaissant le nouveau comité d’élection nommé lors de l’assemblée générale du 18 janvier 2006.
[15]
Lors d’une assemblée spéciale tenue le 16 février 2006, les membres du Conseil réintégré par le jugement de la juge Tremblay-Lamer ont annoncé leur retrait du Conseil, par souci de sécurité publique et personnelle. Ceci étant dit, sept des huit membres du Conseil présents lors de l’assemblée ont précisé par la suite qu’ils comptaient demeurer en poste jusqu’à ce qu’un nouveau conseil soit élu lors d’une élection générale.
[16]
Le 1er mars 2006, le Conseil a adopté la résolution #2006-03-01-008, mandatant le comité d’élection de convoquer une assemblée générale des membres de la communauté afin d’enclencher le processus électoral conformément au Code électoral.
[17]
Le 17 mars 2006, plusieurs membres de la communauté ont adressé une lettre au chef par intérim, pour lui demander de suspendre l’application du Code électoral pour la prochaine élection.
[18]
Le 21 mars 2006, une assemblée publique a eu lieu au cours de laquelle la suspension du Code électoral pour les élections de 2006 a été proposée. Le résultat du vote sur cette proposition était le suivant : 76 en faveur, 3 contre et 2 votes rejetés.
[19]
Le 10 avril 2006, le Conseil a adopté la résolution #2006-04-10-020, reconnaissant les difficultés d’application du Code électoral et la nécessité de tenir d’autres élections le plus tôt possible. Le Conseil a ainsi accepté de suspendre le Code électoral et de soumettre à l’assemblée l’application de certaines normes pour l’élection, soit la composition du comité d’élection, la définition de l’éligibilité aux élections selon l’article 7.1 du Code électoral, le nombre de postes à pourvoir (1 chef et 6 conseillers), la longueur du mandat du futur conseil (2 ans), la désignation d’un arbitre plutôt que d’un comité d’appel, un processus pour le vote des membres résidant hors réserve, et la date de l’élection.
[20]
Ceci étant dit, cette résolution n’a été signée que par le chef et par quatre conseillers, ce qui ne constitue pas la majorité du Conseil. Il faut aussi noter que cette résolution fait suite non seulement à une série d’assemblées générales, mais aussi aux négociations entre Me Bérubé et Me Dallaire, au nom de leurs clients respectifs.
[21]
Le 27 avril 2006, une assemblée publique générale a été tenue pour faire suite à la résolution #2006-04-10-020. Environ 180 personnes étaient présentes et ont voté sur les points soulevés par la résolution en question. Une autre assemblée générale a eu lieu le 3 mai 2006, au cours de laquelle les règlements utilisés pour l’élection de 2003 ont été révisés et mis à jour en vue de l’élection de 2006.
[22]
Les 30, 31 mai et 1er juin 2006, des élections se sont déroulées à Opitciwan, et 770 des 1352 électeurs inscrits sur la liste électorale se sont prévalus de leur droit de vote. Jean-Pierre Mattawa, Fernand Denis-Damée, Régina Chachai, Martine Awashish, Boniface Awashish, Charles Jean-Pierre et Annie Chachai ont été déclarés élus.
[23]
Par une lettre datée du 15 juin 2006 et adressée au président d’élection d’Opitciwan, dix membres de la communauté ont contesté les résultats de l’élection et prétendu que le Code électoral était toujours légalement en vigueur et qu’il n’avait pas été respecté. En l’absence d’une réponse à leur plainte, les demandeurs ont présenté cette demande de contrôle judiciaire, alléguant entre autres des violations du Code électoral quant à l’avis d’élection, au processus de mise en candidature, au processus électoral, aux modalités de scrutin, au code de conduite des élus et au processus de vote pour les membres ne résidant pas à Opitciwan.
[24]
Dans le cadre de la présente instance, les demandeurs demandent à la Cour d’annuler les élections tenues à Opitciwan les 30, 31 mai et 1er juin 2006, d’émettre un bref de quo warranto dépossédant de leurs fonctions les membres de la Bande d’Opitciwan illégalement élus au Conseil lors de ces élections, d’émettre une ordonnance d’injonction ordonnant la tenue de nouvelles élections respectant le Code électoral, et d’ordonner l’exécution provisoire du jugement à être rendu nonobstant appel.
[25]
Le 19 janvier 2007, les demandeurs dans le dossier T-1846-05 se sont désistés officiellement de leur demande, à la suite d’une entente conférant à Simon Awashish le statut d’intervenant dans le présent dossier.
QUESTION PRÉLIMINAIRE
[26]
De façon préliminaire, je dois discuter d’une demande présentée par la procureure des défendeurs le lendemain de l’audition tenue le 13 juin 2007 à Roberval.
[27]
Je note d’abord que les parties ont présenté leurs arguments au cours de la journée du 13 juin, et que le dossier a été pris en délibéré le soir même. Il est inusité de demander à la Cour de rouvrir l’instance pendant le délibéré pour entendre soi-disant une nouvelle preuve.
[28]
J’ai pris connaissance de la correspondance reçue des parties, et je ne crois pas qu’il y ait lieu de rouvrir le débat, puisqu’il revient aux parties de faire en sorte que toute la preuve disponible, pertinente et probante soit déposée devant la Cour en temps opportun et dans le respect des droits des autres parties.
[29]
Je suis donc d’avis qu’il n’est pas dans l’intérêt de la justice de rouvrir le débat, et en conséquence, la demande de réouverture de l’instance est rejetée.
QUESTIONS EN LITIGE
[30]
Essentiellement, les questions suivantes ont été soulevées dans le cadre de ce litige :
1. L’adoption du Code électoral par le Conseil des Atikamekw d’Opitciwan était-elle valide?
2. Si oui, la suspension du Code électoral par le Conseil des Atikamekw d’Opitciwan était-elle valide?
3. Si le Code électoral était toujours en vigueur, la preuve soumise démontre-t-elle qu’il y a eu une ou des violations du Code électoral qui justifieraient l’annulation par cette Cour de l’élection de 2006?
ANALYSE
1) L’adoption du Code électoral par le Conseil des Atikamekw d’Opitciwan était-elle valide?
[31]
Les défendeurs soumettent tout d’abord que l’élection de 2006 ne devrait pas être annulée par cette Cour pour violation du Code électoral, puisque le Code électoral n’était pas et n’a jamais été valide, en raison de l’absence de consensus pouvant démontrer que le Code électoral reflète la coutume de la Bande. Cet argument repose sur le fait que le Conseil n’a pas tenu de référendum, tel qu’il s’était initialement engagé à le faire, et sur l’absence de preuve concernant la façon dont s’est déroulé le processus d’élaboration et de consultation précédant l’adoption du Code électoral. Les défendeurs allèguent de plus que le Code électoral a été adopté à la hâte, puisque le mandat du Conseil tirait à sa fin et que des élections devaient avoir lieu dans les plus brefs délais.
[32]
Les défendeurs s’objectent à la procédure suivie pour l’adoption du Code électoral, alors qu’il a été proposé que le Conseil abroge la procédure de référendum initialement prévue, qu’il a été recommandé au Conseil d’adopter le Code électoral et que celui-ci a en effet été adopté par le Conseil, le tout au cours d’une seule et unique assemblée. Les défendeurs affirment d’ailleurs que nous ne pouvons considérer que l’adoption du Code électoral par tout au plus 30 personnes sur une possibilité de 1352 inscrites sur la liste électorale, démontre que ce Code faisait l’objet d’un large consensus. Les défendeurs ajoutent qu’aucune preuve n’a été faite quant aux avis de convocation de l’assemblée du 19 mai 2005 et que, en l’absence d’un avis raisonnable pour que les membres de la communauté puissent exercer leur droit de vote, il y a eu violation des principes de justice naturelle.
[33]
Les défendeurs affirment finalement qu’il incombe aux demandeurs de prouver que le Code électoral représente la coutume.
[34]
Les demandeurs, tout comme l’intervenant Simon Awashish, maintiennent la validité du Code électoral, insistant sur le fait que le Code électoral est l’aboutissement d’un long processus de consultation afin de mettre en place une structure permettant aux membres de la communauté de voter librement et de façon ordonnée, dans la continuité des pratiques et des coutumes établies dans la communauté. Les demandeurs soumettent d’ailleurs que les défendeurs sont mal fondés en droit de soutenir que le Code électoral ne s’applique pas, parce qu’il n’aurait pas fait l’objet d’un référendum lors de son adoption.
[35]
Les demandeurs soumettent de plus que cet argument sur la validité du Code électoral est soulevé dans un délai totalement déraisonnable et, de surcroît, par des personnes qui se sont proclamées élues en septembre 2005 à la suite d’une élection tenue en vertu du Code électoral.
[36]
Les demandeurs s’appuient aussi sur l’ordonnance rendue par la juge Tremblay-Lamer dans le dossier T-1846-05, soit  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  dans laquelle elle reconnaissait prima facie la validité du Code électoral, notant aux paragraphes 6 et 7 :
… Contrairement aux prétentions des intimés, il existe une forte preuve démontrant que le code électoral représente la coutume de la Bande.
¶ 7 La coutume pertinente lorsqu'il s'agit de choisir le Conseil de Bande dans les cas qui ne sont pas régis par l'article 74 de la Loi sur les Indiens, ibid., doit "inclure, des pratiques touchant le choix d'un conseil qui sont généralement acceptables pour les membres de la bande, qui font donc l'objet d'un large consensus" :  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . En l'espèce, le Code électoral a été valablement adopté par résolution suite à des consultations auprès de la communauté le 31 mai 2005.
[37]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , le juge Strayer notait :
Sauf si elle est définie par ailleurs dans le cas d'une bande donnée, la "coutume" doit inclure, à mon sens, des pratiques touchant le choix d'un conseil qui sont généralement acceptables pour les membres de la bande, qui font donc l'objet d'un large consensus.[…]
Pour ce qui est de la validité de la constitution, la question véritable semble donc se rattacher à sa légitimité politique, et non juridique: la constitution résulte-t-elle de l'accord de la majorité de ceux qui, d'après la preuve produite, paraissent être des membres de la bande? C'est une question qu'un tribunal ne doit pas chercher à trancher en l'absence de critères juridiques discernables qu'il peut appliquer. Certes, l'exercice de la surveillance judiciaire peut être justifié par d'autres motifs, s'il y avait une preuve claire de fraude ou d'autres actes imputables aux défendeurs, qui ne sauraient de toute évidence être autorisés par la Loi sur les Indiens, mais aucune preuve ne m'a été présentée quant à de telles activités.
[38]
Aujourd’hui, il apparaît clairement que le Code électoral est un sujet de controverse au sein de la communauté d’Opitciwan. Cependant, les défendeurs n’ont pas démontré que tel était le cas lors de son adoption en 2005. De plus, bien que le Conseil ait initialement prévu de procéder par voie référendaire, et bien qu’il ait probablement été préférable de procéder de cette façon afin de s’assurer de l’existence d’un plus large consensus avant l’adoption du Code électoral, je ne suis pas convaincu qu’un tel processus était nécessaire pour valider l’adoption de ce Code.
[39]
Dans l’arrêt  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , le juge suppléant Heald a repris l’analyse du juge Strayer dans Bigstone, ci-haut, et élaboré sur certains points. Il a écrit :
¶ 29 Selon le juge Strayer, la coutume d'une bande doit "inclure des pratiques touchant le choix d'un conseil qui sont généralement acceptables pour les membres de la bande, qui font donc l'objet d'un large consensus". Je suis d'accord avec cette description de la coutume d'une bande. Cependant, comme le présent litige l'indique, il est loin d'être facile de déterminer les pratiques qui sont généralement acceptables pour les membres de la bande. Le juge Strayer a ajouté que la validité de la constitution dans cette affaire était une question de légitimité politique qu'un tribunal ne devrait pas chercher à trancher en l'absence de "critères juridiques discernables".
¶ 30 De l'avis des intimés, le critère juridique objectif que le juge Strayer recherchait se trouve à l'alinéa 2(3)a) de la Loi sur les Indiens, dont le libellé est le suivant :
2. (3) Sauf indication contraire du contexte ou disposition expresse de la présente loi :
a) un pouvoir conféré à une bande est censé ne pas être exercé, à moins de l'être en vertu du consentement donné par une majorité des électeurs de la bande; ...
¶ 31 Les intimés ont soutenu que c'est la Bande qui a le pouvoir de déterminer en quoi consiste sa constitution ou sa procédure électorale et que ce pouvoir doit être exercé conformément à l'alinéa 2(3)a) reproduit plus haut. Je conviens que c'est la Bande elle-même, et non son conseil, qui a le pouvoir de déterminer en quoi consiste sa coutume. Toutefois, contrairement à ce que les intimés soutiennent, je refuse de reconnaître qu'il s'agit d'un "pouvoir conféré à une bande" au sens de l'alinéa 2(3)a) de la Loi sur les Indiens.
[40]
Bien que le juge Heald ait reconnu que la coutume doit être déterminée par la Bande, et non par le Conseil, il a refusé d’appliquer l’alinéa 2(3)a) de la Loi sur les Indiens qui prévoit l’obtention du consentement de la majorité des électeurs avant de procéder. Suivant la même logique, je ne crois pas qu’il était nécessaire pour le Conseil de procéder par voie référendaire pour s’assurer de l’appui de la majorité de la population avant d’adopter le Code électoral. Nous n’avons pas devant nous une situation où le Code électoral aurait été élaboré et adopté en secret. La population a été consultée tout au long du processus et le Code électoral a été adopté lors d’une assemblée publique.
[41]
L’aspect le plus convaincant de l’argument des demandeurs quant à la validité du Code électoral est que celui-ci a été utilisé pour l’élection de 2005, à laquelle les électeurs de la communauté ont participé en grand nombre, et que la validité du Code n’a pas été remise en question avant ou pendant l’élection. La validité du Code électoral n’a été questionnée pour la première fois qu’en réponse aux allégations soulevées dans le cadre de la demande de contrôle judiciaire dans le dossier T-1845-06.
[42]
Dans Bone, ci-haut, le juge Heald faisait face à une situation semblable à la situation présente, tel que l’illustre l’extrait suivant de sa décision :
¶ 57 Le prochain événement qui est pertinent quant à l'argument du requérant selon lequel le Code traduit la coutume de la Bande est l'élection tenue le 14 mars 1994. Les parties ne contestent pas le fait que l'élection a été tenue conformément au Code et, par suite de l'élection, la commission d'appel en matière électorale a été désignée en conformité avec le Code et a tranché l'appel du requérant d'une façon compatible avec celui-ci. Effectivement, tout semblait se dérouler conformément au Code jusqu'à ce que les intimés refusent de se conformer à l'ordonnance que la commission d'appel en matière électorale a rendue.
[43]
Face à une preuve permettant « tout au plus, de déduire sans motif convaincant que le Code a reçu l’appui des membres de la Bande », le juge Heald s’est tourné vers l’élection qui a suivi l’adoption du Code, concluant aux paragraphes 67 et 68 de sa décision :
… À mon avis, la réponse se trouve dans la conduite de la Bande lors de l'élection du 14 mars 1994 et dans les événements qui se sont produits par la suite. La mise en candidature, l'élection et l'appel subséquent se sont tous déroulés conformément au Code. Selon l'affidavit de l'intimé Hall, 478 voix ont été exprimées en faveur de l'élection du chef de la Bande. Même si aucune partie n'a présenté de preuve concernant le nombre total d'électeurs admissibles à voter lors de l'élection, l'intimé Hall a déclaré qu'à la date des plébiscites, la Bande comptait 964 membres qui avaient l'âge requis pour voter, y compris les non-résidents. Il est donc permis de dire qu'environ 50 % des électeurs admissibles ont participé à l'élection du 14 mars 1994. Il n'y a aucun élément de preuve indiquant qu'avant ou pendant l'élection, un membre de la Bande s'est opposé à la façon dont l'élection fondée sur la coutume se déroulait. À mon avis, l'acquiescement de la Bande à l'utilisation du Code constitue une preuve suffisante pour satisfaire au critère que le juge Strayer a établi dans l'arrêt Bigstone, précité, c'est-à-dire que le Code décrivait des pratiques qui sont "généralement acceptables pour les membres de la bande, qui font donc l'objet d'un large consensus", et qu'il traduit par conséquent la coutume de la Bande.
¶ 68 J'en arrive donc à la conclusion que le Code était en vigueur le 14 mars 1994.
[44]
Suivant le même raisonnement, je note que 649 électeurs se sont prévalus de leur droit de vote lors du premier scrutin, et 701 électeurs lors du deuxième scrutin, sur une possibilité de 1352 inscrits sur la liste électorale, d’après l’information fournie par les défendeurs. Tel que noté précédemment, aucune preuve n’a été déposée démontrant une objection avant ou pendant l’élection, autre que le refus par M. Fernand Denis-Damée de signer la résolution d’adoption du Code électoral, parce que cette résolution ne respectait pas la résolution prévoyant l’adoption du Code par voie référendaire. Je suis donc satisfait que l’acquiescement de la communauté à l’utilisation du Code électoral lors des élections de 2005 constitue une preuve suffisante pour démontrer que le Code électoral reflétait « des pratiques touchant le choix d'un conseil qui sont généralement acceptables pour les membres de la bande, qui font donc l'objet d'un large consensus » (Bigstone, ci-haut).
2) La suspension du Code électoral par le Conseil des Atikamekw d’Opitciwan était-elle valide?
[45]
Ayant déterminé que l’adoption du Code électoral en 2005 était valide, je dois maintenant considérer si sa suspension en 2006 l’était aussi.
[46]
Au soutien de leur argument quant à l’illégalité de l’élection de 2006, les demandeurs maintiennent que ces élections devaient se dérouler selon le processus prévu dans le Code électoral. En cas de désaccord avec certaines provisions du Code électoral, les procédures d’amendement prévues dans le Code auraient dû être utilisées, ce qui n’a pas été fait. Les demandeurs maintiennent que le processus utilisé afin de suspendre le Code électoral était illicite et donc que le Code électoral demeurait en vigueur lors de l’élection de 2006.
[47]
Les demandeurs affirment que les défendeurs ont manipulé les membres de la communauté, en multipliant les assemblées et résolutions pour écarter le Code électoral et se doter d’un processus antidémocratique qui garantirait leur élection précipitée. Les demandeurs soutiennent que les défendeurs ont présenté à la communauté une pétition, afin de supporter l’opinion émise par le Conseil des Sages, voulant que le Code électoral doive être mis de côté, alors que le Conseil des Sages n’a jamais rien affirmé de la sorte. Les demandeurs concluent donc que l’on ne devrait pas accorder de poids à cette pétition, puisque les gens y ont adhéré spontanément par respect pour ce qu’ils croyaient être l’avis des aînés de la communauté.
[48]
Les demandeurs affirment de plus que les membres du Conseil, réintégrés dans leurs fonctions à la suite de l’ordonnance de la Cour, et ceux du comité d’élection élus en 2005, ont été progressivement écartés, et que les mois précédant l’élection de 2006 ont été marqués par l’intimidation, les pressions et la violence verbale, et que la population a finalement voté dans la plus grande confusion.
[49]
Les défendeurs, pour leur part, maintiennent que l’élection de 2006 était légale, puisque le Code électoral avait été suspendu et remplacé par les règlements en vigueur lors de l’élection de 2003, accompagnés de quelques modifications approuvées lors des assemblées générales des 27 avril et 3 mai 2006. Les défendeurs affirment d’ailleurs que, tel que suggéré par la juge Tremblay-Lamer dans son ordonnance, les parties se sont entendues afin de favoriser un dénouement politique à la crise qui sévissait à Opitciwan, et qu’un comité a déjà été mandaté pour la révision du Code électoral qui sera ensuite soumis à la population pour approbation par voie de référendum.
[50]
Les défendeurs notent de plus que les signataires de la lettre du 15 juin 2006 n’ont contesté la mise à l’écart du Code électoral qu’une fois les élections tenues alors qu’ils y avaient participé.
[51]
Contrairement à la situation lors de l’adoption du Code électoral, les défendeurs notent que la décision de suspendre le Code électoral ainsi que les règles électorales adoptées par la communauté font l’objet d’un large consensus. En effet, les défendeurs allèguent que la participation au processus de suspension du Code électoral en 2006 fut plus importante que pour son processus d’adoption en 2005.
[52]
Les défendeurs affirment d’ailleurs que plusieurs des demandeurs critiquent le processus suivi pour suspendre le Code électoral, sans y avoir participé et sans être au courant des efforts déployés pour arriver à cette entente, tel que démontré par les interrogatoires des demandeurs M. Clément Cleary et Mme Nathalie Awahsish, et de l’intervenant M. Simon Awashish.
[53]
Finalement, les défendeurs soutiennent qu’à la suite des négociations entreprises pour encadrer le processus pour les élections de 2006, la décision de suspendre le Code électoral a été entérinée par le Conseil par l’entremise de la résolution #2006-04-10-020.
[54]
Tout d’abord, j’ai des réserves importantes quant à l’interprétation faite par les défendeurs de la « soi-disant » décision du Conseil des Sages, prise lors de la réunion du 22 décembre 2005. Ayant lu attentivement le procès-verbal de cette réunion, je dois dire que la position du Conseil des Sages sur la question du Code électoral me paraît plutôt floue. En effet, la lecture du procès-verbal, rédigé de bonne foi et dont la teneur n’est pas contestée devant la Cour, m’amène à conclure que rien n’a été décidé par les Sages au cours de cette réunion du 22 décembre 2005. Il s’agissait plutôt d’une rencontre où les participants ont discuté de plusieurs sujets, incluant le Code électoral, mais il m’apparaît que les opinions étaient variées et qu’aucune décision n’a été prise quant à l’application ou non du Code électoral. La seule décision claire semble avoir été de reporter le débat à une nouvelle réunion du Conseil des Sages, après la période des fêtes, au début janvier 2006.
[55]
La pétition qui a circulé pour supporter la suspension du Code électoral, ainsi que la lettre datée du 17 mars 2006, affirmant clairement refléter la position des aînés voulant que le Code électoral devait être suspendu, m’apparaît être un leurre, c’est-à-dire qu’on a utilisé une information incorrecte dans le libellé de la pétition pour obtenir l’accord général des membres de la Bande quant au rejet du Code électoral.
[56]
Le fait de faire circuler des informations incorrectes pour rallier une majorité de citoyens, bien que regrettable, n’est pas nouveau en politique municipale autochtone et ne suffit pas à vicier le processus électoral. Ce que j’estime inacceptable, c’est le fait d’avoir fait croire que le Conseil des Sages, qui sont en fait, les aînés de la Bande, aient pris une décision, alors que ce n’était vraisemblablement pas le cas.
[57]
Ce sont les aînés de la Bande, regroupés à l’occasion dans ce qu’on appelle le Conseil des Sages, qui approuvent les changements apportés de temps à autre au code de conduite que se donne la Bande. Cette procédure n’est pas unique, et elle se retrouve dans l’ensemble des bandes indiennes au Canada. En fait, les membres plus jeunes des communautés autochtones se sentent rassurés d’adopter un code de conduite qui a reçu l’aval des Sages de la Bande. Ce processus d’approbation des grandes décisions relatives à la gestion des Conseils de bandes par les Sages fait partie du processus décisionnel quel qu’il soit.
[58]
Dans le cas qui nous occupe, ce processus d’approbation a été carrément détourné et tout le monde, y compris les aînés eux-mêmes, se sont laissés manipuler et ont fini par croire qu’ils étaient en accord avec le rejet du Code électoral.
[59]
Quel membre de la Bande oserait refuser de signer une pétition pour rejeter le Code électoral croyant que les aînés l’ont eux-mêmes rejetée? C’est évidemment le poids de l’avis du Conseil des Sages qui a amené les gens à signer spontanément la pétition, laquelle prétendait faussement mettre en œuvre la décision des Sages de rejeter le Code électoral.
[60]
Par ailleurs, il est aussi légitime de croire que les mêmes aînés qui s’inquiétaient des divisions à l’intérieur de la Bande, lors de la réunion du 22 décembre 2005, et espéraient que la période des fêtes apporterait un peu de quiétude, auraient été mal avisés de supporter le Code électoral, alors qu’une majorité de membres semblait le rejeter.
[61]
Il est également vrai qu’il y a eu plusieurs assemblées publiques, et que le Conseil a adopté une résolution reflétant le consensus apparent parmi les membres de la communauté, voulant que le Code doive être suspendu. Cette résolution a été suivie de deux autres assemblées générales, au cours desquelles les procédures pour l’élection de 2006 ont été adoptées. Les élections générales ont procédé les 30, 31 mai et 1er juin 2006, et 770 des 1352 électeurs inscrits sur la liste électorale se sont prévalus de leur droit de vote.
[62]
J’en arrive maintenant à la décision formelle de « suspendre » le Code électoral. D’abord, le Code électoral existe, et il est valide, tel que discuté plus haut. La question est donc de savoir s’il est possible, suivant le même Code électoral, d’en suspendre l’application. Ayant réfléchi sur cette question, je ne crois pas que ce soit le cas.
[63]
Je peux comprendre et accepter que les esprits aient été perturbés à la suite des événements survenus en 2005 et en 2006, et particulièrement des élections successives qui ont eu un effet décisif parmi les membres de la Bande. Je comprends également que les membres étaient anxieux de retrouver une certaine stabilité et que le Code électoral semblait causer quelques problèmes.
[64]
Il appert de la preuve présentée que l’application du Code électoral empêchait le Chef de la Bande, défendeur dans le présent dossier, de briguer les suffrages à l’élection tenue en 2006, puisqu’il était accusé d’une infraction criminelle, ce qui le rendait inéligible. La suspension du Code électoral lui permettait donc de briguer les suffrages, ce qui est un élément important lorsque l’on considère le contexte ayant mené à la ‘suspension’ du Code électoral et la motivation des parties impliquées.
[65]
Je comprends également que les défendeurs ont plutôt utilisé le Code électoral comme un « paratonnerre » en le rendant responsable des problèmes de la Bande. J’en suis encore à identifier ce qui est si dangereux dans l’application du Code électoral et ce qui le rend si pervers. En fait, un code électoral, quel qu’il soit, n’est toujours qu’un code qui établit des règles à suivre pour le processus électoral.
[66]
Je constate d’ailleurs que le processus suivi pour suspendre le Code électoral n’a pas respecté les règles du Code électoral lui-même, en plus d’avoir abusé le processus d’approbation des aînés. À quoi peut bien servir un code électoral si on en suspend l’application lors des élections?
[67]
J’ai examiné en détail les procès-verbaux des réunions tenues entre janvier et avril 2006 et je suis d’avis qu’il est pour le moins exagéré de prétendre que ces réunions constituent une large consultation quant à la nécessité de suspendre le Code électoral. Il a été davantage question du choix des membres du comité d’élection et de la légalité du remplacement des gens élus l’année précédente. Il semblait également exister un désir de procéder à une élection dans les meilleurs délais. En fait, les dispositions du Code électoral et les règles devant le remplacer, le cas échéant, n’ont à peu près pas été discutées lors de ces réunions.
[68]
Je n’ai donc aucune hésitation à conclure que les résolutions adoptées à différents moments entre le 18 janvier 2006 et avril 2007 n’ont pas eu pour effet de modifier le Code électoral existant ou encore d’en suspendre l’application, suivant les règles de droit existantes pour ce faire et prévues au Code électoral en vigueur.
[69]
Je suis donc d’avis que les élections tenues à Opitciwan les 30 mai, 31 mai et 1er juin 2006 ont été tenues de façon illégale et qu’elles doivent donc être annulées.
[70]
Je suis également d’avis que les membres du Conseil élus lors de cette élection l’ont été de façon illégale et j’émets un bref de quo warranto à l’effet de déposséder de leurs fonctions les membres de la Bande d’Opitciwan élus au Conseil de Bande des Atikamekw, soit : Jean-Pierre Mattawa, Fernand Denis-Damée, Régina Chachai, Martine Awashish, Boniface Awashish, Charles Jean-Pierre, Annie Chachai.
[71]
J’ordonne finalement la tenue de nouvelles élections dans le respect des règles du Code électoral.
3) Si le Code électoral était toujours en vigueur, la preuve soumise démontre-t-elle qu’il y a eu une ou des violations du Code électoral qui justifieraient l’annulation par cette Cour de l’élection de 2006?
[72]
Compte tenu de mes conclusions sur les questions précédentes, il ne sera pas nécessaire de répondre à cette question.
[73]
Ceci étant dit, j’ajouterais que, considérant qu’une crise politique sévit dans la communauté d’Opitciwan depuis 2005 et que les résultats des deux dernières élections ont été contestés devant cette Cour, il serait souhaitable que la controverse entourant le Code électoral puisse être réglée une fois pour toute. Les membres de la Bande devront réaliser que les normes de conduite pour réglementer le processus électoral ne sont qu’un moyen de procéder à une élection démocratique. Cependant, les élus, quels qu’ils soient, ne peuvent s’autoriser à modifier les règles en vigueur à tout venant.
[74]
Les demandeurs ont démontré que le processus de mise en place du Code électoral a été suivi et que celui-ci est valide. De leur côté, les défendeurs n’ont pas réussi à démontrer que ce Code électoral avait été légalement modifié ou mis de côté.
[75]
Toute tentative, dans le futur, visant à modifier ou changer substantiellement le processus électoral, devra être faite en conformité avec le Code existant, et je me permets de suggérer que le processus devra être transparent et faire l’objet d’une vaste consultation afin que les gens sachent enfin quel est l’objet de leur vote.
[76]
Finalement, bien que le recours au contrôle judiciaire pour s’assurer de la légalité des élections soit un processus légitime, il n’en demeure pas moins qu’il serait souhaitable que les prochaines élections se déroulent de façon plus harmonieuse et mènent à des résultats non contestés devant cette Cour, ce qui permettrait aux élus de se concentrer sur les autres besoins de la communauté.
[77]
La présente demande de contrôle judiciaire est donc accueillie.
JUGEMENT
[78]
La Cour ordonne que :
a) Les élections tenues à Opitciwan les 30 mai, 31 mai et 1er juin 2006 soient annulées;
b) Un bref de quo warranto soit émis dépossédant de leurs fonctions, les membres de la Bande d’Opitciwan illégalement élus au Conseil de Bande des Atikamekw d’Opitciwan à savoir : Jean-Pierre Mattawa, Fernand Denis-Damée, Régina Chachai, Martine Awashish, Boniface Awashish, Charles Jean-Pierre et Annie Chachai;
c) De nouvelles élections soient tenues en conformité et dans les délais prévus par le Code électoral du Conseil des Atikamekw d’Opitciwan;
d) Le jugement soit exécuté de façon provisoire, nonobstant tout appel;
e) Le tout avec dépens contre les défendeurs en faveur des demandeurs.
[End of document]