[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: The plaintiffs bring two motions to overturn the orders of Lefebvre, Senior Prothonotary, issued July 7, 1987, by which he allowed two motions of the defendants: one to strike the statement of claim as against the defendant Andre Teasdale and one for particulars in connection with paragraphs 7 and 9 of the statement of claim. The matter came on for hearing at Toronto, Ontario on September 21, 1987.
[2]
In July, 1986, the plaintiffs commenced an action for infringement of Canadian Letters Patent on a model of windsurfer or sailboard. The first named plaintiff is the holder of the patent in question and the second is the nonexclusive licensee of the patent in Canada. The original statement of claim was issued against both defendants. It referred to Andre Teasdale individually only as the President of the corporate defendant. The allegations of infringing activities were made generally against "the defendants". By letter dated August 15, 1986 defence counsel requested particulars of the infringing activities alleged against each of the two defendants. These particulars were refused, but the plaintiffs amended their statement of claim to identify Mr. Teasdale as the person under whose direction the corporate defendant carries on business. A new paragraph 10 was added:
"10. The defendant Andre Teasdale has knowingly directed, induced, authorized, aided, abetted and procured the said infringement by the defendant Novaction. The defendant Andre Teasdale was at all material times aware of the infringing activities of the defendant Novaction and expressly directed and authorized the said infringing activities by defendant Novaction or, in the alternative, had a reckless disregard in respect of same."
Andre Teasdale was not mentioned by name anywhere else in the amended statement of claim, which was filed December 16, 1986.
[3]
On January 20, 1987 the defendants filed a motion pursuant to rule 419 to strike paragraph 10 of the amended statement of claim. That motion was granted by Lefebvre, Senior Prothonotary, on the basis that paragraph 10 did not contain the facts necessary to support its allegations. That order of the Senior Prothonotary was issued April 10, 1987. On May 12, 1987 the defendants filed the two motions which are the subject of this appeal. By the first they moved under rule 419(1)(a) for an order striking the statement of claim as it applied to the individual defendant on the grounds that no reasonable cause of action against him was disclosed. By the second, they moved that the plaintiffs be ordered to provide particulars of other licensees of the patent in question and the material facts on which they based the allegations that the corporate defendant had used sailboards and had knowingly induced others to sell them in violation of the plaintiffs' patent. Both these motions were granted without reasons by Lefebvre, Senior Prothonotary on July 7, 1987.
[4]
The plaintiffs appeal these two orders of the Senior Prothonotary. The appeals were heard on the same day as another matter involving the same plaintiffs:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). In my reasons for allowing that appeal, I indicated that on an application to overturn a Prothonotary's decision, the appropriate test is whether the Prothonotary gave reasonable consideration to the relevant evidence and arguments and reached a conclusion supported by them. A judge is not entitled on such an application merely to substitute his own appreciation of the facts. However, I wish to repeat here what I said in the Oberson case, that it would greatly assist the evaluation of the Prothonotary's decision on that basis if written reasons were provided. In both cases, the matters were taken under reserve by the Prothonotary for several weeks so that written reasons would have been appropriate.
[5]
The plaintiffs' first ground of appeal in this case is that the motions brought by the defendants constituted an abuse of process. They claim that a party should have only one opportunity to attack his opponents' pleadings. In light of their earlier, successful motion to strike part of the statement of claim, the defendants should not have been allowed to continue a piecemeal attack against other parts of the same pleading.
[6]
In support of this contention, the plaintiffs cite  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  rule, that a party should be allowed only one opportunity to attack his opponent's pleadings. However, these decisions also recognized that special circumstances may arise under which a second motion is justified. Indeed, the latter case was just such a situation. In Speedo Knitting Mills Walsh, J., dealt with a motion for particulars which followed an unsuccessful motion to strike. He characterized both motions as attacks on the pleadings, but granted the order for particulars because the defendant satisfied him it had had good cause not to combine the two motions initially.
[7]
In this case, the defendants explain their failure to deal at once with both motions to strike as follows: Paragraph 10 first appeared in the amended statement of claim following the defendants' request for a clarification of the case against Andre Teasdale. As it was the only part of the statement of claim which identified how Teasdale, as an individual, had allegedly infringed the plaintiffs' patent, the defendants considered paragraph 10 the "pith and substance" of the case against him. Basically, they assumed that by striking paragraph 10, they had effectively succeeded in striking the whole action as it concerned Teasdale. Counsel indicates that following the order of April 10, 1987, he fully expected to receive a further amended statement of claim from which the name of Mr. Teasdale had been deleted. That did not happen and the defendants were forced to bring a second motion to remove Mr. Teasdale as defendant.
[8]
I consider this to be valid reason for permitting the second motion to strike. As will be seen, I am in agreement with the Senior Prothonotary that the removal of paragraph 10 resulted in the removal of any reasonable cause of action against Mr. Teasdale. It was quite reasonable, therefore, for counsel for the defendants to conclude that he had, by his first motion, defeated the case against Mr. Teasdale. If the plaintiffs do not voluntarily recognize this, he should not be precluded from bringing a motion to formally delete the individual defendant.
[9]
The abuse of process argument is even weaker as regards the motion for particulars. Clearly, a motion to strike one paragraph of a statement of claim cannot bar the defendant from requesting particulars as to other, unchallenged paragraphs. I do not find either of the defendants' motions to be an abuse of process.
[10]
The plaintiffs' second argument with respect to the motion to strike is that the statement of claim does disclose a reasonable cause of action against Andre Teasdale, as required by rule 419(1)(a). They cite the following portions of the claim:
"9. The defendants have offered for sale, sold, used and knowingly induced others to sell and use sailboards in infringement of the rights of the plaintiffs ... and intend to continue to do so. In particular, the defendants have offered for sale and sold EON sailboards to members of the public ...
"14. The defendants are disrupting the licensing activities of the plaintiffs by their unauthorized activities ..."
To these allegations, presumably, must be added, as stated in paragraphs 3 and 4, that Mr. Teasdale is the President of the corporate defendant and that its business is carried on under his direction.
[11]
There are thus two possible ways in which the plaintiffs may have an action against Mr. Teasdale for infringement. They may either claim that he personally sold and used and induced others to sell and use infringing sailboards or that, as the "directing mind" of his company, he participated in the infringing actions of the corporate defendant. The first option is not supported by the allegations in the statement of claim. There are absolutely no facts alleged to indicate that Mr. Teasdale at any time engaged in the business of selling or using sailboards independently of his company, Novaction. The plaintiffs cannot, by a statement such as "the defendants have offered for sale and sold EON sailboards to members of the public ...", extend an action against a competing company to include one of the company's officers in his personal capacity.
[12]
To establish a cause of action against Mr. Teasdale as the "directing mind", the mere fact of his capacity as President is insufficient. There must be an allegation that he ordered or authorized the acts complained of. The requirements for such a finding were set out in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  C.P.R.(2d) 164 (F.C.A.). In that case, LeDain, J., cited, as the governing principle, the following quotation from 24 Hals. (2nd Ed.), pp. 652-653, para. 1226:
"1226. Normally the directors of a company are not personally liable for the company's torts, even if they are managing directors or the sole directors and shareholders. In order to make them responsible it must be proved either (1) that they have formed the company for a tortious purpose; or (2) that they have directly ordered or authorised the acts complained of; or (3) that they have so authorised or ordered by implication."
[13]
He then went on to consider what sort of participation in the acts of the company would give rise to personal liability. He started with the following premise:
"... It would render the offices of director or principal officer unduly hazardous if the degree of direction normally required in the management of a corporation's manufacturing and selling activity could by itself make the director or officer personally liable for infringement by his company."
LeDain, J.'s, analysis of the appropriate test incorporated a degree of knowing, wilful participation in infringement:
"What, however, is the kind of participation in the acts of the company that should give rise to personal liability? It is an elusive question. It would appear to be that degree and kind of personal involvement by which the director or officer makes the tortious act his own. It is obviously a question of fact to be decided on the circumstances of each case. I have not found much assistance in the particular case in which courts have concluded that the facts were such as to warrant personal liability. But there would appear to have been in these cases a knowing, deliberate, wilful quality to the participation: see, for example,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (P.C.).
"I do not think we should go so far as to hold that the director or officer must know or have reason to know that the acts which he directs or procures constitute infringement. That would be to impose a condition of liability that does not exist for patent infringement generally. I note such knowledge has been held in the United States not to be material where the question is the personal liability of directors or officers: see Deller's Walker on Patents (2nd Ed. 1972), vol. 7, pp. 117-118. But in my opinion there must be circumstances from which it is reasonable to conclude that the purpose of the director or officer was not the direction of the manufacturing and selling activity of the company in the ordinary course of his relationship to it but the deliberate, wilful and knowing pursuit of a course of conduct that was likely to constitute infringement or reflected an indifference to the risk of it."
[14]
The Senior Prothonotary obviously concluded that the facts set out in the statement of claim did not establish liability in Mr. Teasdale as President of the company. I must agree. By the test set out in the Mentmore decision, assuming proof of all facts alleged, the case against Mr. Teasdale would not be made out. No error was made, therefore, in striking the statement of claim against the individual defendant.
[15]
I turn now to the order for particulars. The defendants have requested further precision with respect to paragraphs 7 and 9 of the statement of claim which read as follows:
"7. The plaintiff, Windsurfing International Canada Inc., has since January 1, 1979 a nonexclusive licence from the plaintiff, Windsurfing International Inc., to manufacture, use and vend to others to use or sell in Canada the subject matter of Canadian Letters Patent 912,921. The plaintiff, Windsurfing International Canada Inc., was the only licensee in Canada from January 1, 1979 until August 1981 and has been importing, manufacturing and selling under licence from Windsurfing International Inc., since January, 1979.
"9. The defendants have offered for sale, sold, used and knowingly induced others to sell and use sailboards in infringement of the rights of the plaintiffs under Canadian Letters Patent No. 912,921 and intend to continue to do so. In particular, the defendants have offered for sale and sold EON sailboards to members of the public. The full extent of the infringement of said plaintiff's rights by the aforementioned defendants is presently unknown to the plaintiffs but is known to the defendants and said plaintiffs claim in respect of all such infringement."
[16]
Regarding paragraph 7 the defendants wish to know the names of the other persons who have held licences under the patent since August, 1981 and the dates of those licences. Regarding paragraph 9 they wish to know first, on what material facts the plaintiffs base their claim that Novaction used sailboards in violation of the patent and second, on what material facts the plaintiffs base their claim that Novaction induced others to sell sailboards in violation of the patent. The Senior Prothonotary ordered that all these particulars be provided by the plaintiffs. The appeal of his order with respect to the use of sailboards by Novaction was withdrawn at the hearing and counsel indicated an amended statement of claim will be filed deleting that allegation. The other two items of particulars remain in contention.
[17]
As a general rule, particulars will not be ordered unless the defendant establishes that they are both necessary for pleading and not within its knowledge, unless of course the pleadings are, on their face, inadequate or in violation of the rules. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[18]
Can it be said that the particulars requested here are necessary for the defendants to plead? With regard to paragraph 7, I think the answer must be no. The defendants claim they need to know the identity of the other licence-holders in order to determine whether the plaintiffs have a case against them. They maintain that their sailboards could have been bought from another licensee, in which case the plaintiffs would have no action for infringement. I disagree. That is a matter of defence. The plaintiffs do not need to establish an exclusive licence or set out the full holding of nonexclusive licences in order to bring this action. Section 57(1) of the Patent Act, R.S.C. 1970, C. P-4, as interpreted by the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , allows even a nonexclusive licensee to bring an action against an infringer. Martland, J., said  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Cork at page 919:
"A licensee relying on this subsection is not claiming against the infringer for infringement of his rights under the licence, he is claiming for the damage he has sustained in consequence of the infringement of the patent."
As counsel for the plaintiffs argued, if the defendants wish to plead licence as a defence they are free to do so. The existence of other licensees is irrelevant to the right of the plaintiffs to bring this action and is not, therefore, required information to enable the defendants to plead in reply. I must conclude that in ordering particulars as to the other licensees the Senior Prothonotary erred in law.
[19]
The remaining item of particulars relates to the defendants' alleged inducement of third parties to sell infringing sailboards. Paragraph 9, while more specific as to the defendants' own sales of sailboards, provides no facts to support the inducement of others to do likewise. This allegation is clearly an important component of the plaintiffs' case and the supporting facts are needed by the defendants to enable them to plead intelligently. A similar situation was dealt with by Jackett, P., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . That case involved a motion for particulars concerning a paragraph which alleged a particular infringing activity and then went on to add a more general claim of infringement without supporting facts. Jackett, P., framed the issue thus:
"The parties are agreed that the question that I have to decide is whether the plaintiff's pleadings sufficiently comply with the Rules if, at this stage of the proceedings, that is before discovery, they state one particular of a type of infringement and claim in respect of other types of infringement that are unknown to the plaintiff but are known to the defendant."
He decided that question in the negative:
"Strictly speaking, the plaintiff must allege in his statement of claim the facts that, according to him, constitute the infringement or infringements of his rights under his patent in respect of which he claims relief. Rule 20 requires, in addition a separate statement of 'particulars' of such 'breaches'.
"As I have already indicated, an allegation that the plaintiff has 'infringed' the plaintiff's rights, as opposed to an allegation of facts constituting an infringement of his rights, is not such an allegation of fact at all."
Jackett, P., then discussed whether the motion should have been for particulars or to strike the statement of claim. He concluded:
"In my view, however, none of these problems arise when the plaintiff, in addition to particularizing as to the facts constituting an infringement that are known to him, attempts to bring within the ambit of his statement of claim facts that are unknown to him and which, as far as he has any ground for belief, do not exist. Such an attempt to include in a statement of claim causes of action based upon no known facts must fail. Either the plaintiff can show that there are facts that justify including a second cause of action in the statement of claim or the references to such a possible cause of action are not relevant to any cause of action and should be struck from the pleading."
[20]
The plaintiffs must, for the same reasons, provide particulars of all the infringing activities they allege in paragraph 9. It is no answer in this case to say that these matters are within the knowledge of the defendants. Where the pleadings are inadequate, the mere fact that the defendants may or must know the true facts is not a valid objection to an order for particulars. The defendants are entitled to know the nature of the case against them and have all the facts necessary to plead intelligently. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  particulars of the defendants' inducing activities must be upheld.
[22]
An order will therefore go:
1. Dismissing the appeal against the order to strike the statement of claim as against the defendant Andre Teasdale;
2. Allowing the appeal of the order to provide particulars of paragraph 7 of the statement of claim; and
3. Dismissing the appeal of the order to provide particulars of paragraph 9 of the statement of claim.
[23]
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed in part.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/sms
[End of document]