Issue
[1]
Rothstein, J.
: The issue in this action is whether the defendants, in manufacturing knitted, crocheted or woven fur garments, have infringed the product and/or process patent of the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs seek, inter alia, a permanent injunction restraining the defendants from infringing the said patent, damages or profits arising out of the infringing acts of the defendants, and exemplary damages.
Facts
The Patent
[2]
The plaintiff, Paula Lishman, is the registered owner of Canadian Letters Patent No. 1107487 ("the Lishman patent"), the application for which was filed on March 21, 1978 with supplementary disclosure filed on February 8, 1979. The patent was granted on August 25, 1981, and will expire on August 25, 1998. The Lishman patent is known as "Fabric of Fur and Method of Production". The plaintiffs' invention is a fabric having oppositely facing furry surfaces and comprised of elongated strips of twisted fur and non-furry strips. The fabric is constructed by knitting, crocheting or weaving.
The Parties
[3]
The plaintiff Paula Lishman Limited ("PLL") is located at Blackstock, Ontario, northeast of Oshawa, and is owned by the plaintiff Paula Lishman and her husband. PLL designs, manufactures, sells and distributes knitted, crocheted and woven fur garments and is the sole licensee of the Lishman patent. In the fiscal year ended August 31, 1995, PLL had sales of some $8.3 million. Approximately sixty-one percent (61%) of its market is in Japan, twelve percent (12%) in Canada and twenty-seven percent (27%) in the United States and Europe. Of its total sales, ninety-eight (98%) percent are sold in the wholesale market, two percent (2%) in the retail market. PLL employs approximately 180 persons, 50 full-time.
[4]
The defendant Harry Iwata ("Iwata") was the principal of H & I Fur Trading Inc. ("H & I") and is the principal of Erom Roche Inc. ("Erom Roche"). From 1978 until 1993, Iwata was carrying on business as a fur agent for a number of manufacturers through his company H & I, even though H & I had been dissolved in 1982 for failure to comply with the
Corporation Tax Act
of Ontario, R.S.O. 1980, c. 97, as amended. (Iwata says he only became aware of the dissolution of H & I in 1993.)
[5]
Iwata now carries on business as a fur manufacturer through Erom Roche which was incorporated in January 1993. Erom Roche manufactures a range of knitted fur garments. Ninety percent of these garments are sold in Japan, the balance in North America. In the fiscal year ended August 31, 1995, Erom Roche sold between 2,000 - 2,500 garments for total gross sales of approximately $3.5 million.
[6]
R.B. Management Group Inc. ("R.B.") (added as a defendant at trial) was a corporation incorporated in 1981. It was dissolved in December 1994 for failure to comply with the
Corporation Tax Act
but steps are being taken to revive the corporation. Iwata was the principal of R.B., possibly together with another individual, Mike Mosler, whom he met and associated with in business sometime in 1990. R.B. is the assignee of a right to obtain a patent for an invention by Mike Mosler described as "Fur Fabric and Method of Production".
Chronology Of Events
[7]
Paula Lishman testified that in the fall of 1990, Iwata called her to inquire if he could purchase some of her products as gifts for family and for some customers. Iwata was known to Ms. Lishman as a participant in the fur industry but she had no substantial contact with him for several years prior to this telephone call. Ms. Lishman agreed to sell products to Mr. Iwata.
[8]
As a result, Iwata's wife visited the PLL location at Blackstock, Ontario, on October 3, 1990. At that time, she purchased four garments. Joan Cochrane, Vice President of Marketing for PLL, testified that Mrs. Iwata confirmed that the garments were being purchased as gifts and advised that the garments were for family and friends. She asked that the invoices be made out to H & I Fur Trading Inc. During the fall of 1990 and the early part of 1991, Mrs. Iwata purchased additional garments from PLL. In total, seventeen (17) garments were purchased. All of the invoicing was done in the name of H & I Fur Trading Inc.
[9]
In April 1991, as a result of the volume of Iwata orders, Ms. Lishman became concerned that the PLL garments purchased by Mrs. Iwata were being sold in Japan to the detriment of PLL's marketing efforts there, which were through an exclusive agent in that market. On April 18, 1991 Ms. Lishman wrote Iwata indicating that PLL would not fulfil any further orders from Mrs. Iwata. Iwata responded by letter dated April 24, 1991 confirming that current orders were to be completed and that no further orders would be placed.
[10]
At the time of his April 24, 1991 letter to Ms. Lishman, Iwata had already contracted with customers for the sale of additional PLL garments. However, the existence of these outstanding orders was not communicated to PLL. As well, Iwata admitted that he took additional orders for PLL garments in Japan after April 24, 1991, despite knowing that PLL would not fulfil further orders. As he needed to fill these orders, but knew PLL would not sell to him, Iwata instructed Mike Mosler to arrange for purchases from PLL. To that end, in November 1991, Mosler attended at the PLL location in Blackstock on a number of occasions under an assumed name, "Tony Dinadis" and placed orders for approximately seventeen (17) garments through an established fur company in Toronto with which he claimed to be associated. Ms. Lishman had no reason to believe Mosler was associated with Iwata at the time and assumed Mosler's purchases were for sale in the Toronto market. When Mosler visited the PLL location at Blackstock, he asked a number of questions regarding the processes utilized by PLL and was provided, at his request, with a blocking pattern for one of the current PLL product lines.
[11]
In April 1992, Iwata began manufacturing knitted fur garments. He produced garments with fur both on the inside and outside, and he admitted that these garments were similar to those of PLL. Iwata's garments came to the attention of Ms. Lishman in late 1992. She consulted a lawyer and sent Colin Kemp, who was a consultant for PLL at the time, to visit Iwata's premises and ascertain what Iwata was doing. As a result of Kemp's report, provided in January 1993, Ms. Lishman believed that Iwata was infringing her patent. In addition, from a description she received from Kemp, Ms. Lishman ascertained that Mosler and "Tony Dinadis" were one and the same persons.
[12]
Ms. Lishman then took steps to obtain evidence of the alleged patent infringement. She asked one Jack Weber to purchase a garment from Iwata. The purpose of the purchase was to investigate the defendants' processes and garments to determine if they were indeed infringing the plaintiffs' patent. The garment purchased by Weber in March 1993, was made of a fabric with fur on both sides, manufactured out of a fur yarn. The yarn was twisted around a non-furry core.
[13]
As a result of her investigation, this action was commenced and an application for an interlocutory injunction was sought. The garment purchased by Weber was admitted by the defendants to be an infringement of the Lishman patent and the defendants consented to the interlocutory injunction sought by the plaintiffs. An interlocutory injunction was therefore granted on May 31, 1993.
[14]
Despite his admitted infringement, Iwata's evidence was that because the garments that were manufactured in a manner similar to the PLL garments were of poor quality, he experimented with different methods of production. He says he stopped manufacturing in a manner similar to PLL in October 1992 (while it is true that the sale to Weber of the admittedly infringing garment was in March 1993, it appears that this was an older garment made prior to the switch in production methods). After October 1992, the defendants modified their yarn production process to include sewing a non-furry nylon or cotton thread along the length of the fur strip close to one edge of the strip. This thread was to provide reinforcement to the fur strip. Between October 1992 and April 1993, it was admitted that the deliberate twisting of the yarn continued for some garments. However, all fur strips at this time contained the reinforcing thread.
[15]
Because the defendants continued to produce fur garments which the plaintiffs believed infringed their patent, they moved to have the defendants found in contempt of the interlocutory injunction of May 31, 1993. The motion was denied on January 31, 1994, the learned motions judge finding:
"Clearly, resolution of these complex issues is required before any determination can be made as to whether the defendants are infringing the plaintiffs' patent. The proper forum for resolution of these complex issues is trial. It would be inappropriate for the court to attempt to decide these difficult questions on a motion for contempt where allegations must be proven to a quasi-criminal standard."
The Law
[16]
While infringement is nowhere defined in the
Patent Act
, any act which interferes with the full enjoyment of the monopoly granted is said to be an infringement.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.T.D.). The issue of infringement involves a mixed question of fact and law: construction of the claims of a patent to determine the scope of the patent is a question of law while determining whether the actions of another fall within the bounds of the patent is a question of fact.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Ex. Ct.).
[17]
The burden is on the plaintiff to prove infringement. A comparison of the alleged infringing product with the claims in the plaintiffs' patent must be made in order for the court to determine whether the product falls within the scope of the patent. If the product does fall within the scope, then there is infringement. Some basic principles relating to the construction of patent claims were recently outlined by Wetston, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), and are paraphrased here. Among other things, it has been determined that the court should take a purposive approach to interpreting the claims, not one which is unduly technical or literal: per Lord Diplock in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (H.L.). The patent furthermore must be construed by a mind willing to understand and seeking a construction that is reasonable and fair both to the patentee and to the public.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 3 N.R. 553, at pages 563 and 559 to 560 (S.C.R.). If the words of the claim are clear and unambiguous, it is not necessary to look any further to discover the nature of an invention; if they are otherwise, then resort may be had to the disclosure of the patent for assistance in comprehending the meaning of the words used in the claims. As stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at 248-249, in construing claims, recourse to the rest of the specification is 1) permissible to assist in understanding the terms used in the claims, 2) unnecessary where the words in the claims are plain and unambiguous, and 3) improper to vary the scope or ambit of the claims.
[18]
While the construction of the claims of a patent is a question of law for the court, it should be undertaken with the knowledge of a person skilled in the art, to the extent that such knowledge is revealed by the expert evidence accepted at trial. See
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at page 5. In the case at bar, the parties adduced expert evidence relating to the properties of the components which are the subject of the patent claims as well as the state of the art at the date of the patent. There was however, no other substantial expert evidence in relation to the construction of the claims in issue nor of the meaning of technical terms. Perhaps that is not surprising because, in this case, the claims do not cover highly technical matters. In any event, the court is the final interpreter of the claims and must construe the claims purposively with a mind willing to understand.
Claim Construction:
[19]
I turn first to the product claims. If it is determined that they are infringed, it will not be necessary to consider whether the process claims are also infringed. The product claims in the patent are 1 to 4, 9, 12 and 14 to 16. They read as follows:
"1. A fabric having oppositely facing furry surfaces and comprising (a) an elongated strip of a hairy-coated skin of a fur-bearing animal twisted such that the skin forms an elongated longitudinally extending core of the strip and the hair stands radially outward from the skin and forms a substantially continuous outer layer which encircles the core; and (b) an elongated non-furry piece.
"2. The fabric as claimed in Claim 1, wherein said twisted strip is knitted to form said fabric.
"3. The fabric as claimed in Claim 1 wherein said twisted strip is crocheted to form said fabric.
"4. The fabric as claimed in Claim 1 wherein said twisted strip is woven to form said fabric.
"9. The fabric as claimed in Claim 1, wherein said elongated non-furry piece is disposed within and is surrounded by said skin.
"12. A fabric having oppositely facing furry surfaces and comprising: an elongated twisted strip of a hairy-coated skin of a fur bearing animal; and an elongated non-furry piece, said skin and said non-furry piece being plied together to form a variegated composite yarn such that said skin alternates with said non-furry piece along the length of said yarn.
"14. The fabric as claimed in Claim 12, wherein said twisted strip and said non-furry piece are knitted to form said fabric.
"15. The fabric as claimed in Claim 12, wherein said twisted strip and said non-furry piece are crocheted to form said fabric.
"16. The fabric as claimed in Claim 12, wherein said twisted strip and said non-furry piece are woven to form said fabric."
[20]
Claim 1 describes a fabric having oppositely facing furry surfaces. The fabric comprises first, an elongated strip of a hairy-coated skin of a fur bearing animal which is twisted such that the fur stands radially outward from the skin, and second, an elongated non-furry piece. The claims cover a fabric which has fur on both sides, being inside and outside, and comprised of the listed components. Claim 1 is quite straightforward and requires little interpretation.
[21]
Claims 2, 3 and 4, which depend on claim 1, indicate that the fabric may be formed by knitting, crocheting or weaving. Specifically, these claims state "The fabric as claimed in claim 1 wherein said twisted strip is knitted (crocheted, woven) to form said fabric". As claims 2, 3 and 4 make reference only to "said twisted strip" and are silent with respect to the non-furry piece referred to in claim 1, there is an ambiguity with respect to what use, if any, is made of the non-furry piece in the knitting, crocheting or weaving of the garments. Resort is therefore made to the disclosure portion of the patent for assistance is clarifying claims 2, 3 and 4. The Description of the Preferred Embodiments indicates:
"With reference to figure 4 a twisted strip 10 may be woven into a fabric 30 in a conventional manner. The strip may form both the warp and the weft of the fabric or it may form only one of the warp and the weft while the other may be formed of a cord or thread of non-animal origin such as cotton or a synthetic fibre.
"It will be understood of course that modifications can be made in the preferred embodiments of the invention described and illustrated herein without departing from the scope and purview of the invention as defined in the appended claims. For example, the fabric of the invention may be composed wholly of one or more strips of furry material or it may, as illustrated in figures 1 and 5, be composed of both furry and non-furry material."
The disclosure, therefore, indicates that either component referred to in claim 1, the furry strip or the non-furry piece, may, when woven, form the warp or the weft of the fabric or, the furry strip may form both the warp and the weft of the fabric [see footnote 1].
[22]
Claim 9, which is contained in the "Claims Supported by Supplementary Disclosure" in the patent, is a dependant claim, depending from claim 1. However, it introduces a variant to claim 1, whereby the non-furry piece is disposed within and is surrounded by the furry strip. I interpret this to mean that the listed components in claim 1 are combined to create one component out of the two, being an elongated yarn with fur standing radially outward and the non-furry piece surrounded by the furry strip.
[23]
Because the defendants distinguish their product from claim 9 in the plaintiffs' patent by reason of their use of separate furry strips and non-furry pieces, counsel for the plaintiffs argued that s. 33(2) of the
Interpretation Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-21, should apply to claim 9 such that it should be read in the plural — that is, that there should continue to be a non-furry piece surrounded by a furry strip and a second non-furry piece which comprises the fabric, as it does in claim 1. Section 33(2) provides:
"33(2) Words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular."
[24]
However, by s. 3 of that
Act
, the
Interpretation Act
applies to enactments — that is, statutes or regulations. Even if a common law rule of construction similar to s. 33(2) were applicable, it would have to be applied according to the context. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  N.B.R.(2d) 417; 30 A.P.R. 417; 37 C.C.C.(2d) 193, per Ritchie, J., at page 638-639 adopting the opinion of Hughes, C.J.N.B., (1976), 15 N.B.R.(2d) 91; 18 A.P.R. 91; 32 C.C.C.(2d) 68 (C.A.) at page 70.) I see nothing in the context of claim 9, which suggests that a second non-furry piece is to remain separate from the furry strip which surrounds the non-furry piece. I do not think that the "singular-plural" rule of construction is applicable in this case.
[25]
Claim 12, again introduces a variation on the fabric claimed in claim 1, however unlike claim 9, it is an independent claim, and is therefore wholly separate from claim 1. Claim 12 describes a fabric with fur on opposite sides which is comprised of a variegated composite yarn. It further describes the variegated composite yarn to be an elongated furry strip and a non-furry piece plied together, with the result that the furry strip alternates with the non-furry piece along the length of the yarn. I interpret this to mean that the fabric, while similar to that claimed in claim 1, is comprised of components which are combined in a certain way. The combination results in a composite yarn formed by plying the components together in a manner such that both components are visible in the resulting elongated strip, as opposed to one component being completely disposed within the other as in claim 9.
[26]
Claims 14, 15 and 16, which depend on claim 12, indicate that the fabric claimed in claim 12 can be formed by knitting, weaving or crocheting the yarn comprised of the composite twisted furry strip and non-furry piece. There is no additional non-furry piece referred to in claims 12, 14, 15 or 16.
Analysis
[27]
Having construed the product claims found in the plaintiffs' patent, I now turn to the question of infringement. Do the defendants' garments infringe the product claims found in the plaintiffs' patent? Pat Fearon, a witness for the defendants, described the defendants' process. His evidence indicated that fur pelts are put through a "spaghetti machine" resulting in fur strips approximately 5mm wide. The fur-bearing strips are then surged so that two strands of thread, usually nylon, are sewn lengthwise into the skin of each strip. The nylon threads are close to the outside edges of the strip. The strip is then spliced lengthwise down the middle leaving two 2.5 mm strips with a nylon thread running longitudinally near one edge of each strip, with no thread near the other edge. The strips are then looped and dyed (to ensure that the cut edge is the same colour as the rest of the strip). The strips are then wrung out and left to dry for twenty-four hours. They are then rolled into balls from which the garments are then knitted.
[28]
The defendants' garments have fur on oppositely facing surfaces similar to that indicated in the plaintiffs' claims. However, the distribution of fur is not exactly uniform, and one side of the garment can end up with a greater percentage of fur than the other. The evidence of Mr. Iwata was that the preference is to have the greater percentage of the fur end up on the outside for appearance reasons. If there is insufficient fur on the outside of the garment at the final stage, then the defendants will use an air compressor to blow fur from the inside to the outside until the desired look is achieved.
[29]
Mr. Fearon indicated that the nylon thread sewn close to the edge of the furry strip is used in order to give the garments added strength. He also testified that while the defendants' process does not involve a specific deliberate step of twisting the fur as is indicated in the plaintiffs' claims, there is some natural twisting which results from the dyeing and drying process, the sewing of the reinforcing thread close to one edge of the strip, and the rolling of the strips into balls for knitting. It is this natural twisting that results in the defendants' garments having fur on oppositely facing surfaces of the fabric.
[30]
The defendants' witness Chris Ewert enumerated the differences between the defendants' product and that of the plaintiffs' as defined in their patent. Specifically she indicated that the defendants do not deliberately twist their fur strips. This is in accordance with the evidence of Mr. Fearon who also alleged that the substance of the plaintiffs' patent was the twisting of the elongated furry strips, either with or without the non-furry pieces.
[31]
It appears clear from Mr. Fearon's evidence that there is a difference between the plaintiffs' process or method and that of the defendants'. It also seems apparent from the evidence of Ms. Ewert that the difference she sees between the defendants' and plaintiffs' is a matter of process but not of product. Indeed, counsel for the defendants asserted before me that it is not possible to separate the product from the process. I interpret this to mean that in the view of the defendants, deliberate twisting is an essential feature of the plaintiffs' product.
[32]
I agree that the plaintiffs' patent clearly indicates that it is twisting that results in fur on oppositely facing surfaces of the fabric. However this is also true of the defendants' product. The product claims in the plaintiffs' patent do not establish a specific manner of twisting. The fact that the defendants do not deliberately twist their fur strips but let them twist naturally is of no consequence. The resulting fabric of the defendants has fur on opposite sides because of twisting, and I am satisfied that the purport or essence of the plaintiffs' claim has been taken by the defendants in this respect.
[33]
I find further on this point, that the defendants themselves have distinguished product and process despite their argument to the contrary. The distinction is made in the patent applications of the defendants, filed both in Canada and the United States. In their patent they distinguish the plaintiffs' patent by stating:
"however, the present invention provides improved strength products either requiring or not requiring the twisting of a strip of skin
prior
to manufacture into a fabric formed therefrom."
The defendants do not say that their fabric does not result from the twisting of fur strips, but rather the distinction is the exact time of twisting. This again is a matter of process and not of product.
[34]
Having found that the lack of deliberate twisting alone is not sufficient to differentiate the defendants' product from the plaintiffs' patent such that it can be said there is no infringement, I must now consider the other differences alleged. First, the defendants allege that the fur on their garments is not uniformly furry, and that as a result there is a difference between their product and that found in the plaintiffs' patent. This argument does not assist them in my opinion. If there is insufficient fur on the outside of a garment, the evidence indicates that the defendants will blow some through from the inside to the outside. I am not satisfied that this is a significant difference, as a distinction is not to be drawn based on the precise amount of fur on each surface of the fabric.
[35]
I find helpful in this respect, the evidence of the plaintiffs' witness, Victor Topper, qualified as an expert in the properties of fur as a material and the methods of processing it. Mr. Topper indicated that the quality of the end product can vary because of the quality of the raw material. Further, it is clear from the evidence that the extent of twisting can vary the amount of fur found on each side of the garment. The fewer the areas in the garment which are bare of fur, the better the quality of the garment. If the defendants' raw material or process does not result in sufficient fur to cover both the inside and outside of the garment as well as the plaintiffs' patent does, the product may be of a lesser quality. This however, is not sufficient to distinguish their product from the plaintiffs' patent. I cannot find that there is no infringement simply because the defendants product is of somewhat inferior quality. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at 445.)
[36]
Inspection of the defendants garments confirms that they have fur on oppositely facing surfaces. Examination of the plaintiffs' patent indicates that their fabric too has fur on oppositely facing surfaces. Further, the defendants' fabric is clearly flexible as it has been formed into a variety of garments. The evidence indicates that the plaintiffs' product, as described in their patent, is also flexible. Lastly, the defendants incorporate nylon thread to give added strength or reinforcement to the finished product. While claims 1 to 4 of the plaintiffs' patent clearly do not encompass such reinforcement, claims 9, 12 and 14 to 16 do.
[37]
The defendants claim that as their garments are reinforced, there is no infringement of claims 1 to 4 of the plaintiffs' patent. They also say that their product does not infringe claims 9, 12 and 14 to 16 because they combine a reinforced furry strip with a non-furry piece, i.e., nylon thread, and in addition utilize another non-furry piece, whereas claims 9, 12 and 14 to 16 do not purport to utilize a separate non-furry piece. The defendants allege that claims 9, 12 and 14 to 16 only envisage the non-furry piece being disposed within and surrounded by the furry strip or combined to form a composite yarn with no separate non-furry piece.
[38]
With respect to claims 1 to 4, I cannot agree that there is no infringement simply because the defendants reinforce their fur strips. The defendants' product is comprised of the same components that are found in claim 1 of the plaintiffs' patent; that is, an elongated furry strip, and an elongated non-furry piece, which are knitted, woven or crocheted to form a fabric having oppositely facing furry surfaces. While it is clear that the defendants' product adds the extra component of reinforcement, which is an improvement on the plaintiffs' product as described in claim 1, this does not mean that there is no infringement. The law is clear that where the alleged infringing manufacture or product falls within the words of a claim, it is no defence to show that it involves ingenuity.
Marconi and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 218. In essence, the mere adding of improvement to an infringing device does not serve to escape liability. As stated in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). In this case Dubé, J., states:
"Under section 44 of the
Act
, the patentee enjoys exclusivity of his invention. The general principle is set out very clearly by Fox.
'In general, infringement is committed where any person without licence from the patentee, either directly or indirectly makes, uses, or puts into practice the invention or any part of it that is embraced by the claims.'
"Thus, there is infringement when the essential components of an invention have been appropriated by the infringer ... Moreover, although a defendant has applied for and obtained its own patent for an 'improvement', it may have appropriated the pith and substance of the patent alleged to be infringed."
A simple example of such a proposition was suggested by counsel for the plaintiff, who argued that one who improves the wheel by inventing a bicycle still infringes the patent for the wheel unless licensed to use it. I therefore find that the defendants' product infringes claims 1 to 4 of the plaintiffs' patent. It is, therefore, not necessary to decide whether claims 5 to 8, which are process claims, or claims 9 to 19 are infringed.
[39]
This however, is not the end of the matter. The defendants allege that claims 1 to 4 of the plaintiffs' patent are invalid on the basis of the prior art. They state that without the reinforcement aspect in the fabric, which is absent from claims 1 to 4, the plaintiffs' patent is too similar to the prior art. Based on the evidence, I find that the argument of invalidity is only relevant with respect to claims 1 to 4 of the plaintiffs' patent, as the supplementary claims, 9 to 19, encompass a product that is reinforced, and there is no evidence of any reinforcement in the prior art.
[40]
Counsel for the defendants did not advance a specific ground of invalidity in either oral or written argument; that is, there were no submissions regarding, inter alia, anticipation, obviousness, or insufficiency of specification or claims. As each of these heads of invalidity involve separate tests, and none were suggested by the defendants, I will address the issue of invalidity and the prior art generally.
[41]
Before doing so, however, I will deal briefly with one particular point made by counsel for the defendants. Despite stating that he was contesting the validity of the patent, he argued that as the claims in the patent were similar to the prior art, the claims should be interpreted as very narrow in scope. This is not proper in law. The prior art has nothing to do with the construction of the claims in a patent; the court interprets the claims on the basis of the evidence of persons skilled in the art. The task of understanding a claim is to be done dispassionately, regardless of any attack on its validity.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). A claim is either valid or it is not. Its scope is not narrowed or widened in an examination of the possible grounds of invalidity. Thus, I cannot accept counsel's submission that the claims should be interpreted narrowly.
[42]
I have considered the evidence of the prior art with respect to claims 1 to 4 of the plaintiffs' patent. I am not satisfied that these claims are invalid because of the prior art, as there are significant differences which set the plaintiffs' patent apart. I find the evidence of Mr. Topper useful in this respect. In his evidence, Mr. Topper indicated that the plaintiffs' patent was much more sophisticated than anything found in the prior art.
[43]
While the evidence contains a number of references to methods employed by the North American Indians who manufactured blankets using strips of fur from fur-bearing animals or bird feathers, sometimes in combination with non-furry material such as strands of cedar bark, the resulting product lacked the flexibility characteristic of the plaintiffs' patent. Twisting sometimes resulted in fur or feathers radiating outward from the strips, however there is no evidence that these prior methods resulted in a product with similar flexibility to that described in the plaintiffs' patent, that could be used to make different types of clothing. I am satisfied that this difference renders the patent different from the prior art. I cannot find invalidity on the basis of the evidence or the argument presented with respect to prior art.
[44]
The plaintiffs are entitled to a permanent injunction, damages, and/or an accounting of profits. The parties have agreed that the damages and/or accounting of profits are to be dealt with subsequently.
[45]
The plaintiffs also ask that exemplary damages of $100,000 be awarded on account of the defendants' breach of the interlocutory injunction ordered in this case. Exemplary damages have, in the past, been awarded by the court for refusal to obey an injunction. See Cullen, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.). However, the recent decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), overturned the decision of Cullen, J., on specific issues pertaining to, inter alia, when exemplary damages may be awarded. In particular, the court found that general damages must first be assessed before the court determines whether general damages are sufficient, or whether exemplary damages are needed to effectively deter an offending party from outrageous conduct. See Stone, J.A., and Linden, J.A., at pages 22-24.
[46]
As mentioned, the parties in this action have agreed to have the issue of damages and/or an accounting of profits determined on a reference following the outcome of this action. As a result, no damages of any type have been awarded as of yet, and, on the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , I am prohibited from awarding exemplary damages to the plaintiffs at this time. The matter is reserved to be dealt with at the time the accounting and/or damages are addressed.
[47]
The plaintiffs are entitled to costs.
[48]
Within 10 days of the date of these reasons, counsel for the plaintiffs and defendants shall arrange for a conference call with the court for the purpose of settling the order giving effect to these reasons. Counsel should be prepared to speak to costs if there has not been agreement between them. Counsel for the plaintiffs shall prepare a draft order and submit it to counsel for the defendants and the court for consideration prior to the conference call. The draft order shall include a timetable for the matters left to be determined. Counsel shall be prepared to provide the court with an estimate of the trial days necessary to complete the outstanding reference, and their preferred trial dates.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Reginald W. Curtis/sg
Footnotes
1.	The warp is the threads stretched lengthwise in a loom through which the crosswise threads are woven. The weft is the threads running from side to side across a woven fabric.
[End of document]