[1]
Joyal, J.
: The defendant applies to this court for an order dismissing the action for want of prosecution. The application is founded on rule 440 of the Federal Court Rules which reads as follows:
"440(1) If the defendant does not, within three months after the close of pleadings, receive notice of trial or have knowledge of an application for an order fixing the date for trial, he may, before notice of trial or of an application for an order fixing the date for trial, apply to the court to dismiss the action for want of prosecution; and on the hearing of such application, the court may order the action to be dismissed accordingly, or make such other order on such terms as seem just.
"(2) No application may be made under this rule unless the applicant is of the view that the plaintiff is not prosecuting the action with due despatch and, save in exceptional circumstances, unless, at least two weeks before service of the notice of motion, the applicant has served notice in writing on the plaintiff that, unless the plaintiff takes the necessary steps to bring the action on for trial, such an application will be made."
[2]
The action instituted by the plaintiffs is for damages for physical injuries suffered on September 3, 1973, in High River, Alberta. Some fifteen years have gone by since that time. Pleadings have been exchanged and discoveries were held. According to the evidence before me, there were several changes of solicitors acting for the plaintiffs. There was a change in the defendant's solicitors as well. These changes created delays when new solicitors had to be retained and briefed. Concurrently, the plaintiffs instituted an action in damages for professional negligence in the Court of Queen's Bench against one firm of solicitors. The action against several defendants named in the original pleadings in this court was dismissed by Addy, J., on March 23, 1977, on the grounds of this court's absence of jurisdiction.
[3]
Furthermore, the plaintiffs' action for professional negligence in the Court of Queen's Bench was stayed pending the disposition of the action before this court. By order of its Chief Justice dated June 8, 1987, the stay is conditional upon the plaintiffs bringing the action before this court to a conclusion before June 7 of this year. The order further declares that unless there should be prior applications to vary its terms, the action before the Court of Queen's Bench is to be dismissed for want of prosecution once the delay has expired.
[4]
The defendant's application before me is a serious one. It was strenuously argued by counsel that the case for the defence was seriously prejudiced by those unconscionable delays and particularly, that one of its main witnesses to the events of September 3, 1973, had died earlier in 1987. Furthermore, the recollection of events by other witnesses would have been considerably dimmed by this time.
[5]
Well and true. Yet, the untimely demise of witnesses or their disappearance or their incapacity to testify seems to me to go with the territory. Actions in court often meet with protracted delays. Rules of pleadings as well as the more human factors of procrastination cause days and months and years to slip by.
[6]
I am far from convinced, however, that the factual situation before me is of a nature that the plaintiffs should be forever barred from their day in court. The Associate Chief Justice of this court expressed such reluctance in the case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  said:
"In two earlier decisions,  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  to deprive plaintiffs of their substantive rights on procedural grounds. It must never appear that the court accepts or encourages such delays and yet in complex litigation, they can scarcely be considered exceptional. Where they do occur, it is almost invariably attributable to solicitors rather than clients, and more often than not, the result of acquiescence on the part of both counsel. There will, of course, be those rare examples when the delays are inordinate, where they are caused by the plaintiff alone and where their effect is to deprive the defendant of the proper opportunity to present his case before the court. In such circumstances, it may be necessary to foreclose the right of the plaintiff to go to trial by dismissal for want of prosecution. In their absence, it seems far more appropriate to compensate by way of costs, and where possible to expediate the trial, than to risk final determination of issues because of procedural developments for which the parties may not be directly responsible."
[7]
It seems to me on reading the voluminous material submitted to me by both counsel that the file has not laid dormant for an unconscionably long time prior to the filing of the defendant's motion to dismiss in January of this year. The female plaintiff was reexamined for discovery on May 27, 1987. A further examination for discovery of her spouse was scheduled for July 29, 1987, but was not proceeded with on the grounds that the defendant had just been informed of the death of its principal witness. There is further evidence that correspondence relating to the setting down of the action for trial was exchanged on September 18, 1987 and September 22, 1987. It was not until September 30, 1987, that the defendant's counsel informed the plaintiffs' counsel that instruction had been received to move for dismissal, a move which was made more than three months later.
[8]
One must keep in mind therefore that new steps in the proceedings were taken more recently and in fact, the letter addressed to defendant's counsel on September 18, 1987, clearly indicates the plaintiffs' intention to proceed with a joint application to fix a trial date.
[9]
It could possibly be that over the years, there were long periods where the carriage of action rested with the plaintiffs and it might then have been appropriate for the defendant to apply under rule 440. It seems to me, however, that if delays are passively countenanced over different periods of time, a defendant should not per se claim the cumulative effect of these delays any more than the defendant, despite counsel's able argument, should plead that the demise of one of its principal witnesses is sufficient cause to have the action dismissed. Such unfortunate circumstances are what parties before any court have to expect from time to time.
[10]
I should therefore dismiss the defendant's motion. I should also enjoin the plaintiffs to take all necessary and expeditious measures to proceed to trial reminding them, as diffidently as I can, that the time allowed in the order of the Chief Justice of the Court of Queen's Bench to have their action before his court kept alive is rapidly running out.
[11]
In the circumstances of this case, costs shall be in the cause.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/mja
[End of document]