[1]
Joyal, J.
: This court is seized of an appeal from a decision of the Citizenship Court refusing to grant Canadian citizenship to the appellant on the grounds that she had failed to pass the residence test stipulated in paragraph 5(1)(b) of the Citizenship Act.
[2]
I should observe that a citizenship appeal before this court is effectively a trial de novo. I have therefore the privilege of hearing and considering all the evidence before me as if the appellant's citizenship application was being heard for the first time.
[3]
The appellant, born in Scotland in 1957, has been a resident of Canada since the age of eleven years. She became a landed immigrant in 1968. She went to school in Canada and married a Canadian citizen in 1980. She entered into courses of study at Trent University in Peterborough and later, at St. Francis Xavier University in Antigonish. She subsequently graduated from Queen's University in Kingston.
[4]
In August 1984, the appellant and her husband, under the sponsorship of Canadian University Students Overseas (CUSO), took up residence in Nigeria and for the next two years of their appointment there, the appellant taught school. She and her husband returned to Canada in July 1986. They then proceeded to complete their articles for admission to the Law Society of Upper Canada. They expect to be admitted to the practice of law in April 1989.
[5]
The appellant's absence from Canada for a period of two years in the course of the last four years of Canadian residency certainly invites an inquiry as to whether or not she complies with the residency rules outlined in section 5 of the Citizenship Act.
[6]
On the face of it, she does not. It might be said of her that she picked a wrong time to apply for citizenship status. Jurisprudence has established, however, that to meet the requirements of section 5 of the Act, physical presence in Canada for the stated minimum number of years is not an essential requirement. A more liberal or flexible interpretation of the rule has been adopted by this court beginning of course with the leading case of Re Papadogiorgakis, a decision of Associate Chief Justice Thurlow (as he then was), and reported at 88 D.L.R.(3d) 243. The approach taken by His Lordship is succintly expressed at page 247 of his reasons where he says:
"... It seems to me that the words 'residence' and 'resident' in para. 5(1)(b) of the new Citizenship Act are not as strictly limited to actual presence in Canada throughout the period as they were in the former statute but can include, as well, situations in which the person concerned has a place in Canada which is used by him during the period as a place of abode to a sufficient extent to demonstrate the reality of his residing there during the material period even though he is away from it part of the time. ...
"A person with an established home of his own in which he lives does not cease to be resident there when he leaves it for a temporary purpose whether on business or vacation or even to pursue a course of study. The fact of his family remaining there while he is away may lend support for the conclusion that he has not ceased to reside there. The conclusion may be reached, as well, even though the absence may be more or less lengthy. ..."
[7]
His Lordship then adopts the observations of Rand, J., in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at page 224 where the issue of residency may be said to be "chiefly a matter of the degree to which a person in mind and fact settles into or maintains or centralizes his ordinary mode of living with its accessories in social relations, interests and conveniences at or in the place in question. ..."
[8]
An analysis of the Papadogiorgakis decision discloses the numerous avenues of enquiries which may be followed in order to establish if residency rules under the Citizenship Act have or have not been met. Various indicia have accordingly been applied in individual cases. Such indicia as family connections in Canada, a continuing place of residence, bank accounts in Canadian banks, provincial driving licences, membership in OHIP or in community and professional organizations, frequency of return trips to Canada, have been applied. The list may be said to be inexhaustible and the weight to be given to any of its several manifestations may of course vary from case to case.
[9]
As a result, the conclusions which may be drawn by the application of all such surrounding circumstances will not often meet that degree of mathematical precision which a simple day-count would provide. It is a fact-finding situation with its usual inferences, implications or conclusions on which judgment calls may very well be different.
[10]
I should also observe at this point that in most cases which have been scrutinized by the court, the indicia which were applied concerned applicants who barely met the four-year rule since becoming landed immigrants. It was then incumbent upon the court to ask for more than self-serving assertions by the applicant of his intentions to reside in Canada, or to return to it. These assertions, on the face of long and protracted absences from the country carry, in my view, little weight unless they are buttressed by objective evidence or by facts which are consonant with avowed intentions. The risk, otherwise, is to create abusive situations where both the intentions of Parliament are frustrated and the doctrine laid down in Re Papadogiorgakis becomes reductio ad absurdem.
[11]
Precedents also disclose cases where even the prior establishment of a residence in Canada, a condition sine qua non to any enquiry under the Papadogiorgakis rule, was left in doubt. If a person becomes landed in Canada but immediately leaves it to carry on his usual occupation or business abroad, the application of the indicia I have referred to simply begs the question as to whether such a person can possibly have an intention to return to a Canadian residence which he has not even established. As I permitted myself to suggest in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ].
[12]
Muldoon, J., had occasion to make the following comment in Nabila Saad El-Din Anquist, T-1893, October 1, 1984, unreported:
"The spirit of the Act has not been changed by the subsequent amendment even though the means of establishing residence have been broadened by reference to section 24 of the Immigration Act, 1976. As Pratte, J., indicated, Parliament intended that the applicant for citizenship demonstrate that he or she has actually resided among Canadians and in effect thrown in his or her lot with us in some Canadian community."
[13]
The foregoing observations are meant to guard against the adoption of prescriptive or fixed criteria in determining residency requirements under the Act. One must eschew a pointcount system for each of the several indicia which have historically been applied by the court. Regard must be had for the spirit of the statute and each and every material fact to support or oppose a finding of continuing residency in Canada must be explored. Mr. Justice Cullen's comments in Yun Yee Ronnee Chan, T-947-86, judgment dated September 10, 1986, unreported, are particularly pertinent in this respect.
[14]
I should now return to the particular case before me. As found by the court below, the appellant, prior to her sojourn in Nigeria under the CUSO program, had lived in Canada and had certainly established residence here. She pursued her studies through the universities of Trent, St. Francis Xavier and Queen's. She married a Canadian citizen in 1980. It was given in evidence before me that her participation in a CUSO program was by exception, as she was not a Canadian citizen. One must conclude that, in that respect, she was carried on her husband's coattails. The arrangement, however, did permit the spouses to devote two years of their lives in achieving CUSO's aims and objectives. And all this, I might add, in return for a meagre stipend.
[15]
It is true, of course, that on leaving Canada, the appellant and her spouse vacated their apartment in Kingston, Ontario, with some books and furnishings being left with her mother. It is also in evidence, however, that neither the appellant nor her spouse had accumulated any material assets. Furthermore, it could not be expected that they could realistically sublet their apartment or keep their furnishings there and look after things from Nigeria.
[16]
As is noted by the learned Citizenship Judge, the appellant kept a bank account in Kingston, kept her driver's licence which, in any event, was valid for two years and also obtained a Returning Resident's Permit. What was added in the evidence before me was that throughout the appellant's stay in Nigeria, CUSO was transferring to her bank in Kingston a portion of her stipend to reduce her bank loan.
[17]
The learned Citizenship Judge also noted, quite appropriately, that "more than an intention to return is required". The appellant, she said, did not maintain anything which remotely resembled a home of her own or any form of residential base. She also concluded that the appellant had "essentially centralized her mode of living in Africa for the relevant period" and that "her work, her husband and her residential base were in Nigeria and not Canada".
[18]
With the deepest respect and with some understanding of the Citizenship Judge's thinking in that regard, I must differ.
[19]
The current state of the law is not that in the absence of a home in Canada or a residential base in Canada, an applicant is foreclosed from meeting the residency rules. As I have observed earlier, regard must be had for all the circumstances which might indicate, one way or the other, whether the residency rules have been met. I have in mind in this respect two aspects of the case which were not before the Citizenship Judge or to which her mind was not directed.
[20]
The first of these is of course the nature of the appellant's involvement in the CUSO program and the nature of the program itself. CUSO is a public program completely funded by the Canadian International Development Agency. CUSO volunteers do not look upon it as an adventure in the nature of a trade to be conducted in some undeveloped country or other. It is effectively a missionary, albeit secular, program to teach, to instruct, to help and assist less-favoured people. There is no money in it for the participant except for the satisfaction, as in the exercise of all charitable pursuits, of having in the process enriched one's life as well as a neighbour's.
[21]
The program is furthermore of a strictly temporary nature and the only commitment by CUSO is that at the end of the term, the volunteer is given an airline ticket back to Canada. During his appointment, the only status he enjoys is that provided through CUSO.
[22]
The other consideration is the link, ostensibly insignificant, maintained by the appellant in having her bank loan serviced in Canada during her absence. This particular link must be weighed, in my respectful view, in the light of other circumstances. The existence of the bank loan is at least indicative of some strain in her financial circumstances.
[23]
In the event, I should find that the absence of a fixed place of abode or any kind of physical place of residence in Canada during the intervening years cannot be determinative. Such a factor must be balanced off against the factors I have previously described. None of them, as in the case of a house or apartment, is determinative, but I suggest that all of them, strung together, have more persuasive force. I should list them as follows:
1. The appellant experienced a long period of residence in Canada as a landed immigrant.
2. She attended three Canadian universities culminating in her graduation from Queen's with a degree in law.
3. She is married to a Canadian citizen since 1980 and her spouse, as well as herself have family roots in Canada.
4. During the appellant's whole period of residence in Canada prior to the CUSO program, there is no evidence that she had any interest in or affiliation with any persons, groups, institutions or communities other than Canadian.
5. The fact that the appellant secured a Returning Resident's Permit prior to her departure for Nigeria, indicates a firm intention of retaining her permanent resident status in Canada.
6. The appellant's continuing to service her bank loan in Kingston is also indicative. One might doubt in this respect that she would have been so solicitous of her bankers had she not intended to return to Canada.
7. What meagre furnishings or books the appellant owned were not brought with her but were left in the care of her mother; perhaps, this was an imposition on the mother but it establishes as well the appellant's links with her own family in Canada.
8. Finally, I should note the temporary purpose, under public auspices, of the appellant's engagement in Nigeria. It might be said her presence there was the tangible expression abroad of Canadian policies and values at home. I should not conclude from this, as the court below did, that it represented a centralized, exclusive African style of living for the relevant period.
[24]
I appreciate very much that my view of the law might appear to be a departure from the principles and observations enunciated by Associated Chief Justice Thurlow in Re Kumar, T-2349-79, judgment dated November 2, 1979, or by Addy, J., in Re Stafford, T-4463-78, judgment dated February 13, 1979, and on which the learned Citizenship Judge relies in her decision. I suggest, however, that these principles and observations were written in the context of the particular facts before the court. To apply them too blindly to the facts before me would close the door to reputable though financially strapped applicants and perhaps, in the same fashion, open them wide to those who can maintain substantial residences in both Forest Hills and Belgravia or, perhaps more to the point, Victoria Peak.
[25]
I should therefore find that in the light of all the circumstances which I have recited, the lack of an actual, physical establishment in Canada during the appellant's absence in Nigeria is no bar to her fulfilling the residency requirements under section 5 of the Citizenship Act.
[26]
In my view of the law and of its application to the case at bar, I should take some comfort in the decision of Grant, D.J., in Re Roberts, 92 D.L.R.(3d) 76, where His Lordship had to deal with a Canadian resident and his wife who, although landed immigrants since 1966, had spent most of the intervening years prior to their citizenship application in 1978, doing missionary work in Argentina on behalf of the United Church of Canada. In reviewing the reasons for judgment in Re Papadogiorgakis (op cit.) and commenting at length on the whole legal concept of "residence", His Lordship said this at page 81:
"On the evidence of Reverend Roberts, I am convinced that at all material times, it was the intention of both applicants to remain outside Canada for such period of time as the United Church requested them to serve as missionaries in Argentina and that they intended then to return and make their permanent home in this country."
[27]
I should reach the same conclusion with respect to the appellant before me. Her appointment in Nigeria on behalf of CUSO's secular endeavours is remarkably similar to Reverend Roberts' appointment in Argentina on behalf of the United Church's missionary endeavours. For purposes of the Citizenship Act, they cannot be distinguished.
[28]
I should allow the appeal and approve the appellant's application for citizenship.
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
[End of document]