 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CF 664)
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> 
Federal Court
Kane, J.
June 17, 2013.
Counsel:
Michael Crane, for the applicant;
Kareena R. Wilding, for the respondent.
Solicitors of Record:
Michael Crane Law Office, Toronto, Ontario, for the applicant;
William F. Pentney, Deputy Attorney General of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, for the respondent.
Summary:
This case is unedited, therefore contains no summary. Any footnotes found in this case will appear below end of document.
[1]
Kane, J.
: The applicant, Ozan Sahin, seeks judicial review pursuant to section 72 of the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act
, SC 2001, c 27 [the Act] of the April 3, 2012 decision of the Refugee Protection Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board [the Board] which found that he was not a Convention Refugee pursuant to section 96 of
IRPA
, nor a person in need of protection pursuant to section 97 of the Act.
[2]
Mr Sahin is a citizen of Turkey who arrived in Canada in November 2010, after spending over two years in the United States of America [USA], and sought refugee protection based on claims of abuse and mistreatment he had suffered in Turkey due to his participation in Alevi-Kurdish activism. Mr Sahin claims he was detained, beaten and tortured in 2006, 2007, and 2008. He also claims to be a conscientious objector to military service in Turkey.
[3]
In 2008, Mr Sahin left Turkey on a five year student Visa to study in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. In 2008 he was charged in Pittsburgh with several criminal charges. He pleaded guilty to one and was convicted of disorderly conduct, sentenced to 90 days probation and fined $300.
[4]
Mr Sahin remained in the USA until November 2010 then travelled to Vancouver and shortly thereafter to Toronto where he claimed refugee status on November 15, 2010.
The Board's decision
[5]
The Board found that there was no reasonable chance or serious possibility that the applicant would be persecuted on a Convention ground if he returned to Turkey or that he would face a risk to his life or be subjected to cruel and unusual punishment.
[6]
The determinative issue for the Board was the applicant's credibility and his failure to provide independent corroborating evidence to support his claim.
[7]
The Board acknowledged that Mr Sahin had participated in Alevi- Kurdish activism but that he did not have a profile that would attract attention for such activities.
[8]
The Board made several credibility findings, reviewed the documentary evidence submitted by Mr Sahin and provided reasons for finding that the specific documents were of little weight and/or failed to establish that he would face a risk if returned to Turkey.
[9]
In addition, the Board determined that the applicant was not a conscientious objector. The Board found that the letter from the Ministry of Defence provided after the hearing, along with the applicant's oral testimony, did not establish that he was a conscientious objector to military service as his service had been deferred to a specific date and he indicated that he would fight on certain conditions. The Board also noted that if he were a conscientious objector, the consequences he would face are addressed by the Turkish law of general application and would not constitute a risk to him pursuant to section 96 or 97.
[10]
The Board also found that the applicant's fear of persecution was not well founded or credible due to his failure to seek asylum in the United States for the two and a half years he remained there. The Board did not believe the applicant's explanation that his lawyer advised him not to seek protection due to his criminal conviction.
[11]
I agree with the applicant and respondent that the Board's decision is somewhat difficult to follow given that the Board revisited its initial decision to refuse to consider additional documents which the applicant sought to submit after the hearing. The Board referred to the lack of the corroborating documents to support the claim and then specifically considered all the documents submitted. I find that when the decision is read as a whole, it is clear that the Board agreed to receive the documents provided shortly after the hearing. The Board considered the documents, but attributed little weight to them.
[12]
The additional documents provided after the hearing included a letter from the Social Democratic Party [SDP], the letter from the Minister of National Defence regarding military service, and a letter from the Alevi Cultural Association.
The Issues
[13]
The applicant submits that the Board's decision was not reasonable with respect to the applicant's credibility. The applicant submits that he provided independent corroborating evidence through the affidavit of his cousin, the letter from his Canadian doctor, the letters from the Pir Sultan organisation and the Alevi Cultural Association, the letter from the Social Democratic Party [SDP] and the letter from the Ministry of National Defence regarding his military service. The applicant submits that the Board erred in not making a clear finding regarding the credibility or authenticity of the letter regarding his military service which the Board accepted after the hearing.
[14]
The applicant further submits that the Board erred in finding that he did not have a subjective fear of persecution in Turkey due to his delay in seeking protection. The applicant notes that he had a five year Visa and he had planned to remain in the US to study. The Board unreasonably rejected the applicant's explanation that he relied on the advice of his US lawyer in not seeking asylum in the US.
[15]
The applicant further submits that the Board erred in finding that he was not a conscientious objector. The applicant's status as a conscientious objector would put him at risk and, even if this did not amount to persecution, it was relevant to the section 97 analysis. The applicant submits that the Board erred in failing to conduct a separate section 97 analysis.
[16]
Finally, the applicant submits that the interpretation at the hearing was not accurate and that this amounts to a breach of procedural fairness.
[17]
The respondent's position is that the Board's decision read as a whole is reasonable. The Board considered each document submitted to support the applicant's claim and reasonably attributed little weight to them and did not find these documents to be sufficiently credible to corroborate the claim. The respondent also submits that the Board reasonably found that the applicant did not have a subjective risk of persecution on a Convention ground pursuant to section 96 nor did he face a risk pursuant to section 97.
Standard of review
[18]
The appropriate standard of review applicable to credibility assessments is that of reasonableness:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [
Lin
] at para 13-14. Given that the Board's analysis of credibility is central to its role as trier of fact, its findings should be given significant deference:
Lin
at para 13;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[19]
It is trite law that the role of the court in judicial review where the standard of reasonableness applies is not to substitute any decision it would have made but to "determine if the outcome falls within 'a range of possible, acceptable outcomes which are defensible in respect of the facts and law': (
Dunsmuir
, at para 47). There might be more than one reasonable outcome. However, as long as the process and the outcome fit comfortably with the principles of justification, transparency and intelligibility, it is not open to a reviewing court to substitute its own view of a preferable outcome":
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[20]
A breach of procedural fairness and other issues raising questions of law are reviewable on the standard of correctness:
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] FCJ no 1326 at para 16;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] FCJ no 875 at para 29;
Canada (Minister of Citizenship and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CarswellNat 434 at para 43;
Dunsmuir,
supra at para 79.
Preliminary Issue - interpretation errors
[21]
The applicant submits that there were errors in the interpretation of Turkish and English at the oral hearing. This assertion was made after leave was granted and by way of an affidavit of another interpreter, who was not cross examined and who did not appear to have a copy of the transcript of the hearing.
[22]
In oral submissions, counsel for the applicant agreed that some of the passages claimed to be inaccurate were not inaccurate. With respect to other passages referred to, I find that there were no significant errors. The wording questioned related to nuances in the language and did not affect the meaning of the terms.
[23]
In addition, as noted by the respondent, any issues with respect to inaccurate interpretation should have been raised at the first opportunity (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[24]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ]). Failure to do so results in a waiver of the right to object to the interpretation on judicial review (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2008] FCJ no 1460 (QL)).
[25]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Snider addressed the same issue where an applicant claimed that his story was not understood due to poor translation and that this was a breach of procedural fairness. Justice Snider noted:
[5] It is well established that a claimant for refugee protection in Canada has the right to "continuous, precise, competent, impartial and contemporaneous" interpretation during the course of the refugee hearing before the Board (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). This is a right that arises pursuant to s. 14 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
, Part I of the
Constitution Act, 1982
, being Schedule B to the
Canada Act 1982
(UK), 1982, c 11 [
Charter
].
[6] Translation cannot be expected to be perfect. Simply asserting that the translation was inadequate may not be sufficient grounds on which to overturn a decision. An applicant must raise the issue at the earliest opportunity or risk a conclusion that the right to procedural fairness was not breached. Moreover, it is not enough to show that there were errors: there will always be errors. A translation mistake will translate into a procedural fairness error where an incorrect translation results in a decision or determinative finding that might have been different had the words been correctly translated.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [2012] FCJ No 169, a case where the Court concluded that the applicant's right to a fair hearing had been breached by the poor quality of translation, Justice Russell described the situation as follows:
The errors in interpretation went to the very essence of the RPD's rejection of the Applicant's claim. The RPD relied, at least in part, on the translation errors to support its conclusion that she was not credible. As the main reason the RPD rejected her claim was its finding that she was not credible, her right to procedural fairness was breached, so the Decision must be reconsidered.
[26]
In the present case the applicant did not raise his concerns about translation at the first opportunity, and more importantly, the passages or words noted to be inaccurate were not significant and did not result in any misunderstanding on the part of the Board.
Credibility and lack of independent corroborating evidence to overcome adverse credibility findings
[27]
The Board found that the applicant was generally not credible and, to overcome that negative credibility finding, sought independent corroborating evidence from the applicant. The Board's findings regarding the applicant's credibility are owed a significant degree of deference.
[28]
The Board found that the applicant is not an individual who had a profile such that he would be targeted for persecution simply because of his involvement in Alevi-Kurd activities. The Board found that the evidence the applicant submitted did not constitute independent corroborating evidence. The Board clearly indicated that it attributed little weight to these documents and the findings of the Board are reasonable.
[29]
The Board reasonably rejected the affidavit of the applicant's cousin because the information was outdated and second hand. The cousin had left Turkey in 1995 and his affidavit was based on information relayed by the applicant's mother. The Board concluded that the affidavit did not support the applicant's claims about his political activities or the problems he faced in Turkey.
[30]
The Board considered the letter provided by the applicant's Canadian doctor which described scars the doctor observed and noted that these were consistent with injuries the applicant had described to his doctor. The Board reasonably attributed little weight to the letter because the doctor examined the applicant years after the alleged incident and could not establish how, when or by whom the scars were inflicted.
[31]
The Board found that the document from the Alevi Association was merely a membership application and reasonably concluded that it did not establish that he was a member or that, if he were a member, he would be at risk.
[32]
Similarly, the letter from the Pir Sultan Abdal Cultural Association was found to only acknowledge and thank the applicant for his support to their youth branch and did not describe any activities or indicate any risk the applicant faced due to his participation.
[33]
The Board noted that the letter from the Ministry of Defence, which was provided after the hearing, was not an original. While the applicant submits that the Board did not make a clear finding about the document, I do not agree. The Board clearly stated that it gave the document low weight and that the provision of the document did not change the Board's earlier finding with respect to the applicant's claim that he was a conscientious objector.
[34]
The Board found that the letter from the Social Democratic Party [SDP] provided after the hearing, which indicated that the applicant had been a member and had participated in cultural and democratic activities, contained little information to suggest that the applicant's life was at risk or would be at risk due to his activities in Turkey. The Board found that the letter did not alleviate its concerns about the well-foundedness of the applicant's claim of persecution, particularly since the applicant had spent two and a half years in the US without seeking protection.
[35]
The Board's conclusions about the SDP letter are reasonable. The Board noted earlier in its reasons (and before it had decided to accept the post hearing documents) that it did not believe the applicant's story that the SDP could not provide the letter and could not set out the problems faced by the applicant in Turkey due to the SDP's fear of the letter being intercepted and resulting in problems for the SDP. The letter was in fact provided and it did mention that Mr Sahin had been detained by the police. However, the letter did not provide any details for the Board to rely on and the Board's finding that the letter was of little weight was reasonable.
[36]
The Board canvassed all of the documents submitted and reasonably concluded that there was no credible evidence to support the applicant's claim that he would face persecution if returned to Turkey.
Lack of subjective fear
[37]
The applicant submits that the Board erred in finding that the applicant did not have a subjective fear of persecution because he did not seek asylum in the United States during his two and a half year stay.
[38]
The Board clearly stated that it disbelieved the applicant's explanation that he relied on the advice of his US lawyer in not seeking asylum in the US. The Board reasonably concluded that his failure to seek asylum detracted from his credibility in claiming he would face persecution upon return to Turkey.
[39]
The Board also found that even if his lawyer had so advised, the applicant had no subjective or objective fear in the first place. The Board noted that his refugee claim in Canada was made two and a half years after his alleged last beating in Turkey and described this as an "afterthought".
[40]
The applicant submits that the Board erred in relying on selective passages from the decision of Justice Pinard in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Matos Quintana
], to conclude that the delay undermined the applicant's subjective fear and that this case can be distinguished.
[41]
The relevant passages are set out below, including the full text of the part paraphrased by the Board:
[4] The panel also found that the fact that the applicant never sought asylum in the United States during his stay there, which was close to three months, undermined his credibility. It found that the applicant had invented his story in order to come to Canada and join his family after his two visa applications had been refused.
....
[6] After reviewing the evidence and hearing counsel for the parties, the panel's findings with respect to the contradictions and omissions attributed to the applicant seem generally reasonable. It is clear that the panel was entitled to compare the applicant's testimony to the information in the newspaper article in question. The fact that the panel did not interpret this article in the same way as the applicant is not an error in itself.
[7] I therefore agree with the respondent that, given the obvious lack of credibility with respect to the claim's central event, it was not unreasonable for the panel to attach no probative value to the exhibits submitted by the applicant. To this end, it is important to reproduce the following excerpt from the decision I rendered in docket  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , 244, the perception that an applicant is not credible on a fundamental element of his claim in fact amounts to a finding that there is no credible evidence sufficient to justify the refugee claim in question.
[8] In particular, there is nothing unreasonable with the way the abduction report and the psychological report were dealt with. The panel was entitled to interpret them as it did. The same can be said for the two reports without letterhead or coat of arms, as the panel noted that it had specialized knowledge of Peruvian documents and that the documents did not possess these elements. With respect to the applicant's two police notices to appear, even though the panel did not find that they were not authentic, I do not find its decision to attach no probative value to them unreasonable. The notices to appear are short and merely state that the applicant must present himself at the police station to answer questions about the murder. I do not find, as alleged by the applicant, that these documents necessarily prove that he was present at the murder.
[9] I further find that it was not unreasonable for the panel to find that the applicant's failure to claim asylum in the United States, where he stayed from April 15 to June 20, 2008, and for which he had a 5-year visa, could be used to undermine his credibility.
[42]
Contrary to the applicant's submissions, I find
Matos Quintana
to be applicable to the present circumstances given that the Board in the present case also made several credibility findings about the applicant, Mr Sahin, and these findings were about the key allegations of detention and beatings he alleged in Turkey.
[43]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> Justice Kelen noted that, "Whether a delay in claiming refugee protection will on its own be sufficient for finding a lack of subjective fear of persecution and disposing of a refugee claim depends upon the facts of the case."
[44]
In the present case, the applicant remained for well over two years in the US without seeking asylum. The Board found that if the applicant had feared persecution in Turkey he would have sought protection shortly after arriving in the US, even though he had a five year visa.
[45]
The finding that the applicant did not have a subjective or objective fear of persecution was reasonably open to the Board to make given the delay and the applicant's overall lack of credibility and failure to provide other credible documents to support his claim.
Conscientious Objector
[46]
The applicant submits that the Board erred in finding that he was not a conscientious objector to military service. The applicant argues that the letter from the Ministry of National Defence which was provided at his own request and indicates that the applicant has no objection to military service until February 21, 2011 is not inconsistent with his submission that he is a conscientious objector.
[47]
The applicant also submits that the Board failed to make a finding about the authenticity of this letter and may have considered it to be fraudulent because it was not an original.
[48]
As I noted above, the Board did accept and consider the letter, although it was provided after the hearing. The Board noted that it was not an original and stated that it attributed low weight to the document based on its content. The Board also referred to the testimony of the applicant regarding his military service. The Board did not accept the applicant's explanation that he did not object to all military service, only military service that would involve him fighting Kurds, but that he still should be considered as a conscientious objector.
[49]
The Board asked the applicant "if Turkey was invaded by a foreign nation would you assist Turkey in defending itself?" The applicant replied:
"It depends, like, the situation of Turkey at that time. I have to first check who is invading Turkey and what for, and if I have equal rights as Turks, if my people have equal rights as Turks, then I will defend Turkey ... but in a country if I have the equal rights in that I'm treated as a human being, then of course I will defend that country. I would be proud of that."
[50]
Based on the oral testimony and the documentary evidence, the Board reasonably found that the applicant is not a conscientious objector.
[51]
I would also note that it is well established that even if the applicant were a conscientious objector, this would not be a basis for his section 96 claim.
[52]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the Court of Appeal held that repeated prosecutions and incarcerations of a conscientious objector for the offence of refusing to do his military service do not constitute persecution on a Convention refugee ground.
Failure to conduct a Section 97 analysis
[53]
The applicant submits that the Board failed to conduct a section 97 analysis by failing to turn its mind to whether the applicant's membership in an opposition political party and a pro-Kurdish group merits protection under section 97
IRPA
. The applicant submits that his status as a conscientious objector would also put him at risk and, even if this did not amount to persecution, it was relevant to the section 97 analysis.
[54]
I do not agree that the Board failed to conduct a section 97 analysis. When the decision is read as a whole, it is apparent that the Board considered both Mr Sahin's risk of persecution under section 96 and his risk under section 97 and found that he would not be at risk due to his political activities nor would he face a risk to his life or to cruel and unusual punishment or to torture if returned to Turkey. The Board noted that even if the applicant was a conscientious objector (which the Board found not to be so) this would not amount to persecution. The Board noted that in Turkey, refusal to serve in the military would result in criminal prosecution, but that this is a law of general application.
[55]
The case law has established that refusal to serve in the military of one's country does not, on its own, justify refugee protection and that failing to comply with a law of general application, although it may result in prosecution, does not constitute persecution.
[56]
These principles were noted by Justice Shore in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[16] The Board noted that while Mr. Ozunal had clearly expressed his aversion to military service, his explanations were not sufficient to lead to the conclusion that he is a conscientious objector. Refusal to serve because one bears aversion to combat or military action cannot in and of itself justify granting refugee status. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL).)
[17] As a conscientious objector, Mr. Ozunal was required to demonstrate not only the possession of such conviction but also the existence of a reasonable chance that he, if conscripted, would be required to participate in military activities considered illegitimate under existing international standards. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] F.C.J. No. 820 (QL), at paragraph 7.)
....
[22] The Board found that the Turkish law is a law of general application and that Mr. Ozunal's claim had to be considered in the context of the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL).
[23] Compulsory military service alone cannot be a ground for Convention refugee status as it is not inherently persecutory. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , above, at paragraph 6.)
[24] Furthermore, prosecution for failing to comply with a law of general application, such as a law requiring military service, does not generally constitute persecution. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] F.C.J. No. 681 (QL), at paragraph 11.)
[57]
Similarly in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Justice Phelan noted that the Turkish law which required military service was of general application and found that the applicant's failure to serve would not amount to persecution. Justice Phelan set out general principles to determine whether a law of general application may constitute persecution:
[14] The Board gave proper consideration to the four principles applicable to determining whether an ordinary law of general application may constitute persecution:
After this review of the law, I now venture to set forth some general propositions relating to the status of an ordinary law of general application in determining the question of persecution:
(1) The statutory definition of Convention refugee makes the intent (or any principal effect) of an ordinary law of general application, rather than the motivation of the claimant, relevant to the existence of persecution.
(2) But the neutrality of an ordinary law of general application, vis-a-vis the five grounds for refugee status, must be judged objectively by Canadian tribunals and courts when required.
(3) In such consideration, an ordinary law of general application, even in non-democratic societies, should, I believe, be given a presumption of validity and neutrality, and the onus should be on a claimant, as is generally the case in refugee cases, to show that the laws are either inherently or for some reason persecutory.
(4) It will not be enough for the claimant to show that a particular regime is generally oppressive but rather that the law in question is persecutory in relation to a Convention ground.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , paras. 18-22 (F.C.A.).
[15] The Board also gave consideration to whether such law or its application constituted cruel and unusual treatment or punishment. The fact that the law is more harsh than laws in Canada or that Turkish prisons are not of the same standard as Canadian prisons is not sufficient to establish this ground under section 97.
[16] It is not for Canada to comment upon or give protection to those who break the law of their own land and would be subject to harsher treatment than in Canada unless such treatment rises to the level of torture, creates a risk to life or is inherently cruel. The requirement to meet one's citizenship duties, even after imprisonment, does not, in and of itself, rise to that level. It was open to the Board to find, on the evidence, that the Turkish law, its application and its consequences, including prison treatment, did not rise to the section 97 threshold.
[58]
In the present case, the Board did not accept that the applicant was a conscientious objector nor did the Board accept that the applicant would face any consequences beyond prosecution in the event that he refused to serve in the military. The Board concluded that the applicant faced no danger if he returned to Turkey and rejected the section 97 claim.
Conclusion
[59]
As noted above, the Board's findings with respect to credibility warrant a high degree of deference. The Board found the applicant to be lacking in credibility and reasonably found that the evidence submitted by the applicant to overcome the negative credibility findings and to support his claim failed to do so. Contrary to the applicant's submissions, the Board did not fail to conduct a section 97 analysis. The Board considered whether the applicant faced a risk of persecution pursuant to section 96 and found that he did not, for the reasons stated, including a lack of subjective fear. With respect to the section 97 claim, the Board reasonably found that the applicant would not face any risk upon his return, even if he were considered a conscientious objector, as the law was one of general application.
JUDGMENT
[60]
THIS COURT'S JUDGMENT is that
:
1. The application for judicial review is dismissed;
2. No question is certified
.........................
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  demandeur, Ozan Sahin, demande le contrôle judiciaire, en vertu de l'article 72 de la
Loi sur l'immigration et la protection des réfugiés
, LC 2001, ch 27 [la LIPR ou la Loi], de la décision de la Section de la protection des réfugiés de la Commission de l'immigration et de la protection des réfugiés [la Commission], par laquelle la Commission a conclu que le demandeur n'était pas un réfugié au sens de la Convention au sens de l'article 96 de la LIPR, ni une personne à protéger au sens de l'article 97 de la Loi.
[2]
M Sahin est un citoyen de la Turquie qui est arrivé au Canada en novembre 2010, après avoir passé plus de deux ans aux États-Unis, et qui a présenté une demande d'asile fondée sur des allégations d'abus et de mauvais traitement qu'il aurait subis en Turquie en raison de sa participation à des activités de groupes activistes kurdes alevis. M. Sahin soutient qu'il a été détenu, battu et torturé en 2006, 2007 et 2008. Il soutient aussi qu'il est un objecteur de conscience au service militaire en Turquie.
[3]
En 2008, M. Sahin a quitté la Turquie muni d'un visa d'étudiant de cinq ans pour étudier à Pittsburgh (Pennsylvanie), aux États-Unis. En 2008, plusieurs accusations au criminel ont été déposées contre lui à Pittsburgh. Il a plaidé coupable à l'une de ces accusations et a été déclaré coupable d'inconduite. Il a été condamné à une probation de 90 jours et à payer une amende de 300 $.
[4]
M. Sahin est resté aux États-Unis jusqu'en novembre 2010, auquel moment il s'est rendu à Vancouver, puis à Toronto, où il a demandé l'asile le 15 novembre 2010.
La décision de la Commission
[5]
La Commission a conclu qu'il n'y avait pas de risque raisonnable ni de possibilité sérieuse que le demandeur soit persécuté pour un motif lié à la Convention s'il retournait en Turquie, ni qu'il y serait exposé à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités.
[6]
La question déterminante pour la Commission était la crédibilité du demandeur et son défaut de fournir des éléments de preuve indépendants corroborant ses allégations.
[7]
La Commission a reconnu que M. Sahin avait bien participé à des activités de groupes activistes kurdes alévis, mais elle a conclu qu'il n'avait pas un profil qui attirerait l'attention pour avoir participé à de telles activités.
[8]
La Commission a tiré plusieurs conclusions de crédibilité, a examiné la preuve documentaire présentée par M. Sahin et a fourni des motifs pour sa conclusion selon laquelle les documents avaient peu de poids ou n'établissaient pas qu'il serait exposé à un risque s'il retournait en Turquie.
[9]
De plus, la Commission a conclu que le demandeur n'était pas un objecteur de conscience. La Commission a conclu que la lettre du ministère de la défense, fournie après l'audience, ainsi que le témoignage oral du demandeur, n'établissaient pas qu'il était un objecteur de conscience au service militaire, parce que son service avait été reporté à une date précise et qu'il avait déclaré qu'il prendrait les armes sous certaines conditions. La Commission a aussi noté que, s'il était un objecteur de conscience, les conséquences qu'il subirait sont prévues par une loi turque d'application générale et ne constitueraient pas un risque au sens des articles 96 et 97.
[10]
La Commission a aussi conclu que la crainte de persécution du demandeur n'était pas fondée ni crédible parce qu'il n'avait pas demandé l'asile aux États-Unis alors qu'il y était resté pendant deux ans et demi. La Commission n'a pas cru l'explication du demandeur selon laquelle son avocat lui avait conseillé de ne pas demander l'asile en raison de sa déclaration de culpabilité.
[11]
Je conviens avec le demandeur et le défendeur que la décision de la Commission est quelque peu difficile à suivre, parce que la Commission a rouvert sa décision initiale de refuser d'examiner des documents supplémentaires que le demandeur souhaitait présenter après l'audience. La Commission a mentionné le manque de documents corroborant les allégations du demandeur et elle a ensuite examiné précisément tous les documents que ce dernier a soumis. Je suis d'avis que, lorsque la décision est prise dans son ensemble, il est clair que la Commission a accepté de recevoir les documents fournis peu après l'audience. La Commission a examiné les documents, mais leur a attribué peu de poids.
[12]
Les documents supplémentaires fournis après l'audience comprenaient une lettre du Parti social-démocrate [SDP], une lettre du ministre de la défense nationale au sujet du service militaire et une lettre de l'association culturelle alévie.
Les questions en litige
[13]
Le demandeur soutient que la décision de la Commission n'était pas raisonnable en ce qui a trait à la crédibilité. Le demandeur soutient qu'il a fourni des éléments de preuve indépendants corroborant ses allégations, soit l'affidavit de son cousin, la lettre de son médecin canadien, les lettres de l'organisation Pir Sultan et de l'Association culturelle alévie, la lettre du Parti social-démocrate [SDP] et la lettre du ministre de la défense nationale au sujet de son service militaire. Le demandeur soutient que la Commission a commis une erreur en ne tirant pas de conclusion claire au sujet de la crédibilité ou de l'authenticité de la lettre au sujet de son service militaire, qu'elle a acceptée après l'audience.
[14]
Le demandeur soutient aussi que la Commission a commis une erreur en concluant qu'il n'avait pas de crainte subjective de persécution en Turquie parce qu'il avait tardé à demander l'asile. Le demandeur soutient qu'il avait un visa de cinq ans et qu'il avait prévu rester aux États-Unis pour étudier. La Commission a déraisonnablement rejeté l'explication du demandeur selon laquelle il s'était fié aux conseils de son avocat aux États-Unis et n'avait pas demandé l'asile dans ce pays.
[15]
Le demandeur soutient aussi que la Commission a commis une erreur en concluant qu'il n'était pas un objecteur de conscience. Le statut du demandeur à titre d'objecteur de conscience l'exposerait à un risque et, même si cela ne constitue pas de la persécution, il s'agit d'une question pertinente quant à l'analyse prévue à l'article 97. Le demandeur soutient que la Commission a commis une erreur en n'effectuant pas une analyse distincte relative à l'article 97.
[16]
Enfin, le demandeur soutient que l'interprétation fournie à l'audience n'était pas exacte et que cela constitue un manquement à l'équité procédurale.
[17]
Le défendeur est d'avis que la décision de la Commission, prise dans son ensemble, est raisonnable. La Commission a examiné chaque document présenté à l'appui de la demande du demandeur, leur a raisonnablement attribué peu de poids et a conclu que ces documents n'étaient pas suffisamment crédibles pour appuyer la demande. Le défendeur soutient aussi que la Commission a raisonnablement conclu que le demandeur n'était pas exposé à un risque subjectif de persécution fondé sur un motif prévu par la Convention, au sens de l'article 96, et qu'il ne serait pas exposé à un risque au sens de l'article 97.
La norme de contrôle
[18]
La norme de contrôle applicable à l'analyse de la crédibilité est la norme de la décision raisonnable:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> à 20;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> [
Lin
], aux paragraphes 13 et 14. L'analyse de la crédibilité par la Commission est un élément essentiel de son rôle de juge des faits et ses conclusions en la matière devraient bénéficier d'une retenue appréciable:
Lin
, au paragraphe 13;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[19]
Il est bien établi en droit que le rôle de la Cour dans un contrôle judiciaire pour lequel la norme de la décision raisonnable s'applique n'est pas de substituer la décision qu'elle aurait prise à celle visée par le contrôle, mais de « déterminer si celle-ci fait partie des "issues possibles acceptables pouvant se justifier au regard des faits et du droit" (
Dunsmuir
, par. 47). Il peut exister plus d'une issue raisonnable. Néanmoins, si le processus et l'issue en cause cadrent bien avec les principes de justification, de transparence et d'intelligibilité, la cour de révision ne peut y substituer l'issue qui serait à son avis préférable »:
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[20]
Un manquement à l'équité procédurale et d'autres questions soulevant des questions de droit sont assujetties à la norme de la décision correcte:
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2010] ACF no 1326, au paragraphe 16;
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2009] ACF no 875, au paragraphe 29;
Canada (Ministre de la Citoyenneté et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  CarswellNat 434, au paragraphe 43;
Dunsmuir,
précité, au paragraphe 79.
Question préliminaire - les erreurs dans l'interprétation
[21]
Le demandeur soutient qu'il y avait des erreurs dans l'interprétation du turc et de l'anglais à l'audience. Cette allégation a été faite après que l'autorisation ait été accordée et se trouvait dans un affidavit d'un autre interprète, qui n'a pas été contre interrogé et qui ne semble pas avoir eu de copie de la transcription de l'audience.
[22]
Dans des observations orales, l'avocat du demandeur a reconnu que certains de passage qui ont été ciblés comme étant inexact ne l'étaient pas réellement. En ce qui a trait aux autres passages mentionnés, je suis d'avis qu'il n'y avait pas d'erreur importante. La formulation contestée portait sur des nuances dans le langage et n'affectait pas le sens des termes.
[23]
De plus, comme l'a noté le défendeur, tout problème d'interprétation inexacte aurait dû être soulevé à la première occasion (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ).
[24]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL) [ <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ], au paragraphe 27). Par son abstention, le demandeur est présumé avoir renoncé à son droit de contester la qualité de l'interprétation au contrôle judiciaire (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2008] A.C.F. no 1460 (QL), au paragraphe 31).
[25]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la juge Snider a traité la même question, dans une situation où le demandeur soutenait que son témoignage n'avait pas été compris en raison d'une mauvaise traduction et qu'il s'agissait là d'un manquement à l'équité procédurale. La juge Snider a expliqué:
[5] Il est bien établi qu'un demandeur d'asile au Canada a droit à une interprétation qui satisfait à la « norme de la continuité, de la fidélité, de la compétence, de l'impartialité et de la concomitance » à l'occasion de l'audience relative à une demande d'asile devant la Commission (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ). Ce droit est prévu à l'article 14 de la
Charte canadienne des droits et libertés
, partie I de la
Loi constitutionnelle de 1982
, constituant l'annexe B de la
Loi de 1982 sur le Canada (R-U)
, 1982, c 11 [la Charte].
On ne saurait s'attendre à ce qu'une traduction soit parfaite. Simplement affirmer que la traduction était inadéquate ne peut être un motif suffisant pour annuler une décision. Le demandeur doit soulever la question à la première occasion ou courir le risque de voir la Cour conclure qu'il n'y a pas eu manquement à l'équité procédurale. De plus, il ne suffit pas de montrer qu'il y avait des erreurs: il y aura toujours des erreurs. Une erreur de traduction deviendra une erreur commise sur le plan de l'équité procédurale dans les cas où une traduction inexacte donne lieu à une décision ou à une conclusion déterminante qui aurait pu être différente si les mots avaient été traduits correctement.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2012] ACF no 169, au paragraphe 51, une affaire dans laquelle la Cour a conclu que le droit de la demanderesse à une audience équitable n'avait pas été respecté en raison de la piètre qualité de la traduction, le juge Russell a décrit la situation comme suit:
Les erreurs commises par l'interprète ont joué un rôle fondamental dans la décision de la SPR de rejeter la demande d'asile de la demanderesse. La SPR s'est appuyée, à tout le moins en partie, sur les erreurs de traduction pour conclure que la demanderesse n'était pas crédible. Comme la principale raison pour laquelle la SPR a rejeté la demande d'asile de la demanderesse était sa conclusion selon laquelle celle-ci n'était pas crédible, le droit à l'équité procédurale de la demanderesse n'a pas été respecté, de sorte que la décision doit être réexaminée.
[26]
En l'espèce, le demandeur n'a pas soulevé ses préoccupations au sujet de la traduction à la première occasion, et, fait plus important, les passages ou les mots qu'il juge inexacts n'étaient pas importants et n'ont pas entraîné de malentendu de la part de la Commission.
La crédibilité et le manque d'éléments de preuve indépendants corroborant les allégations pour surmonter les conclusions négatives au sujet de la crédibilité
[27]
La Commission a conclu que le demandeur n'était généralement pas crédible et, pour surmonter les conclusions négatives au sujet de la crédibilité, elle lui a demandé de fournir des éléments de preuve indépendants pour corroborer ses allégations. Les conclusions de la Commission au sujet de la crédibilité du demandeur devraient bénéficier d'une retenue appréciable .
[28]
La Commission a conclu que le demandeur n'est pas une personne dont le profil est tel qu'il serait ciblé et persécuté du seul fait de sa participation à des activités kurdes-alévies. La Commission a conclu que les éléments de preuve que le demandeur avait présentés ne constituaient pas une preuve corroborante indépendante. La Commission a clairement précisé qu'elle accordait peu de poids à ces documents et les conclusions de la Commission sont raisonnables.
[29]
La Commission a raisonnablement rejeté l'affidavit du cousin du demandeur, parce que l'information était périmée et avait été obtenue par personne interposée. Le cousin a quitté la Turquie en 1995 et son affidavit était fondé sur des renseignements fournis par la mère du demandeur. La Commission a conclu que l'affidavit n'appuyait pas les allégations du demandeur au sujet de ses activités politiques et des problèmes auxquels il avait fait face en Turquie.
[30]
La Commission a examiné la lettre fournie par le médecin canadien du demandeur, qui décrivait les cicatrices qu'il avait examinées et qui précisait que ces cicatrices coïncidaient avec les blessures que le demandeur lui avait décrites. La Commission a raisonnablement attribué peu de poids à la lettre, parce que le médecin a examiné le demandeur des années après que l'incident allégué a eu lieu et qu'il ne pouvait pas établir de quelle façon, à quel moment et par qui les blessures avaient été infligées.
[31]
La Commission a conclu que le document de l'Association alévie n'était qu'une simple demande d'adhésion et a raisonnablement conclu qu'il n'établissait pas que le demandeur était membre ou que, s'il était bien membre, il s'exposait à un risque.
[32]
Dans un même ordre d'idées, la Commission a conclu que la lettre de l'Association pour la culture de Pir Sultan Abdal ne faisait que reconnaître l'appui du demandeur envers leur section pour les jeunes et l'en remercier, et qu'elle ne décrivait pas d'activité à laquelle il aurait participé ou ne mentionnait pas de risque auquel le demandeur faisait face en raison de sa participation à cette association.
[33]
La Commission a noté que la lettre du ministre de la défense, qui a été présentée après l'audience, n'était pas un original. Bien que le demandeur soutienne que la Commission n'a pas tiré de conclusion claire au sujet du document, je ne suis pas du même avis. La Commission a clairement déclaré qu'elle accordait peu de poids au document et que la présentation de ce document ne changeait pas sa conclusion précédente en ce qui a trait aux allégations du demandeur selon lesquelles il était un objecteur de conscience.
[34]
La Commission a conclu que la lettre du Parti social-démocrate [SDP], présentée après l'audience, qui précisait que le demandeur était membre et qu'il avait participé à des activités culturelles et démocratiques, contenait peu de renseignements permettant de conclure que le demandeur était exposé à un risque sa vie, ou qu'il le serait, en raison de ses activités en Turquie. La Commission a conclu que la lettre ne dissipait pas ses préoccupations au sujet du bien-fondé des allégations de persécution du demandeur, en particulier puisque le demandeur était resté deux ans et demi aux États-Unis sans y demander l'asile.
[35]
Les conclusions de la Commission au sujet de la lettre du SDP sont raisonnables. La Commission a noté plus tôt dans ses motifs (et avant qu'elle décide d'accepter les documents présentés après l'audience) qu'elle ne croyait pas le récit du demandeur au sujet du fait que le SDP était incapable de fournir la lettre et qu'il ne pouvait pas établir les problèmes auxquels le demandeur serait exposé en Turquie en raison de la crainte du SDP que la lettre soit interceptée et que cela cause des problèmes pour le parti. La lettre a pourtant été fournie et elle mentionnait que M. Sahin avait été détenu par la police. Cependant, la lettre ne fournissait aucun détail sur lequel la Commission pouvait se fonder et la conclusion de la Commission selon laquelle la lettre avait peu de poids était raisonnable.
[36]
La Commission a examiné tous les documents fournis et a raisonnablement conclu qu'il n'y avait aucune preuve crédible à l'appui des allégations du demandeur selon lesquelles il serait persécuté s'il retournait en Turquie.
L'absence de crainte subjective
[37]
Le demandeur soutient que la Commission a commis une erreur en concluant qu'il n'avait pas une crainte subjective de persécution, parce qu'il n'avait pas demandé l'asile aux États-Unis au cours des deux ans et demi pendant lesquels il y a séjourné.
[38]
La Commission a clairement déclaré qu'elle ne croyait pas l'explication du demandeur selon laquelle il s'était fondé sur les conseils de son avocat aux États-Unis pour ne pas demander l'asile dans ce pays. La Commission a raisonnablement conclu que son défaut de demander l'asile portait atteinte à sa crédibilité et à son allégation selon laquelle il serait persécuté s'il retournait en Turquie.
[39]
La Commission a aussi conclu que, même si son avocat lui avait réellement donné ces conseils, le demandeur n'avait pas au départ de crainte subjective ou objective. La Commission a noté que sa demande d'asile au Canada a été présentée deux ans et demi après la dernière fois où il aurait été battu en Turquie et elle a déclaré qu'il avait présenté sa demande d'asile « après avoir simplement repensé à cette possibilité ».
[40]
Le demandeur soutient que la Commission a commis une erreur en se fondant sur des passages sélectifs de la décision du juge  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [
Matos Quintana
], pour conclure que le retard minait sa crainte subjective, et il soutient que l'affaire en l'espèce se distingue de la décision du juge Pinard.
[41]
Les passages pertinents de cette décision sont reproduits ci-dessous, y compris le texte complet de la partie que la Commission a paraphrasé:
[4] Le tribunal a en outre trouvé que le fait que le demandeur n'ait jamais demandé l'asile aux États-Unis lors de son séjour de près de trois mois là-bas minait sa crédibilité. Il a conclu que le demandeur avait inventé son histoire afin de venir au Canada y rejoindre sa famille, après que ses deux demandes de visa eurent été refusées.
[...]
[6] Après révision de la preuve et audition des procureurs des parties, les conclusions du tribunal quant aux contradictions et omissions attribuées au demandeur m'apparaissent généralement raisonnables. Il est clair que le tribunal avait le droit de comparer le témoignage du demandeur avec l'information contenue dans l'article de journal en question. Le fait que le tribunal n'ait pas interprété cet article de la même façon que l'a fait le demandeur n'équivaut pas en soi à une erreur.
[7] Je suis donc d'accord avec le défendeur que vu l'absence manifeste de crédibilité vis-à-vis l'événement central de la demande, il n'était pas déraisonnable pour le tribunal de ne pas accorder de valeur probante à l'ensemble des pièces déposées par le demandeur. Il importe, à cet égard, de reproduire l'extrait suivant de la décision que j'ai rendue dans le dossier  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , à la page 244, la perception qu'un requérant n'est pas crédible sur un élément fondamental de sa revendication équivaut en fait à la conclusion qu'il n'existe aucun élément crédible suffisant pour justifier la revendication du statut de réfugié en cause.
[8] Il n'y a notamment rien de déraisonnable dans le traitement du rapport de l'enlèvement et le rapport du psychologue. Le tribunal était en droit de les interpréter comme il l'a fait. Il en va de même pour les deux rapports sans en-tête et armoiries, puisque le tribunal a noté avoir une connaissance spécialisée des documents péruviens et que les documents ne comportent pas ces éléments. Quant aux deux convocations du demandeur par la police, bien que le tribunal n'ait pas trouvé qu'elles n'étaient pas authentiques, je ne trouve pas déraisonnable sa décision de ne leur donner aucune valeur probante. Les convocations sont courtes et disent simplement que le demandeur doit se présenter à la police pour répondre aux questions concernant le meurtre. Je ne trouve pas, comme allègue le demandeur, que ces documents prouvent nécessairement qu'il était présent lors du meurtre.
[9] Je conclus enfin qu'il n'était pas déraisonnable pour le tribunal de trouver que le défaut par le demandeur de revendiquer le statut de réfugié aux États-Unis, où il a séjourné du 15 avril au 20 juin 2008 et d'où il tenait un visa de cinq ans, pouvait servir à miner sa crédibilité.
[42]
Contrairement aux observations du demandeur, je suis d'avis que la décision
Matos Quintana
s'applique aux circonstances en l'espèce, parce que la Commission en l'espèce a aussi tiré plusieurs conclusions de crédibilité au sujet du demandeur, M. Sahin, et que ces conclusions portaient sur les allégations principales du demandeur selon lesquelles il avait été détenu et battu en Turquie.
[43]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> le juge Kelen a noté que: « C'est en fonction des faits d'espèce qu'on déterminera si le caractère tardif d'une demande d'asile antérieure est suffisant pour pouvoir conclure en l'absence de crainte subjective de persécution et rejeter une demande d'asile. »
[44]
Dans l'affaire en l'espèce, le demandeur est resté plus de deux ans aux États-Unis sans y demander l'asile. La Commission a conclu que, si le demandeur craignait d'être persécuté en Turquie, il aurait demandé la protection des États-Unis peu après son arrivée, même s'il était muni d'un visa de cinq ans.
[45]
La conclusion de la Commission selon laquelle le demandeur n'avait pas de crainte subjective ou objective de persécution était raisonnable, compte tenu du délai et du manque général de crédibilité du demandeur, ainsi que de son défaut de fournir d'autres documents crédibles à l'appui de ses allégations.
L'objection de conscience
[46]
Le demandeur soutient que le Commission a commis une erreur en concluant qu'il n'était pas un objecteur de conscience au service militaire. Le demandeur soutient que la lettre du ministre de la défense nationale, qui a été présentée à sa propre demande et qui montre que le demandeur n'avait aucune objection au service militaire avant le 21 février 2011, n'est pas incompatible avec son allégation selon laquelle il est un objecteur de conscience.
[47]
Le demandeur soutient aussi que la Commission a omis de tirer une conclusion au sujet de l'authenticité de cette lettre et qu'elle a possiblement cru qu'elle était frauduleuse parce qu'il ne s'agissait pas d'un original.
[48]
Comme je l'ai mentionné, la Commission a accepté et a examiné la lettre, même si elle a été présentée après l'audience. La Commission a noté qu'il ne s'agissait pas d'un original et elle a déclaré qu'elle y accordait peu de poids en raison de son contenu. La Commission a aussi mentionné le témoignage du demandeur au sujet de son service militaire. La Commission n'a pas accepté l'explication du demandeur selon laquelle il ne s'opposait pas à tous les types de service militaire, seulement le service militaire qui l'obligerait à combattre des Kurdes, mais qu'il devrait quand même être considéré comme étant un objecteur de conscience.
[49]
La Commission a demandé au demandeur [traduction] « si la Turquie était envahie par un autre pays, aideriez-vous la Turquie à se défendre? » Le demandeur a répondu comme suit:
[traduction]
Ça dépend, par exemple, de la situation de la Turquie à ce moment-là. Je dois d'abord voir qui envahit la Turquie et pour quelle raison, et si j'ai les mêmes droits que les Turcs, si mon peuple a les mêmes droits que les Turcs, alors je défendrais la Turquie ... Mais dans un pays, si j'ai les mêmes droits dans le sens où je suis traité comme un être humain, alors bien entendu, je défendrais ce pays. Je serais fier de ça.
[50]
Compte tenu du témoignage oral et de la preuve documentaire, la Commission a raisonnablement conclu que le demandeur n'est pas un objecteur de conscience.
[51]
Je tiens aussi à noter qu'il est bien établi que, même si le demandeur était un objecteur de conscience, cela ne serait pas un fondement pour sa demande au sens de l'article 96.
[52]
Dans l'arrêt
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  la Cour d'appel a conclu que le fait d'intenter des poursuites et d'incarcérer un objecteur de conscience qui refuse d'effectuer son service militaire ne constitue pas de la persécution fondée sur un motif visé par la Convention sur les réfugiés.
Défaut de procéder à une analyse selon l'article 97
[53]
Le demandeur soutient que la Commission a omis d'effectuer une analyse selon l'article 97 en n'examinant pas la question de savoir si l'appartenance du demandeur à un parti politique d'opposition et un groupe pro kurde justifie la protection au sens de l'article 97 de la LIPR. Le demandeur soutient que son statut à titre d'objecteur de conscience l'exposerait aussi à un risque et que, même si cela ne constitue pas de la persécution, il s'agit d'une question pertinente quant à l'analyse selon l'article 97.
[54]
Je ne suis pas d'avis que la Commission a omis de procéder à une analyse selon l'article 97. Lorsqu'on lit la décision dans son ensemble, il est évident que la Commission a examiné tant le risque de persécution de M. Sahin au sens de l'article 96 qu'au sens de l'article 97, et elle a conclu qu'il ne serait pas exposé à un risque en raison de ses activités politiques, ni qu'il serait exposé à une menace à sa vie ou au risque de traitements ou peines cruels et inusités s'il retournait en Turquie. La Commission a noté que, même si le demandeur était un objecteur de conscience (elle a conclu que ce n'était pas le cas), cela ne constituerait pas de la persécution. La Commission a noté qu'en Turquie, le refus d'effectuer le service militaire entraîne une poursuite au criminel, mais que cela est prévu par une loi d'application générale.
[55]
La jurisprudence a établi que le refus d'effectuer le service militaire dans son pays ne justifie pas, en soi, qu'on accorde l'asile à un demandeur et que le défaut de se conformer à une loi d'application générale, même si cela entraîne une poursuite judiciaire, ne constitue pas de la persécution.
[56]
Le juge Shore a noté ces principes dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> :
[16] La Commission a souligné que, bien que M. Ozunal ait clairement exprimé son aversion pour le service militaire, ses explications ne permettaient pas de conclure qu'il est un objecteur de conscience. Le refus d'une personne de faire son service militaire parce qu'elle tient le combat ou l'action militaire en aversion ne peut en soi justifier l'octroi du statut de réfugié. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL).)
[17] En tant qu'objecteur de conscience, M. Ozunal devait établir non seulement qu'il possédait ce genre de conviction, mais aussi qu'il y avait une possibilité raisonnable qu'on l'oblige, s'il était conscrit, à participer à des activités militaires illégitimes suivant les normes internationales. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] A.C.F. no 820 (QL), au paragraphe 7.)
[...]
[22] La Commission a conclu que la loi turque était une loi d'application générale et que la revendication de M. Ozunal devait être examinée dans le contexte de l'arrêt de la Cour d'appel fédérale dans
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (QL).
[23] On ne peut fonder le statut de réfugié au sens de la Convention sur le seul service militaire obligatoire puisqu'il ne s'agit pas, en soi, de persécution. ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , précité, au paragraphe 6.)
[24] En outre, le fait d'intenter des poursuites pour défaut de se conformer à une loi d'application générale, comme une loi imposant le service militaire, ne constitue généralement pas de la persécution. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  [2005] A.C.F. no 681 (QL), au paragraphe 11.)
[57]
Dans un même ordre d'idées, dans la décision
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  le juge Phelan a noté que la loi turque qui exige le service militaire était une loi d'application générale et il a conclu que le défaut du demandeur d'effectuer ce service militaire ne constituerait pas de la persécution. Le juge Phelan a établi des principes généraux afin de déterminer si une loi d'application générale pouvait constituer de la persécution:
[14] La Commission a vraiment tenu compte des quatre principes qui s'appliquent lorsqu'il s'agit de décider si une loi ordinaire d'application générale peut constituer de la persécution:
Après cet examen du droit, je m'aventure maintenant à exposer quelques propositions générales relatives au statut d'une loi ordinaire d'application générale lorsqu'il s'agit de trancher la question de la persécution:
(1) La définition légale de réfugié au sens de la Convention rend l'objet (ou tout effet principal) d'une loi ordinaire d'application générale, plutôt que la motivation du demandeur, applicable à l'existence d'une persécution.
(2) Mais la neutralité d'une loi ordinaire d'application générale, à l'égard des cinq motifs d'obtention du statut de réfugié, doit être jugée objectivement par les cours et les tribunaux canadiens lorsque cela est nécessaire.
(3) Dans cet examen, une loi ordinaire d'application générale, même dans des sociétés non démocratiques, devrait, je crois, être présumée valide et neutre, et le demandeur devrait être tenu, comme c'est généralement le cas dans les affaires de réfugiés, de montrer que les lois revêtent, ou bien en soi ou pour une autre raison, un caractère de persécution.
(4) Il ne suffira pas au demandeur de montrer qu'un régime donné est généralement tyrannique. Il devra plutôt prouver que la loi en question a un caractère de persécution par rapport à un motif énoncé dans la Convention. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , paragraphes 18 à 22 (C.A.F.).
[15] La Commission a également examiné si une telle loi ou son application constituait des traitements ou peines cruels et inusités. Le fait que la loi en Turquie soit plus stricte que la loi au Canada ou que les prisons turques ne respectent pas les mêmes normes que les prisons canadiennes ne suffit pas à établir ce motif prévu à l'article 97.
[16] Le Canada n'a pas à formuler des observations ou à protéger ceux qui enfreignent la loi de leur pays et qui seraient soumis à un traitement plus sévère qu'au Canada à moins que ce traitement comporte de la torture, crée une menace à la vie ou soit fondamentalement cruel. L'exigence de remplir ses devoirs de citoyen, même après une peine d'emprisonnement, ne répond pas en soi à ces critères. Il était loisible à la Commission de conclure, d'après la preuve, que la loi turque, son application et ses conséquences, notamment les conditions carcérales, ne franchissaient pas le seuil établi par l'article 97.
[58]
En l'espèce, la Commission n'a pas accepté que le demandeur était un objecteur de conscience et elle n'a pas accepté que le demandeur subirait des conséquences, outre une poursuite judiciaire, s'il refusait d'effectuer son service militaire. La Commission a conclu que le demandeur ne serait pas exposé à un danger s'il retournait en Turquie, et elle a rejeté la demande fondée sur l'article 97.
Dispositif
[59]
Comme je l'ai mentionné, les conclusions de la Commission en ce qui a trait à la crédibilité bénéficient d'une retenue appréciable. La Commission a conclu que le demandeur n'était pas crédible et elle a raisonnablement conclu que la preuve soumise par le demandeur pour réfuter les conclusions défavorables quant à la crédibilité et pour appuyer ses allégations n'y est pas parvenue. Contrairement aux observations du demandeur, la Commission n'a pas omis de procéder à un examen selon l'article 97. La Commission a examiné si le demandeur risquait d'être persécuté, au sens de l'article 96, et elle a conclu que ce n'était pas le cas, pour les motifs établis, y compris un manque de crainte subjective. En ce qui a trait à la demande fondée sur l'article 97, la Commission a raisonnablement conclu que le demandeur ne serait pas exposé à un risque à son retour, même s'il était perçu comme étant un objecteur de conscience, parce que la loi est une loi d'application générale.
JUGEMENT
[60]
LA COUR STATUE que:
1. La demande de contrôle judiciaire est rejetée;
2. Aucune question n'est certifiée.
[End of document]