[1]
Strayer, J.
: This is an application under s. 419(1)(a) of the Rules to strike out portions of the statement of claim. As presented by counsel for the defendants, the relief requested is the deletion of all the plaintiffs except Fernando E. Ricafort, all of the individual defendants, and any contractual claim based on alleged wrongful dismissal of the plaintiff Fernando E. Ricafort.
[2]
The plaintiff's initial objection to this application to strike is that the court should not entertain it since the defendants have already filed a statement of defence. I shall deal with this issue first. The defendants filed a statement of defence on September 1, 1988, in which they took the position that the statement of claim did not disclose a reasonable cause of action on behalf of any of the plaintiffs other than Fernando E. Ricafort, that the court has no jurisdiction over the personal defendants, and further that there was no reasonable cause of action shown in relation to the dismissal of the plaintiff Fernando Ricafort from the Public Service because his appointment was at pleasure. On the same day as filing their defence the defendants filed the notice of motion making this application to strike under subrule 419(1). I am satisfied that the defendants are entitled to make this application as they raised the same objections to the statement of claim in their statement of defence, there was no delay in filing the application to strike, and in part the application is based on there being a lack of jurisdiction in the court. Rule 419 permits the court "at any stage of an action" to order any pleading struck out. While there are many situations where a party has not been allowed to have a pleading struck out to which he has previously pleaded in response, the present circumstances are well within those permitted by the jurisprudence for an application to be made notwithstanding the filing of a defence by the applicant [see footnote 1].
[3]
Looking at the substance of the statement of claim, I must first observe that the nature of the plaintiffs' claim is badly obscured by their pleading. A simple reading of the statement of claim does not clearly disclose the nature of the cause of action. It was explained by counsel for the plaintiffs, and I accept for these purposes, that the statement of claim alleges tort, breach of contract, and some kind of liability (perhaps tortious in nature) for discrimination practised against the plaintiff Fernando B. Ricafort. I shall deal with each of these in turn.
[4]
With respect to the alleged torts, these appear to include intentional infliction of mental suffering, mental anguish, intimidation, conversion, inducement of breach of contract (this by the individual defendants), and conspiracy to commit these torts. With respect to these claims, the defendant Crown accepts that the statement of claim may at least allege such torts committed by the individual defendants for which, if proven, the Crown could be vicariously liable. While, for reasons which I will give below, I do not believe that the statement of claim in law discloses any cause of action for breach of contract and therefore cannot involve a maintainable action for inducement of breach of contract, I am unable to say that the statement of claim does not disclose other tortious causes of action. It appears to me at least arguable from the jurisprudence that some or all of the plaintiffs might be able to make out a claim in tort if they can prove the facts alleged. If the claim is lacking in details in respect of, for example, foreseeability of injury to any or all of the plaintiffs, the Crown can request particulars or explore this matter in discovery. Therefore, in respect of the tort claim the statement of claim cannot be struck out insofar as the Crown is the defendant.
[5]
It is argued on behalf of the individual defendants, however, that they are not subject to the jurisdiction of this court in such matters of tort. I am inclined to think that there is a statutory ground of jurisdiction with respect to these defendants by virtue of s. 17(4)(b) of the Federal Court Act which gives this court concurrent original jurisdiction:
"... in proceedings in which relief is sought against any person for anything done or omitted to be done in the performance of his duties as an officer or a servant of the Crown" [see footnote 2].
However, in order for this court to deal with the matter the claim must be based on a "law of Canada" within the meaning of s. 101 of the Constitution Act, 1867 [see footnote 3]. There is no such law of Canada applicable to support these claims in tort. Section 3 of the Crown Liability Act [see footnote 4] provides that:
"... [t]he Crown is liable in tort for the damages for which if it were a private person of full age and capacity, it would be liable
(a) in respect of a tort committed by a servant of the Crown ..."
This adopts as federal law, by reference, the relevant provincial law of tort or delict but only with respect to the vicarious liability of the Crown itself. It does not adopt as federal law provincial laws imposing tortious liability on servants of the Crown. Therefore there is no law of Canada to support a claim in this court against the individual defendants and they must be struck out of the statement of claim as far as the claims in tort are concerned.
[6]
With respect to the plaintiffs' claim in contract for the wrongful dismissal of Fernando E. Ricafort, I am satisfied that there is no cause of action disclosed by the statement of claim. Section 24 of the Public Service Employment Act [see footnote 5] provides as follows:
"The tenure of office of an employee is during the pleasure of Her Majesty, subject to this and any other Act and the regulations thereunder and, unless some other period of employment is specified, for an indeterminate period."
It has been frequently held that in the absence of special circumstances, the remedies of a dismissed public servant lie elsewhere and not in actions for wrongful dismissal [see footnote 6]. A special circumstance might exist, for example, where an employee was appointed for a fixed term [see footnote 7] but that is not what the plaintiffs are alleging here. Admittedly the statement of claim is somewhat ambiguous in not spelling out the terms of appointment, but paragraph 6 does state that:
"[u]nder normal circumstances the plaintiff, Ricafort, would have worked until 1994 with the Canadian Armed Forces ..."
Counsel confirmed that this was intended as a reference to Fernando Ricafort's normal retirement date. Counsel for the plaintiffs sought to put in a letter of appointment dated June 21, 1977, which offered Mr. Ricafort this job as an appointment to "an indeterminate position". I cannot of course take into account such evidence on an application to strike based on the grounds that the statement of claim discloses no reasonable cause of action. This is precluded by subrule 419(2). I would only note that the position of the plaintiff Fernando Ricafort as represented by his reliance on this letter only confirms what appears to be alleged in the statement of claim, namely that he was not appointed for a fixed term of office but for a normal "indeterminate" appointment. In the absence of earlier termination at pleasure by Her Majesty, it would continue until normal retirement age. This is the kind of appointment which is referred to in s. 24 of the Public Service Employment Act, quoted above, as being "during the pleasure of Her Majesty". The plaintiffs allege no Act or Regulations applicable to the plaintiff Fernando Ricafort creating any exception to that general principle. Therefore the plaintiff Fernando Ricafort has not disclosed any cause of action in favour of himself for wrongful dismissal. As for the other plaintiffs, it is difficult to conceive of them having any action for breach of a contract to which they were not parties, even if they could prove some kind of injuries suffered by them personally as a result of breach of the contract by the defendant Crown. With respect to Fernando Ricafort, if I thought that his claim could be correctly framed so as to disclose a cause of action in contract I would give an order to strike but with leave to amend within a certain period of time. However, I understand the position of the plaintiff to be that his appointment was of an indeterminate nature and if that is the case he cannot amend so as to frame a sustainable cause of action. It is indicated instead in the statement of defence and by counsel for the plaintiffs before me that the plaintiff Fernando Ricafort has pursued the statutory remedy provided for public servants in respect of dismissal. That is the remedy which he must pursue, not an action for breach of contract.
[7]
As noted earlier, counsel for the plaintiffs also suggested that the statement of claim discloses a cause of action for damages for wrongful discrimination against Fernando Ricafort. In support of this he cited decisions arising under the Canadian Human Rights Act [see footnote 8] such as  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  respect to discriminatory practices therein defined and prohibited. It is clear that such legislation was not intended to create civil liability enforceable in the ordinary courts; indeed the assumption of such legislation is clear that such matters can be more effectively and more economically disposed of through conciliation and, if necessary, hearings by special tribunals [see footnote 10]. In the absence of legislative provisions to the contrary, breach of a statute does not as such give rise to a cause of action [see footnote 11]. Apart from this reliance of counsel on the Canadian Human Rights Act, he was unable to indicate to me, nor does the statement of claim suggest, any known basis for legal liability arising per se out of discriminatory acts. One can imagine that discrimination may provide a motive for a variety of wrongful acts which are of themselves tortious or in breach of contract, but at common law discrimination does not per se give rise to a claim for damages.
[8]
In reaching these conclusions I have, of course, been mindful of the caution which courts must exercise in striking out all or part of a statement of claim. I have reached the conclusions that I have only after being satisfied that it is clear certain of the claims cannot succeed as a matter of law.
[9]
I will therefore order struck out all references in the statement of claim to an action for alleged breach of contract based on wrongful dismissal and any damage claims dependant thereon. The only specific portions of the statement of claim I can identify related exclusively to these matters are paragraph 7 and subparagraph 19(b) and these are struck. But other portions solely relevant to the contract claim must also be taken to be struck out. I will also order that all of the individual defendants be struck out. As these rulings may affect the case which the remaining defendant must now meet, I will give leave to the defendant to amend the statement of defence within 30 days of the date of this order. Costs will be in the cause.
[10]
Counsel for the plaintiffs hinted at the difficulties he was working under because of his unfamiliarity with law pertaining to federal Crown liability, federal public service contracts, and the practice and jurisdiction of this court. Yet when I reviewed the questions in issue in this application they appear to me to be amply dealt with in the jurisprudence and the statutes which are readily available. I do not think the plaintiffs can reasonably complain of being taken by surprise by these rulings. Nor do I think they should feel disadvantaged by having struck out a part of their action which is patently untenable as it would be no favour to them to allow such matters to form the subject of lengthy pretrial and trial procedures which could not in the end succeed.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/nmg
Footnotes
1. See, e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 522 F.C. (C.A.).
3. See, e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 766 S.C.R.
4. R.S.C. 1970, c. C-38.
5. R.S.C. 1970, c. P-32.
6.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . See, e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.).
[End of document]