[1]
Hargrave, Prothonotary
: In this action, commenced July 13, 1994, the plaintiffs' basic aim appears to be a declaration as to their status as Chief and Councillor following Band Council elections in March 1994. The defendants, by Counterclaim, say that the election was not in accordance with the
Band Customs Election Regulations
, that they filed an appeal of the result, but that nothing was done and further that the ballots were destroyed, with the assistance of the plaintiff, Barbara Allison, one day before a recount was to have been held. The defendants, in their Counterclaim, which the plaintiffs now move to strike out, seek a declaration that the March 29, 1994, election for Band Council is null and void and an Order for a new election. The fact that the defendants seek a discretionary remedy has a bearing on the outcome.
[2]
The plaintiffs, pursuant to rule 401(c), seek to strike out the defendants' Counterclaim on the grounds that the Federal Court lacks jurisdiction because the defendants did not utilize the statutory appeal procedures for elections and thus did not exhaust all of their remedies before coming to this court.
[3]
The plaintiffs, who have produced an elaborate chronology of events, say the defendants did not file an appeal of the election result and thus failed to exercise their remedies under the
Lower Similkameen Indian Band Customs Election Regulations
(the "
Customs Election Regulations
"). The defendants deny this, pleading that they filed an appeal on April 27, 1994, well within the appeal period, all as required by Part VIII of the
Customs Election Regulations
and point out that the issue of the filing of an appeal is at the heart of the whole case. This seems to me an issue on which a judge ought to hear witnesses at trial.
Consideration
[4]
I note that the parties have recently obtained an expedited trial date, with the trial to commence June 17, 1996. The plaintiffs have been looking at the counterclaim for some 21 months. They leave it late to make an elaborate motion to strike out. In my view the plaintiffs are estopped from moving to strike out in the present instance, but ought to be required to leave the matter to the trial judge who can assess the witnesses. For this reason I would dismiss the motion. However, if I am wrong, there are three other reasons why the motion ought to be denied.
[5]
To begin, the subject matter is within the jurisdiction of the Federal Court in that an Election Appeal Board, set up under the
Customs Election Regulations
, as allowed by the
Indian Act
, is a "federal board, commission or other tribunal": see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), in which the actions of an election appeal board, under a
Reserve Election Act
, were at issue.
[6]
The plaintiffs' point, set out in some 35 pages of argument and many references, is that the defendants did not properly file an appeal under the
Customs Election Regulations
and because they did not do so, they have not exhausted all of their remedies and thus the court has no jurisdiction. For this lack of jurisdiction the plaintiffs say the counterclaim ought to be struck out under rule 401.
[7]
The plaintiffs' application is supported by a number of affidavits, some current, others sworn in earlier proceedings in this action. In that the present proceeding to strike out is under rule 401, on a jurisdictional point, and not under rule 419(1), as disclosing no reasonable cause of action, affidavit evidence is permissible: see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 687 (F.C.A.).
[8]
On the plaintiffs' analysis, a failure to exhaust the election appeal remedies under the
Customs Election Regulations
, and leaving aside whether or not a proper or any Election Appeal Board had been established, the plaintiffs must show that no appeal was filed. There is various affidavit material to this effect, including the affidavit of Joan Bent, the Electoral Officer for the election in question and the February 2, 1996, affidavit of Tony Qualtier which sets out that he was asked to sit on the Election Appeal Board, but did not see a copy of the appeal petition. However, there is conflicting evidence for the defendants. For example, the affidavit of Theresa Dennis, sworn July 18, 1994, sets out that:
"7. On April 27, 1994, an appeal of the Election (the 'Appeal') was filed in the LSIB [Lower Similkameen Indian Band] office. It was stamped by Kathy Terbasket. The Appeal was signed by 36 LSIB members. Attached to this my Affidavit and marked Exhibit '2' is a copy of the Appeal."
The so-called appeal appears to have been in the form of a petition.
[9]
Nancy Allison, one of the defendants, was asked on examination for discovery, at Question 222, to confirm that the appeal petition, which had been taken to the Band Office and stamped, had not been left at the Band Office. Her response was:
"I believe there was one there, because I knew it was there, because I was Acting Administrator at the time."
She goes on to set out the date on which she saw the petition at the office and the circumstances surrounding it. See also Questions 268 et seq. of the discovery transcript which appear to establish that there was a copy of the document referred to as the appeal which had been kept in the Band Office when it was stamped on April 27. The subject of the appeal also appears in the April 25 and April 27, 1994, Band meeting minutes.
[10]
Section 1 of Part VIII of the
Customs Election Regulations
deals with election appeals. It provides, in part, that any candidate or elector "... may lodge an appeal by forwarding it in writing by mail to the Appeal Board at the Lower Similkameen Indian Administration, Box 100, Keremeos, B.C., V0X 1N0". On the one hand it is the plaintiffs' position that no appeal was ever filed, but on the other hand the defendants say that an appeal was taken to the desk at the Band Office and stamped.
[11]
The plaintiffs have failed to clearly establish that no appeal was filed: on the basis of the conflicting affidavit material, I am not prepared to determine whether or not an appeal was filed.
[12]
Second, even assuming that the defendants ought to have exhausted an alternative remedy, that is a remedy through an Election Appeal Board, that does not end the matter, for a party need not exhaust all prior remedies where such remedies are inadequate: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , a decision of the Supreme Court of Canada, where Mr. Justice Beetz discussed this aspect at p. 696 et seq. See also the dissenting reasons of Mr. Justice Dickson, as he then was, at p. 714 et seq. The category of factors to be considered, in weighing whether a court should accept jurisdiction or require an applicant to proceed with an adequate statutory remedial procedure, is never closed:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 31. In the present instance it may well be that the destruction of the ballots by one of the plaintiffs, before they were recounted, would have prevented any Election Appeal Board from doing its job and as a result the Board either might have been able to give only an inadequate remedy or might no longer have had any jurisdiction: see for example
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[13]
The third additional reason why I would dismiss the motion is that I question that a pleading ought to be struck out where it is discretionary whether the trial judge will allow the remedy: for example see
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at pp. 1267-1268:
"Turning to the second branch of the case, a preliminary point should be mentioned as to whether the power of a superior court to grant declaratory relief is necessarily ousted where the statute governing the particular matter provides a special procedure in another court in which the question involved might arise. This question was dealt with by the House of Lords in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . In that case it was held that the mere fact that a statute contained provisions governing the procedure for enforcement of an
Act
did not oust the jurisdiction of the superior court to grant declaratory relief. See per Viscount Dilhorne at p. 79. See also per Lord Donovan at pp. 75 and 76."
Justice of Appeal Thurlow, as he then was, who wrote the reasons for the Court of Appeal in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case, concluded that it would be wrong to abort the proceedings prematurely by striking out the Statement of Claim. In short, it might well be within the trial judge's discretion to award the relief sought.
[14]
For all of these reasons, the motion is dismissed with costs to the defendants.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Steven C. McMinniman/saf
[End of document]