[1]
Teitelbaum, J.
: This is an application for an order setting aside the decision of a visa officer, James Gill, dated September 9, 1994, refusing the applicant's application for permanent residence in Canada.
Background
[2]
On May 18, 1993, the applicant, Hon Man Choi, submitted an application for permanent residence pursuant to the Investor category, to the Canadian High Commission in Hong Kong. The application included the applicant's wife and five dependent daughters. The applicant's eldest daughter, Pui Shi Choi, suffers from a mental disability and was diagnosed to be mentally retarded at the age of two. At the time of the application, Pui Shi Choi was 17 years old. The visa officer, James Gill, determined that Pui Shi Choi was the applicant's dependent daughter within the meaning of s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1987, because she was, at the time the application was submitted, under the age of 19 and unmarried.
[3]
On July 29, 1993, the applicant and his dependents were instructed to undergo medical examinations.
[4]
On August 22, 1994, a visa officer, Victor Majid, conducted an interview with the applicant to determine whether the applicant and his dependents were admissible to Canada and whether the applicant met the selection criteria established in the
Regulations
. The interview was conducted with the assistance of an interpreter fluent in both Cantonese and English.
[5]
Pui Shi Choi underwent a medical examination on August 28, 1993. The results of this medical examination were recorded on form IMM 1017 (Exhibit B to the affidavit of Dr. Bernstein). Form IMM 1017 together with the psychiatric reports, dated April 26, 1993 and January 12, 1994, from Dr. Irene Kwok confirming by way of the Wechsller's intelligence Scale that Pui Shi Choi was in the moderate subnormal range, was submitted to the medical office of the Canadian High Commission in Hong Kong.
[6]
On May 7, 1994, Dr. Ted Axler, a medical officer employed at the High Commission, reviewed the medical and psychiatric reports, and formed the opinion that Pui Shi Choi's admission to Canada might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on social services due to her mental retardation and more particularly Pui Shi Choi's need for special training and lack of employability or productivity in the usual Canadian setting. In Dr. Axler's opinion, the special training and the reliance on social assistance was likely to result from the inability to support herself constituted excessive demand on social services. Dr. Axler categorized Pui Shi Choi's condition as M7 (inadmissible), per Table 3 of Section III of the Outline of Basic Medical Criteria contained in the Employment and Immigration Canada Immigration Manual.
[7]
On May 13, 1994, Dr. Axler's opinion was submitted to Dr. Bernstein, a medical officer, employed at the headquarters of the Department of Citizenship and Immigration. Dr. Bernstein concurred with Dr. Axler's opinion. The medical notification from the medical section of the High Commission to the visa section read as follows:
"
MENTAL RETARDATION
This 18 year old woman has moderate grade mental subnormality. Her speech is infantile and dysarthrig. She requires special schooling and training and will require home care and supervision indefinitely. She is likely to cause excessive demand on social services and is therefore inadmissible under Section 19 (1)(a)(ii) of the
Act
.
ALSO HAS: MILD CEREBRAL PALSY." (Exhibit B to affidavit of James Gill)
[8]
By letter dated June 22, 1994, Victor Majid, a visa officer, advised the applicant of the medical officers' opinions and that the opinions would likely result in the refusal of his application. The applicant was also advised the he was welcome to submit additional medical information.
[9]
On July 14, 1994, the applicant submitted, through his legal representative, additional medical information to the High Commission in Hong Kong. This additional information consisted of: a letter from Dr. Chung, a paediatrician, dated July 12, 1994; a letter from Dr. C.M.Yeung, dated July 7, 1994 and a report dated July 8, 1994 from Hannah Chung, a registered clinical psychologist. The information was reviewed by both medical officers, however, they did not change their opinions as they were of the view that the reports did not contradict their opinion that Pui Shi Choi was likely to require special schooling and have limited employability in a Canadian setting and that the use of such special schooling and the reliance on social services which was likely to result from limited employability, constituted excessive demand. According to Dr. Bernstein's affidavit, he and Dr. Axler noted that: Dr. Yeung's letter dealt with Pui Shi Choi's cerebral palsy, which was not a factor in their decision that Pui Shi Choi's admission to Canada might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on social services; Mrs. Chung's report indicated that Pui Shi Choi had a full scale I.Q. of 51, which in their opinion can be considered borderline between mild and moderate mental retardation and which was consistent with their opinion; and that Dr. Chung's letter basically summarized Dr. Yeung's letter and Mrs. Chung's report.
[10]
In September 1994, the visa officer, James Gill, after speaking with Dr. Axler and after reviewing the applicant's file, including the opinions of the medical officers, determined that Pui Shi Choi was the applicant's dependent and was a member of a class of medically inadmissible persons pursuant to s. 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Immigration Act
. As a result of this determination, the visa officer concluded that s. 9(1)(a) of the
Regulations
prohibited him from issuing immigrant visas to the applicant and his dependents.
[11]
The applicant was advised of the visa officer's decision by letter dated September 9, 1994. The letter provided in part:
"In the opinion of a medical officer, concurred in by another medical officer, your dependent, Choi Pui Shi is suffering from
moderate grade mental retardation
, as a result of which her admission to Canada would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on social services. She is therefore a member of the inadmissible class of persons described in subparagraph 19 (1)(a)(ii) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (the '
Act
')
"Your lawyers submitted additional medical information by letter dated July 14, 1994. This material has been referred to both medical officers who rendered this opinion regarding your daughter. They have both replied that their opinion regarding her medical condition, and demands on social services which might reasonably be expected to be caused by her admission are unchanged. I have reviewed these decisions, and I find them to be reasonable."
Applicant's Position
[12]
The application is based on the ground that the visa officer erred in his interpretation of the combined effects of s. 19(1) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, s. 9(1) of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978 and s. 2(1) of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1992.
[13]
The applicant maintains that the medical officers failed to consider relevant information provided before issuing a certificate of medical inadmissibility; the medical officers failed to consider the factors set out in s. 22 of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978; the medical officers failed to apply the proper test in assessing Pui Shi Choi's potential demand on health and social services and that the visa officer failed to consider the medical officers' errors.
[14]
The applicant relies on the medical reports and letters to support his argument that Pui Shi Choi's level of mental disability will make her financially dependent on her parents but would not cause excessive demands on health or social services. Specifically, Mrs. Chung's summary and conclusions provide as follows:
"1. Pui-shi was assessed on the WAIS-R (Cantonese Version) to be cognitively functioning within the Mild Grade Mental Deficiency range with a Full Scale IQ of 51.
"2. Her social maturity, as assessed on the VSMS, yielded a social age equivalent of 7 years. She was independent in some basic selfhelp skills.
"3. Pui-shi was observed to exhibit short attention span and impulsivity at testing. Thus the current result might only represent the floor of her intellectual potentials. Given appropriate training, she should be able to acquire more independent living skills.
"4. With Pui-shi's current level of cognitive and social functioning, she should benefit from sheltered workshop placement. She requires supervision and financial support from her family. Her family pledges full support of her and no institutional care is required at present or in the future." (Exhibit H to the affidavit of Dr. Bernstein)
[15]
On the other hand, Dr. Kwok's opinion was the Pui-Shi is suffering from a mild form of cerebral palsy with a moderate grade mental subnormality and that with a moderate grade subnormality, she is unlikely to progress beyond the lower grade. Dr. Kwok was also of the opinion that Pui-shi would not require institutional care or prolonged hospitalization and with training is expected to be able to perform some unskilled or semi-skilled work. Financially, she will probably remain dependent on her parents for life.
Respondent's Position
[16]
The respondent submits that the visa officer provided a full and fair assessment of the applicant's application for landing pursuant to s. 9 of the
Immigration Act
and that the applicant has not shown the visa officer made any error to warrant quashing his decision.
[17]
The respondent maintains that the affidavits of Dr. Bernstein and James Gill show that the medical officers considered all the relevant information before them, including the applicable statutory provisions. The respondent submits that the medical officers considered the factors outlined in s. 22 of the
Regulations
, in particular the medical officers noted that as a result of Pui Shi Choi's medical condition, she would require special schooling and training and will require home care and supervision indefinitely. The medical officers also noted that the special training and reliance on social assistance, as a result of her inability to support herself, would likely cause an excessive demand on social services.
[18]
With respect to the applicant's argument that the medical officers applied the wrong test, the respondent submits that the question for determination is whether the applicant's daughter might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services and argues that it cannot be said that the medical officers failed in finding that because of Pui Shi Choi's special schooling and training needs resulting from her retardation, she would create more than normal demands on Canada's health or social services.
[19]
The evidence supports the opinions of the medical officers and as such is reasonably based.
Comments
[20]
Section 22 of the
Immigration Regulations
, 1978 provides that:
"22. For the purpose of determining whether any person is or is likely to be a danger to public health or to public safety or whether the admission of any person would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on health or social services, the following factors shall be considered by a medical officer in relation to the nature, severity or probable duration of any disease, disorder, disability or other health impairment from which the person is suffering, namely,
(a) any reports made by a medical practitioner with respect to the person;
(b) the degree to which the disease, disorder, disability or other impairment may be communicated to other persons;
(c) whether medical surveillance is required for reasons of public health;
(d) whether sudden incapacity or unpredictable or unusual behaviour may create a danger to public safety;
(e) whether the supply of health or social services that the person may require in Canada is limited to such an extent that
(i) the use of such services by the person might reasonably be expected to prevent or delay provision of those services to Canadian citizens or permanent residents, or
(ii) the use of such services may not be available or accessible to the person;
(f) whether medical care or hospitalization is required;
(g) whether potential employability or productivity is affected; and
(h) whether prompt and effective medical treatment can be provided."
[21]
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), namely that procedural fairness requires third-party communications to the applicant, to the medical process. In other words, a duty of fairness was recognized with respect to communications between Immigration Medical Services and the visa officer and accordingly it would seem that a full and complete interchange of medical information will have to take place between the visa officer and the Immigration Medical Services.
[22]
In <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , there were conflicting medical reports regarding the admissibility of the applicant's son, Qi. The applicant's son and wife arrived in Canada in 1986 on visitors' visas. Qi had been assessed by Health and Welfare officials in Shanghai and found to be healthy. In 1987, Qi underwent a second medical assessment and mental retardation was diagnosed. In 1988, two medical officers assessed Qi as inadmissible. In July 1988, the applicant and his family claimed refugee status. Qi was referred for another medical examination and this report made no mention of his mental retardation. In May of 1990, Health and Welfare Canada requested extensive specific information regarding the applicant's son's mental development and the son was referred to Glendale Lodge Society where an intensive medical, psychological hearing and speech profile was carried out. The report was forwarded to Health and Welfare Canada in September, 1990. In December 1991, the applicant was informed that his son was still medically inadmissible. The respondent submitted affidavit evidence which showed that the Glendale report was reviewed on December 12, 1990. The son was assessed at M5. However, in 1988, two medical officers' opinion classified the applicant's son at M7. The court noted the evidence was that C.E.I.C. was notified of this assessment in November 1991. The applicant was not made aware of the December 1990 assessment of the Glendale report or of its communication to C.E.I.C. in November 1991, nor did he receive the second medical notification arising from that assessment. Dubé, J., was of the view that the contradictory information should have alerted the immigration officer to the need for further investigation, i.e., to inquire why there was an inconsistency, and when he did not do so, the decision became subject to judicial review.
[23]
At p. 318 of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Dubé, J., provides a summary of the principles to be applied in reviewing decisions of medical officers relied upon by visa officers.
"The governing principle arising from this body of jurisprudence is that reviewing or appellate courts are not competent to make findings of fact relating to the medical diagnosis, but are competent to review the evidence to determine whether the medical officers' opinion is reasonable in the circumstances of the case. The reasonableness of a medical opinion is to be assessed not only at the time it was given, but also as of the time it was relied upon by the Immigration Officer, since it is that decision which is being reviewed or appealed. The grounds of unreasonableness include incoherence or inconsistency, absence of supporting evidence, failure to consider cogent evidence, or failure to consider factors stipulated in s. 22 of the
Regulations
."
[24]
The issue before me in this case relates to the reasonableness of the medical officers' decision. As such, in reviewing this matter, I must be satisfied that the medical officers' opinion was reasonable, in that the officers considered all the relevant information regarding Pui Shi Choi's condition, including the factors outlined in s. 22 of the
Immigration Regulations
. Further, Dubé, J.'s, comments make it clear that the reasonableness of the medical officers' opinion must also be assessed at the time it was relied upon by the visa officer.
[25]
It appears from the respondent's affidavit evidence, particularly Dr. Bernstein's, the medical officers did consider the factors outlined in s. 22 of the
Regulations
.
[26]
In terms of what constitutes "excessive demands", Reed, J., noted in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  definition of what constitutes 'excessive demands for medical services'. Immigration Regulation 22 sets out a list of considerations to be taken into account when deciding whether a person is medically admissible. Among these are: whether the medical services which the individual will require is limited so that the provision of such services to Canadian citizens might be prevented or delayed; whether medical care or hospitalization is required; whether potential employability or productivity of in the individual is affected because of the medical condition."
[27]
In this regard, Gibson, J., made the following comments in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (T.D.), at p. 258:
"There remains the question of whether the demands on health or social services that might reasonably be expected to flow from the admission of the principal Applicant would be 'excessive', that being the term used in subparagraph 19(1)(a)(ii) of the
Act
. Counsel for the Applicant argued that 'excessive' should be interpreted as 'unreasonable' or beyond what the system reasonably provides to everyone. This is not inconsistent with one of the meanings assigned the word 'excessive' to
The Oxford Dictionary of Current English
which was cited by counsel for the Respondents, that being ' ... more than what is normal or necessary'. Against the relevant criteria set out in section 22 of the
Regulations
, and in light of the opinions of Medical Officers that are before me, particularly that of Dr. Weinerman, I conclude that the admission of the principal Applicant would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause more than what is normal, that is to say excessive, demands on health or social services in Canada."
[28]
The evidence clearly indicates that the visa officer provided a full and fair assessment of all of the facts and reports in this case. This can be gleaned from the affidavit of James Christopher Gill dated November 15, 1994.
[29]
All of the medical reports filed were examined by the visa officer and I see no basis to interfere with the decision taken that "In the opinion of a medical officer, concurred in by another medical officer your dependent, Choi Pui Shi is suffering from moderate grade mental retardation, as a result of which her admission to Canada would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause excessive demands on social services".
[30]
It is of no importance that the applicant can be considered a wealthy person and, if his daughter will require special care, he can well afford the cost of same. I agree with the submission of the respondent that as a term or condition of admission, the respondent cannot impose a term or condition that the applicant and his family would agree to waive all rights to social services in Canada for his dependent daughter Pui Shi Choi (see s. 23.1 of the
Immigration Regulations
).
[31]
I agree with Gibson, J., in the
Jim
case (supra) when he states that the admission (of Pui Shi Choi) would cause or might reasonably be expected to cause
more than what is normal
, that is to say, excessive demands on social services in Canada.
[32]
I am satisfied that no error was committed by the respondent or of any representative of the respondent that would warrant me to interfere with the decision.
[33]
The judicial review application is denied.
Application denied.
Editor: Angela E. McKay/slm
[End of document]