[1]
MacKay, J.
: This is an application for judicial review seeking an order in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent Minister to review certain submissions of the applicant regarding its drug products Apo-A and Apo-B, as I shall describe them, on the basis of the submissions made, to determine whether those adequately establish the safety and effectiveness of the two drugs for use in Canada. That order is specifically requested without regard to a condition precedent to such review that the reference products tested in the comparative bioavailability studies, submitted by the applicant, be purchased in Canada or that there be certification from the manufacturers of the Canadian reference products that they are identical to the non-Canadian reference products used in the studies submitted by Apotex. A further order is also sought directing the respondent upon completion of the review of the submissions to issue Notices of Compliance if the review is satisfactory, and if it is unsatisfactory in the case of either submission then to respond to the submission with details of the deficiencies disclosed in the review.
[2]
Three collateral matters arose in connection with the application.
(1) The first concerns practice of the court in treatment of its records, in a case of this sort, where, under a confidentiality order the court's file was sealed almost from the commencement of the application. That order was granted by the Associate Senior Prothonotary upon application of Apotex which sought confidentiality to protect proprietary interests. It is because of that order that these reasons designate by letter rather than by name the drug products here in issue, which for purposes of these reasons are called Apo-A and Apo-B. I return to this matter, and arrangements for treating the court's file, after setting out reasons and conclusions on the merits of the application.
(2) The second matter concerns the issue of mootness of this application as it relates to the Apo-B submission, raised in argument at the hearing, in light of developments subsequent to the hearing and before the order and these reasons were filed. Counsel differed on whether those developments should be brought to the court's attention, and whether they were relevant for the decision in this matter. I invited written submissions from counsel and this matter is further considered in the following reasons.
(3) The third matter arose as a result of initiatives taken by a third party, Novopharm Limited, a competitor of the applicant, which applied for intervenor status in these proceedings, an application dismissed by my colleague Mr. Justice Pinard in January 1992. An appeal of that decision was filed and Novopharm applied to the Court of Appeal to expedite hearing of the matter. Subsequently, on short notice the day before the hearing of this application, Novopharm made a further application to this court, that the hearing of this matter be stayed, pending consideration by the Court of Appeal of its appeal, on the ground that its interests could be adversely affected by the outcome of this application. The application to stay was heard at the commencement of the hearing and was then dismissed for reasons orally outlined and subsequently written and filed.
[3]
Apotex is a Canadian company, a manufacturer and distributor of generic pharmaceutical products. It is not the originator of prescription drug products and its products are generally not those first approved for use in Canada. Rather Apotex manufactures and sells its brands of prescription drug products under licence, compulsory or otherwise, from the original manufacturer or innovator of products which, in most if not all cases, have already had approval from the Minister for use in Canada.
[4]
The basis of the claim for relief is the applicant's allegation that those responsible on behalf of the respondent Minister for review of new drug products for use in Canada have refused to consider Apotex submissions for approval of the drugs in question. In each case its submission included a bioavailability study comparing a new product with a reference product not obtained in Canada. The Health Protection Branch ("HPB") of Health and Welfare Canada advised that in each case the submission was not adequate because the bioavailability study required was not made with reference to a product purchased in Canada or one certified by the manufacturer of a Canadian reference product to be identical to the non-Canadian reference product utilized in the applicant's study. No advice about deficiencies found in relation to some aspects of the applicant's submissions, particularly some aspects of that for Apo-A, was provided, unlike the experience of Apotex in the case of other submissions, yet the respondent contends the submissions have been considered. They are deemed inadequate in light of a requirement of HPB that where reliance is placed on bioavailability studies those are to be based on comparison of a new drug with a Canadian reference product, that is, one that is already approved for sale in Canada. There is dispute about when notice of this policy was provided to Apotex and about the consistency of HPB in application of the policy, and this gives rise to claims by the applicant of unfairness in the consideration by the respondent of the new drug submissions for Apo-A and Apo-B.
[5]
In argument counsel for the parties perceive and portray the facts and issues differently. For the respondent it is urged that the application insofar as it relates to Apo-B is moot, an argument buttressed by submissions following the hearing in light of subsequent developments. In relation to Apo-A the respondent urges that the application is premature in the sense the HPB is flexible in its approach and ready, as required by regulations, to consider further submissions of Apotex to establish safety and effectiveness for human use of the drug in question. In effect it is argued there was no refusal by the Minister's representatives to consider the submissions of Apotex. Rather, the applicant is not satisfied with results of the consideration by HPB, that is that its submissions do not meet requirements for a notice of compliance. It is admitted that in reaching that decision HPB did not review the bioavailability study with reference to a foreign (U.S.) originator product, but that study was not accepted in light of HPB's policy requiring or preferring that such a study be with reference to a drug already approved for marketing in Canada, a requirement which the respondent urges is within the discretion of the Minister under the
Act
and
Regulations
.
[6]
After consideration of arguments and further review of the evidence it is my view that the basic issues in this application concern the scope of discretion vested in the respondent, in particular with reference to the requirements of new drug submissions, that is, the evidence upon which a decision is to be made approving or disapproving a new drug for market in Canada, and the standard for determining when the exercise of that discretion should be subject to remedies through judicial review. These underlying issues arise in relation to HPB's refusal to consider the bioavailability study submitted by Apotex comparing its proposed new drug with a foreign reference brand, and to HPB's requirement that a bioavailability study comparing the new drug with a Canadian reference standard be submitted as part of the new drug submissions. Other issues, which I class as collateral issues, raised in this application seem to me inappropriate for a court to determine or their determination does not dispose of the application. They are briefly reviewed however, because this assists in clarifying the main issues, as I seem them.
[7]
Before considering collateral or subordinate issues, I turn to the process for approval of new drugs for use in Canada and the background of the new drug submissions here in question. The evidence is in the affidavits filed with numerous exhibits, and in transcripts of examination upon the affidavits and further documents produced in undertakings on examination of affiants. What I consider as collateral issues are then briefly reviewed. Certain conclusions of fact, not entirely agreed upon by the parties, are drawn which concern the main issue, on which the merits of the applicant's claims for relief are assessed.
The Process For Approval Of
New Drugs In Canada
[8]
Under the
Food and Drugs Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-27 as amended, ("the
Act
") and
Regulations
made under it, before selling a "new drug", as that term is defined in regulation C.08.001, a notice of compliance must be obtained from the Minister. That notice issues where the Minister is satisfied, inter alia, upon review by HPB of a new drug submission, that the drug under consideration is safe and effective for use by humans on the basis of the information and material submitted.
[9]
By s. 30(1), the
Food and Drugs Act
authorizes the Governor-in-Council to make regulations, inter alia,
"(b) respecting
. . . . .
(iii) the sale or the conditions of sale of any food, drug, cosmetic or device ...
"(e) respecting the method of manufacture, preparation ... and testing of any food, drug, cosmetic or device in the interest of, or for the prevention of injury to, the health of the purchaser of consumer.
. . . . .
"(o) respecting
(i) the method of manufacture, preparation, preserving, packing, labelling, storing and testing of any new drug, and
(ii) the sale or the conditions of sale of any new drug, and defining for purposes of this Act the expression 'new drug' ..."
In apparent exercise of authority under the
Act
, regulations enacted include those in Division 8, concerning new drugs. Regulation C.08.001, defining "new drug", and other regulations particularly relevant in this application are the following.
"C.08.001. For the purposes of the Act and this Division 'New Drug' means
(a) a drug that contains or consists of a substance, whether as an active or inactive ingredient, carrier, coating, excipient, menstruum or other component, that has not been sold as a drug in Canada for sufficient time and in sufficient quantity to establish in Canada the safety and effectiveness of that substance for use as a drug;
(b) a drug that is a combination of two or more drugs, with or without other ingredients, and that has not been sold in that combination or in the proportion in which those drugs are combined in that drug, for sufficient time and in sufficient quantity to establish in Canada the safety and effectiveness of that combination and proportion for use as a drug.
. . . . .
"C.08.002. (1) No person shall sell or advertise for sale a new drug unless
(a) the manufacturer of the new drug has filed with the Minister, in duplicate, a new drug submission relating to that new drug, having a content satisfactory to the Minister;
(b) the Minister has issued a notice of compliance to that manufacturer of the new drug in respect of that new drug submission pursuant to s. C.08.004;
. . . . .
"C.08.002. (2) A new drug submission shall include such information and material as the Director may require and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, shall include
. . . . .
(g) detailed reports of the tests made to establish the safety of the new drug for the purpose and under the conditions of use recommended;
(h) substantial evidence of the clinical effectiveness of the new drug for the purpose and under the conditions of use recommended;
. . . . .
(m) samples of the drug in the finished pharmaceutical form in which it is proposed that the new drug be sold;
. . . . .
"C.08.004. (1) The Minister shall, after completing an examination of a new drug submission or supplement thereto,
(a) if that submission of [sic] supplement complies with the requirements of section C.08.002 or C.08.003, as the case may be, and section C.08.005.1, issue a notice of compliance; or
(b) if that submission or supplement does not comply with the requirements of section C.08.002 or C.08.003, as the case may be, or section C.08.005.1, notify the manufacturer that the submission or supplement does not so comply.
"C.08.004. (2) Where a new drug submission or supplement thereto does not comply with the requirements of section C.08.002 or C.08.003, as the case may be, or section C.08.005.1, the manufacturer who filed that new drug submission or supplement may amend the new drug submission or supplement from time to time by filing additional information and material.
"C.08.004. (3) The Minister shall, after completing an examination of any additional information or material filed in respect of a new drug submission or supplement thereto,
(a) if that submission or supplement complies with the requirements of section C.08.002 or C.08.003, as the case may be, and section C.08.005.1, issue a notice of compliance; or
(b) if that submission or supplement does not comply with the requirements of section C.08.002 or C.08.003, as the case may be, or section C.08.005.1, notify the manufacturer that the submission or supplement does not so comply."
[10]
There is no disagreement between the parties that under the
Regulations
, in particular regulations C.08.002(1)(a), C.08.002 (2)(g) and (h) and C.08.004, the manufacturer of a new drug must establish that the new drug is safe and effective for use in Canada and that HPB makes that decision based on the information included in the manufacturer's new drug submission.
[11]
Regulation C.08.002(2) generally describes, but does not elaborate specifics of, all of the particular types of data, studies or other information to be submitted. In general terms, to meet the requirements of subparas. (g) and (h) the safety and effectiveness of a particular brand of a drug product is established in practice either by:
(a) conducting original clinical trials, the results of which, as included in the new drug submission, demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of the product in use by humans, or
(b) comparing the new brand of the drug product under consideration with a reference brand of the drug product which is either known or demonstrated to be safe and effective. The manufacturer of the new drug may by appropriate tests demonstrate that the new brand is therapeutically equivalent to the reference brand or may certify that it is the same drug as the reference brand.
[12]
The latter course is typically followed by Apotex. It frequently employs a comparative bioavailability study to establish therapeutic equivalence of its product to a reference brand. A study of this kind compares the extent and rate of absorption into the blood stream of the active medicinal ingredient from the two brands of the same drug product, after the drugs are administered to human volunteers in two testing sessions some weeks apart. If the results of the tests demonstrate that the extent and rate of absorption of the two brands into the blood stream fall within certain accepted statistical limits, then the two brands are considered bioequivalent, that is, the two brands are deemed equivalent within accepted statistical limits in terms of their performance in humans.
[13]
If the comparative bioavailability study demonstrates that the drug product under consideration is bioequivalent to the reference drug product, the qualities of the latter are deemed to be applicable to the drug product under consideration. Thus the safety and effectiveness of the new drug is essentially established by the standard of safety and effectiveness of the reference drug product.
[14]
It is Apotex's experience that the safety and effectiveness of the reference brand is generally established by filing of all known medical literature which describes the performance of that brand in terms of both its safety and effectiveness, and unless a new drug submission contains information, from publications or otherwise, that establishes the reference product to be safe and effective HPB has refused to accept a bioavailability study as sufficient.
[15]
On behalf of the respondent, it is averred by affidavit of Bruce Rowsell, Director, Bureau of Pharmaceutical Surveillance, HPB that "HPB has required for many years that a comparative bioavailability study submitted to establish the safety and efficacy of a new drug be in reference to a drug product marketed for sale in Canada or to a drug product that has been confirmed as identical to a drug product marketed for sale in Canada".
[16]
I note that Mr. Rowsell has been a member of staff of HPB for some years and from 1984 to 1988 was Director, Bureau of Drug Quality. In April 1988, that Bureau was changed to be the Bureau of Pharmaceutical Surveillance and its responsibilities were changed to include the evaluation of comparative bioavailability studies submitted by manufacturers.
The New Drug Submissions
In Issue
[17]
The new drug submissions here in issue concern Apotex brands of the drugs X (for these reasons the Apotex product is called "Apo-A") and Y (the Apotex product is here called "Apo-B"). HPB had already approved an original brand of each of the drugs for sale in Canada, designated for purposes of these reasons by letters X and Y rather than by name. In the case of X the original brand name is C (hereinafter referred to as C (Can.)) sold by Bristol Laboratories of Canada, and in the case of Y the original brand name is D (hereinafter referred to as D (Can.)) sold by Burroughs Wellcome Inc. Before approvals were sought and granted in Canada original brands of each drug had been approved by the Food and Drug Administration in the United States. There, in the case of X the original product was named C (the same name as for the originator product in Canada) sold by Mead Johnson (whose product is hereinafter referred to as C (U.S.)), and in the case of Y the original product was D (the same name as for the equivalent originator product in Canada) sold by Burroughs Wellcome Co. (whose product is hereinafter referred to as D (U.S.)). In each case the originator in the United States was apparently affiliated with the originator company in Canada.
[18]
Apotex submitted a new drug submission for its generic Apo-A to HPB in January 1988. The product submitted by Apotex as its generic product was actually produced by Barr Laboratories, a company affiliated with the applicant, located in the United States, and the bioavailability study submitted compared that product with that of the U.S. originator (i.e. C (U.S.)). By letter dated May 1, 1989, Apotex was advised by HPB that its submission had only been reviewed in part and it was not considered to comply with regulation C.08.002 on the ground that "As you are aware, your Submission should include evidence in the form of ... bioavailability studies comparing your proposed product with the standard [X] product marketed in Canada, in order to determine their bioequivalence." HPB requested the results of an appropriate bioavailability study comparing "your proposed product" with the standard product marketed in Canada, i.e., C (Can.), upon receipt of which it would given further consideration to the new drug submission.
[19]
Thereafter, for over a year there was an interchange of several letters between the applicant and HPB, as Apotex sought to persuade HPB that the latter was obliged to consider its submission and HPB continued to insist on bioavailability studies with reference to a product already approved and marketed in Canada. A letter was submitted by Apotex, written by an officer of Bristol Laboratories of Canada to a doctor, who was associated with Apotex though this may not have been known to the Bristol employee who wrote, affirming that C (Can.) sold in Canada and the product of the same name sold by Mead Johnson in the United States, C (U.S.), are identical, in that both use the same source of active ingredient and have the same concentration of inactive ingredients, and that there should be no differences in effectiveness between the two products. This was not accepted by HPB as evidence certifying that the originator drug sold in the U.S. was identical to the originator drug sold in Canada.
[20]
In August 1990, Apotex filed an application in this court in relation to the refusal of HPB, on behalf of the Minister, to review its new drug submission in relation to Apo-A. That matter was settled between the parties in November 1990 on terms set out in a letter from counsel for the respondent Minister to counsel for Apotex which provided, in substantial part:
"Further to recent discussions, this confirms that the review of your [Apo-A] new drug submission is continuing and has not been completed for the purposes of s. C.08.004 of the
Food and Drugs Regulations
. If there are any deficiencies, they will be identified upon completion of the examination.
"Any existing and further data provided by Apotex to establish that [Apo-A] is chemically and therapeutically equivalent to a drug product sold in Canada will be considered. For the purposes of a comparative bioavailability study, the Health Protection Branch is prepared to consider evidence to establish equivalency between Canadian and non-Canadian reference standards."
[21]
In the course of discussions leading to this settlement the President of Apotex provided to Mr. Rowsell of HPB, whose office is concerned with approval of new drug submissions, further information intended to confirm the equivalency of C (U.S.), which Apotex had used as the reference brand for its bioavailability study, with the originator's brand already approved in Canada, C (Can.). It was Apotex's understanding from discussions at the time of the settlement that laboratory comparisons of the Canadian and U.S. reference brands would be accepted as evidence of equivalency, and that those comparisons would consist of chemical analyses and dissolution studies, the latter being designed to measure the rate of release of the active medicinal ingredient in an acceptable medium such as water.
[22]
Most information provided by Apotex was considered but was not accepted by HPB as establishing, as it described in some subsequent communications that the two reference brands were "identical", or in other communications, upon being reminded by Apotex of the terms of settlement, that the two were "equivalent". On March 8, 1991 HPB advised that the examination of the submission for Apo-A was completed and that the submission did not comply with requirements of s. C.08.002 of the
Regulations
. A number of comments were made about the submission, including that it "failed to establish the safety and efficacy of [Apo-A] Tablets in comparison to a Canadian reference standard".
[23]
Thereafter, there was considerable communication between the parties by letter and by telephone, and Apotex forwarded further information seeking to persuade HPB that the two originator brands were equivalent. That information, according to the affidavit of Dr. Bernard Sherman, President and Chief Directing Officer of Apotex, included "data pertaining to appearance, weight, dimensions (diameter and thickness), infrared spectra, near infrared spectra, CHN analysis and dissolution data" which in the view of Apotex constituted "all analytical comparisons that can reasonably be required to demonstrate that the U.S. and Canadian references are indistinguishable".
[24]
In the final result Apotex was advised by letter on June 21, 1991, that the information supplied did not establish the equivalence of the reference standard used by Apotex and the Canadian reference product. While HPB was prepared to review further information Apotex might submit, the letter stated, "... it is our opinion that anything other than a comparative bioavailability study utilizing [C] tablets obtained from the Canadian market or a direct certification from the manufacturer, will be sufficient for that purpose". (The letter was apparently in error; the word "not" was intended before "be sufficient", and this is the way the letter was interpreted by Apotex.) The letter also advised
"... in view of the length of time that has passed since the Branch initially requested that a comparative availability study be provided and the fact that no other satisfactory method of establishing equivalency has been identified, the Branch would suggest that the most expeditious method to complete the [Apo-A] New Drub Submission and consequently its review, would be the submission of a comparative bioavailability study using the Canadian reference product."
Thereafter, HPB undertook, on the urging of Apotex, to reconsider the matter, but it subsequently advised on July 3, 1991, that its position was unchanged.
[25]
I digress from the principal thread of description of the facts to deal with an aspect of the submission concerning Apo-A that was referred to by counsel for the respondent at the hearing of this application. This concerns the product submitted by Apotex for approval, which was a generic product produced by Barr Laboratories in the United States. Counsel for the respondent submitted that equivalence between that product and the Apotex generic was also required to be established and reference is made to the letter of March 8, 1991, from HPB advising that the Apo-A new drug submission did not comply with s. C.08.002 of the
Regulations
because, inter alia, "the comparative bioavailability study is also deficient in that the test product is not from a batch intended for sale on the Canadian market". The only evidence, as I understand it, of what Apotex intended in regard to the test product submitted, is that of Mr. Sherman, in examination upon his affidavit, that it intended to market a product, to be produced in Canada, that is the same as the Barr Laboratories product. As Mr. Sherman described it, the Apotex product and the Barr product are the same, "just two different batches of the same product".
[26]
If the test product was approved and Apotex reproduced it for sale in Canada, it could market Apo-A produced by it in Canada subject to possible further approval of that product from HPB, if that were required. As I understand the evidence of Mr. Sherman, not contradicted by evidence offered on behalf of the respondent Minister, it is not uncommon for a manufacturer to seek and obtain approval for a drug product which is subsequently further developed for market, or at least is produced in a different batch for market. Assuming laboratory tests demonstrate equivalency between the drug as produced for the market and the drug as tested, formal approval by HPB of the product produced for market is apparently not required.
[27]
In these circumstances, the fact that the test product submitted by Apotex for its Apo-A was produced by Barr Laboratories does not have any significance, in my view, for the issues raised in this application.
[28]
The lack of approval of the new drug submission relating to Apo-A when this application for judicial review was initiated in July 1991, has continued thereafter, and it is conceded by the respondent that HPB has not reviewed the bioavailability study comparing the Apo-A product with C (U.S.), the reference product selected by Apotex. The parties do not agree whether consideration has been given to information submitted by Apotex, in particular dissolution studies, after the 1990 settlement, to establish equivalency of the Canadian and U.S. originator brands, a matter I return to in reviewing issues which I class as collateral.
[29]
The circumstances of the applicant's new drug submission for its Apo-B product are generally analogous to those pertaining to Apo-A. In the case of Apo-B the test product was not one produced abroad but again the bioavailability study was completed with reference to a foreign brand, D (U.S.), not the originator brand, D (Can.), already approved in Canada. Despite substantial data, including laboratory analysis of chemical components and dissolution studies comparing the U.S. and Canadian originator products, HPB declined to accept the information from Apotex as confirming the two products were indistinguishable. It also declined to accept, as evidence that the two were the same (i.e., D (U.S.) and D (Can.)), evidence of two telephone conversations, initiated on behalf of Apotex without that fact being indicated to the person called, in which staff of Burroughs Wellcome Inc., the Canadian originator, confirmed that the two products were identical, indeed the source of the product sold in both countries, under the same name by affiliated companies, was the U.S. manufacturer.
[30]
Moreover, HPB refused to acknowledge that the settlement arrangements concluded with Apotex in December 1990 concerning Apo-A applied in the case of Apo-B. That agreement on its face appeared to hold open the prospect of establishing equivalence of the U.S. reference brand with that in Canada but no such prospect was held open in the case of Apo-B. Rather, HPB indicated that a comparative availability study for Apo-B would only be acceptable if done with reference to the Canadian originator brand already approved, unless the Canadian originator were to certify that the United States and Canadian original brands were identical.
[31]
Y is a drug of current significance in treatment of AIDS. As such, the new drug submission for Apo-B was subject to a fast-track process for consideration, without waiting in the queue for assessment in the normal process within HPB. At some time, I infer after this application for judicial review was filed, Apotex initiated a second bioavailability study, this one comparing Apo-B to the Canadian originator product, D (Can.), the only course which appeared to meet the requirements of HPB, without any dispute, if the new drug submission were to be considered. By the time of hearing this application in April 1992, that study had been completed and submitted for review. In view of that development, the respondent argued at the hearing that the application was moot with reference to Apo-B.
[32]
Subsequent to the hearing Apotex was granted a Notice of Compliance in relation to Apo-B, presumably based at least in part on the bioavailability study with reference to the Canadian product, D (Can.). This change in the factual circumstances after the hearing raised differences between counsel on whether or not that should be brought to the attention of the court and whether that change in circumstances has significance for the issue earlier argued that the application for judicial review was moot in relation to Apo-B. As earlier noted, I invited written submissions from counsel on these questions.
[33]
After consideration of those submissions I am persuaded that the issue of a notice of compliance in relation to Apo-B after argument at the hearing of this application is relevant for considering the exercise of the court's discretion. Just as a change in circumstances following trial and decision but before an appeal is heard may render moot issues raised on appeal (see e.g.,
The King ex rel.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ), so, in my view, may a change in circumstances following a hearing but before decision in an application for judicial review.
[34]
In this case the issue of the notice of compliance for Apo-B, dated May 25, 1992, renders moot this application insofar as it concerns Apo-B. The relief sought in relation to that product, an order that the respondent consider the new drug submission and issue a notice of compliance if the review be found satisfactory, has now been granted by the respondent without intervention by the court. The live controversy between the parties in regard to the processing of the application for Apo-B has disappeared.  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Sask.R. 82; 38 C.R.R. 232; 57 D.L.R.(4th) 231; 47 C.C.C.(3d) 1; 33 C.P.C.(2d) 105; [1989] 3 W.W.R. 97, Mr. Justice Sopinka for the court enunciated the general principle of the doctrine of mootness and the basis on which a court in certain circumstances should exercise its discretion to hear, or to dispose of, a matter that is moot. In regard to the general principle he said (at p. 353):
"The doctrine of mootness is an aspect of a general policy or practice that a court may decline to decide a case which raises merely a hypothetical or abstract question. The general principle applies when the decision of the court will not have the effect of resolving some controversy which affects or may affect the rights of the parties. If the decision of the court will have no practical effect on such rights, the court will decline to decide the case. This essential ingredient must be present not only when the action or proceeding is commenced but at the time when the court is called upon to reach a decision. Accordingly if, subsequent to the initiation of the action or proceeding, events occur which affect the relationship of the parties so that no present live controversy exists which affects the rights of the parties, the case is said to be moot. The general policy or practice is enforced in moot cases unless the court exercises its discretion to depart from its policy or practice. ..."
[35]
Mr. Justice Sopinka then identifies three general circumstances which a court may find warrant the exercise of discretion to consider a matter it has determined to be moot. These include those where although there is no longer a live controversy between the parties the necessary adversarial context still prevails, where special circumstances warrant the application of scarce judicial resources, and where there is a need to demonstrate a court's proper lawmaking function.
[36]
I am not persuaded that this application as it now relates to Apo-B, meets those criteria. For Apotex, counsel urges that the necessary adversarial interests of the parties continue in relation to the processing of new drug submissions that include bioavailability studies with reference to foreign brands of drugs not approved for market in Canada; indeed these have been fully presented at the hearing and thus the second criterion, the need for judicial economy is not here a factor. Yet these adversarial interests in regard to the same basic issue arise and are disposed of in these reasons as they relate to Apo-A. Insofar as these reasons may affect the review by HPB of new drug submissions in future, that will occur as an outcome of my decision on the application as it relates to Apo-A, and any decision as it might relate to Apo-B is not, in my view, a matter of importance at this stage except for the applicant's satisfaction, for its rights in relation to marketing of Apo-B will remain, unaffected by the outcome of this application. Finally, in my view, the circumstances now prevailing in relation to Apo-B, do not indicate any special basis for intervention of this court in the interests of "the effectiveness or efficacy of judicial intervention", in the words of Sopinka, J. Indeed these circumstances appear to me to strongly favour declining to exercise discretion to resolve a matter now moot, even though it was a live controversy at the time of hearing. The relief sought has been granted by the respondent since the matter was heard, other relief referred to in the usual terms in the prayer for relief hardly warrants consideration of a declaration of the applicant's rights to a matter which has now been resolved, which is, in effect, the only kind of relief that could respond to the applicant's claims in relation to the Apo-B submission at this stage.
[37]
In sum, I conclude that the issue raised in this application in relation to the Apotex submission in regard to Apo-B is now moot, and further that there is no basis on which the court should exercise its discretion to deal with that matter at this stage. The balance of these reasons concerns the application as it relates to the new drug submission for Apo-A.
Collateral Issues
[38]
Much evidence and argument advanced on behalf of the parties concern issues which, in my view, are not for resolution here, or in the final analysis are not relevant to the basic issues for consideration. They do, however, help to define those issues and thus they warrant brief reference. I deal with these issues before turning to the basic issues raised in these proceedings.
[39]
The first two of these issues, in my view, are not matters which this court should determine, for they deal with matters involving decisions that depend upon scientific judgments, matters that in my opinion are best left for determination between the parties and are ultimately within the discretion of the respondent Minister under the
Act
and applicable regulations which vest in him or her the discretion to authorize new drugs for sale in Canada.
[40]
First, each of the parties urges that the process it seeks to establish or defend has a rational basis. Apotex seeks recognition by HPB of bioavailability studies comparing its new drug product to a foreign originator brand that is for sale in the foreign market. The company urges that the basis of that proposal is entirely logical. As expressed in the affidavit of Mr. Sherman, the Apotex position is as follows.
"15. Very often, original drug products are first marketed in the United States once approval is given by the Food and Drug Administration, a body analogous to the H.P.B. Subsequently, approval is obtained from the H.P.B. to market what is ostensibly the same product, although sometimes the product will be marketed by a subsidiary or licensee corporation. In such instances, the world literature that is available for the drug product is primarily referable to the American brand of the drug product since it is upon this brand that the testing and experience has occurred. However, the New Drug Submission of the original brand in Canada typically includes the data and/or literature referable to the original foreign brand since these two brands are bioequivalent. In some cases, the product is manufactured in the United States as part of the production for the U.S. market and is then shipped to Canada. In other cases, the product may be manufactured separately in Canada for the Canadian market but uses the same formulation so that the product is in any event identical or equivalent.
"16. It follows from the foregoing that, in conducting a bioavailability study, where the original brand of a drug product has been marketed both in Canada and outside of Canada, for example in the United States, either the Canadian or the American version of the original brand should be usable as the reference brand for testing purposes. In fact, logically it would appear more appropriate that the reference brand be the U.S. brand to which the world literature directly relates. This is so since the generic submission for approval relies on the world literature to establish the safety and efficacy of the reference product. Thus, it is logical that the standard used as the reference in testing be that to which the literature most clearly relates. Moreover, approval of the Canadian original brand is itself usually based upon the date generated for the foreign reference brand and upon demonstration of bio-equivalence to that brand."
[41]
For HPB the position of the respondent Minister is set out as follows in the affidavit of Mr. Rowsell of HPB.
"8. The H.P.B. has required for many years that a comparative bioavailability study that is submitted under subsection C.08.002(2) of the
Food and Drugs Regulations
to establish the safety and efficacy of a new drug be in reference to a drug product marketed for sale in Canada or a drug product that has been confirmed as identical to a drug product marketed for sale in Canada.
"9. The H.P.B. can only be sure that the formulation of the standard used for comparison is safe and effective if it is marketed for sale in Canada, and detailed performance information in the Canadian marketplace is only available if the drug product is marketed for sale in Canada. The standard for approval, and the nature and characteristics of a drug product may differ in other jurisdictions. However, if the standard used for comparison is a product marketed in Canada, then the Department has the assurance that the standard used for comparison was evaluated and found by the Department to be safe and effective and consequently approved for marketing in Canada. Marketplace performance information on products marketed outside Canada, if available, is not sufficiently complete to permit a full assessment of safety and efficacy under subsection C.08.002(2) of the
Food and Drugs Regulations
."
[42]
In an affidavit responding to that of Mr. Rowsell, Mr. Sherman of Apotex is critical of the position as described by Rowsell, on grounds of logic and reason. Moreover, the HPB position appears to me to make little sense, if it were to be related to an originator brand of a new drug proposed to be introduced in Canada, where the new drug submission may rely upon bioavailability studies of equivalency with a foreign reference brand or upon certification that the foreign product is identical to that proposed to be marketed in Canada. Thus, I interpret Mr. Rowsell's defence of the HPB policy as related exclusively to generic or synonym drugs, in a case where an originator drug has already been approved for marketing in Canada.
[43]
While the parties differ on whether HPB has considered various aspects of the submissions by Apotex concerning Apo-A, it is clearly conceded by counsel for the respondent Minister that the bioavailability study comparing Apo-A with a foreign originator product, i.e., with C (U.S.), has not been considered.
[44]
The second subordinate issue concerns the processes followed by Apotex to establish equivalency of the United States originator brand, which it used as the reference for its bioavailability study, with the Canadian originator brand, and the assessments of those processes by HPB.
[45]
In the case of its Apo-A submission, as it had done for Apo-B, Apotex included evidence of statements by staff members of the Canadian originator, made to a third party, that the Canadian product was essentially the same as the United States originator brand. HPB was not prepared in either case to consider the statements as satisfactory to establish that the two brands were identical. It declined to confirm, either from its own records or by its own direct inquiry to the Canadian originator concerned, that the two were identical. HPB treats the records and information on each drug product as confidential between HPB and the manufacturer concerned, and that information is not considered to be available to support a submission by another manufacturer. Each submission is required to be complete in itself on the basis of information the manufacturer submits that it supplies from its own resources and testing.
[46]
For Apotex, it is urged on the basis of judicial decisions in other countries that information about a particular drug product provided by one manufacturer is available to the regulator, though not to others, in considering submissions of another manufacturer of a generic product. Here, of course, that information, it is implied, would confirm for HPB the equivalency of the Canadian and the foreign originator brands, an equivalency that Apotex contends it has established by other evidence including laboratory tests. In this regard Apotex refers to
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (Aust. Fed. C. of A.). These cases concern applicable laws in the United Kingdom and in Australia respectively and from the reported decisions there are differences between those legal regimes and that applicable in Canada; moreover, neither case directly raises the issue here raised and both are distinguishable on their facts. I am not persuaded that HPB's practice is beyond its authority.
[47]
Particularly after the settlement in 1990 of the first application for judicial review in relation to Apo-A, Apotex sought to establish equivalency, between the U.S. reference brand used for its bioavailability study and the Canadian originator brand, by laboratory tests, in particular chemical analysis and dissolution studies. That was what Apotex understood, as a result of the settlement agreement, would establish equivalency. That understanding apparently was not shared by HPB. Although HPB held out that, in accord with the settlement, it was prepared to consider any information Apotex submitted, and that it had done so, the submissions by Apotex did not satisfy HPB. At the hearing of this matter, counsel for the Minister conceded that HPB was satisfied with chemical equivalency of the two reference brands, but it was not satisfied that the test data submitted by Apotex established their therapeutic equivalence.
[48]
Much of the difference between the parties on this aspect concerns the significance of dissolution studies. The Apotex view is that where chemical analysis demonstrates the products have the same ingredients and formulation, proper dissolution studies can demonstrate whether elements of the two products will be released in the same quantities at the same rates. On examination, witnesses put forward for HPB indicated that the use of dissolution studies to establish therapeutic equivalence is not fully accepted and is the subject of debate among scientists. Moreover, there was no evidence that the dissolution methods used by Apotex were discriminating enough to address the HPB's concerns over compression, crystalline structure and particle size, particularly with regard to Apo-A, a tablet. In his affidavit Dr. Iain McGilveray, Chief of the Biopharmaceutrics and Pharmacodynamics Division of HPB, states:
"7. In my scientific opinion, the use of dissolution as a performance test in lieu of comparative bioavailability assessment of two oral drug products for which other information, such as manufacturing details, is lacking is unacceptable. Products with similar dissolution profiles can have different bioavailability profiles and vice versa. As will be indicated below, use of dissolution in place of human biological performance measures of two products is controversial and regulatory agencies should be prudent in such circumstances and require human testing.
"8. In the case of [Apo-A] and [Apo-B], in paragraph 4 of Dr. Spino's Affidavit, he claims that Apotex have established these products 'to be therapeutically equivalent to the original brands of these products marketed in the United States which in turn have been demonstrated to be equivalent to the same original brands in Canada'. The point in contention is that the Apotex products have not been tested in humans in comparison to the marketed innovator Canadian products; i.e., there is no comparative bioavailability study. The Apotex products have been compared to the U.S. innovator products in such bioavailability studies, but the link of the U.S. innovator product to the Canadian innovator product is made by means of comparing physico-chemical measurements with no in vivo comparison. As noted in paragraph 7, I do not consider this to be acceptable."
[49]
As I interpret these comments, they stress the difference between dissolution studies and bioavailability studies, a difference Apotex would not deny, and they highlight, from HPB's perspective, the limitations of dissolution studies for purposes of establishing therapeutic effectiveness when contrasted with bioavailability studies comparing the drugs under study in their use with human subjects by in vivo tests.
[50]
With reference to the information submitted by Apotex in its two drug submissions to establish equivalency of U.S. originator brands with Canadian originator brands, Mr. Rowsell's affidavit states as follows:
"38. Apotex has not submitted evidence to the Department upon which we could conclude on any reasonable basis that the manufacturing instructions, process and equipment used in the manufacture of their U.S. reference standard products used in their [Apo-A] and [Apo-B] new drug submissions are equivalent to the instructions, process and equipment used to manufacture the innovator's drug products approved for marketing in Canada. The bulk of the evidence submitted by Apotex goes only to establishing chemical equivalence or equivalence in terms of the formulation of the U.S. reference standard and the Canadian drug products.
"39. Good Manufacturing Practices (G.M.P.) requirements described in Division 2 of the
Food and Drugs Regulations
, set out proper procedures, but they do not describe the manufacturing processes themselves. Although G.M.P. provides assurance of quality, it does not establish overall safety and efficacy.
"40. Establishing that U.S. facilities and equipment meet Canadian G.M.P. requirements, does not establish that the U.S. manufacturer employs the same manufacturing processes and controls as the manufacturer of the reference standard marketed for sale in Canada.
"41. Differences in manufacturing processes and controls may have a significant impact on the therapeutic effect of a drug product upon the human body. For example, during the manufacturing process tablet compression, particle size, or crystalline structure may be altered, which could change the therapeutic results.
"42. Manufacturers of drugs in Canada, both innovators and generic drug companies, must report adverse reactions to the H.P.B. pursuant to the
Food and Drugs Regulations
(see for example s. C.08.007(h)). The H.P.B. does not have such direct access to market results for the U.S.A.
"43. As products are marketed and experience is gained in their use and effects, such products are changed from time to time. As the regulator of drugs marketed in Canada, the H.P.B. knows about changes to Canadian products, but we do not necessarily know about changes to products marketed for sale in the U.S.A. To ensure therapeutic consistency, H.P.B. must be aware of significant changes to all marketed drug products."
[51]
In regard to these concerns Mr. Sherman, by affidavit in response, urged that HPB's concern with changes to drug products properly related to drugs marketed in Canada. In examination on their affidavits both Mr. Rowsell and Dr. McGilveray, spokespersons for HPB, ultimately concede that, at least in theory, dissolution studies could be designed to indicate any significant differences in formulation and manufacturing processes used for drugs compared in the studies. In fact, Mr. Rowsell professed no personal expertise in dissolution studies and deferred to Dr. McGilveray as an expert. The latter professed no personal knowledge of the Apotex studies and spoke to dissolution studies on the basis of general principles. He acknowledged that such studies were acceptable for purposes of comparing chemical and therapeutic equivalence in different batches of the same drug produced by one manufacturer, even, as I understand it, when produced in different factories. Yet he declined to accept Apotex dissolution studies as a basis for establishing therapeutic equivalence of C (Can.) and C (U.S.) even though, belatedly, chemical equivalency was accepted. Neither Mr. Rowsell nor Dr. McGilveray were knowledgable about the details of any review by HPB of the Apotex studies, though they were put forward as spokespersons on behalf of HPB and the respondent Minister. It is apparent from their examination in discovery that their views reflected general considerations and circumstances rather than positions adopted after any personal consideration of the particulars of the Apotex submissions.
[52]
HPB's negative conclusion with reference to comparative information submitted by Apotex relating to the two originator products is reflected by the position stated in Mr. Rowsell's letter to Apotex on June 21, 1991. As earlier noted, that letter stated, in part, "in view of the length of time that has passed since the Branch initially requested that a comparative bioavailability study be provided and the fact that no other satisfactory method of establishing equivalency has been identified, the Branch would suggest ... submission of a comparative bioavailability study using the Canadian reference product" as the most expeditious method to complete the new drug submission and its review.
[53]
The failure of HPB to suggest any particulars of deficiencies in regard to the dissolution studies by Apotex in comparing the Canadian and U.S. originator products is said by counsel for Apotex to be indicative of a failure or refusal to review those studies. Unlike its experience in relation to other new drug submissions, and indeed unlike its experience with other aspects of its submission for Apo-A, where HPB responded with particulars of its concerns or deficiencies, in relation to dissolution studies, before this application for judicial review was initiated, the basic response was that they were insufficient to establish chemical and therapeutic equivalency. For the respondent it is urged there is no requirement for deficiencies to be identified. To the extent prior practice of HPB to respond concerning deficiencies may have established any reasonable expectation, it was urged this was met by HPB's letter of March 8, 1991, advising of noncompliance and describing deficiencies in the new drug submission, even though no deficiencies were included in relation to the bioavailability study or to dissolution studies intended to establish equivalency between C (Can.) and C (U.S.). To do more, it was said by counsel, would require the regulator to tell the manufacturer how to do his work. Only in the course of pleadings and examination for discovery after this application for judicial review was commenced were HPB's concerns about tablet compression, particle size, crystalline structure, or manufacturing processes identified.
[54]
In light of the ultimate admissions, in discovery, of Dr. McGilveray and Mr. Rowsell, that at least in theory appropriate dissolution studies would indicate significant differences in relation to these concerns, it is difficult to assess how real the concerns of HPB were in relation to the dissolution studies actually done and submitted by Apotex. As I see it the principal concern was to have Apotex submit information comparing in vivo use of Apo-A with in vivo use of C (Can.), the Canadian originator. HPB's failure to respond with particulars about deficiencies of the dissolution studies is said by Apotex to be unfair, in light of its experience with HPB's detailed responses to perceived deficiencies in relation to other new drug submissions, and unfair in light of HPB's undertaking in the 1990 settlement to identify deficiencies. This gives rise to the claim by the applicant for an order directing the respondent to reply with particulars of deficiencies if upon review of the submissions the information is found insufficient to warrant the issuance of a notice of compliance.
[55]
My own review of this portion of the evidence leads me to conclude that, in the final analysis, HPB refuses to accept, for purposes of establishing safety and effectiveness of the Apotex brands, evidence of equivalency of U.S. and Canadian originator products. The emphasis, in Rowsell's affidavit, on comparing manufacturing processes used in preparation of the Canadian and U.S. originator brands, which ordinarily would be beyond the ability of Apotex to obtain, in my view makes clear that HPB was not prepared to consider equivalency of the two originator brands on the basis of any evidence Apotex could produce by laboratory tests. Despite its protestations that it would consider, in relation to the Apo-A submission, any further information Apotex submitted, HPB was only prepared to consider as sufficient a bioavailability study with reference to the Canadian originator product, C (Can.). HPB clearly stated that no other method satisfactory to it for establishing equivalency had been identified. While formally HPB's position was open to consider Apotex submissions, for all practical purposes only the submission of a satisfactory bioavailability study of Apo-A and C (Can.) would satisfy HPB of the safety and effectiveness of Apo-A.
[56]
If those responsible for HPB knew at the time of the settlement with Apotex in 1990 that there was no method satisfactory to HPB identified to establish equivalency of the U.S. and Canadian reference brands, then, in my view, in the settlement HPB misrepresented that they were prepared to consider information to establish that equivalency. If it became clear only after the settlement that no other method could establish equivalency to HPB's satisfaction, it seems to me disingenuous to continue to say they were prepared to consider all other submissions of Apotex for this purpose, when in effect only the submission of a bioavailability study with reference to C (Can.) would suffice to establish safety and effectiveness in human use of Apo-A.
[57]
For the respondent, while it is acknowledged that dissolution studies are relevant, it is urged that HPB's conclusion concerning the persuasiveness of those studies is based on credible evidence and is not unreasonable. Further, where there exists a reasonable scientific doubt about the efficacy of a new drug the Minister and his delegates should err on the side of caution. Where there is an alternative means for the manufacturer to seek approval for its product, presumably a means that would reduce or eliminate that doubt, this court ought not to intervene in relation to the decisions of HPB.
[58]
This matter, and the first collateral issue dealt with, concern in substantial part, judgment of scientific methodology. It may be that officials of HPB will, or will not, have much support from scientists in the specialized disciplines and methodology concerned. HPB policy ultimately will be vindicated by the consensus of scientists interested, or it will be modified, perhaps with some delay, if the policy and practice is not supported by scientists. Neither of these issues are ones that this court can, or should attempt to, resolve. I acknowledge that Apotex does not seek such a resolution in this application. But what it does seek, an order that the new drug submission be reviewed as now submitted, without a bioavailability study relating Apo-A to the Canadian reference product, C (Can.), does require the court to assess whether HPB's requirement for such a study as part of the Apotex submissions concerning Apo-A is a matter within discretion of HPB or the Minister under the
Regulations
. I return to this matter in discussion of basic issues.
[59]
The third collateral issue concerns the policy, claimed by HPB to be of longstanding, by which it required reference to Canadian standards or reference products in bioavailability studies, and concerning the application of that policy in relation to submissions regarding Apo-A.
[60]
Mr. Rowsell's affidavit describes the policy as one of longstanding and it contends that Apotex has been aware of HPB policy since at least 1981 when the policy was said to have been described in correspondence concerning an earlier new drug submission for another product. That correspondence does speak of a refusal to accept a bioavailability study made with reference to a standard product not available in Canada, but I am not persuaded the letter does discuss what Mr. Rowsell describes as the HPB policy. Rather it simply insists that in that case the study be with reference to a product marketed in Canada. In that case, Apotex points out that the foreign reference standard used for its bioavailability study was shown to be different from the reference standard originator product approved for sale in Canada. By implication Apotex suggests that if the Canadian and foreign originator products had been equivalent, no bioavailability study with reference to the Canadian product would have been required. That may be a logical deduction but that does not assist in resolving this case.
[61]
It may well be, as averred by Mr. Rowsell, that most new drug submissions by Apotex since 1981 included bioavailability studies comparing proposed new products to Canadian originator reference products, but not all submissions did, and some which did not were approved by HPB. In some cases approvals were granted after the Apotex submission to HPB for approval of Apo-A, and after June 1989. I find it surprising that the only written evidence offered of the policy of HPB, described as one of longstanding, was the letter of 1981 to Apotex, earlier referred to, which in my view does not speak of such a policy, and an internal memorandum of HPB dated June 23, 1989, after the Apotex submission for approval of Apo-A, from the Director General, Drugs Directorate, for HPB's Policy Issue Binder. The latter document of June 1989 states:
"Standard for Comparative Bioavailability
and Comparative Pharmaceutical Studies
"In conformity with past Directorate practices, I wish to reiterate that New Drug Submissions (NDS) for 'generic' or synonym drug products should contain appropriate, adequate and validated data on comparative bioavailability studies.
"Such comparative studies should be performed by the use of the corresponding currently marketed Canadian drug formulation as the essential reference standard."
A copy of that memorandum was sent to Apotex in November 1989, some months after the memorandum was dated in June, under a covering letter from a staff member of HPB, responding in relation to another new drug submission, who referred to the HPB policy as though it were recently established.
[62]
HPB points to an August 1990 expert advisory committee report to HPB, as support for its policy. That report entitled
Report on Bioavailability of Oral Dosage Formulations of Drugs Used for Systemics Effects
, states in part, in relation to a "Drug and Reference Drug",
"For a new drug substance, i.e., the first market entry, the reference product should be the intravenous formulation administered orally, if available, or an oral solution. In bioequivalence studies, the reference product must be that marketed in Canada by the innovator, his licensee, or if there is no recognized innovator, the market leader."
Evidence offered from one member of Apotex staff and from the chairperson of this committee concerned is that little attention was paid by committee members to this aspect of its report; but the report speaks for the committee, until it be changed. HPB also points to the practice of other countries in requiring, for approval of generic drug products, bioavailability studies with reference to drugs marketed in the "home" market, as outlined in a letter of May 17, 1991 to Mr. Rowsell from the Swiss Office of Drug Control in Berne, Switzerland. These external sources may be of some comfort to HPB in the policy it espouses. Indeed, they may lend credence to its position that the policy is reasonable, but that may not fully respond to concern about application of the policy in this case, especially in light of the timing of adoption of the policy and notice to Apotex.
[63]
I find it surprising that the evidence offered in support of the existence of a policy, said to be of longstanding, is all of such recent origin. Moreover, no explanation is offered of the interrelation of the policy, if it were of longstanding, with omission of any reference to it in
Guidelines for New Drug Product Requirements
published in February 1981 by the then Bureau of Human Prescription Drugs of HPB. These guidelines include reference to "General Requirements for Safety and Efficacy" and to "Bioequivalence", and both references refer to studies relating to acceptable brands of the drug product under review. It is noted that drugs may be introduced in different countries. In relation to Bioequivalence the guidelines state that "Generally the bioavailability of the new generic drug product is compared to that of an acceptable standard, in studies in man using an ethically acceptable dose and a validated method." No reference is made to any necessity for studies to be related to a Canadian reference brand. Though these guidelines might be changed by HPB acting within discretion vested by regulation C.08.002 (see, in relation to a change in regulatory policy regarding the definition of "new drug" under C.08.001,
C.E. Jamieson &  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 213; 46 D.L.R.(4th) 581, at p. 644; 37 C.C.C.(3d) 193 at p. 255), there is no evidence that the guidelines were revised and published, as the 1981 version was, for the guidance of the industry. If HPB policy was of longstanding, I find it extraordinary that Apotex, a major generic drug manufacturer, was unaware of it until the matter was brought to its attention by HPB in the latter part of 1989 in response to an Apotex new drug submission other than for Apo-A. In its timing, the communication of HPB's policy statement to Apotex was after its new drug submission for Apo-A, though Apotex apparently conceded it was aware of the policy before its new drug submission for Apo-B was put forward to HPB.
[64]
My conclusion is that HPB may well have had a practice, not followed dogmatically as we shall soon see, which practice was reduced to writing, as a policy statement, in June 1989, that bioavailability studies submitted in relation to new Generic drugs where an originator brand is already available in the Canadian market should be done with reference to the brand currently sold in the Canadian market. That is what the internal policy memorandum of June 23, 1989, clearly says. That may have implications for circumstances where a generic brand is the first of a drug product to be brought to market in Canada, if those circumstances are possible, but those are not relevant here. The use of the verb form "should be" in the policy statement may be intended to be mandatory, but it evidently is intended as a directive for the future.
[65]
The final collateral issue concerns exceptions by HPB to its own claimed longstanding policy, and unfairness or the discriminatory manner in which it was applied in relation to Apotex submissions concerning Apo-A. Apotex cites other cases, five of them involving Apotex new drug submissions, in the case of Amoxi tablets in July 1987, of Theophylline tablets in 1984, of Tamoxifen tablets in late June 1989, of Timolol in January 1988, of Doxycycline tablets and capsules of another manufacturer in September and March of 1989, of Erythromycin tablets and capsules in June of 1990, of Methotrexate tablets of another manufacturer in January 1991. All were said to involve instances where HPB had accepted bioavailability studies with reference to a foreign originator brand. Some of them were decisions made after enunciation of the written policy in June 1989. Mr. Rowsell sought to distinguish these cases by affidavit and in his examination, but when no clear distinction could be drawn, the instances were described as "mistakes" which HPB would not repeat.
[66]
This evidence is not supportive of a firm policy by HPB to require bioavailability studies to be done in relation to a Canadian reference brand. Counsel for the respondent sought to persuade the court that this indicated HPB was not inflexible, rather that it had a preference for a particular form of bioavailability studies with reference to a Canadian originator product, but it was prepared to waive its preference where it was otherwise satisfied of the safety and effectiveness of the drug in question. That flexibility was said to be shown by HPB's position in the settlement agreement of December 1990 and its readiness to consider subsequent submissions in relation to Apo-A. Yet if that were so, it is difficult to justify HPB's treatment of the new drug submission here in question, by insistence on the bioavailability study with reference to a Canadian originator product and no explanation of why other studies submitted were not considered sufficient. So far as any explanation was offered, that was only after the Apotex application to the court in this matter, by affidavits of Mr. Rowsell deferred to Dr. McGilveray as the HPB expert in relation to dissolution studies, and Dr. McGilveray admittedly discussed general science principles without particular knowledge of or reference to the facts of the Apotex submissions concerning equivalency of C (Can.) and C (U.S.). In light of their evidence the reasons of HPB's refusal to consider that therapeutic equivalency was established by dissolution studies appear, at least to one not expert in the scientific methodology, to be based more on general principles than upon specific concerns about the studies submitted by Apotex.
[67]
The record is one of less than consistency in the application of its stated policy or practice by HPB, though Apotex may well have been no worse off or no better off than any other manufacturer. The record does not depict an efficient, effective HPB in terms of its relations with Apotex, one of the manufacturers whose products it is required to approve for sale in Canada. Apotex was itself the beneficiary of decisions accepting studies with reference to foreign originator products in other cases. Nevertheless, it is difficult to agree that it was subject to discrimination or even unfairness from the requirement of HPB in this case on submission of a bioavailability study with reference to the Canadian product for the discretion of the Minister and his advisers is to be exercised in relation to each application and I am not persuaded there is a firm basis here for comparing applications for similarities in all relevant respects.
[68]
I sum up my conclusions in relation to the issues which I have classed as collateral. Both parties claim a rational basis for their respective views about the necessity of bioavailability studies of Apo-A and the Canadian reference product. Apotex claims, and HPB refuses to accept, that in the circumstances of this case, where chemical equivalency of the Canadian and foreign originator brands is established, dissolution studies as completed can establish therapeutic equivalence of those two products, the effect of which should be to eliminate any requirement for a bioavailability study of a new drug comparing it to the Canadian originator brand where a study has been completed with reference to the foreign brand. Both of these issues depend ultimately upon judgment based on scientific principles; neither is an issue for this court to assess. Ultimately that assessment is a matter for the respondent and his advisors within discretion vested under the
Act
and
Regulations
.
[69]
Insofar as HPB has a policy requiring in the case of generic drugs that a bioavailability study to establish safety and effectiveness of a new drug be done with reference to a product already on the Canadian market, there is no evidence of such a general policy being established before June 1989, more than a year after the Apotex submission for Apo-A. Even thereafter the policy was not applied consistently in all cases. To refuse to consider the entire Apo-A submission in reliance on such a reputed policy, one not even made known directly to Apotex until November 1989, would be unfair administration of the regulatory authority vested in the Minister and might be found to constitute a fettering of the Minister's discretion. That possibility may have influenced the respondent in reaching the settlement agreement in December 1990.
[70]
Since that agreement, I find that, except for the bioavailability study comparing Apo-A with C (U.S.), HPB has considered submissions of Apotex, including dissolution studies intended to establish equivalency of Canadian and U.S. originator brands, i.e., C (Can.) and C (U.S.), but HPB has not been satisfied that these establish equivalency at least in therapeutic terms. HPB has suggested it would be satisfied if there be submitted satisfactory results of a bioavailability study comparing Apo-A and C (Can.), the same position as it had taken in 1989 prior to the enunciation in writing, in June 1989, of its claimed general policy. That requirement concerns the evidence upon which the respondent Minister is to exercise discretion after review of the new drug submission for Apo-A.
The Basic Issues
[71]
The
Regulations
, in particular C.08.002, do not specify that bioavailability studies are required, or any other particular studies, to establish safety and effectiveness of a new drug. That requirement arises from the practice of HPB in dealing with manufacturers, a practice illustrated in the 1981
Guidelines
concerning new drug submissions.
[72]
Two basic issues to be resolved in this application concern the scope of discretion vested in the respondent Minister and his advisers in regard to the evidence to be considered in a new drug submission, and the appropriate standard for intervention of the court through judicial review in relation to that discretion. These issues relate to two questions, whether it was lawful for HPB to refuse to consider the bioavailability study submitted by Apotex comparing Apo-A and C (U.S.) for purposes of establishing safety and effectiveness of Apo-A, and whether HPB could lawfully insist upon a satisfactory study comparing Apo-A and C (Can.) as part of the new drug submission for Apo-A. The issues may seem interrelated but I believe they must be considered separately. The principal relief requested by Apotex raises both questions for it seeks an order directing review of its new drug submissions in respect of Apo-A and Apo-B to determine whether they adequately establish safety and efficacy for use as drugs in Canada "without regard to a condition precedent to such review that the reference product tested in the comparative availability study be purchased in Canada or that there be certification from the manufacturer of the Canadian reference product that it is identical to the non-Canadian product".
[73]
Under s. 30(1) subparas. (b) and (e) of the
Act
, the Governor-in-Council is authorized to regulate respecting the conditions of sale of any drug, the method of manufacture and testing of any drug in the interest of, or for the prevention of injury to, the health of the purchaser or consumer. Subparagraph (o) specifically includes authority to regulate respecting the method of manufacture and testing of any new drug, and the sale of any new drug and defining for purposes of the
Act
the expression "new drug". Division 8 of the
Regulations
made under the
Act
concerns new drugs, including definition of that term. Subsection C.08.002(1) of the
Regulations
prohibits the sale or advertising for sale of a new drug unless, inter alia
"(a) the manufacturer of the new drug has filed with the Minister ... a new drug submission relating to that new drug, having a content satisfactory to the Minister;"
and
"(b) the Minister has issued a notice of compliance to that manufacturer of the new drug in respect of that new drug submission pursuant to s. C.08.004."
As I read subpara. (a) the words "having a content satisfactory to the Minister" qualify the words "new drug submission" so that in every case the content of a submission is a matter within the discretion of the Minister and those acting on his or her behalf to determine.
[74]
Subsection C.08.002(2) then provides for the content of a new drug submission which
"... shall include such information and material as the Director may require and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, shall include [inter alia]
(g) detailed reports of the tests made to establish the safety of the new drug for the purposes and under the conditions of use recommended;
(h) substantial evidence of the clinical effectiveness of the new drug for the purpose and under the conditions of use recommended."
Section C.08.003 prohibits sale of a new drug even after issuance of a notice of compliance if changes specified, including changes in plant and equipment used in manufacturing, in processing and packaging the new drug, or methods of manufacture and controls or tests applied to control potency, purity, stability and safety of the new drug, are introduced and are significantly different from the information contained in the new drug submission, unless a supplement to the new drug submission is made and a notice of compliance is issued in respect of that supplement. The section specifically provides that
"(2) A supplement to a new drug submission shall include such information and material as the Director may require."
[75]
In my view the
Regulations
vest complete and exclusive discretion in the respondent Minister and the Director of HPB to determine the requirements of a new drug submission in terms of the information or evidence to be provided by the manufacturer. That discretion is not unlimited, for it must be exercised on consideration of factors that are relevant to the purposes of the
Act
and
Regulations
. Those purposes, in relation to new drugs, are to provide a process for approval of new drugs to be marketed in Canada that is "in the interest of, or for the prevention of injury to, the health of the purchaser or consumer" (the
Act
, s. 30(1)(e)).
[76]
The refusal of HPB to consider the Apotex bioavailability study would be unlawful unless the study, after at least some preliminary consideration, is found to be irrelevant to the assessment of safety and effectiveness of Apo-A, the purpose for which it was submitted and a purpose clearly within the purposes of the
Act
and
Regulations
. Refusal would be unlawful if it were based on some reason unrelated and thus irrelevant to the purposes of the legislation, or if it failed to take into account factors relevant to those purposes. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Man.R.(2d) 215, at pp. 174-176.)
[77]
Was the study here submitted, comparing Apo-A with C (U.S.), relevant to the safety and effectiveness of Apo-A? At no time did spokespersons for the respondent Minister say that it was irrelevant; indeed I doubt this could be said. At best their position is that in itself it is insufficient to establish safety and efficacy of Apo-A for marketing in Canada because they believe it is necessary to have information comparing in vivo studies of Apo-A with in vivo studies of a Canadian reference brand, C (Can.), information that was not here submitted by Apotex.
[78]
In my view, refusal to consider the full submission for Apo-A because of a claimed policy that bioavailability studies be done only with reference to a Canadian product, as for a time appears to have been the position of HPB following the letter of May 1989, and particularly after written expression of its policy in June 1989, would be unlawful fettering of discretion. (See e.g.,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (B.C.C.A.);
Re Lewis and Superintendent of Motor Vehicles for British Columbia
(1980), 108 D.L.R.(3d) 525 (B.C.S.C.).) Similarly, it would be unlawful to refuse consideration of the Apotex bioavailability study for the reason, suggested at the hearing by counsel for the respondent, that it did not demonstrate equivalence of C (Can.) and C (U.S.), for the study was not submitted for that purpose and Apotex never suggested that it was. Finally, it would be unlawful to refuse for the reason, also alluded to at the hearing, that Apotex was simply seeking a convenient method of preparing a new drug submission, relying upon a study of Barr Laboratories, its affiliate in the U.S., rather than undertaking a study of its own. Surely convenient and efficient methods for seeking approval for a submission which meets the requirements of HPB should be encouraged, rather than discouraged, it seems to me. All of these reasons are irrelevant to the purposes for which the bioavailability study was submitted or to the purposes of the legislation.
[79]
Refusal to consider the bioavailability study might be acceptable even if the study is considered relevant to the safety and effectiveness of Apo-A, if it were established that though relevant it was so peripheral to the main processes for establishing safety and effectiveness of the drug that it was unwarranted to direct scarce resources available for review to considering the study, but that was not here argued.
[80]
This leads me to conclude that Apotex is entitled to have the bioavailability study reviewed in relation to assessment of the safety and effectiveness of Apo-A for marketing in Canada. It is relevant to that assessment and no lawful reason for refusing its review has been suggested. (See
Oakwood
, supra.)
[81]
I turn to the final issue. Can HPB's requirement that there be a bioavailability study comparing Apo-A with C (Can.) included in the new drug submission for Apo-A be said to be beyond discretion vested in the Minister and the Director HPB by the
Regulations
? This depends upon the appropriate standard to be applied by the court in an application for judicial review in considering the scope of executive discretion vested by legislation and regulations.
[82]
I have already indicated that the discretion vested in the Director to specify requirements for evidence or information in a new drug submission is complete and exclusive under s. C.08.002 of the
Regulations
. That discretion is to be exercised in each case. HPB may have policy guidelines for guidance of the industry and the Branch itself in the usual case, but reliance on any guideline, not specifically provided by regulation, does not permit HPB to exclude other valid or relevant evidence or information in the exercise of discretion in each case. (
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(3d) 634, at p. 645 (F.C.A.) per Le Dain, J.A.; supported with approval by McIntyre, J., on appeal, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 2, at p. 7; 44 N.R. 354.) Nor does the legislated discretion permit HPB to require information or evidence irrelevant to the legislated purposes, or to base its decision on irrelevant evidence.
[83]
Here Apotex was advised in May 1989, before the June 1989 statement of policy was enunciated, and again in March 1991, following review of the submission after the settlement of the first application of Apotex for judicial review, and subsequently, that only a satisfactory bioavailability study comparing Apo-A with C (Can.) will suffice to establish safety and effectiveness of Apo-A. No such study has yet been submitted.
[84]
In this case the discretion granted to the executive involves more than the determination of facts and the application of the law in determining the rights of a party that do not directly affect the welfare of others. More is here involved than is often the case where courts are called upon in an application for judicial review to review the process followed by an administrator or tribunal. Discretion here vested by the
Act
and
Regulations
requires judgment in light of special expertise, in this case in related fields of applied and basic sciences, which judgment affects not merely the rights of an applicant party but is directed ultimately to the interests of, or prevention of injury to, the health of others, purchasers and consumers. In my view, discretion of this sort warrants judicial deference that recognizes the special expertise and responsibilities of the Minister and his advisers within HPB who must deal with numerous applications for approval of new drugs.
[85]
In judicial review of specialized tribunals, such as labour relations boards or adjudicators whose decisions, based upon particular expertise and experience, are to be final and binding and not subject to appeal or review, it is now accepted that a court will intervene only where the decision-maker has interpreted governing legislation in a manner that is so patently unreasonable that it demands intervention by the court. (
Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 963 v. New Brunswick Liquor Corp.
, [1979] 2 S.C.R. 227; 26 N.R. 341; 25 N.B.R.(2d) 237; 51 A.P.R. 237; 97 D.L.R.(3d) 417; 79 C.L.L.C. 14,209, per Dickson, J., as he then was.) In view of the discretion here, requiring special expertise and informed scientific judgment it seems to me a comparable sort of standard is appropriate for this court to consider in this case. Put as a question, in view of the particular, specialized discretion here vested in HPB can it be said that its application of the governing regulation, s. C.08.002, to require evidence of a bioavailability study comparing Apo-A and C (Can.) in the new drug submission for Apo-A is patently unreasonable? Is it so unreasonable that the governing regulation clearly will not support its application in this way?
[86]
Viewed against that standard, the evidence on behalf of the respondent Minister, particularly that of Dr. McGilveray, though disputed by Apotex, the fact that in many previous submissions by Apotex itself bioavailability studies were included with reference to a Canadian standard product, and HPB's reference to practices followed in some other countries, lead me to conclude that there is no basis for this court to determine that the HPB requirement is patently unreasonable or beyond the discretion of the Director under s. C.08.002 of the
Regulations
.
[87]
Except for the refusal to consider the bioavailability study comparing Apo-A with C (U.S.), the Minister's responsibility to consider the Apotex submission was met, ultimately by the letter of March 1991 advising that the new drug submission at that stage did not meet requirements for compliance with the
Regulations
. Among other deficiencies then noted was the failure to establish the safety and efficacy of Apo-A in comparison to a Canadian reference standard, which Apotex concluded meant there was a requirement for a bioavailability study using a Canadian reference, a conclusion borne out in subsequent correspondence with HPB. That requirement for a revised new drug submission has not been met by Apotex. Until there is such a submission, no duty rests on the respondent Minister to again consider the issuance of a notice of compliance for Apo-A.
Conclusion
[88]
In these circumstances there is no basis for an order in the nature of mandamus as sought by Apotex in relation to its new drug submission for Apo-A. I have already indicated that this application as it related to Apo-B is now considered moot and there is no basis on which discretion of the court should be exercised in judicial review of the process followed in relation to the new drug submission for Apo-B. Thus, an order goes dismissing the applicant's application for judicial review.
Costs
[89]
In written submissions, the respondents requested costs in relation to this application. Rule 1618 now provides that no costs shall be payable in respect of an application for judicial review unless the court for special reasons so orders. There are no special reasons in this case. Indeed, this is a case where special reasons in my view militate against any award of costs to the respondent.
[90]
In the manner of its dealing with Apotex, HPB seems, in my view, to have been maladroit, at times dissembling if not actually misleading. I do not believe that it acted in bad faith or with malice. Nevertheless, it relied for a time on a "longstanding" policy, of which it could produce no written evidence antedating June 1989, after the Apo-A submission was initiated. HPB reached a settlement of the first application for judicial review undertaking "to consider evidence to establish equivalency between Canadian and non-Canadian reference standards" and later professed that there was no known methodology to establish this (presumably, aside from bioavailability studies directly comparing those two brands). It was intransigent in acknowledging it was satisfied of chemical equivalency of Canadian and U.S. reference standards until these proceedings were initiated and the matter heard; it failed to identify any particular dissatisfaction with dissolution studies, unlike its practice in other respects, until pleadings and discovery in these proceedings when its reservations were articulated. In my view it failed to reasonably explain other examples of accepted new drug submissions which relied upon bioavailability studies with reference to a foreign product, some approved after its enunciation and espousal of a policy that would preclude this. All these are instances of less than full and forthright dealing with Apotex. Perhaps these arose from some confusion or from reorganizations within HPB; perhaps some such circumstances are inevitable in a bureaucracy with its attendant difficulties of coordinating management of information and of people. But that does not excuse what must have seemed to Apotex a stubborn position supported over time by differing explanations. In short, had HPB's relationship with Apotex been more open and cooperative, while still setting HPB's own requirements with rational explanations, it is quite possible that the first application, or this one, for judicial review would not have been seen as necessary.
[91]
In these circumstances, there would be no basis to award costs to the respondent even in the absence of rule 1618.
The Court's Confidential File
[92]
Finally, I turn to the question of the sealed, confidential record of the court in this matter pursuant to the order of the Associate Senior Prothonotary. If my order dismissing the application is the subject of appeal, I leave the question of appropriate maintenance of the court's record, now sealed and confidential, for determination of the Court of Appeal. If there be no appeal within the time limited by the court's
Rules
, I shall issue directions, by separate order, taking into account the agreement of counsel for the parties on this matter of the court's file. That agreement was submitted at my request following the hearing. If it seems appropriate to the court or is of interest to either party, a further hearing, to consider matters to be maintained as confidential on the file, will be arranged.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/sms
[End of document]