[1]
McKeown, J.
: The Refugee Division found the applicant not to be a Convention refugee.
[2]
In my view the Board erred in law when it found that the facts in this matter did not amount to previous persecution. Board reasons page 9:
"As traumatic as that may have been, the panel is not satisfied that this experience provides a valid basis to justify a finding that it amounted to persecution. As the panel is not satisfied that there has been previous persecution, it is appropriate that the claimant be determined not to be a Convention refugee."
[3]
While persecution is not defined in the
Act
, Heald, J.A., relied on two dictionary definitions of the term in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.) at pp. 133, 134:
"The
Living Webster Encyclopedia Dictionary
defines 'persecute' as:
'To harass or afflict with repeated acts of cruelty or annoyance; to afflict persistently, to afflict or punish because of particular opinions or adherence to a particular creed or mode of worship.'
"The
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
contains, inter alia, the following definitions of 'persecution':
'A particular course or period of systematic infliction of punishment directed against those holding a particular (religious belief); persistent injury or annoyance from any source.'"
[4]
The court has accepted a broad range of harassment and ill treatment as constituting persecution. Furthermore, the court has stated that neither deprivation of physical liberty nor physical mistreatment are essential elements of persecution.
[5]
In 1981, the applicant's brother and family were murdered by the National Guard. His mother saw the murders and died of shock three days later. Board reasons p. 2:
"In 1986 he noticed soldiers watching his shop. He told his guerrilla contacts to make other arrangements. In 1987, during a conflict between guerrillas and the military, several guerrillas fled to his shop. The military arrived and he and the guerrillas were arrested. He was photographed and fingerprinted. During six weeks in detention he was mistreated, sexually assaulted, and accused of being a guerrilla."
Board reasons p. 3:
"The claimant testified that after his arrest he and the guerrillas were taken to a barracks. He and other prisoners had to dig pits. They found decomposing human bones. The soldiers told the prisoners they were digging their own graves. The soldiers asked the claimant how he helped the guerrillas, and they put hot pliers under his fingernails and beat him. He was sexually assaulted. He was interrogated seven times and accused of being a guerrilla accomplice."
Board reasons p. 2:
"He escaped when guerrillas attacked the jail and released the prisoners. He stayed at a guerrilla camp for 15 days before returning to San Miguel, where he heard the military were looking for him. He stayed with a friend in San Miguel, and then went to his brother in San Salvador. In 1988 he returned to San Miguel to stay with his sister. He was afraid to go about freely. He worked for 'El Papalon', a cooperative which distributed food and helped organize demonstrations.
"In 1990 he heard the military were looking for him."
[6]
Following this he spent the next two years in hiding or not moving about freely. In July 1990 he arranged to meet his son but when he arrived at the rendezvous he discovered several dead guerrillas, including his son. There is no evidence of direct involvement of the government or its military in this 1990 incident.
[7]
In my view the two incidents in 1981 and 1987 amount to persecution. There is detention of the applicant for 45 days, serious physical abuse of the applicant, sexual abuse of the applicant and killing of his relatives. This is torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment contrary to art. 5 of the
Declaration of Human Rights
. Ill treatment of family members has constituted persecution.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), at pp. 782 and 783 found persecution when a 16 year old was placed in detention for three weeks where he was beaten with rifle butts and with fists and was continually interrogated. Although the applicant was 53 at the time of the 1987 incident the facts are far more serious than in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Accordingly, there is previous persecution. It was patently unreasonable for the Board to come to the opposite conclusion. In my view the Board was not competent to consider s. 2(3) when they had already found there was no persecution.
[8]
While I might have decided that there was not a change in circumstances as required in s. 2(2)(e) I am satisfied that there was evidence to support the Board's findings in this respect.
[9]
I must now find whether the applicant falls within the "special or limited category of persons" to which s. 2(3) applies. See
Minister of Employment and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  humanitarian principle which permits a person who has suffered serious past persecution to retain or obtain Convention refugee status despite fundamental changes in his country of origin. The UNHCR Handbook states:
"It is frequently recognized that a person who - or
whose family
- has suffered under atrocious forms of persecution should not be expected to repatriate. Even though
there may have been a change of regime in his country
, this
may not always produce a complete change in the attitude of the population, nor,
in view of his past experiences,
in the mind of the refugee
.
In interpreting the meaning of "compelling reasons" in the case of <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the Federal Court of Appeal referred to persons who had "suffered such appalling persecution that their experience alone is a compelling reason not to return them".
[11]
Hugessen, J.A., stated at p. 9 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> that "It is hardly surprising, therefore, that it should also be read as requiring Canadian authorities to give recognition of refugee status on humanitarian grounds to this special and limited category of persons, i.e., those who have suffered such appalling persecution that their experience alone is a compelling reason not to return them, even though they may no longer have any reason to fear further persecution."
[12]
Based on objective factors alone, the persecution suffered by the applicant was clearly sufficiently serious, "atrocious" and "appalling" to warrant the application of s. 2(3). The
Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English
, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1990, contains the following definitions:
"'atrocious': 1. very bad or unpleasant; 2. extremely savage or wicked (atrocious cruelty)
"'atrocity': 1. an extremely wicked or cruel act, esp. one involving physical violence or injury
"'appalling': shocking, unpleasant, bad."
In my view the torture and sexual assault experienced by the applicant (as described in the Board's reasons as herein before referred to surely qualify as "atrocious" and "appalling" acts, as defined above. Furthermore, ... the right not to be subject to torture and cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment is a fundamental right which enjoys the highest international protection. For all these reasons, the Board clearly erred in determining that "the test set out in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> is not met.
[13]
Since the Board had erroneously determined the issue of past persecution it led to its failure to consider the negative or psychological effect of the past persecution of the applicant.
[14]
There was ample evidence before the Board to show that the applicant continued to suffer severe psychological hardship as a result of the very serious persecution which he and his family members suffered in El Salvador. The incidents in both 1981 and 1987 can only be described as "atrocious" and "appalling".
[15]
A psychiatric report entered in evidence at the hearing stated that the applicant was suffering from post traumatic stress disorder, related to his personal and family history of violent persecution, torture and massacre. He was found to be moderately depressed and his psychiatrist recommended medication and future therapy. The applicant testified that he was in fact seeing the psychiatrist for this purpose. The Board noted, ... that the applicant had "difficulty in controlling his emotions". In fact, towards the end of the hearing and after several hours of intensive questioning, the applicant rose from the chair and went into a corner of the room, where he cried uncontrollably.
[16]
The psychological and emotional suffering demonstrated by the applicant meant that he continued to suffer the effects of past persecution and that refugee status should have been granted.
[17]
The applicant testified to a strong subjective fear of returning to El Salvador and said that he did "not have the courage" to go back and live in his country. The applicant demonstrated a knowledge of the current conditions in El Salvador. He nonetheless expressed his fear of the military, who are still a strong presence on the scene, and of the death squads who had just murdered a trade unionist. If there is no longer an objective basis for the applicant's fear (which is not admitted but expressly denied), the lack of change of the principal members of the government in El Salvador and the continued presence and power of the former agents of his persecution, justified the applicant's strong subjective fear of returning to his country. As stated in the UNHCR Handbook,
"a change in regime in his country may not always produce a complete change in the attitude of the population, nor, in view of his past experiences, in the mind of the refugee."
In the case of El Salvador, the changing conditions have not, ... even brought about a change in regime, as discussed in paragraph 45 supra. It is therefore submitted that the unsettled and violent conditions in El Salvador, the applicant's subjective fear and the lasting psychological effects of the serious past persecution suffered, established that the applicant had "compelling reasons" arising out of past persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection of El Salvador. It is respectfully submitted therefore that the Board's finding to the contrary, that s. 2(3) did not apply to the claim, was based on a misconstruction of the applicable test, or alternatively of the evidence before it, and in either event constituted an error in law.
[18]
The retention of the principal member of the prior government, the applicant's subjective fear and lasting psychological effects of the serious past persecution suffered established that the applicant had "compelling reasons" arising out of past persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection of El Salvador. Therefore, the Board's finding that s. 2(3) did not apply to the claim, was based on a misconstruction of the applicable test and constituted an error in law.
[19]
The application is granted and is returned back to a differently constituted panel of the Immigration and Refugee Board to reconsider the evidence in accordance with these reasons.
Application allowed.
Editor: Janette Blue/sms
[End of document]