[1]
MacKay, J.
: By motion, heard in Ottawa on March 27, 1992, the applicants seek leave to apply for an order staying the execution of the decision and order, issued on behalf of the respondent, in the form of a departure notice against the applicants, scheduled to take effect not later than April 1, 1992, for a stay of that decision and order and for leave for short service or an order dispensing with service of the notice of motion and documentary evidence pursuant to rule 469(3). Since arrangements were made for a hearing of the application to stay proceedings against the applicants, an order for short service or dispensing with service of the notice of motion and documentary evidence was not required.
[2]
At the conclusion of the hearing I dismissed the application for a stay and then provided summary oral reasons for that decision. Counsel for the applicants then raised a matter not earlier addressed in argument. I declined to vary the decision then made. While I then anticipated that a transcript of the reasons orally given at the conclusion of the hearing might suffice for the requirements of s. 51 of the
Federal Court Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7, which require filing a copy of reasons given for a judgment to be filed in the Registry of the court, upon reflection it seems more appropriate that these reasons now written be filed to comply with the
Act
. These reasons incorporate a ruling concerning jurisdiction of the court in this matter which I made at the commencement of the hearing and the decision made at its conclusion. The reasons herein for the decision are in essence the same as those rendered orally at the conclusion of the hearing.
Background
[3]
The notice of motion seeking leave and a stay of the decision and order to issue a departure notice against the applicants to be effective April 1, 1992, was one of two motions filed on behalf of the applicants on March 18, 1985. The other was an application for leave to commence proceedings under s. 18.1 of the
Federal Court Act
, which latter motion also included an application for a stay of the decision and order to issue a departure notice in addition to an order in the nature of certiorari, and a declaration relating to the determination made on behalf of the respondent. The decisions on behalf of the respondent were made March, 1992, by a panel constituted under the
Immigration Act
which determined that the applicants did not have a credible basis for their claim to be convention refugees. As a result of that determination the panel had issued the departure notice, following indication by the applicants that they were able and would be prepared to depart from Canada if their remaining in the country was not considered lawful.
[4]
The applicants are three young persons, all children of one family. The eldest, Katharina, was born in Romania in 1971; she arrived in Canada in 1987 with a student visa which expired in January 1990. Victor was born in Romania in 1975 and arrived in Canada in 1989 with his parents on a visitor's visa which expired in 1990. Johan, the youngest, was born in Germany in 1982; he arrived in Canada in 1988 on a visitor's visa which expired in March 1989. In 1991 all three made claim to be convention refugees. All are German citizens, Katharina and Victor apparently so by virtue of the nationalization of their parents with whom they lived in Germany from 1980 until their arrival in Canada, and Johan is a German citizen by birth.
[5]
Their claims to convention refugee status were apparently considered together with those of their parents who are naturalized German citizens. In each case no credible basis was found for their claim and the panel, having made that decision issued departure notices.
[6]
The paternal grandparents of the children are resident in Canada, having claimed refugee status and having been processed under the backlog program through which they were recognized as refugees. The three children are said to be very close in their relationships with the grandparents who have acted as their guardians and have had considerable responsibility for their upbringing.
[7]
The applicants are all registered and actively involved in Ottawa area schools. The eldest, Katharina, is in her final year of high school studies. If they are required to leave Canada by April 1, as the departure notice provides, it is said they will suffer irreparable harm in that they will not be able to complete the current school year and will lose accreditation for this. Neither of the boys have current travel documents and none has permission to enter or stay in the United States or countries other than Germany, where they fear they will face persecution threatening their personal security because of alleged threats there against persons who are not perceived as being native to Germany. They claim from previous experience in Germany and from more recent reports of attitudes there that, by their appearance and by their language, they will be perceived as foreigners and mistreated.
Jurisdiction Of The Court
[8]
Counsel for the respondent raised as a preliminary matter a question concerning the jurisdiction of the court to grant a stay of process relating to a departure notice. He did so essentially on two grounds, first, that the
Immigration Act
makes no provision for a stay, and second, that the nature of a departure notice was such that grant of a stay of the process would be inappropriate.
[9]
After hearing counsel I ruled that the court had jurisdiction to consider this application. That jurisdiction does not arise by virtue of the
Immigration Act
but rather, by virtue of the
Federal Court Act
and the inherent jurisdiction of the court pursuant to that
Act
. Following the principle enunciated by Heald, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (F.C.A.), it is my view that this court has inherent jurisdiction to grant a stay in circumstances where action by one party may render nugatory relief sought from this court by another party. Moreover, by s. 18.2 of the
Federal Court Act
, in force as of February 1, 1992, the court has jurisdiction to grant interim orders on an application for judicial review, pending final disposition of the application. That provision, in my view, warrants interpretation that encompasses the authority to grant an interim stay pending final disposition of an application for leave to commence proceedings seeking judicial review and, if leave be granted, pending disposition of the judicial review proceedings. The application in this case is clearly one interrelated with the application for leave to commence proceedings for judicial review under s. 18.1 of the
Act
.
[10]
As for the nature of the departure order herein issued, counsel for the respondent urges that it be considered, not as a decision on behalf of the respondent, but as an arrangement agreed upon when the person to whom it is directed has indicated willingness to voluntarily depart from Canada using his or her own resources. While that background may reflect the circumstances in which a departure notice is considered appropriate, rather than a deportation order which would issue to one who indicates no willingness to leave the country voluntarily, the decision to issue one or other of the orders is subject to judicial review, and in my view, it is not inappropriate to consider a stay of the process arising as a result of the decision to issue a departure notice, in the same way as it would be if the decision were to issue a deportation order. In either case, the test for considering whether a stay should be granted is the same, though it may be more difficult to meet that test in the case of a decision resulting in a departure notice.
The Application For Leave And
The Application For A Stay
[11]
Having determined that this court has jurisdiction to consider the application for a stay, I note that since the matter was set down for hearing, further consideration of the application for leave for the matter to be heard was unnecessary, at least in the absence of objection from the respondent.
[12]
On the merits of the application for a stay counsel were agreed that
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; [1975] 1 All E.R. 504 (H.L.), that test, in the case of an application for a stay as for an interim injunction requires that the court be satisfied that there is a serious issue to be tried, that irreparable harm will be suffered by the applicant if the order sought is not granted, and that the balance of convenience considering the total situation for both parties favours the granting of the order.
[13]
I assume for purposes of considering this application that there are serious issues raised by the application for leave to seek judicial review, but without prejudging whether that case is made out by that application for leave, a matter that can only be determined on the basis of affidavits and argument which at this stage cannot be considered to be complete. At this stage, on the face of the application for leave itself serious issues appear to be raised though that will only be assessed when it is clear that the respondent has filed affidavits and argument dealing with the application. Assuming serious issues are raised, this leaves for consideration whether the case presented in favour of a stay demonstrates the likelihood of irreparable harm to the applicants and the balance of convenience favours grant of the order sought.
[14]
I am not persuaded that irreparable harm will be occasioned to the applicants if the court does not intervene to stay proceedings at this stage. Indeed, it seems it would be premature to intervene now. Though I accept that the departure notice is a decision on behalf of the Minister, in my view it does not in itself deprive the applicants of any right or result in irreparable harm. As I understand the process, if the applicants do not leave Canada on or before April 1, 1992, further proceedings by or on behalf of the Minister, by way of inquiry pursuant to s. 27 of the
Immigration Act
, would be necessary before the applicants are ordered removed or deported from this country. Counsel for the applicants raised, in a respectful manner, a question following my oral decision indicating that I found no irreparable harm. He suggested that the departure notice was in effect an ultimatum and if the applicants had not departed Canada on the date set by the notice they were subject to further proceedings which would inevitably result in their deportation from Canada and consequent inability to return lawfully to the country for a period of two years, unless leave were granted for their application for judicial review and that review resulted in quashing the determination of the panel concerning their claim to refugee status. As I indicated at the time that scenario is based on a series of decisions yet to be made, including the timing of any inquiry which might be instituted by the respondent if the applicants remain in Canada beyond April 1, 1992. Those circumstances do not at this stage establish that the applicants will suffer irreparable harm if the process arising from the departure notice is not stayed at this stage.
[15]
Absent evidence of irreparable harm, it is strictly speaking unnecessary to consider the question of the balance of convenience. Nevertheless, it is useful to recall that in discussing the test for a stay or an interlocutory injunction in the
Metropolitan Stores
case Mr. Justice Beetz stressed the importance of giving appropriate weight to the public interest in a case where a stay is sought against a body acting under public statutes and regulations which have not yet been determined to be invalid or inapplicable to the case at hand. That public interest supports the maintenance of statutory programs and the efforts of those responsible for carrying them out. Only in exceptional cases will the individual's interest, which on the evidence is likely to suffer irreparable harm, outweigh the public interest. This is not such an exceptional case.
[16]
In these circumstances the application for a stay of process resulting from the issue of the departure notice to the applicants, is dismissed.
[17]
I would add this comment, as I did at the conclusion of reasons delivered orally. If further proceedings are carried forward in relation to the three young applicants in a manner that would result in an interruption of their studies in the current school year, I have no doubt there will be serious disruption in their lives. I do not accept the respondent's submission that loss of a school year at this stage in their lives could not constitute irreparable harm. While further processes concerning the applicants, and the timing of those, are matters for the respondent to consider, I would urge that regardless of the outcome of the application for leave to seek judicial review, the applicants should not be compelled to leave Canada before completion of their respective school years.
[18]
No representations in relation to costs were made in this matter and no costs are awarded.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]