[1]
McNair, J.
: The defendant (plaintiff by counterclaim), pursuant to rule 341(a) of the Federal Court Rules, seeks summary judgment dismissing the plaintiff's action on the basis of alleged admissions made by an officer of the plaintiff company during his examination for discovery.
The Facts
[2]
The action itself is one for infringement of the plaintiff's reissue patent No. 1,212,569. The plaintiff and defendant companies are both incorporated under the laws of Saskatchewan, and carry on business as manufacturers and distributors of farm equipment in that province. On August 17, 1979, the plaintiff applied for a patent for a "multiple section draw bar" invented by Terry Summach, Glen S. Pask, Dennis Summach and William Newton, all of whom subsequently assigned their application rights to the plaintiff company. A request for a special order for accelerated prosecution of the application was filed by the plaintiff on April 24, 1980. This was supported by an affidavit of Terry Summach as the plaintiff's Secretary-Treasurer and General Manager, in which he averred
"[t]hat a competitor of Flexi-Coil Ltd. has recently begun to manufacture and to market in Canada equipment virtually identical with the equipment which forms the subject matter of application No. 334,034. The competitor's equipment embodies virtually all of the features of the present invention and is being vigorously promoted in Canada by the competitor."
[3]
The special order was granted, and the plaintiff's application was allowed on October 14, 1980. A number of amendments were made at the plaintiff's request "to further and better define the scope of protection sought by way of editorial amendments to the claims and the disclosure to ensure consistency between the claims and to correct a number of typographical and grammatical errors appearing in the disclosure". In the result, patent No. 1,099,566 was granted to the plaintiff on April 21, 1981.
[4]
On April 22, 1985, the plaintiff filed a petition for reissue of patent No. 1,099,566 on the following bases:
"(2) That the said Patent is deemed defective or inoperative by reason of insufficient description or specification.
"(3) That the respects in which the patent is deemed defective or inoperative are as follows: it does not contain claims limited to the narrow scope expressed in new additional claims 33 to 87, attached hereto nor a corresponding statement of invention. The attached claims are well within the scope of the invention as originally expressed in Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,099,566 and within the applicant's intention at that time.
"(4) That the error arose from inadvertence, accident or mistake, without any fraudulent or deceptive intention in the following manner: the patent was issued without knowledge on the part of the inventors or the applicant (Your Petitioner herein) [of] the art mentioned below notwithstanding searches for any such art conducted prior to issue thereof. Such searches by inadvertence, accident, or mistake did not reveal the said art.
"(5) That knowledge of the new facts stated in the amended disclosure and in the light of which the new claims have been framed was obtained by Your Petitioner sometime after the 18th day of October, 1981, with respect to the Kopaska reference (namely U.S. Patent #2,970,658, copy attached), and on or about the 10th day of December 1984 with respect to the Lindsay reference (namely 1977 Lindsay brochure, copy attached) in the  following manner: both references were revealed to the applicant by a third party."
[5]
Along with the petition for reissue, the plaintiff filed a revised version of the specification and the claims of the original patent. Specifically, it added new passages to the specification at pages 6b to 6h, and appended new claims 33 to 88 inclusive to the 32 claims of the original patent. The reissue application was allowed by notice dated July 22, 1986.
Alleged Invalidity
[6]
In this proceeding, counsel for the defendant alleged that the reissue patent was invalid, void, and of no effect for two reasons. Firstly, he argued that the petition for reissue contained material allegations which were untrue with the result that the reissue patent was void, pursuant to s. 55(1) of the Patent Act, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-4. Secondly, counsel contended that the reissue patent had been issued by the Commissioner of Patents without authority since the requirements prescribed by s. 50(1) had not been met. In particular, he submitted that there was no basis upon which the original patent could have been deemed to be defective or inoperative by reason of insufficient description or specification, and that there was no error in the text of the specification or claims which could have been ascribed to inadvertence, accident or mistake.
[7]
The statutory provisions relied on are ss. 55(1) and 50(1) of the Patent Act, which read as follows:
"55(1) A patent is void if any material allegation in the petition of the applicant in respect of such patent is untrue, or if the specification and drawings contain more or less than is necessary for obtaining the end for which they purport to be made, and such omission or addition is wilfully made for the purpose of misleading.
"50(1) Whenever any patent is deemed defective or inoperative by reason of insufficient description or specification, or by reason of the patentee's claiming more or less than he had a right to claim as new, but at the same time it appears that the error arose from inadvertence, accident or mistake, without any fraudulent or deceptive intention, the Commissioner may, upon the surrender of such patent within four years from its date and the payment of a further prescribed fee, cause a new patent, in accordance with an amended description and specification made by such patentee, to be issued to him for the same invention for the then unexpired term for which the original patent was granted."
[8]
Defendant's counsel developed his argument as follows. He identified first a number of allegations in the petition for reissue which he submitted were material. He then sought to show, partly on the basis of admissions made, that each of these allegations was in fact untrue, thus leading to the inevitable conclusion that the reissue patent was void. Finally, he referred to the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  and argued that the principles of that case were directly applicable to the present situation. It followed, in his submission, that the legal result was unmistakably clear and entitled his client to summary judgment dismissing the action at this stage.
[9]
I am not certain I entirely understand defendant's counsel's interpretation of the interrelationship, if any, which exists between ss. 55(1) and 50(1). While the wording of the notice of motion would appear to indicate that the two subsections were relied upon as alternative grounds for dismissal, counsel submitted during the course of argument as follows [transcript, pp. 69-70]:
"I have identified a number of material facts as I apprehend them in s. 47(1) [old s. 50(1)]. ... I need succeed in ony one of them. It is  not a cumulative problem under s. 47(1).
"My submission is that all of them are material, and all of them are untrue for reasons I indicated, but if I make out one as being material, and that one being untrue, then the statutory basis and jursidiction for the Commissioner to grant the reissue is gone.
....
"What I say is that applying [the] law to the admitted material facts in this case requires a conclusion under s. 53 [old s. 55] of the Patent Act that the patent is void."
[10]
It appears to me I have authority, if I find any of the material allegations in the petition for reissue to be untrue, to declare the reissue patent void pursuant to s. 55(1). Alternatively, I can arrive at the same conclusion if I find the statutory prerequisites for reissue in s. 50(1) were not met. Given that the allegations submitted to be material by defendants' counsel are directly related to the question of whether those conditions are satisfied, it seems to me that the issues raised by those two subsections of the Act are one and the same: if any of the material allegations determinative of the exercise of statutory authority to grant the reissue patent are untrue, then the reissue patent is invalid under both subsections.
[11]
Before addressing each of the arguments of defendants' counsel in turn, I should comment briefly on the purpose and scope of the rule under which the present proceedings are framed. Rule 341(a) of the Federal Court Rules reads as follows:
"Rule 341. A party may, at any stage of a proceeding, apply for judgment in respect of any matter
(a) upon any admission in the pleadings or other documents filed in the Court, or in the examination of another party, ...
....
without waiting for the determination of any other question between the parties."
The decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> ; 4 N.R. 172, has been followed in numerous cases. The following comments of Thurlow, J., are particularly significant [pp. 148-149 F.C.]:
"The rule is, however, limited, as the passages I have quoted appear to me to indicate, to situations where as a result of admissions etc., there is nothing in controversy either in the action as a whole or in a particular part or parts of it. Even when all the necessary facts have been admitted but the legal result of them is still in controversy the rule is not appropriate if the legal question is a serious or fairly arguable one."
In the present case, the defendant has the burden of establishing both that the admissions relied upon are so clear as to leave no factual matters in controversy between the parties, and that the applicable law is so determinative that the plaintiff is not even left with a fairly arguable case to present at trial.
Insufficiency Of Description Or Specification
[12]
The first allegation in the petition for reissue which counsel for the defendant contends is material and untrue is that contained in paragraph 2 of the petition, namely, that "the ... Patent is deemed defective or inoperative by reason of insufficient description or specification". I agree that this allegation is material as its truth is fundamental to the authority of the Commissioner to grant a reissue patent pursuant to s. 50(1). As to its untruth, defendant's counsel submitted that no insufficiency of description or specification had been referred to either in the petition for reissue or  in the prosecution file of the reissue application. He also pointed out that neither the passages added to the specification nor the new claims 33 to 88 purported to correct any insufficiency of description or specification related to the claims of the patent. He stressed the point that no change to either the description and specification or the claims of the original patent appeared in the reissue patent. In counsel's submission, there was therefore no basis on which the Commissioner properly could have concluded that the description or specification were insufficient.
[13]
Counsel for the plaintiff argued that it was because of the discovery of prior art that the plaintiff attempted to enhance the sufficiency of the original description and claims by amending the latter as indicated, and that the question whether any perceived insufficiency of description or specification existed and was corrected by the amendments was clearly a triable issue. I am bound to agree. The subsequent allegations, to which I will make further reference, purport to particularize the allegation of insufficiency. Moreover, the specification of the reissue patent is certainly longer and more detailed than that of the original patent. Given these factors, it would seem to me that the plaintiff has an arguable case on this point. Consequently, I am unable to conclude that the Commissioner was clearly wrong in granting the reissue patent on this basis. These comments apply as well to defendant's counsel's attack on the first part of paragraph 3 of the petition for reissue, wherein the applicant purported to particularize the allegations just examined.
Intention Of The Applicant
[14]
I turn now to defendant's counsel's next submission that the allegation in the second part of paragraph 3 of the petition for reissue, namely, that "[the] attacked claims are well within the scope of the invention as originally expressed in Canadian Letters Patent No. 1,099,566 and within the applicant's intention at that time", was material and untrue. He argued that it was manifestly impossible for the added claims to be within the applicant's intention at the time the original patent was granted when, as evidenced by paragraph 5 of the petition, knowledge of the prior art on the basis of which the plaintiff framed its new claims was obtained well after the date the original patent was granted, a fact which Terry Summach admitted was true to the best of his knowledge. In short, he argued the case was conclusive that there could have been no intention as claimed by the applicant in April of 1981 because the applicant had no knowledge of the United States art at that time.
[15]
To buttress his contentions on this point, defendant's counsel sought to carify what he submitted was, in fact, the applicant's intention at the time the original patent was granted. He pointed to the applicant's request for the special order for accelerated prosecution and the filing of an amendment after allowance as evidencing the applicant's consciousness and concern regarding the contents of its application and the scope of the protection sought. He stressed the point of the applicant bringing infringement proceedings against a number of competitors shortly after the issue of patent No. 1,099,566 on the strength of being "... satisfied that the claims represented the protection that the plaintiff was entitled to on the basis of the application", as stated by Mr. Summach on his examination for discovery. None of this, in my opinion, clearly justifies a finding that the applicant's allegations regarding its intention, which I agree are material, are untrue within the meaning of s. 55(1) or, alternatively, that the requirements of s. 50(1) have not been met. It is understandable that the plaintiff was satisfied as to the unassailability of its patent, both at the time of the initial application and when infringement proceedings were instituted against competitors. Upon  subsequent discovery of the prior art, the plaintiff understandably sought to amend the original patent. Conceivably, the plaintiff might have filed its petition for reissue on the basis it had "claim[ed] more or less than [it] had a right to claim as new". Instead, it chose to treat the description or specification of its original patent as being insufficient, and added to the disclosure and the list of claims as a means of attempting to correct that insufficiency. I have dealt with the issue of the alleged insufficiency, and reiterate that I am unwilling to conclude that the Commissioner was clearly wrong in causing a reissue to be granted on this basis.
The Searches
[16]
The next allegation whose truth is challenged by counsel for the defendant is that set out in paragraph 4 of the petition for reissue which reads:
"[t]hat the error arose from inadvertence, accident or mistake, without any fraudulent or deceptive intention in the following manner: the patent was issued without knowledge on the part of the inventors or the applicant (Your Petitioner herein) [of] the art mentioned below notwithstanding searches for any such art conducted prior to issue thereof. Such searches by inadvertence, accident, or mistake did not reveal the said art."
Again, I agree the allegation is material. According to defendant's counsel, it is untrue because no searches for "such art" were in fact conducted by the applicant. In his view, therefore, it was wrong to base the allegation of error arising from inadvertence, accident or mistake on the failure of "such searches" to reveal the United States art. Here, counsel relies on what he asserts are conclusive admissions made by the plaintiff's president and counsel on his examination for discovery, appear ing in the following relevant excerpts from the transcript of Mr. Summach's examination at pp. 117-119:
"Q.	Can you tell me what searches were made for any such art?
A.	I requested of Gowling & Henderson that searches be done, and I think you have the results of that. That's been produced.
Q.	You are referring to the search reported --
A.	D-80, I believe it is.
Q.	-- in the Exhibit D-80?
A.	That's correct.
Q.	Is that the only search that was made for any such art?
A.	Of that type. There was -- the only other thing would be, I guess, you know, in the recollection of the inventors there was nothing we were aware of of relevant farm equipment, and if you call that a search, I guess that's the other one.
Q.	Are you indicating that so far as formal searches were concerned, the only one that took place was the one reported in D-80?
A.	Can you help me? I don't know.
Mr. Clarke:
Well, your answer is you don't recall. The answer is yes.
Mr. Smart:
Are you able to answer that for him?
Mr. Clarke:
Yes. The only formal search conducted with respect to this paragraph was the search of which you have the results, D-80, other than the -- you might consider the search of the Canadian Patent Examiner, but we didn't cause that to occur.
Mr. Smart:
I see. So we do not have, however, the instructions as to what that search was to be for. According to my recollection, the witness indicated yesterday that the instructions were by word of mouth and that there were no  written instructions, and he did not, as I recall, recall precisely what those instructions were.
Mr. Clarke:
I think we also referred to the possibility of a photograph, did we not?
A.	I don't -- I just don't remember.
I'm sorry. That's a very long time ago.
Mr. Smart:
In any event, the actual search was a search in the Canadian Patent Office; is that right?
Mr. Clarke:
The answer to that question is yes.
Q.	Mr. Smart: Do you accept your counsel's answer?
A.	Well, he knows more than I do about it. I mean, I assume so. It's a list of Canadian patents, so I guess that's what it was.
Q.	All of the references listed are Canadian patents; is that correct?
A.	Yes."
[17]
In my opinion, the tenor of this testimony is not so clear and obvious as to entitle the defendant to summary judgment at this stage. Counsel for the plaintiff submits he should be given the opportunity to argue his case on the full evidence, which could include details as to exactly what searches were instigated, what instructions were given therefor, and whether or not such searches would be likely to bring to light the two pieces of prior art. I agree. In my view, the answers given to questions regarding formal searches and actual searches are not so conclusive and irrefutable in the way of admissions as to preclude the plaintiff from calling evidence at trial in respect of searches for the United States art. Moreover, I am mindful of the words of Strayer, J., in Preston v. 20th Century Fox Corporation and Lucus (1987), 15 F.T.R. 54; 15 C.I.P.R. 110 (Fed. T.D.), when he said at p. 113:
"... It should also be kept in mind that admissions made on examination for discovery are informal only and can be amplified or even contradicted by the plaintiff by further evidence in Court."
My reading of the allegations pleaded in paragraph 4 of the petition for reissue does not enable me to find at this juncture that the plaintiff failed to show an error arising from inadvertence, accident or mistake, pursuant to s. 50(1) of the Act.
The Legal Issues
[18]
My finding that factual issues remain in controversy between the parties would suffice to dispose of the present application. However, it appears to me that the legal question raised by the application is a serious or at least a fairly arguable one. Counsel for the defendant relied strongly on the Supreme Court of Canada decision in Northern Electric, supra, wherein Duff, C.J., delivering the judgment of the court, held a reissue patent to be invalid because the statutable conditions governing the exercise of the Commissioner's authority to grant that patent were all absent. It is unnecessary to review the case in detail. However, it appears to me that Northern Electric is distinguishable from the present case by reason that there was no reference in the former to the discovery of prior art subsequent to issuance of the original patent. It seems that the patent was held invalid because its highly skilled and experienced inventor was taken to have fully understood the scope and effect of his application and the description or specification of his invention. Moreover, no evidence was adduced to show that the specifications, description or claims of the original patent were insufficient to give effect to the inventor's intention, or that the latter had failed to sufficiently describe or specify his  invention by reason of inadvertence, accident or mistake. In my view, the lack of evidence on these issues was clearly a factor in determining the particular result in Northern Electric.
[19]
Among the authorities referred to by counsel for the plaintiff was the Supreme Court of Canada case of  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  which appears to me to be particularly relevant to the present case. There, the appellant, who was the inventor's assignee, petitioned for reissue of its patent for a new style of curling broom on the basis that the original patent was defective because of insufficiency of description or specification and because, in certain respects, the inventor had claimed more and, in others, less than he had the right to claim as new. The court held, inter alia, that the Commissioner of Patents had acted properly in granting a reissue patent under s. 50 of the Patent Act. Martland, J., writing the opinion of the court, put this aspect of the decision on the following ground at p. 531:
"In my view this is a case of patent which is defective by reason of insufficient description, and this resulted from mistake; i.e., a failure by the first patent attorney fully to comprehend and to describe the invention for which he had been instructed to seek a patent. In my opinion it was a proper case for the application of s. 50, and the Commissioner was entitled to grant a reissue patent."
[20]
Defendant's counsel submits that the decision in Curl-Master turned on the failure of professional advisers to give effect to the intention of the applicant when seeking a patent, making in sufficiently distinguishable to lease his own case unimpaired. However, the patent attorney's inefficiency and the inventor's inexperience with the requirements of a patent application were not the only mistakes relied on by the appellant in Curl-Master. The petition for reissue, reproduced at pages 522-524 of the S.C.R. report, also contained the following allegations:
"That the error arose from inadvertence, accident or mistake, without any fraudulent or deceptive intention in the following manner:
"... Moreover, the Canadian Examiner only cited against the original patent application, U.S. Patent 2,043,758-Lay-June 9, 1936. Therefore the Patent issued without knowledge either by the Patentee, his Patent Agent, or the Canadian Office, of a prior Patent teaching that it was known to have a broom with a stepped construction which might render claim 1 of the patent invalid.
'That knowledge of the new facts stated in the amended disclosure and in the light of which the new claims have been framed was obtained by Your Petitioner on or about the last days of December 1958. ...'"
[21]
Unlike Northern Electric, supra, the Curl-Master case did present a situation in which the discovery of prior art subsequent to the granting of an original patent caused the holder of that patent, at least in part, to amend the disclosure, frame new claims and petition for reissue, thus entitling him to the relief sought. Without making any prejudgment of the matter on its merits, it seems to me that the plaintiff should be afforded the opportunity of arguing at trial that its own reissue patent was validly granted, according to the principle of Curl-Master.
Disposition
[22]
In final analysis, I am not persuaded that the factual matters between the parties are beyond controversy nor that the legal result flowing from the admitted facts is beyond doubt. Accordingly, the defendant's application under rule 341(a) necessarily fails, and the same is hereby dismissed with costs.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/slg
[End of document]