Relief Requested
[1]
Strayer, J.
: Four motions were heard together on January 9, 1991, as follows:
(1) A motion by Her Majesty under rule 1729 seeking directions as to the trial of matters referred to in the third party notice it had served on the Chief and Councillors of the Samson and Ermineskin Indian Bands of intention to sue them on their own behalf and on behalf of the members of their respective bands;
(2) a motion by Her Majesty (in effect in the alternative) for an order under rule 1716(2)(b) joining the Chief and Councillors of those bands, sued on their own behalf and on behalf of the members of their respective bands, as party defendants in the within action;
(3) a motion on behalf of the Ermineskin Band seeking leave to file a conditional appearance and an order striking out the third party notice against it referred to above; and
(4) a motion by the Samson Band for an order striking out the third party notice against it as referred to above.
The Crown's motion for directions as to the trial of matters referred to in the third party notice was not argued, counsel for the plaintiffs and the defendant both having indicated that this matter should be dealt with later.
[2]
The Chief and Councillors of each band, suing or sued on their own behalf and on behalf of the members of that band, will be referred to compendiously hereafter as the Montana Band (or "the plaintiff"), the Ermineskin Band and the Samson Band (or "the third parties") respectively.
Facts
[3]
Briefly stated, the essential facts as alleged to date in the pleadings are as follows. The plaintiff Montana Band claims that it had acquired an interest before 1909 in Reserve N
o
139 near Hobbema, Alberta, a reserve which it says was previously known as the Bobtail Reserve of which the Bobtail Band was the beneficial owner. The plaintiff alleges that the Bobtail Band had abandoned this reserve before 1909. It states that by 1909 the defendant Crown owed the Montana Band a fiduciary duty in respect of Reserve N
o
139, then occupied by the Montana Band, of the same nature as the Crown owes to other bands in respect of their recognized reserves. The plaintiff Band complains that in 1909 the defendant Crown purported to obtain a surrender of Reserve N
o
139 from "remnants" of the Bobtail Band who had by that time become members of the Samson and Ermineskin Bands located on adjacent reserves. It says that this surrender was void ab initio and the taking thereof amounted to the breach of a fiduciary obligation and a breach of trust by the Crown, as did the subsequent sale or other disposition of the land and its proceeds. The plaintiff alleges against the Crown a breach of fiduciary obligation amounting to equitable fraud, fraudulent breach of trust, and interference with statutory rights of the plaintiff. It seeks declarations which will be discussed later, an order for an accounting of the proceeds of the sale of the lands, damages and compensation.
[4]
The defendant Crown filed a third party notice directed to the Samson Band and the Ermineskin Band under rule 1726, claiming to be entitled to contribution or indemnity from, or to relief over against, those bands. The Crown states in this notice that if the plaintiff is able to establish certain allegations in the statement of claim to the effect that at the time of the surrender the Bobtail Band had no rights in Reserve N
o
139, then the defendant Crown would be entitled to contribution, indemnity, or relief over, such relief including: a declaration that the Crown holds any proceeds from the disposition of the lands for the benefit of the plaintiff and not for the benefit of the Samson and Ermineskin Bands to whom proceeds were to be paid under the terms of surrender; a declaration that it holds a portion of the Samson Reserve which had been transferred from Reserve N
o
139, in trust for the Montana Band and not for the Samson Band; an accounting by the Samson and Ermineskin Bands for proceeds paid to them from disposition of the land in question; declarations that those two bands hold such proceeds in trust for the defendant Crown; and an order that those bands indemnify the defendant Crown for all damages and compensation for which the Crown may be adjudged liable to the plaintiff. The defendant filed, at the same time as the third party notice, a defence which was subsequently served in respect of the principal action. Suffice it to say that in that defence the Crown essentially denies that the plaintiff has any right to the reserve in question.
Conclusions
(1) - Directions On Third Party Notice
[5]
As noted, counsel for the plaintiff and the defendant both suggested that this matter be dealt with later, counsel for the defendant suggesting that directions might be settled by agreement. Counsel for the third parties took no position on this matter. For reasons which will become apparent, I am adjourning this motion sine die in the hope that agreement can be reached on a set of directions having regard to my reasons herein.
(2) - Addition Of Samson And
Ermineskin Bands As Defendants
[6]
I am dismissing this motion. I am not satisfied that the addition of the Ermineskin and Samson Bands as defendants is, in the words of rule 1716(2)(b), "necessary to ensure that all matters in dispute in the action may be effectually and completely determined and adjudicated upon ...". Further, it is not apparent to me that any section of the
Federal Court Act
purports to give this court jurisdiction between subjects in a case such as this, quite apart from whether such a claim would be based on any "law of Canada". Further, it is not clear to me that the statement of claim, as presently framed, directly asserts any claim to which the Samson and Ermineskin Bands would be relevant parties.
(3) And (4) - Motions To Strike
Third Party Notice
[7]
Both of the third parties challenge the jurisdiction of this court to entertain the claims described against them in the third party notice. Although the Ermineskin Band asked for leave to file a conditional appearance to challenge the jurisdiction of the court, this was not pursued and I did not consider it necessary. I understand this to be a challenge to the jurisdiction of the court
ratione materiae
. Such a challenge may be raised at any time and, indeed, the court may raise such matter itself. Further, rule 1729(2) expressly refers to the power of the court to strike out a third party notice when an application is made for directions as to trial of the matters referred to therein, and it appears to me that it is open to a third party to raise the question of jurisdiction among other objections to the third party notice at that time.
[8]
It is common ground that the established test for jurisdiction of this court was set out by McIntyre, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  jurisdiction by the federal Parliament.
"2. There must be an existing body of federal law which is essential to the disposition of the case and which nourishes the statutory grant of jurisdiction.
"3. The law on which the case is based must be 'a law of Canada' as the phrase is used in s. 101 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
."
With respect to the first test I am satisfied that this court has jurisdiction under s. 17(5)(a) of the
Federal Court Act
[See Footnote 2], which provides as follows:
"(5) The Trial Division has concurrent original jurisdiction
(a) in proceedings of a civil nature in which the Crown or the Attorney General of Canada claims relief ... ."
That literally describes the whole of the proceedings contemplated by the third party notice. I believe that at least some of those proceedings would also fall within s. 17(4) which provides:
"(4) The Trial Division has exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine proceedings to determine disputes where the Crown is or may be under an obligation, in respect of which there are or may be conflicting claims."
Among other claims made by the plaintiff, a declaration is sought that certain unalienated mineral rights in the reserve in question "are held in trust for the plaintiffs". It appears to me that this is a claim "conflicting" with possible claims of the Ermineskin and Samson Bands, since, according to the surrender document of June 12, 1909 (referred to by the plaintiff in its statement of claim) the balance of monies received from the sale of Reserve N
o
139 (minus certain per capita distributions to members of various bands) was to be placed to the credit of the Samson and Ermineskin Bands. There is also a claim for a declaration that the Crown "held the subject lands under a fiduciary relationship" for the benefit of the plaintiff Band. This surely is inconsistent with the position of the defendant in paragraph 9(b) of the statement of defence that the "Indians of the Hobbema area" including several bands named therein "have been and continue to be the sole beneficiaries of the said surrender of 1909 and of the disposition and sale of the reserve" -- a position which recognizes a claim by the third parties to the same proceeds of surrender. Further, the plaintiff wants a declaration that the taking of the surrender, the sale and disposition of Reserve N
o
139 "was a breach of fiduciary obligation" owed to themselves. This is clearly inconsistent with the surrender document which operates in favour of, inter alia, the Samson and Ermineskin Bands and the general responsibility which the Crown asserts it owed to the "Indians of the Hobbema area". An assertion that the Crown owed a fiduciary obligation to the plaintiff Band in respect of Reserve N
o
139 or its proceeds of sale is in effect an assertion that the Crown owed no fiduciary duty to the Samson and Ermineskin Bands in respect thereof. This surely gives rise to a "conflicting claim" to being the beneficiary of a fiduciary obligation. I do not understand s. 17(4) to be limited to situations where two or more parties have independently initiated conflicting claims; it must also cover situations where the Crown contends that it does not owe, or has not owed, obligations to both parties where such obligations are mutually exclusive.
[9]
The more difficult question arises as to whether requirements 2 and 3 as set out in the
ITO
case are met: that is, is there an existing body of federal law essential to the disposition of the case "nourishing" the statutory grant of jurisdiction, which federal law is a "law of Canada" within the meaning of s. 101 of the
Constitution Act, 1867
? As recognized by Wilson, J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  there is both federal statute law and federal common law which is essential to the disposition of the claims by the Crown against the Samson and Ermineskin Bands as contemplated by the third party notice. As recognized by the Supreme Court in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case there is a federal common law relating to aboriginal title which underlies the fiduciary nature of the Crown's obligations to Indian bands [See Footnote 4]. Just as decided cases have elaborated the nature of the fiduciary obligation in respect of the duty owed by the Crown to an Indian band [See Footnote 5] so, I assume, the recourse which the Crown might have against a band which has falsely or mistakenly claimed to be the beneficiary of that relationship, or has wrongly received benefits thereunder when those benefits were owing to someone else, must also develop as part of the federal common law in respect of aboriginal title. With respect to federal statutory law governing the situation, the
Indian Act
in force in 1909 [See Footnote 6] would be a major factor in determining whether the Crown and the third parties had acted lawfully in respect of the surrender of Reserve N
o
139. For example ss. 17 and 18 of that
Act
governed membership in bands, transfers of membership from one band to another, and entitlement to share in the assets of a band. Sections 48 and 49 governed the procedure for surrender of reserves. While it was argued by the third parties that any claim which the Crown may assert against the third parties is essentially a matter of property and civil rights involving questions of equity or tort, I do not believe this is determinative. As was said by Laskin, C.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  institutions, such as 'tort' cannot be invariably attributed to sole provincial legislative regulation or be deemed to be, as common law, solely matters of provincial law."
The same can equally be said of claims in equity. According to the jurisprudence, it is sufficient for Federal Court jurisdiction if the essential relationships are created by federal law, relationships out of which the claim submitted to that court arises [See Footnote 8]. I therefore conclude that this court has jurisdiction to entertain the claims contemplated in the third party notices.
[10]
The third parties contend that the third party notice discloses no reasonable cause of action. In part this seemed to be an argument that the defendants now to be sued, namely the Band Council members of each band who are sued on behalf of all members of the Band, are not the same people who could have incurred liability in 1909 through deceit or misrepresentation. Counsel for the Crown was prepared to admit, for the purposes of this motion, what counsel for the Ermineskin Band stated in this respect, namely that only two of the present members of the Ermineskin Band were alive in 1909, being aged one year and eighteen months respectively at that time. Counsel for the Band also asserted, and wanted the opportunity to submit affidavit evidence on the point if necessary, that none of the funds arising from the disposition of Reserve N
o
139 were still in the hands of the Band or the Crown. It was argued that if the funds could no longer be traced by the Crown to the Ermineskin or Samson Bands, then no decision could be rendered imposing on present Band members any obligation in respect of such proceeds. In short, counsel argued that there could be no succession by present Band members to the liability of deceased Band members, and that current Band assets cannot be exigible in lieu of previous Band assets that might have been subject to some charge. I believe this is the kind of question which should not be disposed of on an interlocutory motion to strike. Profound issues are raised here on which counsel were unable to cite any directly pertinent authority. Given that Indian bands are not corporate bodies with a perpetual legal personality there may well be doubts as to the continuity of their inability. On the other hand, the whole concept of aboriginal rights represents a substantial departure from common law principles of succession. Aboriginal rights arise out of the use of land "since time immemorial". As claims to such rights arise from long use, it is axiomatic that current claimants base their claims on the entitlement through use of their ancestors -- ancestors who have not conveyed to them any interests by any ordinary legal instrument. Similarly band members claim under treaties signed many generations ago, without any title to succession which would be recognized in other fields of law. It would not be surprising if there were some continuing obligations, as well as continuing rights, flowing from the acts of their forebears. If the band was unjustly enriched several generations ago, it is arguable that present band assets might somehow be exigible. These are profound issues which I do not think appropriate to address here: suffice it to say that the inadmissibility of the Crown's claim against the third parties is far from being "plain and obvious", the usual test for striking out claims. While I have particular doubts about the viability of the claims in tort -- if such are contemplated in the third party notice -- against present members of the Band arising out of activities of their ancestors, I believe all these matters should be left to the trial judge to dispose of after hearing evidence and full argument.
[11]
A further complaint made against the third party notice is that it is inconsistent with the defence which the defendant Crown filed at the same time. The rule invoked here is paragraph 419(1)(e) which allows the court to strike out anything in a "pleading" if
"(e) it constitutes a departure from a previous pleading ..."
Assuming for the moment that a document apparently filed on the same day as the statement of defence can be regarded as a "previous" pleading, I am prepared to treat the third party notice as a "pleading". Rule 2 defines "pleading" as meaning
"... any document whereby an action in the Trial Division was initiated
or a claim in such an action was defined
... ."
I believe that a third party notice defines a claim even though it is not a statement of claim [See Footnote 9].
[12]
It is necessary to consider more fully the nature of a third party notice and the right of parties to resort to this procedure. Filing a third party notice, unlike adding codefendants, is not a step for which a defendant requires the leave of the court. By rule 1726(1) a defendant is entitled to file a third party notice where he
"... claims to be entitled to contribution or indemnity from, or to relief over against, any person not a party to the action (hereinafter called the 'third party') ... ."
The only challenge that can be made to the exercise of this choice by the defendant is on the basis that what he claims is not a "contribution or indemnity from, or ... relief over against ..." the third party. Counsel for the third parties and for the plaintiff argued to varying degrees that the third party notice was improper because the basis of the claims which the Crown asserts against the third parties is different from the basis of its defence against the plaintiff's claim. That is, it was argued that in the Crown's defence to the plaintiff's action the main contention is that the plaintiff is without any rights in the reserve in question. However, in the claims signalled by its third party notice, the Crown is contending that if it is found to have owed a duty to the plaintiff, a duty which it has breached, then it will have various claims against the third parties for having misled the Crown and wrongly taken benefits under a surrender of lands to which the third parties were never entitled.
[13]
I do not believe there has to be perfect symmetry between the defence in the main action and the statement of claim in the third party proceeding. I respectfully accept the rationale for third party proceedings stated by Laskin, J.A., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  proceedings is that the facts upon which the plaintiff relies against the defendant should issue out of the relations between the defendant and the third party."
In the present case the statement of claim is replete with allegations to the effect that neither the Samson and Ermineskin Bands nor certain members of those Bands had any interest in Reserve N
o
139 in 1909, the purported surrender by them thus being invalid. The invalidity of that surrender is fundamental to the plaintiff's case. For the plaintiff to refute the allegations in the Crown's statement of defence that the plaintiff had no right to that reserve, the plaintiff will, inter alia, have to establish that the Bobtail Band had abandoned its rights to the reserve. If it succeeds in establishing that fact then the defendant Crown will prima facie be able to make out a case that it gave the proceeds to the wrong party. In other words the plaintiff must, inter alia, demonstrate that the defendant Crown in accepting the surrender from members of the Samson and Ermineskin Bands was dealing with the wrong parties. Therefore the facts upon which the plaintiff relies issue, in part, "out of the relations between the defendant and the third party" as described by Laskin, J.A.
[14]
It was argued by counsel for the plaintiff that the claims described in the third party notice could not arise out of the defendant Crown being found liable to the plaintiff in respect of its claims. Counsel contended that the plaintiff is basing its claim on the existence of fraud or intentional wrongdoing on behalf of the defendant whereas, it is said, the rationale of the claims described in the third party notice is that the defendant was the innocent victim of misrepresentations or fraud practised by the third parties. Counsel for the plaintiff contended that if the plaintiff fails to make out intentional wrongdoing by those acting for the defendant then the plaintiff's claims will fail and the defendant will not be liable for sums in respect of which it might have a claim over against the third parties. That is, if the defendant's agents were innocent of any intentional wrongdoing, the premise upon which the third party claims are based, then it will suffer no liability to the plaintiff in respect of which there would be any need for indemnity, contribution, or claim over against the third parties. But I am unable to characterize the statement of claim as exclusively alleging intentional misconduct on the part of the agents of the defendant. Without going through the statement of claim in detail, there is reference, for example, in paragraphs 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 24 and 25 of the alleged fiduciary obligation owed by the Crown to the plaintiff and the breach thereof. In paragraph 25 it is said that this breach of fiduciary obligation amounted to "equitable fraud". It appears to me from the jurisprudence that allegations of breach of fiduciary relationship of the Crown in respect of Indian lands and allegations of equitable fraud related thereto do not necessarily imply an allegation of intentional fraudulent misconduct. In the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case the trial judge specifically found that
"There was not, as argued by the plaintiffs, fraud in the sense of deceit, dishonesty, or moral turpitude on the part of Anfield, Arneil and others. But the failure to return to the Band or Council, after October 6, 1957, for authorization as to the proposed terms of the lease, was, in view of all that had gone on '... an unconscionable thing for the one to do towards the other'. There was a concealment amounting to equitable fraud." [See Footnote 12]
This view was upheld in the Supreme Court of Canada. Dickson, C.J., writing on behalf of four members of the court agreed that there was breach of the fiduciary relationship and equitable fraud
"[a]lthough the Branch officials did not act dishonestly or for improper motives in conceding the terms of the lease from the Band ... ." [See Footnote 13]
Further, in paragraph 26 the plaintiff alleges that the servants or agents of the Crown
"knew or
ought to have known
that the persons from whom the surrender was taken had no legal interest in the subject lands and that the Montana Indian Band had a legal interest therein, [and thereby] acquired the surrender by deceit." (Emphasis added).
This is an allegation of deceit based in part on negligence. Also in paragraph 28 it is alleged that the Crown "interfered with the statutory rights of the Montana Indian Band", this allegation apparently embracing intentional, negligent, or innocent interference with the statutory rights of the plaintiffs.
[15]
Allegations of this nature, it appears to me, are not exclusively allegations of intentional misconduct for the reasons which I have stated. If the plaintiff's contentions are sound in law and fact it could succeed on some of its claims simply by proving negligence on the part of agents of the Crown, and on other claims simply by proving innocent paternalism of the kind found to exist in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case. The Crown might thereby be found liable in respect of facts out of which some legitimate claims, as described in the third party notice, might arise against the third parties who allegedly misrepresented their interest in Reserve N
o
139. It is conceivable, for example, that the facts could demonstrate that agents of the Crown were led to an erroneous belief in circumstances where, perhaps, they should have verified more carefully the identity of those entitled to Reserve N
o
139; but in such circumstances the Crown might have a claim over against the third parties in respect of misleading representations by those responsible for the affairs of the Samson and Ermineskin Bands at that time.
[16]
It appears to me that the pleadings of the defendant Crown are consistent with this possibility. In subparagraph 6(n) of the statement of defence the defendant alleges that:
"n) i) Upon realizing their mistake, [i.e. as to who were the beneficial owners of Reserve N
o
139] on June 12, 1909, officials of DIA obtained a surrender of the entire reserve from a group of Indians
whom they believed to be and were reputed to be
Bobtail Indians." (Emphasis added).
Consistently with this, in subparagraph 8(a) of the third party notice a claim is made against the Samson and Ermineskin Bands on the basis that they "unlawfully held out or represented or passed off to the Crown" that certain members of those bands were members of the Bobtail Band "when you knew or ought to have known this to be false" and caused or aided and abetted those members to sign the surrender, thus causing the Crown to act upon the surrender instruments and thereby obtaining lands, monies and other rights and benefits for the third parties.
[17]
The complexity of these various claims and the interrelationships among them demonstrate very well why a judge should not, on an interlocutory motion, strike out the third party notice. It is far from being plain and obvious that the third party notice contains no claim that would be sustainable as a claim for a contribution, indemnity, or for relief over against the third parties should the plaintiff succeed in some or all of its claims.
[18]
Having regard to broader principles, it appears to me that this is an appropriate case for third party proceedings because the facts pertinent to claims in both the statement of claim and the third party notice are identical or closely related and should, in my view, be tried together if possible. Further, it is eminently desirable that the third parties be bound by the findings of the court in the plaintiff's action and that there should not be a multiplicity of proceedings all of which would involve in one way or another the circumstances and the validity of the surrender of June 12, 1909.
[19]
It was also contended by the Ermineskin Band that the third party notice is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious or otherwise an abuse of the process of the court. This point was not argued specifically nor do I think it has any merit having regard to what I have said above.
[20]
I am therefore dismissing the motions to strike the third party notice.
Costs
[21]
Costs of these applications should be in the cause.
Order accordingly.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/gas
Footnotes
1.	[1986] 1 S.C.R. 752; 68 N.R. 241, at p. 766.
2.	R.S.C. 1985, c. F-7.
3.	[1989] 1 S.C.R. 322; 92 N.R. 241; 25 F.T.R. 161, at pp. 330-331.
4.	Ibid at p. 337.
5.	See e.g.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .	R.S.C. 1906, c. 81.
7.	[1980] 2 S.C.R. 442; 34 N.R. 290, at p. 447.
8.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.);
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  (C.A.).
9.	per
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at p. 466.
12.	[1982] 2 F.C. 385, at p. 425.
13.	Supra note 5 at p. 390; see also the views of Wilson, J., to similar effect, writing on behalf of three judges, at p. 356.
[End of document]