[1]
Muldoon, J.
: The Attorney General of Canada brings these applications for a writ or an order of certiorari, and a writ of prohibition both directed against the Canadian Human Rights Commission (hereinafter: the Commission) in order to suppress all current and future enquiry by it, or by the tribunal which it constituted, into a complaint (No. PO4412) expressed by the respondent Mary Pitawanakwat (hereinafter: the respondent; or Pitawanakwat; or, as the solicitors designate her, the complainant).
[2]
The history of this dispute begins over a decade ago. The complainant was hired as a social development officer by the federal Department of the Secretary of State ("S.O.S." according to the applicant; the "employer", according to the respondent) on October 22, 1979. The complainant alleges that in the course of her employment she repeatedly encountered discriminatory treatment on the basis of her race. According to the Commission's investigation report, Exhibit I to the affidavit of Diane Gorman, sworn February 9, 1990, filed, Pitawanakwat is a woman of Ojibway ancestry, and so, from a Euro-Canadian point of view she is one of a visible, racial and perhaps cultural minority. In terms of her complaint, but quite out of chronological sequence, it is noted that in August 1989, she elected to add to the allegation of racial discrimination an allegation of discrimination on the basis of sex.
[3]
In early October 1985, almost six years after taking up employment with S.O.S., the complainant received a performance appraisal from the department's regional director for Saskatchewan (Gorman affidavit, Ex. C, fourth page) in which he stated he would recommend to the department's "senior officials" the complainant's "release on the basis of incompetence". Exhibit C displays earlier job performance appraisals, too. Exhibit D is a copy of a letter dated November 1985 from the then current Assistant Under Secretary of State for regional operations wherein he stated:
"A review of your file indicates your continued failure to meet the requirements of the performance objectives established for this position despite the constant guidance of an experienced and knowledgeable Regional Director. In view of your job performance over the last three year period, I concur with the Regional Director's recommendation.
"Therefore, by the authority delegated to me by the deputy head, under s. 6(5) of the
Public Service Employment Act
, I hereby give notice of my decision to recommend to the Public Service Commission that you be released under s. 31 of the
Public Service Employment Act
, because of incompetence in the performance of the duties of your position.
"The Public Service Commission will advise you of the effective date of your release. If you decide to appeal this recommendation, you must do so within fourteen days of receipt of this notice."
As stated, this action was taken pursuant to s. 31 of the
Public Service Employment Act
, R.S.C. 1970, c. P-32, thus:
"31(1) Where an employee, in the opinion of the deputy head, is incompetent in performing the duties of the position he occupies or is incapable of performing those duties and should
(a) be appointed to a position at a lower maximum rate of pay, or
(b) be released,
the deputy head may recommend to the Commission that the employee be so appointed or released, as the case may be.
"31(2) The deputy head shall give notice in writing to an employee of a recommendation that the employee be appointed to a position at a lower maximum rate of pay or be released.
"31(3) Within such period after receiving the notice in writing mentioned in subs. (2) as the Commission prescribes, the employee may appeal against the recommendation of the deputy head to a board established by the Commission to conduct an inquiry at which the employee and the deputy head concerned, or their representatives, are given an opportunity of being heard, and upon being notified of the board's decision on the inquiry the Commission shall,
(a) notify the deputy head concerned that his recommendation will not be acted upon, or
(b) appoint the employee to a position at a lower maximum rate of pay, or release the employee,
accordingly as the decision of the board requires.
"31(4) If no appeal is made against a recommendation of the deputy head, the Commission may take such action with regard to the recommendation as the Commission sees fit.
"31(5) The Commission may release an employee pursuant to a recommendation under this section and the employee thereupon ceases to be an employee."
The same provision, virtually unchanged, is enacted as s. 31 in the
Public Service Employment Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. P-33. Both
Acts
are hereinafter referred to as the
P.S.E.A.
In both, "deputy head", in terms of a department of government, generally means the deputy Minister.
[4]
In the meanwhile, it was on November 1, 1985, that the complainant had filed with the Commission a human rights complaint against her employer alleging discrimination on the basis of race, alone.
[5]
The events overlapped. Having in November received a written copy of the employer's decision to recommend her dismissal, the complainant appealed under s. 31 of the
P.S.E.A.
before a Public Service Commission Appeal Board (hereinafter: P.S.C.A.B.) and a hearing was conducted on December 16 and 17, 1985, in Regina, before Paul E. Girard, chairman. Pending the decision of the P.S.C.A.B., the Commission postponed dealing with the complainant's complaint of racial discrimination pursuant to s. 41(a) of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
(hereinafter:
C.H.R.A.
).
[6]
According to the applicant's memorandum of fact and law, the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> received evidence and testimony relating to each of the complainant's allegations of racial discrimination under the
C.H.R.A.
Those included allegations that her workload was disproportionately large, that she was required to do dangerous work, that she was criticized for leaving a Christmas party, that her travel claims were not submitted, that S.O.S. management actively solicited a complaint against her, that her performance appraisals were biased, that she received no training, but excessive supervision, and that she was wrongly accused of managing time poorly and of communicating poorly. It is all apparent from a reading of the written decision of Paul E. Girard, chairman and sole member of the P.S.C.A.B., which is Exhibit E to Diane Gorman's affidavit. Is it all racial discrimination manifested in different guises?
[7]
On March 21, 1986, that decision was rendered, dismissing the complainant's appeal. The P.S.C.A.B. concluded that the employer, S.O.S. had acted "honestly and in good faith", and stated:
"... none of the incidents referred to by the [complainant], singly or collectively justify [sic] her contention that the department was out to get her or that her performance could reasonably be thereby affected to the extent that it would become incompetent."
In the result, the P.S.C.A.B. upheld the recommendation to release the complainant from her employment for incompetence. The complainant was accordingly so released, effective April 18, 1986.
[8]
The complainant asserts that "the P.S.C.A.B. did not address the issue of whether the complainant had been the victim of discrimination". That assertion is too simplistic in that the P.S.C.A.B., in the written decision, Exhibit E, noted that the complainant had in effect countered the employer's allegation of incompetence by means of her own allegation of racial discrimination levied against her as the cause of less than satisfactory job performance, not incompetence. Alternatively, the complainant argued that she was not incompetent in her job, but only so assessed, falsely, by persons who harboured racial prejudice in regard to the complainant. In this regard, the P.S.C.A.B. chairman in the written decision dealt with the parties' respective cases, starting with the complainant's case on page 18. The chairman mentions certain tips of the alleged racist iceberg to which the complainant pointed, at pages 28, 29, 31, 35, 47, 49 and 50. In the last mentioned passage the chairman of the P.S.C.A.B. further recited the complainant's position in the matter before him, thus:
"The appellant [i.e., the complainant] logically concluded that their [her supervisors'] calm acceptance of the situation and their dismissal of the remarks condoned the attitude that one race could be superior to another and the appellant recognized at the same time that such an attitude represented a contradiction of the department's own mandate which was in part to promote the sense of belonging of all Canadians. Given what the appellant perceived to be the true attitude towards the appellant's own people it was understandable that she found it to be a difficult environment in which to work. On the one hand, the appellant had to gain the cooperation and confidence of Indian and Native groups and on the other she knew that their suspicions and distrust of the Government were well-founded." (pp. 49 & 50)
Again the chairman further recited the complainant's counter response to the employer's allegation of incompetence, in this passage:
"During this period the appellant [complainant] was subjected to ridicule at staff meetings, crude and insensitive jokes around the office and derogatory comments in regard to her personal involvement in and commitment to the Native Community which she saw as being perceived by others as a substitute for her work rather than a part of her work as a Social Development Officer." (p. 51)
[9]
Further along in the written P.S.C.A.B. decision (Gorman's Exhibit E), at pages 54 and 55, the chairman notes and describes other counter allegations put forward on the claimant's behalf. However, at pages 73 and 74, the chairman observes of the claimant's former colleague and newly promoted supervisor, Ms. Smee, that the latter's hostility could perhaps be described as "overzealous", which was "equally consistent with the type of conspiratorial puffing demonstrated by some newly appointed supervisors". The chairman certainly trivializes the complainant's contentions. In an earlier, thankfully past era, such a chairman might just have chuckled: "boys will be boys".
[10]
The chairman again recognizes that a counter-complaint of racial discrimination - another alleged tip of a racist iceberg - was before him in his passages on pages 76 and 80 of the P.S.C.A.B. decision.
[11]
Finally there is this passage near the end of the chairman's conclusions in Exhibit E, the P.S.C.A.B. decision:
"As noted she [the complainant] originally had faith in him [André Nogue, the regional director] and only turned away from him when he legitimately and objectively criticized her work. She also believed, without any apparent foundation and therefore unreasonably in my view, that Ms. Lane (since working elsewhere) and Ms. Smee (his subordinate) exerted some unspecified form of influence over him. It is not enough to say that they were once colleagues for, equally, the appellant was once a colleague as well. Finally, Mr. Nogue repeatedly made it clear to the appellant that she was being given chance after chance and he cannot be faulted if the appellant chose not to believe him for I find as a fact that such chances were bona fide and should reasonably have been construed as such. In this regard, and as a general observation, the appellant was very sensitive to and unforgiving of the errors of others. For example, the word 'savages', by definition, is applicable to any person or group exhibiting unacceptably excessive behaviour. It has, however, a totally unacceptable connotation when applied to indigenous peoples of any nation. Ms. Lane's use of the word related to a group of indigenous people exhibiting unacceptably excessive behaviour and while such use may have been ill-considered the appellant equally chose to ignore that Ms. Lane had been threatened with physical violence by the group at which her remarks had been addressed all of which occurred in the heat of the moment. Similarly, Mr. Nogue arguably made an error in judgment by directing the appellant to involve herself in a drug investigation. However, the standards of honesty and good faith do not imply perfection any more than does the standard of competence." (pp. 86, 87, 88)
Thus it is simplistic to say that the P.S.C.A.B. did not address the issue of racial discrimination because the chairman recognized that it had been raised by the complainant, but he treated it as if it were an invisible, inconsequential issue.
[12]
He concentrated so intensively on resolving the issue of incompetence that he gave little or no weight to the other issue. Indeed, in logic incompetence could be explained entirely in terms of discrimination (except perhaps in the case of an incredibly determined-to-succeed, and superhumanly self-confident employee); and, conversely, discrimination could be explained entirely in terms of incompetence. In the semantics of logic the formulation appears to be the same as the old philosophers' conundrum of the chicken or the egg. In terms of knowledge of the human species, however, the two aspects are different not only in sequence but also in quality. Competence and/or incompetence are situational and personal to an individual. Racial discrimination is rather more endemic, inoculated by upbringing, parental example or formation, and boosted by similarly infected siblings, peers or teachers the virus often accords lifelong immunity from tolerance, fairness, democratic principles, respect for life and even a dollop of intelligence. Those afflicted by racial prejudice almost always have it long before their victims have a chance to demonstrate occupational competence or incompetence, and of course, from such a pejorative viewpoint, the victim will always be adjudged to be incompetent. Sometimes the mindless will take an instance of real incompetence or other substandard performance of an individual and build an attitude of racial prejudice and discrimination on that one instance or a few instances.
[13]
The chairman of the P.S.C.A.B. had the issue of incompetence as his focus for adjudication, and rightly so in terms of s. 31 of the
P.S.E.A.
, but in maintaining that focus, he did not sufficiently notice the complainant's counter allegation of racial discrimination as an effective depressant of competence in the performance of her duties. Indeed, while her counter allegations, acknowledged, but considered trivial, by the P.S.C.A.B. make a reasonable sort of reply (to be proved, of course) against the employer's allegation of incompetence, s. 31(3) of the
P.S.E.A.
does not make an employee's counter allegation of racial discrimination really relevant to the enquiry. That, however, is the principal focus of the
C.H.R.A.
[14]
On November 1, 1985, the complainant had filed her complaint against the employer, S.O.S., alleging racial discrimination contrary to s. 13.1 of the
C.H.R.A.
, but S.O.S. avers that its first notice of that complaint came to it by a letter dated September 8, 1986, almost ten months later. After the rendering of the P.S.C.A.B. decision on March 21, 1986, - some months later - on November 20, 1986, the Commission advised S.O.S. that pursuant to s. 33(b)(i) [now 41(b)] of the
C.H.R.A.
it had decided not to deal with Mary Pitawanakwat's complaint of discrimination, "because it has been more appropriately completely dealt with by the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  appointed pursuant to s. 31 of the Public Service Employment Act". (Gorman's Ex. G)
[15]
The complainant challenged the Commission's refusal to proceed with her complaint, and, on September 17, 1987, the Federal Court of Appeal ruled that the Commission had to proceed with the complaint, and ordered it to do so, in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Appeal in that judgment followed the then-recent decision of a different unanimous panel on May 14, 1987 in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> .
[16]
The Commission's reason for declining to deal with the complaint in
Burke
was expressed in the very same statutory words as employed in the present case. There, Mr. Justice Urie for that earlier panel of the Appeal Division in
Burke
wrote that the Commission had misinterpreted s. 33(b)(i). He further wrote, that the subparagraph:
"... clearly contemplates resort to a procedure under an
Act
of Parliament which has not, up to the time of the complaint, yet been utilized and thus is still available for a potential remedy for the complaint and not to a matter which has already been dealt with under such an
Act
and before resort has been had to the
Canadian Human Rights Act
. The French version of the clause makes this view of the proper interpretation of the paragraph abundantly clear. The Commission, therefore, was not authorized to dispose of the applicant's complaint in this case on the basis upon which it did, viz. pursuant to s. 33(b)(i).
"... The decision of the Commission will be set aside and the matter will be referred back to it for decision pursuant to ss. 35 and 36 of the
Act
."
The court ruled, in effect, that the Commission could not shirk its duty just because a P.S.C.A.B., a Classification Review Board or some other such enquiry had already rendered its decision before resort has been had to the
C.H.R.A.
Therefore the complainant's complaint of racial discrimination is still validly afoot before the Commission despite the P.S.C.A.B.'s earlier disposition of her appeal against dismissal on the ground of incompetence.
[17]
On April 18, 1988, the Commission appointed an investigator, Nicole Ritchot, to investigate the complainant Pitawanakwat's human rights complaint, no. PO4412. On April 25, 1988, the complainant amended her original complaint of November 1, 1985 to add an additional basis of complaint, being under s. 7 of the
C.H.R.A.
, no doubt in view of her having been released by S.O.S., her employer. The employer was informed of all the foregoing developments by letter dated May 3, 1988. The foregoing facts are shown in: the affidavit of Glenys Parry, paragraph 5, and Exhibit B (tabs 5 and 7, the Commission's motion record, vol. I at pp. 70 and 75); and Gorman's affidavit, paragraph 13, and Exhibits H and I.
[18]
Nicole Ritchot concluded her investigation and signed her report on August 4, 1989. It is mentioned in the Gorman affidavit, paragraph 13, and replicated in Exhibit I. That investigator's report recommends that a human rights tribunal be appointed to enquire into this complaint. The employer was notified of all this by registered letter dated September 1, 1989, included in the above mentioned Exhibit I.
[19]
Following, and based on, the investigator's findings, the complainant, on August 9, 1989, moved again to amend her complaint to allege sexual harassment. The matter is described in its various aspects in paragraphs 14 and 44 to 52 inclusive of the investigator's report. The report shows juvenile minds at play among the staff and even the complainant's female supervisor. The admitted juvenile conduct of the latter suggests the possibility of lesbian harassment of the complainant, depending on the verifiable circumstances, but whether that misconduct was such in fact, is not so found here, although what was apparently admitted was clearly puerile and grossly objectionable conduct on the part of an allegedly responsible public servant in the workplace. The S.O.S. was advised of the pertinent amendment of the complaint by letter dated August 25, 1989, as noted in Gorman's affidavit, paragraph 14 and Exhibit J.
[20]
The S.O.S. made a submission in response to the investigator's report. The submission is included in Exhibit C to the filed affidavit of Alta Erker displayed in vol. 3 of the applicant's motion record. The response to the investigator's report of those admissions of inappropriate, puerile conduct by the complainant's female supervisor is countered by the latter's allegations of being misquoted and by self-serving statements about her commitments and her beliefs, as well as her endeavouring to correct foul language which bothered some of her staff. The bare facts are not controverted, however. These passages are in Part III, s. 4, pp. 19 and 20, of the S.O.S. submission forwarded to the Commission on November 27, 1989. Also in Part III of Exhibit 3 to Erker's affidavit are responses to the complainant's allegations of unwanted touching, crowding and leering on the part of two of her male colleagues. Two incidents, one of buttock-patting and one of crowding, were not remembered by the alleged perpetrators, and others were admitted and explanations of the events were given in the attempt to minimize any sinister connotations.
[21]
The amendment of the complaint on August 9, 1989, some three years and three and a half months after the complainant was released from her employment on April 18, 1986, is raised by the applicant as a bar to the Commission's further dealing with that added complaint of sexual harassment. The applicant invokes s. 41(e) of the
C.H.R.A.
which runs as follows:
"41. Subject to s. 40, the Commission shall deal with any complaint filed with it unless in respect of that complaint it appears to the Commission that
. . . . .
(e) the complaint is based on acts or omissions the last of which occurred more than one year, or such longer period of time as the Commission considers appropriate in the circumstances, before receipt of the complaint."
[22]
The applicant is entitled to a certain, but no undue, respect for its position in regard to the complaint of sexual harassment added on August 9, 1989, to the complainant's outstanding complaint dated November 1, 1985, and already once amended on April 25, 1988 shortly after the apprehension underlying that original complaint was realized and she was released from her employment. Has the Commission demonstrated that it exercised its statutory discretion to undertake consideration of the complaint expressed long after the statutory criterion or datum line for considering complaints? It has not. Such exercise is surely not evinced in the letter, Gorman's Exhibit J, dated August 25, 1989, from the Commission's regional director to S.O.S. advising falsely that the Commission was "currently in the final stages of the investigative process", when the investigator had signed her report on August 9, 1989. Nor is it evinced in writing "please find enclosed an amended complaint form dated August 9th, 1989". This letter is far too coy and cryptic, since the employer already knew of
an amended complaint form
from April 25, 1988, already. But even if one holds that the communication is unexceptionable, it does not show why the Commission would consider such a marked departure from the statutory norm of one year's limit enacted in s. 41(e) of the
C.H.R.A.
(formerly s. 33(b)(iv) of that statute).
[23]
Now, the investigator confirms that the complainant had made some allegations of sexual harassment during the course of her employment. It appears from the investigator's report that the complainant was corroborated, as noted in paragraphs 49 and 50 of that report, thus:
"49. The complainant states that she raised these incidents of [sexual] harassment at a training session for all staff but neither then nor later did management representatives who were present discuss the matter with her. The two management persons, the Regional Director and Witness B, both state that the complainant did not complain to them about sexual harassment or the incidents specified above. However, Witness B did say that she had heard of suggestions or implications that the complainant felt she had been sexually harassed. She did not speak to the complainant about it.
"50. The trainer who gave the session
says he remembers the complainant talking about being sexually harassed
. However, the group, which included the Regional Director and Witness B, decided not to deal with the issue further." (Emphasis not in original text) (Gorman's affidavit, Exhibit I, p. 9)
These and the other paragraphs elicited a definite reaction and immediate response from the employer, S.O.S.
[24]
On September 29, 1989, the director general of the employer's personnel branch wrote a letter (Gorman's Exhibit L) to the Commission complaining about the lateness of this complaint of sexual harassment, suggesting that it "may have deprived us of our right to fairness as we were not informed of all the grounds which were to serve as a basis for the investigation and report". In that letter the director general complained:
"... Further, there are mistakes in the chronological summary and there are no specific or even approximate dates reported for important incidents of alleged sexual harassment (par. 45, 46). As mentioned above, the entire section on sexual harassment deals with allegations not specifically mentioned in the grounds of complaint for which the investigation was undertaken." (Gorman's Ex. L, p. 2)
Now, it was no wide-eyed surprise to the employer's lower and middle management, including the female supervisor earlier mentioned, in light of these passages, among others, in the employer's official submission to the Commission in relation to the complaint:
"
Part III - Sexual Harassment*
. . . . .
"*The Respondent [S.O.S.] was not notified of the allegations of sexual harassment until after the Investigator's report was completed and signed (Exhibit 4). Therefore, it is submitted that these allegations should not have appeared in the Investigator's report and that they should be dismissed by the Commission for these reasons. However, should the Commission choose not to dismiss the allegations on those grounds, the Respondent submits the following comments for the Commission's consideration.
(Gorman's Exhibit S, p. 16)
"3.
The Allegations that the Complainant Raised these Incidents With Management and that Nothing Was Done (clauses 49 and 50)
"In clause 49 the Investigator reports on the Complainant's allegation that she raised these issues of sexual harassment at a training session but that neither then nor later did management discuss the matter with her. In the same clause the Investigator states that both the present Regional Director and Witness B denied that the Complainant had complained to them about sexual harassment. The Investigator also states that Witness B said that although she had heard suggestions that the Complainant thought she was being sexually harassed, Witness B did not speak to her about it.
"The Respondent talked to the trainer mentioned in clause 50, who said that he indeed remembered that the Complainant had talked about being sexually harassed during a training session and that neither the Regional Director nor Witness B had dealt with it further during that session. The trainer said that the issue was one among other issues raised by the persons participating in the training session. He said that he believed it was up to management to decide whether to deal with such allegations immediately, in the public forum of the session, or deal with them later in private. No member of management recalls being asked about this incident by the Investigator, either during the main interview or later by telephone."
[25]
The employer cannot rationally adopt a posture of surprise, as the above texts amply demonstrate, since the regional director and the complainant's female supervisor were evidently present at the training session. That however is not the issue. The issues are whether the employer was dealt with unfairly and can take the advantage of Parliament's criterion of a one year datum line expressed in s. 41(e) of the
C.H.R.A.
[26]
The Commission has not acted properly or legally in this regard. One hesitates to become too technical in matters of human rights, but it is not "too technical" to expect the Commission to abide by the law's provisions in fairness to the person or body against which any complaint is lodged. The Commission's authority to launch an investigation is expressed in s. 43(1) of the
Act
. It runs:
"43(1) The Commission may designate a person, in this Part referred to as an 'Investigator', to investigate a complaint."
That, at least, means an existing complaint, not some future complaint. The complainant's complaint of sexual harassment did not exist as such under the
C.H.R.A.
until after the investigation was completed. The investigator at least must proceed on the basis of a complaint which is known, and is to be investigated. The Commission is not entitled to designate an investigator to go about dredging up complaints which have not yet been articulated by a complainant. That is just common sense, for, if the opposite were true the Commission could indulge in the tyranny of socalled "witch-hunts". Such is not within its power, nor undoubtedly is it within its intention, being after all, a human rights watchdog.
[27]
Such an interpretation is buttressed by what s. 44(3) provides the Commission may do about the investigator's report. It runs:
"44(3) On receipt of a
report
referred to in subs. (1), the Commission
(a) may request the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel to appoint a Human Rights Tribunal in accordance with s. 49 to inquire into the
complaint
to which
the report relates
if the Commission is satisfied
(i) that, having regard to all the circumstances of
the complaint
, an inquiry into
the complaint
is warranted, and
(ii) that
the complaint
to which
the report relates
should not be referred pursuant to subs. (2) or dismissed on any ground mentioned in paragraphs 41(c) to (e);" (Emphasis not in statutory text)
Since the investigator is not empowered to go about dredging up complaints not articulated by the complainant,
the complaint
to which
the report relates
, means an already articulated complaint under the
C.H.R.A.
which the investigator investigates not one for which the investigator first fishes in order to investigate, for that would be oppressive and clearly unlawful. It is not everyone who wishes to be a complainant, and that is the purpose behind the statutory permission to the Commission "to refuse to deal with the complaint unless the alleged victim consents thereto" as enacted in s. 40(2) of the
C.H.R.A.
Here it is apparent that the complainant did indeed accord her consent to the complaint of sexual harassment, but only after the investigation had been completed.
[28]
Therefore, insofar as the report related to a matter, alleged sexual harassment, which was extraneous to the complaint - any complaint - upon which the investigator was required to make a report, the Commission had no statutory authority under subs. 44(3)(a)(i) to make the request of the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel to do anything whatever. Why? It is because the Tribunal might lawfully enquire into
the complaint to which the report relates
, all right, but only such a complaint, and not some extraneous complaint (even although its factual allegations are mentioned in the report) which complaint came into existence only after the report was completed. The complaint, all of whose circumstances the Commission regarded warranting an enquiry, in subs. (a)(i), is the original complaint to which the investigator's report relates. It would be otherwise of course if the statutory provision related to "any additional but subsequently formulated complaint based on allegations or facts roughly contemporaneous with those incorporated into the complaint to which the report relates", for that indeed is what the sexual harassment complaint is. It is not a mere amendment like that of April 25, 1988. It cannot lawfully be invoked as a subject of a Tribunal's enquiry in contemplation of s. 44(3)(a)(i) of the
C.H.R.A.
[29]
Counsel for the Secretary of State made such a point in oral argument when she said this:
"... For example in this case, the Commission has decided it will go the investigative route. Having decided that, surely they have to go the investigative route with full procedural fairness and can't simply say if there's a breach here or a gap there, it's okay because we can catch them when we later get to the quasi-judicial stage. In fact, as the statute says, there are certain things you must address here; you must address them with procedural fairness." (Transcript: vol. 1, p. 170)
Counsel based her argument on the majority reasons of Mr. Justice Sopinka, in the case of the Syndicat des employés de production du Québec et de l'Acadie, cited as
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  D.L.R.(4th) 385.
[30]
Other allegations were raised by the S.O.S. in the role of respondent employer. The said employer was critical about the detail and accuracy of the investigator's report and the anonymous designation of witnesses by letter rather than by name. As a practical matter it is not too difficult for even the court at its remote place in time, physical proximity and lack of familiarity with the employer's other employees who were contemporaries of the complainant, to identify most of the persons involved by means of generous clues in the report. However, it is the employer's undoubted right to invoke (up to a point of reasonability) the rule of law, despite the easy practicalities of identification.
[31]
The majority of the Supreme Court of Canada in the <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> case above noted, lauded the reasons expressed by Mr. Justice Marceau for the Federal Court of Appeal in the same case
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Sopinka, J., expressed such praise under the title: "Reviewable Error" at S.C.R. 902-903, and D.L.R. 430-431, writing thus:
"I agree with the reasons of Marceau, J., that the Commission had a duty to inform the parties of the substance of the evidence obtained by the investigator and which was put before the Commission. Furthermore, it was incumbent on the Commission to give the parties the opportunity to respond to this evidence and make all relevant representations in relation thereto.
"The Commission was entitled to consider the investigator's report, such other underlying material as it, in its discretion, considered necessary and the representations of the parties. The Commission was then obliged to make its own decision based on this information. All this was done."
It is noted that in referring to "such other underlying material", Sopinka, J., did not invite the Commission to exceed the bounds of s. 44(3)(a)(i) by metaphysically writing into that statutory provision the imaginary expression "any additional but subsequently formulated complaint based on allegations and facts roughly contemporaneous with those incorporated into the complaint to which the report relates". That is what the Commission did in regard to the thirteenth-hour "amendment" concerning sexual harassment and, in so doing, the Commission exceeded its jurisdiction.
[32]
In a slightly later decision of this Court's Appeal Division, formulated again by Marceau, J., that of
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  natural justice and disclosure arose and the court held:
"... it should be noted that this court has had occasion to deal with s. 36 of the
Act
and the manner in which the Commission is to determine the course of a complaint once it has been investigated in two recent cases.
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Québec et de l' <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , [6 C.H.R.R. D/2831] it expressed the view that it was indeed on the basis of the report of the investigator and the representations of the parties that the Commission was called upon to make its decision. Moreover, the complainant here had been made aware that that would be the case. ... It was held in those same decisions that the demands of natural justice did not require that the Commission make available to a complainant the entire content of the investigator's file; a fair summary of the relevant evidence, witness' statements and investigator's notes was sufficient. The simple omission from material given to the complainant of the whole set of statistics on the basis of which the investigator had made his statement as to the number of natives from Eastern Canada appointed to positions in the Department does not appear to us to constitute a breach of the duty of disclosure to which the Commission is subjected as it did not affect the complainant's opportunity to make his representations."
As between the present parties to the case at bar, the immediately above cited jurisprudence cuts both ways, like a double-edged sword.
[33]
The employer, S.O.S., was entitled in general to have the substance of the investigator's report, not necessarily all the details be it remembered. It is the substance of a report relating to the complaint made in timely manner and assuredly long before the completion of the report. Nevertheless the employer was gamely attempting to obtain more information, possibly more than that to which it was entitled, before the twice extended deadline for response arrived. The employer's counsel is quite correct to say that the necessary information is surely a function of the time available for response, for it matters not how long the time may be extended if one be as much in the dark then as one was before the extensions were granted. S.O.S. was not in the dark.
[34]
In the exchanges between the employer and the Commission on the matter of further disclosure, the Commission, instead of adopting the result indicated by Mr. Justice Marceau's pronouncements, parried with a spurious feint. The Commission told the employer to go invoke the
Access to Information
statute. Here is what counsel for the Secretary of State, the employer, submitted on that score:
"Ms. Kinnear: ... Under s. 19 it's made clear that the exemptions in the
Act
apply only to requests for information made under the
Act
, which this very obviously wasn't.
"Secondly, if you turn to s. 8 it says that personal information may be divulged under s. 8(2)(a) for the purpose for which the information was obtained or compiled by the institution or for a use consistent with that purpose. Well, obviously this information was compiled for the purpose of a report and investigation to the Human Rights Commission and, in my submission, that's the purpose for which it was obtained, is consistent with giving these documents to the Secretary of State. At the very least, that would be a use consistent with the purpose and would fall within s. 8(2)(a).
"Alternatively, s. 8(2)(d) says that the information can be given to the Attorney General of Canada for use in legal proceedings involving the Crown in right of Canada or the Government of Canada. That might apply as well.
. . . . .
"So, in other words, the long and short of it is you cannot use the
Access Act
to not disclose this kind of information, and for the tribunal to have come back with that response is one which, in my submission, is patently ridiculous and just a nonstarter. I think the point that should be made here is that the Secretary of State was not asking for every scrap of paper, nor were they asking for an oral hearing. They were simply asking for what was needed to respond to the case in a meaningful fashion." (Transcript: vol. 1, pp. 173-174, 177-178)
The court is pleased to adopt and ratify counsel's above quoted repudiation of the Commission's spurious reference to the access to information legislation, while not prepared to find that the employer needed, in fairness, all it sought to obtain from the Commission.
[35]
This above expressed conclusion is this court's final pronouncement on the highly ill-advised, if not fatuous, assertion of the Commission to the effect that the very respondent named in a complaint must resort to access to information legislation in order to obtain disclosure of the substance, if such only it be, of the investigation of the accusations levied against such respondent. That, as counsel put it, is a "nonstarter".
[36]
The court now returns to direct consideration of the allegations of sexual harassments made after the completion of the investigator's report. It is found that in regard to that after-formulated complaint, the Commission has no jurisdiction to deal with it pursuant to s. 44(3)(a)(i). In those circumstances this provision cannot be engaged in order to invoke s. 49. Such a finding does not, however, foreclose all dealing with the subsequent complaint, for the Commission may wield another power, in the proper circumstances.
[37]
Such other power resides in s. 49(1) of the
C.H.R.A.
which makes no reference whatever to any investigator's report. It runs, thus:
"49(1) The Commission may,
at any stage after the filing of a complaint
, request the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel to appoint a Human Rights Tribunal, in this Part referred to as a 'Tribunal', to inquire into the complaint if the Commission is satisfied that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry into the complaint is warranted." (Emphasis not in statutory text)
Assuming, as the court finds to be the case, that the "amendment" of the complaint to allege sexual harassment, is, and must be regarded as, a new complaint, filed initially on August 9, 1989, then it is apparent that the Commission may still convoke a Tribunal to enquire into it pursuant to s. 49(1). In this regard the Commission appears to have a free-standing authority to obtain such an enquiry, free of any of the statutory fetters consequent upon receiving an investigation report: it may do so "at
any
stage
after
the filing of a complaint --
à
toute
étape
postérieure
au dépôt de la plainte
". In this sense, then, the late-filed complaint appears to be revived and unexceptionably referred to a Human Rights Tribunal, pursuant to the Commission's statutory power pursuant to s. 49(1), even if its power to deal with such a late-filed complaint be extinguished in regard to s. 44(3)(a)(i).
[38]
There remains a statutory fetter upon exercise of the Commission's power under s. 49(1), and that fetter resides in s. 41(e) of the
C.H.R.A.
, earlier above recited. The Commission acted in a manner largely oblivious to its statutory imperatives, on December 18, 1989, as shown in Exhibit B to the affidavit of Diane Stewart sworn on May 17, 1990, found in the C.H.R.C.'s motion record, volume 1. In the first place the Commission seems to have been oblivious to having before it the investigator's report, with its sequence of events and complaints. The Commission also seems to be oblivious to the time at which the latest "amendment" to the complaint was filed and it treats "the complaint", as being one monolithic (although amended) lump dated November 1, 1985. The Commission, cognizant of the investigator's report relating to the original complaint of racial discrimination, properly invokes s. 49(1), but obliviously sweeps under its aegis the late-filed complaint of sexual harassment. By disregarding that complaint's discrete and tardy formulation, the Commission seems utterly oblivious of the time limit - a permeable limit indeed - and consequently is again oblivious to the need to exercise its discretion in order to find such effluxion of time to be appropriate, if such it were, for the purposes of the
C.H.R. Act
.
[39]
All of the foregoing oblivion is evinced in the Commission's bilingual resolution of December 18, 1989, which runs in English like this:
"3.5.5 Mary Pitawanakwat v. the Department
of the Secretary of State of Canada
The commission resolved:
pursuant to s. 49 of the
Canadian Human Rights Act
, to request that the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel appoint a Human Rights Tribunal to inquire into the complaint (PO4412) of Mary Pitawanakwat of Regina, Saskatchewan against the Department of the Secretary of State of Canada dated November 1, 1985, as amended, alleging discrimination in employment on the grounds of race and sex, because the Commission is satisfied that, having regard to all the circumstances of the complaint, an inquiry thereinto is warranted." (Stewart's affidavit, Ex. B, p. 00066)
[40]
It may well be truly contended that the Commission could not have been so oblivious to its statutory imperatives as its resolution indicates, for, after all, it had the investigator's report presumably to be discussed on the table before it. But of what avail is it for an administrative body just to discuss its jurisdiction? The Commission is, no doubt, a collection of intelligent, alert people, but it
acts
, and it
exercises its jurisdiction
through a legally recognized record,
a resolution
stating what statutory authority it invokes to propel the parties into the enquiry process which it alone has the power to precipitate. That propulsion is not by nature, and cannot be permitted to become by negligence, a casual, off-the-cuff sort of petty paroxysm of that notable authority with which Parliament has solemnly invested the Commission. It is clear that a proper and necessary evocation of the Commission's powers is still very far removed even from its expressing its reasons for such evocation. Reasons are another matter. In failing to evince some deliberate exercise of power by its resolution, the Commission simply does not exercise the power accorded to it under s. 41(e).
[41]
Now, it is apparent that Parliament in setting the datum-line criterion of one year's limit in s. 41(e) did so in order seriously to confer a benefit, and not just wantonly to complicate the
C.H.R.A.
That one year's limit appears to be of no direct benefit to the complainant. Whom did Parliament intend to benefit? The limit - permeable as it is in terms of the Commission's consideration of what is appropriate - appears to be of direct benefit to a respondent employer, such as S.O.S. in this case. It is just too plain for elaboration that if the employer is to be deprived of the benefit which Parliament provided, the Commission must give some cogent signal or demonstration of why it considered it to be appropriate so to deprive the employer. But the Commission is just moribund on that score. It did not even mention its own internal guidelines for extending the time, exhibited in both official languages in Alta Erker's affidavit, applicant's motion record, volume 3, tab B.
[42]
The Commission's failure to exercise its jurisdiction, as it was bound to do by s. 41(e) of the
C.H.R.A.
amounts to an error of law. Such error can be perceived by contrast with two inverse judgments, cited by the employer, wherein the Commission declined to grant the extension of time for late-filed complaints. The judgments, both pronounced by this Court's Appeal Division are, in chronological order:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada denied, [1989] 1 S.C.R. xvi.
[43]
The consequence of the Commission's error in law - its failure to exercise its power, resulting in its loss of jurisdiction regarding the late-filed complaint of sexual harassment - its acting unfairly and contrary to law in this regard, must be exactly that which the Attorney General for Canada seeks in the notice of motion by which these proceedings were instituted on behalf of the employer. There will be orders (not writs) pronounced pursuant to paragraphs 17(5)(a) and 18(b) of the
Federal Court Act
, as follows:
- quashing the decision of the C.H.R.C. to request the President of the Human Rights Tribunal Panel to appoint a Tribunal to enquire into the complainant's complaint of sexual harassment, dated August 9, 1989, which decision embedded in others, was communicated to the Department of the Secretary of State by letter dated December 21, 1989;
- an order of prohibition permanently enjoining the C.H.R.C. from referring the said complaint of sexual harassment, dated August 9, 1989, to a Human Rights Tribunal for enquiry;
- an order of prohibition permanently enjoining the respondents William C. Kushneryk, Norma G. McLeod and Ashley C. Taylor, constituted as a Human Rights Tribunal, and any other Tribunal otherwise constituted, from proceeding with an enquiry into Mary Pitawanakwat's said complaint dated August 9, 1989.
[44]
The above detailed orders do not, however, dispose of all the matters in contention between the parties. There remains the original complaint dated November 1, 1985, unexceptionably amended on April 25, 1988. This is the core of the Commission's recorded complaint numbered PO4412, mentioned in the applicant's notice of motion by which these proceedings were initiated, and which the Commission seeks to make the subject of a Human Rights Tribunal's enquiry. This is Mary Pitawanakwat's complaint of racial discrimination. This is the complaint to which the investigator's report unexceptionably relates. This is the complaint with which the Commission could legally deal pursuant to s. 44(3)(a)(i) of the
C.H.R.A.
. This is the complaint of racial discrimination, filed before the investigation was launched, and to which, only, the investigator's report legally relates.
[45]
The applicant's principal objection to the Commission's referring the racial discrimination and harassment complaint to a Human Rights Tribunal is grounded on the principle of issue estoppel. The Attorney General on behalf of the employer, the S.O.S., states that the circumstances leading to the complainant's release from her employment, including her allegations that her work environment was poisoned and that her release was motivated by racial discrimination, were fully canvassed by the P.S.C.A.B. The complainant, says counsel for the S.O.S., did not seek a review of the P.S.C.A.B.'s decision, which was rendered on March 21, 1986. In the meanwhile, however, on November 1, 1985, the complainant had already filed with the Commission her complaint against her employer alleging racial discrimination.
[46]
The employer submits that all of the facts and issues raised by the complainant's allegations of racial discrimination contrary to the
C.H.R.A.
were finally and properly dealt with by the P.S.C.A.B. pursuant to s. 31 of the
P.S.E.A.
So, asserts the employer, the complainant is estopped from contending that her release from her job is for reasons other than incompetence. Thus, runs the argument, her being so estopped in regard to her allegations pursuant to the
C.H.R.A.
means that the Commission has no jurisdiction to refer this complaint to a Tribunal. In so doing, the S.O.S. contends, the Commission exceeded its jurisdiction and erred in law on the face of the record.
[47]
One question to be answered is whether issue estoppel can arise, on a motion for extraordinary relief, that is judicial review, in regard to alleged determinations of issues made by federal boards, commissions or other tribunals, the natural objects of summary proceedings pursuant to s. 18 of the
Federal Court Act
. There appears to be no sound policy reason for declining to apply this estoppel principle to the decisions of adjudicative boards, commissions and other tribunals insofar as their pronouncements do in fact determine at least nominally contentious issues inter partes, in the same way as courts do. The essential question is whether the parties are, or would be, subjected to the same impact of the application or nonapplication of the principle, and not whether the body making the pronouncement be curial, quasi-judicial or administrative in nature. The lack of traditional written pleadings and discovery presents little, if any, difficulty in perceiving whether a litigant seeks to litigate an issue in or before a federal board, commission or other tribunal, which has been previously litigated conclusively between the parties in or before the same, or any other such board, commission or tribunal.
[48]
Of no little interest in this regard is the same conclusion reached by two of the three Australian Federal Court judges in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Their reasoning sits comfortably in this court's appreciation of this threshold issue. Accordingly, the court holds that the applicant herein is entitled to assert issue estoppel. Now, one must see if it be applicable in these circumstances.
[49]
The underlying notion of issue estoppel is to prohibit one party to previous litigation from putting a concluded issue finally determined therein, into contention again in newly instituted proceedings taken against the same opponent before the same, or another, tribunal having jurisdiction to adjudicate and determine that issue anew. Although expressed in different words the above summation has its several origins in:
Re Bullen
(1972), 21 D.L.R.(3d) 628, at p. 631 ( <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at pp. 20 to 25, Spencer-Bower and Turner:
The Doctrine of Res Judicata
(2nd Ed.) pp. 9 to 19, Sopinka and Lederman:
The Law of Evidence in Civil Cases
, Butterworths, Toronto, 1974, pp. 365-366.
[50]
The rules, principles and doctrines of law and equity were born in jurisprudence and operate as received in litigious matters unless and until reinterpreted by judicial pronouncement or modified by legislation. So it is in the matter of human rights cases.
[51]
The very question of the applicability of issue estoppel in this present matter would seem itself to be regulated by res judicata, in the judgment of the Court of Appeal in this very case,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  judgment
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  Canada denied, also above cited (1988). The court there commanded the Commission, which had declined to deal with this case on the basis that it had been already dealt with by the P.S.C.A.B., to proceed with Pitawanakwat's complaint. Now, the appeal court did not direct the Commission how exactly to deal with the complaint, but it would hardly have made such an order if the only legal consequence would have been dismissing the complaint. The Commission was ordered to proceed with the complaint of racial discrimination without any fetter on its action. Since the Commission was by judicial command set at liberty to proceed with this complaint, it sits ill with this court now to be moved on the basis of issue estoppel to prohibit that which the appeal court commanded. After all, the Commission's expressed reason (Gorman's Ex. G) for not dealing with the complainant's original complaint of racial discrimination was itself the Commission's own apprehension of issue estoppel based in effect on the provisions of s. 33(b)(i), now s. 41(b). That statutory statement is one which evinces the notion of issue estoppel.
[52]
That, indeed, was the thrust of the Chief Commissioner's expressed reason, on November 20, 1986, for declining to deal with the complaint, quoted earlier above at page 8. The Commission then collectively believed that the complaint had been more appropriately completely dealt with by the P.S.C.A.B., just as the Attorney General now pleads, but just as the Federal Court of Appeal unanimously repudiated on September 17, 1987. Whether it meets all of the technical requirements of res judicata, the decision itself of the Federal Court of Appeal stands as a matter already adjudged in these identical, very circumstances. What if the complement of parties had been identical? Obviously, had the Attorney General joined the Commission in resisting the complainant's application to have the Commission ordered to deal with her complaint, the result would surely have been the same.
[53]
Now, the court ordered the Commission make a decision pursuant to ss. 35 and 36 of the
C.H.R.A.
, now ss. 43 and 44; and the Commission has made that decision, that is, to refer the complaint - restricted now to the original complaint of racial discrimination acceptably amended on April 25, 1988 - to a Human Rights Tribunal. The
Burke
decision (above cited) was adopted by the court in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  circumstances, would it have given the Commission the authority to make such a reference? The Commission, ordered by the court to deal with the complaint specifically pursuant to s. 36 (now 44) had, as the court well knew, the following duties:
"36(2) If, on receipt of a report ... the Commission is satisfied
(a) that the complainant ought to exhaust grievance or review procedures otherwise reasonably available, or
(b) that the complaint could more appropriately be dealt with, initially or completely, by a procedure provided for under an Act of Parliament other than this Act,
it shall refer the complainant to the appropriate authority."
Can it be imagined that the Federal Court of Appeal made its order to the Commission just to generate more litigation in the event that the Commission would decide to refer the complaint to a Tribunal? Did the appeal court purport to forbid such a reference? Hardly.
[54]
The court made that order on September 17, 1987, and could not foresee that the Commission would fumble in relation to the new complaint filed on August 9, 1989, after the investigator's report was completed. The court could not foresee that the Commission would blindly lump that late complaint into the reference to a Tribunal without a scintilla of signal (quite apart from reasons) that it was exercising its jurisdiction to deprive the S.O.S. of the benefit which Parliament has accorded, or why such deprivation was considered appropriate in the circumstances as required by s. 41(e) of the
C.H.R.A.
That, however, was the Commission's own subsequent mistake. It is not shown to have made any mistake whatever in referring the original complaint, as amended, on April 25, 1988, to a Human Rights Tribunal.
[55]
There is more reason even than the foregoing for declining to apply issue estoppel to the Commission or to the - or any necessarily restructured - Tribunal. As already noted, the P.S.C.A.B.'s focus was on the complainant's doing of her job, and although the chairman mentioned the complainant's response, really her "defence", of racial discrimination, he could not go into her "defence" as a Tribunal can, and treated it dismissively as really not bearing pertinently upon the question of competence. The question not being
eadem questio
, this is not a case of issue estoppel:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  at p. 257,
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  "defence" of racial discrimination, that Board's decision to dismiss her appeal pursuant to s. 31 of the
P.S.E.A.
can or could nevertheless stand without any implied disposition of the issue of racial discrimination, for a complainant can conceivably be both incompetent and the victim of racial discrimination, which could most probably be a process of causation. However the P.S.C.A.B.'s finding of incompetence does not depend on such causation being found in that adjudication:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at pages 646-647. In any event, the chairman and sole member of the P.S.C.A.B. excused the complainant's supervisors and co-employees on the fond basis that they, as he found, formed no plan to intimidate her (page 82) and that they were not out to "get" her but treated her ever and always with honesty and good faith (pages 87-88). That, of course, is not the whole issue upon which she, or the Commission should be estopped, for intention is not a necessary element of the forbidden discrimination, and to require intention would make the
C.H.R.A.
unworkable:
Ontario Human Rights Commission and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  O.A.C. 241, (per McIntyre, J., at page 549),
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , (per La Forest, J., at pages 90-91 S.C.R.).
[56]
The principle of issue estoppel, if applicable here, would be diluted further on the score of the identity of parties. It is true that the complainant was the appellant before the P.S.C.A.B. and she raised racial discrimination as her "defence" to the employer's allegation of incompetence: it is also true that she was first the complainant before the Commission where she raised racial discrimination as a substantive complaint. But although she is a nominal respondent in the present litigation (questionably, too, under present law, since although she would be most conveniently impleaded she is no federal board, commission or other tribunal (Parliament has not nearly exhausted its jurisdiction in regard to "the
better
administration of the laws of Canada" "notwithstanding
anything
in this [
Constitution
]
Act
)) the Attorney General rightly does not seek any order which would prohibit her from articulating her rights under the
C.H.R.A.
and her access to the Commission. That, too, would be "a nonstarter". In strict logic, the issue here lies between the applicant on behalf of the S.O.S. and the Commission with its designated Tribunal: it does not lie between the applicant and the complainant. She may be regarded, however, as the natural defender of the impugned proceedings.
[57]
It must not escape notice either that there is a drastic difference in the kind of adjudication which can be performed by the P.S.C.A.B. and the Tribunal. The Human Rights Tribunal is invested with true powers of curiality such as: compelling attendance; and compelling on oath or affirmation testimony, viva voce and by affidavit, and production of documents; permitting cross-examination; protecting privilege under the law of evidence; according witnesses proper conduct money; and excluding members of the public from its sessions, only if it considers such exclusion to be in the public interest. These powers and duties, accorded by Parliament in ss. 50 to 52 of the
C.H.R.A.
, are followed in ss. 53 and 54 by a variety of remedies placed there within the Tribunal's jurisdiction, together with enforcement provisions in s. 57. By contrast, the powers and procedures of a board established under s. 5(d) of the
P.S.E.A.
to hear appeals under s. 31 of that statute, taken individually and altogether, as instruments of truth finding, are pathetically pallid in comparison with the powers and procedures of a Human Rights Tribunal. Further, the power of the Commission to determine if reference to such a Tribunal be warranted is not even quasi-judicial, but rather, administrative. Given the disparity of the boards, commissions and tribunals involved here, the principle of issue estoppel appears to be fatally stifled in these circumstances.
[58]
The
coup de grâce
here is the very configuration of certain important provisions of the
C.H.R.A.
It is trite, but true, that all common law and equitable rules, principles, doctrines, maxims and precepts whatever are subject to modification or even suppression by operation of constitutionally valid legislation - all, including the principle of issue estoppel. The operation of constitutionally valid legislation is evinced in statutory text, as well as in authoritative judicial interpretations thereof.
[59]
So, the principle of issue estoppel is modified by Parliament by enacting the
C.H.R.A.
in ss. 41(a) and (b), 42(2), 44(2)(a) and (b), 44(3)(a)(ii), 47(1)(b), 49(1) and 66(1) whereby the
C.H.R.A.
"is binding on Her Majesty in right of Canada", and that includes, of course, authoritative judicial interpretation of this
Act
. Section 41(a) provides that the Commission is not required to deal with the complaint if it appears to the Commission that the complainant ought to exhaust grievance or other review procedures reasonably available to him or her. Section 41(b) provides that the Commission is likewise not required to deal with the complaint if it be one which could be more appropriately dealt with, initially or completely according to some other statute's procedure. In effect Parliament is directing that before approaching the Commission, a claimant may be required first to exhaust other remedies. Paragraph (a) refers to the employment, collective agreement and grievance procedures reasonably available, and paragraph (b) refers alternatively to some other remedy available under some other Act of Parliament. In
Burke
(above cited) and <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> (also above cited) the Federal Court of Appeal held that paragraph (b) was invocable by the Commission if that alternative remedy were still available to the complainant. Because it was no longer available, but had been exhausted by means of her appeal under the
P.S.E.A.
, the court required the Commission to deal with the complainant's racial discrimination complaint.
[60]
Now, while leaving some latitude for discretionary findings with the Commission, it appears from the statutory text, and from the court's interpretation of it, in regard to the principle of issue estoppel, if it would otherwise apply here, that Parliament has drastically modified the principle - or even turned it inside out.
[61]
The applicant's invocation of issue estoppel inescapably presumes that the P.S.C.A.B. and the Human Rights Tribunal processes must, somehow, be equal or symmetrical in efficacy, but the statute evinces no such legislative intent. The statute, the
C.H.R.A.
, evinces the opposite intent, in that the Commission is to be the ultimate body to deal with complaints even if they subsume other available grievances or review procedures previously, initially or completely dealt with by other boards, commissions or tribunals. All circumstances being equal, and they are not, the statutory provisions simply suffocate issue estoppel, and deliberately so.
[62]
The operation of the human rights legislation is accorded a kind of paramountcy within the laws of Canada. This conclusion is buttressed by prior judicial interpretation. Such paramountcy resonates from the following authorities:
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> . Dickson, J. (as he then was), for the Supreme Court of Canada wrote this passage which appears at pages 194-195, in regard to the
Ontario Human Rights Code
, R.S.O. 1970, Chap. 318, as amended 1971 (Ont.) c. 50, 1972 (Ont.) Chap. 119 and 1974 (Ont.) c. 73, thus:
"The view taken by the Ontario Court of Appeal is a bold one and may be commended as an attempt to advance the common law. In my opinion, however, this is foreclosed by the legislative initiative which overtook the existing common law in Ontario and established a different regime which does not exclude the courts but rather makes them part of the enforcement machinery under the
Code
.
"For the foregoing reasons, I would hold that not only does the
Code
foreclose any civil action based directly upon a breach thereof but it also excludes any common law action based on an invocation of the public policy expressed in the
Code
. The
Code
itself has laid out the procedures for vindication of that public policy, procedures which the plaintiff respondent did not see fit to use."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , at 157-158 S.C.R., and
Ontario Human Rights Commission and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , and there, in <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , imparting the same paramountcy to the
C.H.R.A.
, as was earlier accorded to provincial human rights legislation:
"In the Court of Appeal and in the arguments before this court, considerate attention was given to various theories supporting the liability of an employer for the acts of its employees, such as vicarious liability in tort and strict liability in the quasi-criminal context. As Thurlow, C.J., notes, however, the place to start is necessarily the
Act
, the words of which, like those of other statutes, must be read in light of its nature and purpose.
"The purpose of the
Act
is set forth in s. 2 as being to extend the laws of Canada to give effect to the principle that every individual should have an equal opportunity with other individuals to live his or her life without being hindered by discriminatory practices based on certain prohibited grounds of discrimination, including discrimination on the ground of sex. As McIntyre, J., speaking for this court, recently explained in
Ontario Human Rights Commission and  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , the
Act
must be so interpreted as to advance the broad policy considerations underlying it. That task should not be approached in a niggardly fashion but in a manner befitting the special nature of the legislation, which he described as 'not quite constitutional'; see also
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , per Lamer, J., at pp. 157-158. By this expression, it is not suggested, of course, that the
Act
is somehow entrenched but rather that it incorporates certain basic goals of our society. More recently still, Dickson, C.J., in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , emphasized that the rights enunciated in the
Act
must be given full recognition and effect consistent with the dictates of the
Interpretation Act
that statutes must be given such fair, large and liberal interpretation as will best ensure the attainment of their objects."
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Mahoney, J., writing for a unanimous division of the Federal Court of Appeal, is recorded at page 31, thus:
"The rule appears to be that when human rights legislation and other legislation cannot stand together, a subsequent inconsistent enactment, unless clearly stated to create an exception to it, is not to be construed as repealing the subsisting human rights legislation. On the other hand, when the human rights legislation is the subsequent enactment, it does repeal by implication the other inconsistent legislation."
[63]
So, it is concluded that on the basis of the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in
 <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED>  the
C.H.R.A.
itself, the paramount status of the
C.H.R.A.
, and the circumstances ill fit in or under the principle of issue estoppel, that strongly asserted principle just does not apply here. The Attorney General's posture is untenable.
[64]
The applicant, the Attorney General of Canada on behalf of the employer, the S.O.S., thrust, as resourceful counsel would, two further but highly fragile, brittle sticks into the spokes of the respondents' wheels. There was a complaint raised by the applicant to the effect that the Commission was in some way influenced by media clamour on the complainant's behalf; and there was a further complaint that the Chief Commissioner having attended the same conference and having been present in the same room as the complainant, might have been influenced thereby to favour her cause. The applicant does not, however, throw into that scenario the fact that, the Commission, making litigious resistance, had been ultimately ordered to obey the court and in effect bend to the complainant's will by dealing with her complaint of racial discrimination from which the Commission previously believed she was estopped. If any such events could be said to influence the Commission there would appear to have been a neutralizing equilibrium. In any event, there is so little solid inference, and so much speculation in and about the applicant's thrusting of those puny sticks into the spokes of the respondents' wheels, that this court cannot find, and declines to notice, any impediment to the carriage of the complainant's complaint of racial discrimination in and before the Commission or the Tribunal which it designates.
[65]
The conclusions drawn from the evidence, argument and jurisprudence presented to the court in this proceeding warrant summation.
1. There was no unfairness in the Commission's appointment of an investigator, its reception of her report, its according of time to permit the S.O.S. to respond, and its finding that reference of the complainant's complaint of racial discrimination to a Human Rights Tribunal was warranted. Both employer and the Commission are exposed in silly postures in this regard. The Commission, without breaking the law or losing jurisdiction could have been a little more forthcoming and accommodating toward the employer in terms of more details about the investigation. True, it must be cautious about letting loose unsubstantiated rumours about alleged discriminators, and alert to the "official" intimidation of witnesses for the complainant. However, to refer the implicated employer, here the S.O.S., to invocation of access to information legislation in order to obtain more facts, details and disclosure of the very case in which the employer is implicated is just plain silly. It is somewhat akin to adopting that posture against a defendant in a lawsuit or an accused in a prosecution. On the other hand, the employer is hoist on its own petard: the more it asserts, in furtherance of issue estoppel, that all the matters of the complaint were so thoroughly canvassed before the P.S.C.A.B., the less surprised, shocked, prejudiced or needful of detailed disclosure it can be seen to be, in terms of responding to the investigator's report. After all, in fairness, a good and valid response to such preliminary findings is that they are, some or all, made of whole cloth and wrong, if such be the case. The preliminary stage is not the occasion for a hammer-and-tongs cross-examination and defence as would be appropriate before a Tribunal, if one be convoked. The Commission, itself, after all, does not and cannot discharge the curial functions which are conferred on a Tribunal. The Commission should be an effective filter against apparently false or obviously out-of-time complaints.
2. The Commission, itself, should operate as a filter of obviously out-of-time complaints, unless it plainly exerts its jurisdiction to extend the time. Here, the record discloses that it wilfully ignored or was oblivious of the fact that the sexual discrimination part of the purported complaint was new and different from the original complaint of racial discrimination. That is not to say that the latter cannot subsume some of the particulars of the former, but always and only under the rubric of racial discrimination. In referring the complaint presented as a monolithic lump to a Tribunal, the Commission blithely deprived the employer of the benefit of the one year limit, by extending the time without seeming to know what it was doing or giving any signal of exercising its power to do so, and why. Whether the Commission was obliged or not to give written reasons is not here in issue. It gave nothing but trance-like obliviousness when, if it were
deliberately
depriving the employer of its statutory benefit, the Commission was obliged to evince consciousness of exerting its power to find appropriate circumstances, pursuant to s. 41(e), to effect that extraordinary measure. The Commission could be held to have stripped itself of jurisdiction thereby, when in truth it lost its jurisdiction by not exerting it in circumstances where it nevertheless obliviously inflicted the deprivation of benefit blindly upon the employer, S.O.S. The Commission will therefore have its decision to refer the sexual harassment complaint to a Tribunal, insofar as there was a decision, quashed by an order in the nature of certiorari; it will be prohibited from inserting that complaint, as such, into any reference to a Tribunal concerning the complainant's complaint regarding events prior to April 18, 1986, the date on which the complainant was released by her employer.
3. In all other respects, apart from what is stated in paragraph 1 immediately above, the applicant's motion, and the Commission's intervention to support its lost jurisdiction to refer the out-of-time complaint to a Tribunal, are dismissed with costs. Because of the complainant's counsel's active support of the Commission's attempt to resurrect its fumbled jurisdiction, the complainant is awarded not solicitor-and-client costs, but party-and-party costs herein, payable after taxation in full by the applicant, who shall have judgment for one-half of that taxed amount against, and payable by, the Canadian Human Rights Commission.
Application allowed in part.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]