Reasons For Order
[1]
Jerome, A.C.J.
: This is a motion brought by Her Majesty The Queen (the "respondent") to dismiss an application brought by Timothy P. Neeb (the "applicant") under s. 225.2(2) of the Income Tax Act (the "within application"). The within application was initiated by the applicant to fix a day and place for determining whether a "Jeopardy Collection" direction issued by the Minister of Revenue pursuant to s. 225.2(1) of the Income Tax Act was justified and to obtain an order staying execution upon Certificates filed by the Minister of National Revenue (the "Minister") pursuant to ss. 222 and 223 of the Income Tax Act. In this motion, the respondent also requests that the partial stay, imposed by Madame Justice Reed on March 31, 1988, be discharged.
[2]
The motion was heard at Toronto, Ontario on February 5 and March 5, 1990. On August 21, 1990, I granted the orders requested by the respondent for reasons given orally and indicated that these written reasons would follow.
[3]
The specific relief sought by the respondent is contained in the respondent's amended notice of motion dated January 10, 1990:
"The Motion is for:
1. An order dismissing the within Application;
2. An order discharging the partial stay imposed by Order of the Honourable Madam Justice Reed dated the 31st day of March, 1988;
3. Accumulated Sheriff's storage costs arising out of delay in the disposition of this matter; and
4. Costs."
[4]
The salient facts are as follows. By four notices of reassessment, three dated June 30, 1987 and one dated August 11, 1987, the applicant was reassessed with respect to his 1983, 1984, 1985 and 1986 taxation years. This resulted in an unpaid tax liability in the amount of $1,502,359.89. On November 25, 1987, the applicant filed notices of objection in respect of all four reassessments, outside of the 90 day period prescribed by s. 165(1) of the Income Tax Act. The applicant also applied to the Tax Court of Canada pursuant to s. 167 of the Income Tax Act for an extension of time to file the aforementioned notices of objection.
[5]
By virtue of s. 225.1, the Minister is restricted from taking various collection activities with respect to outstanding tax liability prior to the completion of a 90 day period following the mailing of the Notices of Assessment. On March 1, 1988, the respondent issued a Ministerial Direction pursuant to s. 225.2(1) of the Income Tax Act which allows collection activities to be undertaken where such activities could reasonably be considered to be jeopardized by a delay. On March 15, 1988, the respondent registered notices of seizure with respect to a 1978 Cadillac Seville, a 1986 Chevrolet Blazer and the exigible assets belonging to the applicant and located in the applicant's dwelling place at 627 Bob-O-Lynk Road, Mississauga, Ontario.
[6]
On March 23, 1988, the applicant initiated the within application pursuant to s. 225.2(2) to vacate the Ministerial Direction. It was brought before Madame Justice Reed on March 23, 1988 and a hearing date was set for April 27, 1988. Reed, J., also imposed a partial stay as follows:
"the seizure and garnishment of assets and money shall be permitted to proceed provided that any assets seized or monies garnished shall not be sold or disposed of by the Sheriff but shall be held by him until further order of this Court."
On April 27, 1988, the parties appeared before Mr. Justice Addy who adjourned the within application sine die on consent.
[7]
The Tax Court of Canada heard the application to extend time to file notices of objection on June 27, 1988, and September 19, 1988. On June 12, 1989, the Tax Court rendered its judgment denying the applicant's request for an extension.
[8]
Following the Tax Court's decision and unsuccessful efforts by the parties to dispose of the within application on consent, the respondent brought a motion on December 4, 1989, amended on January 10, 1990, to dismiss the within application.
[9]
The respondent also wrote to the applicant on two separate occasions, February 2, 1989, and July 10, 1989, indicating that reassessments were proposed for the taxation years in issue. On December 27, 1989, the respondent sent the applicant another letter suggesting that it did not propose to issue such reassessments at that time.
[10]
The issue before me with respect to this motion is whether the within application has been rendered academic by the judgment of the Tax Court of Canada.
[11]
The provisions of the Income Tax Act relevant to this motion are the Seizure of Chattels provisions, s. 225, the Collection Restrictions provisions, s. 225.1, the Collection in Jeopardy provisions, s. 225.2 [see Footnote 1], and the Assessment Provisions, s. 152:
"225(1) Where a person has failed to pay an amount as required by this Act, the Minister may give 30 days' notice to the person ... of the Minister's intention to direct that the person's goods and chattels be seized and sold, and, if the person fails to make the payment before the expiration of 30 days, the Minister may issue a certificate of the failure and direct that the person's goods and chattels be seized.
"225.1(1) Where a taxpayer is liable for the payment of an amount assessed under this Act (in this subsection referred to as the 'unpaid amount'), ... the Minister shall not, for the purpose of collecting the amount,
(g) give a notice, issue a certificate or make a direction under subsection 225(1),
before the day that is 90 days after the day of mailing of the notice of assessment.
"(2) Where a taxpayer has served a notice of objection under this Act to an assessment of an amount payable under this Act, ... the Minister shall not, for the purpose of collecting the amount in controversy, take any of the actions described in paragraphs (1)(a) to (g) before the day that is 90 days after the day on which notice is mailed to the taxpayer that the Minister has confirmed or varied the assessment.
"225.2(1) Notwithstanding section 225.1, where it may reasonably be considered that collection of an amount assessed in respect of a taxpayer would be jeopardized by a delay in the collection thereof, and the Minister has, ... so advised the taxpayer and directed the taxpayer to pay forthwith the amount assessed or any part thereof, the Minister may forthwith take any of the actions described in paragraphs 225.1(a) to (g) with respect to that amount or that part thereof.
"(2) Where the Minister has under subsection (1) directed a taxpayer to pay an amount forthwith, the taxpayer may
(a) ... apply to a judge of a superior court having jurisdiction in the province in which the taxpayer resides or to a judge of the Federal Court of Canada for an order fixing a day (not earlier than 14 days nor later than 28 days after the date of the order) and place for the determination of the question whether the direction was justified in the circumstances;
(b) serve a copy of the order on the Deputy Attorney General of Canada within six days after the day on which it was made; and
(c) if he has proceeded as authorized by paragraph (b), apply at the appointed time and place for an order determining the question.
"(6) On an application under paragraph (2)(c), the judge shall determine the question summarily and may confirm, vacate or vary the direction and make such other order as he considers appropriate.
"(8) Costs shall not be awarded upon the disposition of an application under subsection (2).
"152(1) The Minister shall, with all due dispatch, examine a taxpayer's return of income for a taxation year, assess the tax for the year, the interest and penalties, if any, payable and determine ...
"(2) After examination of a return, the Minister shall send a notice of assessment to the person by whom the return was filed.
"(8) An assessment shall, subject to being varied or vacated on an objection or appeal under this Part and subject to a reassessment, be deemed to be valid and binding notwithstanding any error, defect or omission therein or in any proceeding under this Act relating thereto."
[12]
Counsel for the respondent argues that, absent the restrictions set out in s. 225.1 of the Income Tax Act, the respondent is statutorily unrestrained from taking action to enforce Her claims with respect to a taxpayer's tax liability. The respondent submits that the 90 day limitation prescribed by s. 225.1 had been exhausted and, therefore, did not apply to restrain the respondent from enforcing Her claims against the applicant. The Minister nevertheless considered it prudent to make a direction under s. 225.2(1) in the light of the applicant's Tax Court application. Counsel maintains, however, that the Minister need not have done so and submits that, in any event, the Tax Court decision effectively ends the matter.
[13]
Counsel for the respondent submits that by virtue of s. 152(8), the four notices of reassessments sent to the applicant are valid. They have not been varied or vacated on objection or appeal and there has not been a subsequent reassessment. As a result of the Tax Court's decision denying the applicant an extended period of time within which to file notices of objections to the reassessments, the applicant has no statutory means available to him to contest the reassessments. A "Jeopardy Collection" Direction under s. 225.2(1) is no longer necessary to enable the Minister to seize, sell and otherwise dispose of the taxpayer's assets to collect the assessed tax. Therefore, the subject matter of the within application no longer exists and the within application should be dismissed.
[14]
Counsel for the applicant, on the other hand, argues that the Tax Court decision does not render academic his client's application. He suggests that there is yet another way for the reassessments to be subject to reveiw and collection activities restricted. He reasons that if the Minister issues new notices of reassessment, the applicant would then have another opportunity to file notices of objection, the collection restrictions found in s. 225.1(1) would again apply, and the provisions of s. 225.2, upon which the within application is based, would again come into play. The Minister would then be precluded from taking action to realize on the unpaid tax liability until the within application is determined. The applicant's argument is essentially based on two letters sent by the respondent to the applicant on February 2, 1989 and July 10, 1989. The relevant portions of these letters, Exhibit "A" and "B" to the affidavit of Timothy P. Neeb dated December 8, 1989, are as follows:
"February 2, 1989
Dear Mr. Neeb:
We have now completed the investigation of your financial affairs ...
The attached schedule shows the unassessed portion of your income.
We will hold the reassessing action for 30 days pending receipt of any representations in this matter. If you wish to meet to discuss your tax affairs we will be pleased to meet with you at your convenience."
. . . . .
"July 10, 1989
Dear Mr. Neeb:
Following the receipt of additional information, revisions have been made in calculations of your income earned over the years 1983-87.
Schedules are enclosed setting out the following:
1. Calculations of your revised unreported income.
2. Calculations of revised unreported income to be assessed.
We propose to issue reassessments without delay, however; if you wish to discuss the proposed reassessments please contact us to arrange a meeting.
In addition, we wish to remind you that you have not yet filed your T1 Income Tax Returns for 1986, 1987 or 1988.
Although the Department has assessed tax for 1986 and 1987 under authority of subsection 152(7) of the Income Tax Act this does not relieve you of the responsibility to file Returns for those years."
[15]
A third letter, dated December 27, 1989, referred to in the applicant's [sic] Memorandum of Fact and Law at paragraph 4, wherein the Minister advised the applicant that the Minister did not "propose to issue reassessments at this time," should also be noted.
[16]
Counsel for the applicant states that the letters of February 2, 1989, and July 10, 1989, represent a "concrete indication from the respondent that there will be a new reassessment". He states that this alleged possibility of a new reassessment and, hence, the possibility of another right to object, is sufficient to maintain the within application.
[17]
Counsel for both parties have made reference during argument to a decision of the  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , particularly the following statement of Board Member, Mr. Dubrule, at page 339:
"The Minister, in the words of subsection 152(2) '... shall assess the tax ... payable'. To me that clearly means the tax as computed by the Minister in accordance with the provisions of the Income Tax Act and any other relevant statute. This would appear to be the duty imposed on the Minister by the Income Tax Act and it is incumbent upon him to perform that duty if he may reassess within the limits imposed by the Act. Not only should he, but he must correct assessing errors by reassessment if he knows of them. Assuming (without deciding) that that which he did in this case was correcting errors, then the reassessments were not 'unfair and unreasonable treatment' by the Minister."
[18]
In Russell, the taxpayer had appealed an adverse ruling on his notice of objection. The taxpayer had been served three notices of reassessment in one year and the issue before the Tax Review Board was whether the reassessments were "unfair and unreasonable" treatment by the Minister.
[19]
The applicant argues that the letters referred to above provide clear evidence from the Minister's own officials that evidence of an error has been discovered and therefore, based on the comments of Board Member Dubrule in Russell, the Minister is under a positive duty to reassess. However, Board Member Dubrule's comments must be considered in the light of the issue before him. Consequently, the decision in Russell cannot be extended to impose a positive duty upon the Minister to reassess as has been alleged by the applicant. The decision rather is limited to the proposition that if the Minister has a reasonable basis upon which to reassess and he does so, such action is not unfair or unreasonable.
[20]
Counsel for the respondent has also drawn to my attention a number of cases that support the proposition that the Crown is not bound by "undertakings" or "indications" given by its Officers. In No. 358 v. Minister of National Revenue, 56 D.T.C. 466, the Tax Appeal Board stated at page 468:
"It has been observed more than once in reasons for judgment issued by the Board that the Crown is not estopped by opinions set out in any departmental report or letter by any of its officers or servants. Where that has been written is found later to be incorrect, a Minister is at liberty to proceed as though it were not even on record:  <FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED> , Tax Appeal Board Member, Mr. W.O. Davis, commented at page 15:
"Regardless of what information was given to the appellant by the Minister's officials, the Minister is not obliged to apply the provisions of the Income Tax Act, as enacted by Parliament and, regrettable though it may seem to the appellant, I know of no provision of the Act which would permit me to deal with the assessment other than in a manner that is already adopted by the Minister."
[22]
After having examined the arguments put forward by the taxpayer, I find that I am unable to accept his submissions. There is no basis in law to support the submission that the Minister is bound by the indications of his officers, or his own indications for that matter, that he intends to reassess. A reassessment is a process undertaken by the Minister that culminates in a notice of reassessment. The process is not reviewable until the notice is sent to the taxpayer and it is only reviewable if a notice of objection is filed by the taxpayer within a statutorily prescribed period of time unless the Tax Court grants the taxpayer an extension. In any event, this right does not pre-exist the notice of reassessment.
[23]
The applicant taxpayer, therefore, cannot rely on indications that a reassessment may take place to argue that a reassessment
must
follow, for two reasons: first, that such indications cannot otherwise bind the Minister; and second, that the applicant's statutory rights do not arise unless and until a notice of reassessment is given. Counsel for the applicant has agreed that I am unable to direct the Minister to reassess and I am of the opinion that Russell does not extend that Minister's duty to reassess.
[24]
Finally, it now appears that the special collection procedures invoked by the Minister are no longer necessary. Since the Tax Court has denied the applicant an extension to file notices of objection, the time period limitations are conclusively exhausted and the Minister has no statutory restrictions preventing him from taking action to realize on the unpaid tax liability. The rationale for the Ministerial Direction no longer exists and the within application to vacate the Ministerial Direction should be dismissed.
[25]
Accordingly, the relief sought by the respondent is granted, the applicant's within application under s. 225.2(2) of the Income Tax Act is dismissed, and the partial stay imposed by Madame Justice Reed is removed.
[26]
The accumulated sheriff's storage costs will be added to the balance of the taxpayer's outstanding tax liability, however, in accordance with s. 225.2(8) of the Income Tax Act, costs will not be awarded.
Application allowed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/dmh
Footnotes
1. Section 225.2 has since been repealed by S.C. 1988, c. 55, s. 170.
[End of document]